The following episode has been heavily censored with parts redacted due to the unsettling controversial topics discussed and the naughty words that were used. However, if you want the full unedited ad free version of the podcast, it's on our Patreon. It's linked at the top of the description below. Enjoy the show. Is that true to black people think that the Holocaust didn't happen? I don't think most black people care. I don't think black people are probably 90% of black people have a very negative view of Jews. Really? Well, especially Kanye, he's one of them. I actually know he just took it back the other day. I saw that you tried to talk him off the ledge. You tried to interview him and tried to convince him not to be an anti-Semite. Yeah. That went great. That was a smash. It. I couldn't get past the first 10 minutes. It's a good interview. You should watch it. It's funny. Have you ever heard? I was just talking to you. I mean, live. I mean, we were recording. Okay. This is it. This is show. Yeah. Yeah. This is show. This is show. There's this dude. There's this documentary that Hamilton Morris's dad did called Mr. Death. I don't know if you ever heard of it. That means it's about. Yeah. It's a film about a guy who his dad worked for the Bureau of Prisons and the Electric Chair broke and they needed somebody to fix the electric chair. So they told this guy's dad like figure out, go find some electric and to fix the electric chairs. We can keep killing people or whatever. Because we don't have much time. And he took it home and then his kid, his teenage kid was tinkering around the garage and like fixed it on being out to him. And he came downstairs like dad, I fixed the electric chair and they brought it back to the prison and it worked. And then the prison's like, oh, my God, this is amazing. We want to hire your son to fix all the electric chairs across the country. And then eventually they started hiring him to develop new ways to execute people that weren't like because a lot of people are going to electrocute it and not dying. They're just like getting turned into vegetables. And then he eventually invented gas chambers. Then he invented, he developed what year is this? I don't know. You'd have to look it up like pre World War two or recently. No, this is not this is after World War two. I want to say this is in like the 70s. Okay. I could be wrong, but I was right around there. And then he invented the lethal injection stuff and all these crazy ways of executing people and they called him. Well, the name of the documentary is Mr. Death. And eventually there's this guy, I'm sure you're familiar with him. Zundal. This guy who we do a costume. I had a costume. I had a costume. Yeah. So Zundal found out about this guy and found out he was building gas chambers for the prisons and used him and convinced him to testify for him in court, to prove that the gas chambers and Auschwitz and all across Germany. Oh, and really dive into it. Yeah. And that convinced them and use him as like an expert witness who had no training in either shit and just figured it out as he was going. That they were they didn't they didn't work. There's no way those gas chambers would have worked. Anyways, it's just like before we started the show, I was doing a joke about saying the most offensive thing possible. Yes. And using the N word and Holocaust, but here on the live show, or the real show, we're actually discussing whether the Holocaust happened or not in the first 10 seconds. Yeah. Isn't that good? I think it's right. I think it's right on brand. I don't mind. I don't mind. So anyways, that yeah, that was a crazy documentary. You should watch it. Okay. I mean, are we asking, are we discussing the Holocaust, whether it happened or not? Oh, no, just it was just an anecdotal thing. I thought you might find it's kind of a big. That's like talking about whether your mother cheated on your dad or not. I don't think you can't just gloss over that. No, it's just an interesting like dive into like this weirdo. This like crazy character. But it doesn't sound very weird. It sounded like he was very an accurate scientist. No, he wasn't a scientist. He just got he just like an accurate in electrical engineer. He wasn't even a like he wasn't even like trained in electrical engineering. He just like was. He taught himself. Huh. You don't want this band off YouTube? No, it won't be band off YouTube. But your first question is, I saw this documentary about this super smart guy. Yeah. That says the Holocaust never happened. I called him smart. I don't think I called him smart. It sounds smart. You think? Yeah. Well, he was kind of an idiot because he got hoodwicks. He fixed the electric chair. Yeah. Well, I mean, that's a certain kind of intelligence, right? But he also got hoodwinked by the other guy to convince him that has a lot. So you feel about the Holocaust. I mean, I don't deny the Holocaust, not a Holocaust an iron. The guy how many people you think died? What? Well, I don't know. What's the consensus? Six million is the general consensus. Okay. Yeah. I mean, this is not like my expertise from my background. I kind of like whatever the narrative is. That's how I feel. Yeah. It's just a weird thing to bring up at the very beginning of an interview. Oh, I'm sorry. I'm not mad. Oh, okay. But you're like, it's like starting an interview with when do you think a child is live viable? No, I mean, I cold. He's shit, dude. I'm totally into any topic you want to talk about, but wow. Yeah. That's right out of the gate. Okay. What do you want to talk about? No, no. I'll talk about anything. My, my, my, my think about genocides and Holocaust and is, and it's not a very popular subject, but I don't really care. Like, Mal killed 80 million. Right. So like Ernst Sundel is really into going to Auschwitz and checking like the Zai clone B and all this stuff. Right. So okay. You're the, you're the guy. Right. So me, like getting into mouths greatly forward and the 80 million that were killed, like I'd have to go like with a Chinese translator and go through all these things. And that's a valid thing to do. You should question all of these horrific mass murders, like Pol Pot, Cambodian and all his stuff. Yeah. I don't have the time. I mean, I'm so concerned with today. Yes. And the massive corruption that goes on and the rewriting of history, like from last week, like we're told that the media had no idea Biden was retarded until three days ago. Right. And you go, no, that's not true. So I'm, I'm definitely open to investigating the Holocaust. Yeah. investigating Pol Pot, investigating the, the Armenian genocide, investigating all of these horrific genocides. I'm definitely sure if I have extra time, I'm definitely going to get to that. But like within the short amount of time I have every day, I'd like to investigate the media's lies about Joe Biden one hour ago. Oh, and then spread backwards from there. See, I'm kind of the opposite. I kind of don't give a what's going on in the media today that much. Really? Yeah. No. That's an interesting take. I feel like what's that blue shit in your mouth? What is that? Oh, it's the stuff. It's called methylene blue. Is that one of your sponsors? No, no, no, they don't sponsor me, but it's a, it's a, it's blue gene die. As one does. Yeah. In just blue gene die. Yeah. Or it could be fish tank cleaner as well. Okay. All right. Um, what was I going to say? So you don't care about what's going on in this right now. No, I, I, I, not that I don't care. I'm just not as interested because it just feels like something, it just feel like a big distraction to keep, don't you feel that way? Sometimes they like all the bullshit that you see in all like them. The 30 second clips on all the news media websites and all the little podcast clips that come out about Biden this, come all of that, Trump this blah, blah, blah, like none of it. Like it's just like washed your hands and repeat tomorrow. The next thing like we forgot about Trump getting almost assassinated as soon as the Olympic thing came out with all the fat trainees jumping around. Oh, I didn't forget. And forget most of them. Man, that's in my foot to low. Don't you think though that some of this cultural stuff, this culture war stuff that's happening every single day is just, it's just purposely to keep us divided so that whoever's at the top can control us. Well, it better not be or I'm out of a job. But my job is to talk about modern culture warship and how it applies to everything around us. And I mean, you're making me doubt myself and maybe I should retire. But I think that this is the most important modern culture in the history of America. I mean, that's out of the Civil War in recent history. Like if Trump didn't win, we were toast. And the fact that Trump won is huge. And now that he's winning, I want to like China spotlight on the fact that like we got the Panama Canal back. This is a big deal. I want to shine a spotlight on D transitioners. These kids were like, why did you tell me to cut my stuff? Yeah. That I shouldn't have done that. Now as far as like their mini genocide, yeah, how many people died the mini genocide? Definitely. Let's let's check that out at some point. But right now, I want you to know that, you know, schools are still woke. People are still getting canceled. We still haven't won the culture wars. And as Andrew Bipard said, politics is downstream from the culture. So I want to I want to get, I keep saying on my show, be the culture. Like if someone is at the airport in a wheelchair and they can walk, go, you can walk or at a bar. Did you tip? Like and my wife gets some, I hate these. Play a video. We'll. All right. We'll take them off. But my wife goes like, what are you doing? Why are you getting involved? You're causing a scene. I go, I'm a patriarch. This is a patriarchy. This is my society. So this guy sitting in the wheelchair who isn't paralyzed is my problem. That's my wheelchair. And I was in an argument. Is this on the Disney cruise you saw this? That's a different thing. Okay. We'll get to that. But there was these scales at my local bar. Who's that? Skels is like a crackhead loser, junkie. Okay. Piece of shit. Black guy and his fat white girlfriend. And they come in and they want to plug in the phones and they ask for a water. And I go, no, you're not getting a water and you're not plugging your phones. And the bar made is like, this isn't your bar, Gavin. And I go, is it really not my bar? Like, this is my bar I come to. Is your church not your church? This is your church. Right. Say someone is like, I don't know, spray painting. You facts on your street. That's my street. You're not going to spray paint that on my street. Right. So it's my street. It's my bar. It's my church. And it's my airport. Like I'm in Western society. So you're in a wheelchair in my airport. So be the culture get involved today. Now the fact that you seem more interested in the past, I totally respect that we need to historians. But personally, my obsession these days has been like, what are you doing? Why you ain't crocs and pajamas at the airport and the drunk where I get, the more I confront them. And that's not, because I'm going to get stabbed. You've been knocked out, haven't you? Like you got knocked out during a, uh, what was that? What was that? I was doing a pilot called the emergentist. It's a, it's a word I invented that's not very sexy. But I'm like, if you're doing journalism, don't sit at your desk, googling, like go live with them, go, go be them. In fact, I saw you have Thomas Morton on your, their racer board. Yeah, because we wanted to, we want to get him on the show. So he took my concept and made it his career. I'm hard to listen. Well, when he started advice, he was a very high IQ intern that I knew was good, but had zero testosterone. But, but was willing to do anything. He'd fight Mike Tyson. That's why we call him baby balls because he had a bottle of ketchup. He was going to smash on his head and everyone was like putting down money to do it. Yeah. And I'm like, dude, can stop like the glass on a ketchup bottle is like an inch thick. Right. You're going to cut your, you're not just going to like get a bloody head. You're going to cut your facial muscles and you're going to be Jean Kretchant, the Prime Minister of Canada. You're going to look like the Nazis. The, yeah, you're going to be like, they, baby smash a bottle of ketchup on my head. I don't like stop, dude. And he was, I had to hold the ketchup bottle. And then this dude Trevor Sims are Andrew W. Case manager goes, that guy's got balls. He's little, but he's got balls. He's baby balls. So he became baby balls forever. But what I did with baby balls, I was like, all right, like Puerto Ricans in New York, major part in New York. Yeah. As upper middle class whites don't really know them. Although I do know, I don't know how raunchy we can get in this show, but you use raunchy as you want. We can build a little post. The same guy Trevor is, is buddy Mark Ryan. They were like, how come we lived in New York for like 20 years? No one's ever to Puerto Rican. And they go, let's start in Puerto Ricans. So they go, they go up to them on the train and they're like, hi, my name is Trevor. Hi, my name is Mark. What's your name? And like, go on in Maria. What's up? And then they cross streams where these cultures weren't meant to be together. So Mark is fucking one of them. And he feels like something going on. So yeah, fishes his finger in there. He pulls out a condom. He was not wearing a condom. No time to cook. No problem. Our friends at Hule today sponsor spelled HUEL has you covered with their new black edition ready to drink. And it's a total game changer. It's a complete meal in a bottle with 35 grams of protein, 27 vitamins and minerals, high fiber and low sugar. So you feel full focused and ready for the day. No prep. No cleanup. Just grabbing go. Hule has already sold over 500 million meals around the world. And now it's your turn. New customers get 15% off at Hule.com when you use my code, Danny. Hule is incredibly affordable, especially when you compare it to fast food alternatives, plus you don't have to wait in line. My favorite is the chocolate flavor. And after drinking just one of these things, I really do feel full. It's not a burst of carbs or a protein brick. It's just the perfect balance for me. It was designed by experts to provide all the ingredients your body needs for a meal. And Hule is incredibly affordable. It's cheaper than a burger. And for me, that makes it the perfect choice for a balanced meal on the go. Get 15% off for new customers using my exclusive code, Danny, DANNY at Hule.com. Please see our description for terms and conditions. Skip a stress, not the nutrition. Try Hule today for complete nutrition bottled. It was still in there from another guy. Oh. And she's got pigtails and she's chewing gum. And she's like this and he goes, holy sh... and he goes back to work. Yeah. But he's like, I just found a condom in there. And she goes, I know that's bugged out, right? And I'm like, all right, we're not meant to be together. We're very different. So when baby balls started advice, I go, let's live with these people. So we set up a thing where he lived with like a Puerto Rican family in the project. They might have been Dominican. Same difference. Promise, little blacker. Yeah. And you know, it was a really cool expose on how different these cultures are. Like one thing they do is they don't want roaches when they have a pizza. They put it in the sink and then they soak it and then they roll it into a tube and put it in the garbage. Some junky uncle was there sleeping all day. Anyway, baby balls went on to have a pretty good career as an emergionist. And I think that's an important part of like modern cultures. Like what are you guys doing? Yeah. And we don't do that anymore. We don't know anything about each other. Which is why you have this woman where white women watch these movies where there's a bunch of trans men who are like, look here, boys. This black lady thinks she could be a scientist. Not on my watch. Meanwhile, if there's a black woman that want to be a scientist, everyone would be being off like come on in. Do I sound crazy right now? Yeah. I don't know what you're talking about right now. Okay. So white women like to watch white women like to watch movies and commercials where black women are geniuses and white men are complete. Canadians. Oh, okay. I see we're saying yeah, like can't put the furniture together and the black woman comes in and she's like, it's called an alley key. More on right. And then that's in their sitcoms and in their soap operas and in their movies. Yeah. That's how they that's how they try to make Hollywood diverse right like sinners, the new movie centers. It's these these magical Negroes who work with vampires and then the KKK is like, not on my watch more. Which may have been true at some point, but it's not who we are. Yeah. Did you watch any of the Super Bowl commercials last year? There were some interesting ones. Yeah. Yeah. I'm sure I did. There was the one with Tom Brady and who who else was it? As like an Israeli commercial. It was paid for by Israel. Wasn't it? Are we going back to the Holocaust again? Is this like an anti-Semitic hit piece? No. No, it's not anti-Semitic. What was this commercial? Yeah, play it. What was this? I could be wrong. I might just be expecting my own with a with a Vince Vaughn. Yeah, that's it. That's it. No, maybe that's not it. I said it was with yeah, this is it right here. The no hate one. Play this one. I hate hate. Put your put your have you seen hate hate hate is one of my pet peeves. Have you seen this right here? That's this commercial. I don't know. Play it for him. I hate you because we from different neighborhoods. I hate you because you look different. I hate you because I don't understand you. I hate you because people I know hate you. I hate you because I'm just positive. Yeah, positive. So Snoop Dogg is from Compton. Yes. Everyone in his community hates everyone else for being from the wrong neighborhood. Chinese even probably different black neighborhoods. Right. So he's mocking that culture. That's his culture. Tom Hardy. Tom Brady. Tom Brady. Sorry. His neighborhood masked to the concept of any other neighborhood giving a fuck about them. And they would love like if they went to Harlem and they got high five, they would ejaculate in their pants. So this is such poor shit. Snoop Dogg is lampooning this fictional black dude who is him. And Tom Brady is lampooning this dude who's not even remotely close to him. Mm. That's the thing that drives me nuts about this crusade against like Christian white heterosexual males. We need to expose their racism because it's latent. They I've known a lot of different demographics over the years. They're the least racist group I've ever come across in my life. Maybe to a fault. But like this guy and all his friends for black dude showed up to a party. I mean he might get it be like the Beatles in 1950. Like he might have his clothes ripped off. But then he's like, oh, like black. They totally sucked. Dude finish. But they're playing it. I want to see the go to the end of it. Because I need someone to blame because you talk different because you act different because you're just different. You're stupid. And I hate that things are so bad. What's on the earth? Marshall about it. Stand up to hate. Look paid for by the foundation to combat anti-Semitism. Okay. That's what I was right. Yeah. Take your head. We're tired of you know, the problem with these ADL SPLC things is like they give Jews a really bad name. And if I was in charge of Jews, yeah, I'd be like, all right, first of all, ADL is abolished as Bill Caesar balls. Like Yay says the Jews control the banks and they freeze his bank accounts. Right. If I was in control of Jewish PR, I'd be like, guys, let him rant. Yeah, you let him run. Enjoy it. Yeah. We're validating everything he says. I remember who's that guy? He was Sid Vicious and Sid and Nancy, but he was in a Playboy interview. He's British guy. And he was like, you know, if I said that the Jews control Hollywood, I'll be forced to apologize the next day. He was severely canceled the next day and forced to apologize to the ADL. Okay. Well, you just proved to say, I'm going. Yeah. Chill out. Meanwhile, as a white man, we are defecated upon every day. And we just go, man, as dads were defecated upon every day, we go, man, where do you live right now in Westchester? A suburb of New York, you lived in New York for 20 years. 20 years for 20 years. Yeah. I wonder if that's like, why do you feel like that? You feel like you're with a white man, the white Christian man is being shit on. Wait. So hold on, you start this whole thing about how the Holocaust didn't happen. I didn't say the Holocaust didn't happen. I was telling you about what you were doing. And now you're like, why are your subsets with the white dudes? Yeah. Are you like a curious? Are you like a left wing anti-Semite? No, I'm not. What do I, we're doing, we're doing pangue. I don't think you can argue that if you watch commercials that white Christian heterosexual males are the whipping post. No, I don't. I don't see that. Maybe it's because I live in Florida. Do you mean you're like a character? No. Are you doing a character? No. You're the guy. Pull up a dude. Go to live TV right now. I don't watch live TV. Maybe that's where I'm at. And there'll be some buffoon white guy trying to assemble an Ikea table. Didn't pull a black room and it's like, okay. Didn't Trump just put somebody in his cabinet that's like in charge of like bolster in Christianity in America? Yeah. An hour ago. That's how it is. It's like at least a month and a half ago. Oh, I'm sorry a month that I have ago. Is it that good for white Christian people? No, it's that bad. I think that here's the analogy I always use in my home. In my home stead. Yes. I don't even know what that word means. Does that mean like a commune in your own house? I don't know what a home stead means. If my children were to fart on my wife, they'd be in big trouble. You don't fart on mom. Right. If you fart on me, it's funny. Right. You got me. That was super stinky. Don't. Oh, Jesus. Yeah. Because I can take it. My wife is the woman of the house and she's, I don't know. She's not tough. So you can't punch her. You can punch me. We could do a thing. You punched me three times a punch you once. Right. My wife would never sit there with our kids being like, okay, you punched me three times a punch you once. Right. So I think that's indicative of a patriarchy and it's indicative of of modern society where I think we're buttholes on all commercials and in geopolitics and everything else because we can take it. And I'm going to like, okay, yeah, yeah, yeah, I got it. And here's a mouth of tangent now, but here's something I'm noticed with comedy. They want to be controversial. They can't be racist. They can't mock Judaism. They can't mock Islam. They can sort of mock Christianity, but yeah, it's bad for business. So they tend to make really inappropriate child's jokes, which I'm fine with. If that's your thing, you're like the controversial show, but you got to spread it out with like racism and other very controversial things. But if you watch like SNL, the only time they get dangerous is like an incestuous mother who's in love with her 20 year old son. And it ends up being this imbalance where kids are the only people we can fuck with. And that's gross. If you're going to do controversial comedy, you got to spread the diarrhea around on every religious group. Yes, people ageism sexism. Yeah, homophobia. Like, yes, but all around. But the way it's going these days is it's just like, what a kid, which, okay, really, I've never seen any comedy like that. Oh, yeah. I mean, I haven't been around comedy as long as you have, but I've watched a lot of comedy specials been a lot of comedy shows. But like, it's an example. SNL had this like, Quizzy game show. I'm sure you could try. And it was like the newly wedged game type of show. Okay. And that was big in the 80s. Like, what's the craziest place you and your husband ever made whoopie? They called it whoopie back then. Yeah. And one of the women was like, in the bum, and I was like, what the f- we met a crazy location bitch. Um, so they were kind of parroting that. And it was the couples were all weird, but they were, you know, normal. And then one of the couples was a mother and her son. And her son was like, I don't know, 19 in this sketch. Very gross, very weird. But you're like, okay, I'm watching the gross, weird comedy show. I can handle that. Mm-hmm. But the next joke better be the most racist shit I've ever seen. And the next joke, better be the most anti-Semitic shit I've ever seen. But they're too scared of those. So now when you see controversial comedy, it's just like, kid shit. Huh. Which is disgusting. Out of context. Why do you know what that is? Because kids can't fight back. Really? Yeah. If you make fun of Jews, you're going to get the ADL and the f- and SBLC, you make fun of Muslims, you're going to get the Muslim Brotherhood, you make fun of blacks, you're going to get BLM, this is me, riots in the street, everyone's going to get fired. Mm-hmm. Make fun of kids. They're at school. They just suffer. And that's the sign of a declining society when you pray on the week. Mm-hmm. So what seems like a throwaway joke is actually a harbinger of the apocalypse. At what point did you transition from male to female? I told you that was a secret. Oh, I asked you not to bring it up on the show. Oh, I'm sorry. Well, I tell you. You betrayed us and you betrayed our NDA. Yes. What I was going to ask was at what point did you transition into this guy, this clean cut guy with the mustache and the combed hair that talks about all this stuff all the time? I mean, I never changed. I never changed. I never changed. Let me kind of give some context. I watched Thomas Morton documentary that he made and it was fascinating. I don't want to like say that I thought what he did. Well, that thought I got a piss. I really broke the seal hard. Yeah, you did. We got to get you a bucket to sit next to you. If you want to get like five solo cups, I'm fine with that too. Okay. So you saw it's not funny anymore? Yeah. I watched the documentary. I had to get a VPN and like go like sign up for their this weird platform and I had to lie about my address being in Canada, but I was able to watch it. Are you Canadian? No. Oh, right. Dumb question. Oh, that's cool. You still got your, uh, your vice ring. No, I don't. Is it not safe? I saw it. It says hate. hate. Wow. I look at the same styles, the vice rings. Yeah. That was my idea. That was my shit with rings. I get fights in New York. You know, brass knuckles and you to jail. And I didn't have my citizenship that I was worried about being deported. If you were rings, yeah, you can fight all night. And if you get these Puerto Rican style things with the hard edges, you're going to rip someone's face on you. That would not be good. I'm actually not supposed to say that on air. Oh, because they could say you knew that those rings would do damage. But you do want me to remove it or kind of keep it in. All right. Cool. But it seems like like he went and he interviewed all of your friends, all of your like childhood friends. Yeah. All these. All set up. I mean, I mean, no one really had anything really bad to say. Because I am a good guy. Right. They were all just kind of fascinated by your this evolution of you going from like the early crazy guy, vice days, swinging your around the office and doing Coke to like this crazy right wing. No, I just didn't know. I don't know. They weren't fascinated by that. Anyone who knows me knows that there wasn't a change. This is the problem with these like when he did that documentary, he showed me these cards and it's like, I saw that. Why did you become a Nazi? Were you beaten? Did you fall down the stairs? Did you read see some documentary? And I'm like, wait a minute. The problem is your hypothesis. It's like me doing a documentary on why you became gay. Right. And I'm like, what happened? And I have all these theories like you saw. Musical you got involved in ballet, you listen to disco. And you're like, these are all great theories. I'm not gay. So when he showed me all those I go, dude, I thought you got a high IQ. This is your hypothesis is wrong. Yeah. And the media's perception is that I went right. But the thing you got to understand about pre-Trump hipster America like for lack of a better word, cool culture is the other day I was at a restaurant waiting to pay my bill. Then I saw a roach crawl out of the printer. Turns out they bought their cashier system second hand and it was old, slow, and running Windows 95. But none of this would have happened if they would have went with square. Squares gear is cheaper, touch screen. past your system secondhand and it was old slow and running Windows 95. But none of this would have happened if they would have went with square. Square's gear is cheaper, touch screen and upgradeable with software. It's the perfect solution for businesses, whether you're running a cafe, salon or selling little UFOs to people on the street. Square is simple, easy and it takes the headache out of business. I love checking out at a business that uses square. It's everywhere downtown, especially with the little startups, pop-up shops, food trucks and stuff like that. It's because the point of sale is so easy, use and integrates perfectly with their business. And square isn't just hardware. It includes all the tools to manage and monitor your business too. You can even set up an online store if you're selling digital products. Square takes all major credit cards, including Apple and Google. I'm telling you it's super simple. Square keeps up so you don't have to slow down. Get everything you need to run and grow your business without any long-term commitments. And why wait? Right now you can get up to $200 off square hardware at square.com slash go slash Danny. That's squ.re.com slash go slash Danny. Run your business smarter with square and get started today. And thank you to square for sponsoring this episode. We all had that shit going on. Like, and fed me in reptile records, Tom Hazelmeyer. He named his daughter Reagan and we're like, oh, that's the right wing guy. Johnny Ramon said, uh, kill a commie for mommy. You know, fear had a big, like American eagle on their records. Yeah. Yeah. Gangrene. We're all about Budweiser. No, like the meatman, the early punk people were like, liberal and this is 80s. Like right. The meatmen were like, uh, I'm glad I'm not a girl. They have to sit down to pee. The forgotten rebels bomb the boats feed the fish. Now, obviously punk was definitely left leaning, but there was a, you could be weird and controversial and loving. I swear a shirt that said, speak English and it had a little American flag there. And I would hang it with David Cross and like all these pattern, Oswald and John Benjamin and Todd Barry. And they were all like, oh, that's Gavin and his cookie. I just screwed driver belt buckle. And David Cross would say, where'd you get that? Like he wanted one. Now, I'm obviously not a fan of screwdriver, but it was just like, it was sort of like the punks in the 70s having swastikas or GGL. I don't think anybody listening to this will even know anything about screwdriver, which is funny. They were super offensive like white power, not seabant. So you're just like, I got something to say. For example, Robert Crumb, he did this, uh, comic called, and you could, I'll censor myself, but when the king ends take over the world and he did another, uh, three-page comic called when the God can J's take over the world. And they were both that one was a parody of races and the other was parody of antisemitism, but there was a picture of like these blacks that he drew. And it's like, you see these ends? They hate you. So I put that on a t-shirt with screwdriver on it. And it was like, like the most offensive shit you could have. And it's obviously not serious, right? And then with Trump, the nuance was gone. And there was no, there was no way to joke around anymore. And they kicked us out of culture. The, the, the, the, the nuance, right was kicked out of culture in 2015. And when I say the nuance, right, I mean, anyone who would dare even look into that shit. Uh, we weren't deaf. Like it's all like we were real Rush Limbaugh, Papi can and guys, but we were interested in Rush Limbaugh and Papi can. Let's check it out. And there was a whole, there was a, there was a spectrum. That's, that's what I should say. The spectrum died with jump. And they were like, you're 100% with us. Right. 100% against us. All of you. And it was such a weird time. Like, like this dude, John Glaser, we were best friends, uh, not best friends. But our families who go on vacation together, he's a comedy writer guy. And our thing, me and him was women are inept at loading the dishwasher. It's mind blowing. Every time I load the dishwasher, it looks like a commercial for dishwashers. Bulls, plates, and I look at my wife and she's just like plopping a bull upright, like on the top shelf. Honey, that's just going to load with water. It's not getting washed. Really? Yeah. You've never seen a woman load a dishwasher. My wife loads a dishwasher. Great. You're wrong. I'm not wrong. She does. And she's a dude. My problem. Have you seen her genitalia? Yes. My problem with the dishwasher is it doesn't clean shit. Yeah. I agree with you 100%. And that it takes my dishwasher is two hours. Really? Yes. It's two hours because of Biden is not Biden just, but like this modern shit with, like, eco stuff. I have an 80s house and I have a bar on the basement. The dishwasher is from the 80s. Dude, you could put, I don't know, King Tut's fucking, you could put his coffin in there. And it would come out sparkling bright because they boil up the water. And so anyway, we're off to tangent here. But anyway, I would get back and forth with John about dishwasher shit. You know, you have certain friends, like Lily Gaddis on our site. We send each other pictures of people at airports wearing pajamas and crocs. That's our entire text. There's no other discussion. You know, you lock in with someone and you're like, that's my guy. Like you have a friend in Ireland and you're like, Ireland at another African kill an old couple and you don't send him anything like, I'm feeling upset. I don't feel like my wife loves me anymore. That's a different texting. Yeah. So John sent me a text that was like, Hey, man, I think you know, uh, you knew this was coming. But, um, obviously I have an awesome dishwasher picture to send you, but I, I can't because you know what's coming. And I'm like, what's coming? And he goes, Trump because he knew I supported Trump. And 2015, 2016 was this crazy split that was unprecedented. Like when we were kids, when I was a kid in the 70s, you had no fucking clue who your neighbor voted for. Right. And then all of a sudden it was 100% with us, 100% against us. Yeah. And, uh, and then they had to explain why Gavin is no longer our friend. And I'm not the only Gavin, by the way, there's probably 50 million. No, there's probably 150 million Gavin's in this analogy. But they go, uh, yeah, he, uh, he joined the Nazi call. He's a racist. And then instead of going really aren't his kids like Native American, they go, no, let's find out why he's a racist. And a Thomas soul talked about this. He goes, you can go from a liberal to a conservative without changing your views when the media's narrative shifts. Yes. And I'm a socially liberal, fiscally conservative libertarian for strong borders. That was Hillary Clinton and Bill Clinton in 2004. Yeah. That was Barack Obama in 2004. It's also normal Archie Bunker dad politics. Like, do you want your dad to be pro trans? Mm. That's gay. That is pretty gay. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. My dear dad was like, don't her trans kids. What's that quote? I think I heard you say this quote, uh, which I love. I said, if you're not a libous, I'm going to butcher it. You can probably say better if you're not a liberal when you're not pushed to the line. I don't know if you're not, if you're not a conservative, you know, if you're not a liberal, I think he said, socialist, if you're not a socialist when you're young, you have no heart. Right. And if you're not a conservative when you're old, you have no brain. I mean, a conservative is just a liberal who got mugged. And if you ever make, start making money, which I assume you are, this escape from New York set, yeah, you've got to be conservative because you can get your check and you see how much the government took and you go, what the fuck? Right. And then you go, OK, well, the roads are going to be like a skate park when I go outside. No, the roads are in Iraq. Oh, the education is going to be mind blowing. My kids are going to be Benjamin Franklin. No, your kids don't know who Benjamin Franklin is. They're reading a George to Chi graphic novel about internment camps. OK. Well, what am I getting for my fucking money? Pete, buddy, gig blowing up train tracks with toxic chemicals. CIA operations in the Ukraine. I'm OK to I'm open to socialism. If the money goes where I want it to go, if you could pick where you're toxic. Yeah. I think it was brag about Northern Europe. I might be a socialist in Finland. I was in Boston recently and I never I hadn't been there in years. And I was at a bar and everyone was white and everything was organized. There was no skills. There's no crackheads around. And I go, oh, I can't why there's so left wing up here. Because they don't see the scammers and the junkies and the EBT cards, it's strip clubs and the constant, yeah, violence against police. Yeah. So they're like, we need to be more generous. Yeah, it's like that in Denmark too. Where they're like, I think even the women in the maternity leave in Denmark is like a year and a half or something insane. Sounds great. And they pay and they pay them. I think they pay moms. Like if you have a kid, they just like pay you like an extra five grand. And it's ridiculous. I hate that shit too. Because you're comparing apples and oranges. Like America has it had 30 million illegals before Biden. I think it has 40 now. Right. We probably write about that. He led in 12 million more than Ellis Island in his total 80 year history. We also have this insane. Very unique obesity problem. Yeah. Where you go. Poor people are obese. Isn't that strange? Now our poor eat too much as John Stossel said, that's our biggest problem is our poor eat too much. And they eat garbage. They eat. Go to Disneyland. And it's just spheres everywhere. Humans spheres. So driving around in those little cards. Dude, talk to a surgeon, man. They don't know what to do with these fucking pigs. Like my dad is a drunk. And he was like fixing some branch at like three in the morning with a chainsaw. He's like, this is dangerous. So I'll put on three hats. Right. Because there's nothing safer than three wool hats. And I'll put on two jackets in case I get hit. So he was like tying up branches. And he actually ended up making a Gavin's dad killing machine where when he finally released the branches, it went rock. And it sent him flying through the air and his ladder. He landed. He broke his back in 15 places. Jesus Christ. Yeah. It was rough. You wore a turtle shelf for like a year. But they went in there. They fixed them all with pins. Yeah. And the surgeon goes, I got to say, man, I did skinny because drunk stony, because what don't eat drunk stony, okay. In fact, they starve to death. But we still we try to get them Chinese food. So they're just going to drunken alcoholic. Great question. I think it's I think drunk. So drunk funny. Alcoholics are sad. Right. And drunk alcoholic is like at the bar at nine. A drunk is at the bar at three. Right. And usually the drunk don't go to meetings either. No. So the surgeon goes, I got to say, man, this is what we went to medical school for like you cut open the skin and the spines right there. These tubs of shit, you cut open the belly and just goes, boy. And so you fix what you got to fix. You have all this yellow fat. You close it. There's this vacuum, trying to open it back up again. So they they rip the sutures up constantly. Yeah, yeah. Because there's this like opening here. You can't stitch fat. Right. So don't tell me about Denmark. Don't tell me about medicare. Don't tell me about even England where there's still plenty of fatties. We are unlike any other country in the world. We were built on guns and violence. We took over the most powerful, you know, empire in the world at the time. And you're like, well, actually in Finland, you know, they could pay it into oranges. Okay. That sounds nice. We're not doing that here. Actually, there's a train in Beijing that can get you to shag on and know or okay. We got cars here too. We're pioneers. Yeah. I want to hear more about your Disney cruise. Where was that? Oh my God. Don't get me started. What did you see a lot of these fatties on your Disney cruise? And also, do the people? Are you aware of like, there's these people that are influencers and all they do is go to Disneyland and they teach you how to go to Disney. Yeah. And they're there full blown adults. I saw video an hour ago about some new park epic universal or something. And there's all these adults, like 40 years old running and screaming. It's because, okay, just to go back a little bit. Harris, what's his name on it for worse was talking about this? Asians, liberal women, blacks, gays. If we only let them vote, everything would be blue. The only place that would turn America red is white males. So let's make everything against white males. And part of that is don't breed. And when they say don't breed, blacks and Hispanics don't listen to that. Right. So when you say don't breed, white women hear it and they're like, okay, done. So you have this paternal instinct. So you like you become a firm mom and you adopt rescues. But you also become obsessed with Disney. It's like fake mommy thing. Where I don't know your husband's your baby. I don't know who the kid is in this scenario. But kids are you are. So it's a disgusting, sad culture that's pathetic and embarrassing. It's why I started the Proud Boys actually. Oh, really? Because our producer, your guy was 23 a virgin. He went to Disneyland with his friends, didn't get wasted and didn't f*** anyone. And I'm like, I'm okay going to Disneyland if you're in the butthole surfers and you guys do LSD. And it's ironic. But this was not ironic. So anyway, my Disney story is, yes, tons of fatties on the cruise. The thing about cruise people is they're not adventurous. You'll have to stop me because I have nine hours on Disney cruise. Oh, really? Okay. But they're on these like rascals. There's a one part of the hallway. There's like a chart that shows you where you are on the cruise. The fatties have that's our elephant's graveyard. They pilgrimage over there. And then they just look at the chart of where they are. You know when you're on a plane, you can see where the plane is? Yeah. You look at it for like four seconds. Okay. We're near Ireland. Anyway, back to my movie. They're just like, that's so f***ing insane. Yeah. It's a floating shopping mall. And you got to understand like travel is semi adventurous. If you're on a cruise, you're not an adventurous person. So you're not social. So at one point, I'm the, the, the lawn chairs are all touching. So I'm about to get in bed with two men. Like our shoulders might even physically touch. So I got to say something and I throw up my towel. I don't know why I'm doing this. And I'm like, all righty, here we go. And the guys don't go like getting kind of too close for comfort. Or it's some little dumb joke or come on in the water is fine or some done. Yeah. They don't have to flip. Yeah. Break this. They just stay like this. Like facial tattoos. And I do have a lot of tattoos. So okay, let's take me out of the equation. So my wife set the bar and this woman's getting a drink. And it's like three o'clock. And she goes, I'll get a margarita and my wife's behind her. And we're trying to socialize a little bit. My, I didn't know my third kid. I had a four year old and a two year old. So she gets some margarita. And then my wife does super generic social shit. Where she goes, that's five o'clock somewhere. And the woman goes like, put the camera on me. The woman goes, like, I'm like, did we Mickey Mouse? And I wasn't told about it. Brutal and the cabin is you're in an ocean all night. Really? The only way I could sleep is I pretended I was a billionaire and I was on my own private jet where yeah, it's pretty loud. I'm going over Dubai. So the only people I could talk to were the staff. So that's why I feel so comfortable here because I was in the gallows. Because my wife goes to bed early. She's a, she's a squad doesn't drink. Right. But uh, so like nine o'clock I've known hangout with and the concurred gen Xers are, I don't know, playing shuffleboard and drinking peanut coladas. So I just hung out with the staff the whole time. That's so funny. And do not go on a cruise. No, cruise is suck balls. That you don't want to go, you don't want to travel or go anywhere. Like the best part about traveling is getting in weird situations where you might die. Thank I think. And even with the family, the best part of traveling is like finding a weird place. Like in St. Martin, there's this beach. It's all French people. And they serve like cheeseburgers and beer and the kids can play on the beach. And yeah, no one knows about it. And that's your little, you know, your hidden spot. Right. Right. That's fun. Going somewhere in a car where you're driving on the wrong side of the road and you pull up to some weird cutout beach cutout where there's a guy bellowing cars here. You're not sure if he's going to kill or mug you. Thank you. That's that's the exact same truck. You're not going to get that in a cruise ship. Get your hair braided, maybe. If you go on a cruise ship, you're a loser. Sorry. Yeah. It's a mall. It is. And now it's a can get a mall. Oh, really? So yeah, they've gotten way worse. I think they got destroyed by COVID that to lower their prices. And now it's just the hood. So don't do that. Where did your cruise go? Like where was it? Where was it out of? It went through the Caribbean. You know, okay, I love it. You love it. You go St. Martin. We actually, we stopped at St. Martin and we went to some weird little, like working class French shit hall with the cheeseburgers and the beach went on for hours. And I'm like, we have to get back on the cruise. So we like made a note and then we went on a vacation the next year. We just went there. St. Martin is awesome. I love St. Martin. Yeah. It's great. St. Martin is so dangerous that when you go somewhere, it's razor-wired in and you're in like a little aquarium. Yeah. But St. Martin is open. It's the best place in the Caribbean. I used to do a ton of traveling through the Caribbean and all around like South America to film surfing back. Oh, really? You surf? Yeah. Well, not as much as I used to. But when I'm in the hospital, it's not possible. It's not possible. It's a myth. I'm like a flatter or a surfing. Oh, really? It's it's fake. What do you mean by that? I try to it can't those guys must be CGI'd because you get out to the waves. And by the time you get to the spot, your arms are Grover spaghetti. Right. And now you have to be stronger than ever. Yes. Because you have to ride with the wave. Right. I just I'm toast. I just did 750 pushups. Yeah, it's fucking brutal. Those got what the fuck is going on? It's insane. Yeah, it's a it's a it's a different kind of cardio that you build over all. Holy shit. It's like hockey. It's going to say you play for four minutes and you start puking your guts. Yeah. Yeah. That's literally like it's the most hardcore cardio you've ever done for like you probably spend. If you go out surfing in like big waves for two, three hours, you're spending maybe 10 minutes out of that three hours. When they're doing they have no upper body strength. How do they get out there? I'm in a good kanjetski. Yeah, it's weird. There's no reason though. I've been like, go to pipeline in Hawaii, which is like the most dangerous wave in the world. And you're surfing over AI, razor sharp reef. That's like that. That's like that. On the way. It's not like eight year olds out there surfing that shit. It's crazy. That's gross. Brock made them. They're not. Not not possible. And it's funny. One of the guys I used to film with, he's how I discovered vice because he got a job with vice. What year was that? God. Do you mean Jake? No, Jerry. Ah, shit. Do you know Jerry? No. He was good friends with Jake. He felt you know Jake. I know personally, but I know who he is. Great guy. You know what I love about Jake? And it's an inspiration for all dads, everyone. His dad was like a Jeffs Picoli guy. And he would go to his school and be like, Oh, Jake's got a dentist appointment. And they're like, really? I don't have that on the files here. He's like, yeah, it's really bad. He's called like, in cavities and shit. So they're like, Jake, you're just recalling dad is taking a dentist. And he'd be like, he knew what it was. And he's getting the truck surfboards in the back. Oh, yeah. Dad would just shred all they've named in and in and in and in and in and in. That's awesome. And I'm like, I want to be like that. I want to be like Jake's dad. So Jerry, I think I think went with Jake to North Korea to film that North Korea thing. I don't know. There's a whole shit thing. Jerry filmed the whole noisy. I don't know how much you followed it after you left. But that was all after you left. I discovered it after I think you left. You left in like 2008. 2008 North Korea was like around my time. That was around your dad. For some very dubious things about that. Like you gotta understand, you can't bribe your way into North Korea. It's not like Morocco. Right. So if you filmed anything in North Korea, you were allowed to film it. There's no like there's no way to do North Korea edgy. It's like doing a Soviet Union edgy in 1985. Like it's just it's that's not what happened. And there's no hidden camera shit. But they so they got in there with Dennis Robin. He got him in, right? Yeah. That was all fake too. Like that would not fake. But that was all sanctioned, I should say. Right. They were like Dennis was like their tour guide and the game of Latour through. Well, they'd already been I think. So it was a second time was with Dennis Robin. Oh, really? Yeah, that intellectual Dennis Robin. Yeah. He's a funny guy. I don't know. They've really botched that I think really far as I'm concerned. Yeah. Do you think how long do you think it took for vice to start going downhill after you left? Well, here's a beauty of that. I want the narrative to be they got rid of Gavin and they went bankrupt. Right. It was the opposite. Yeah. But here's the thing. The way history is written, they did insanely good for 15 years. But over time, that 15 years is going to compress. And it'll be like, go over to give and they went broke. Not true. But that's the way history works these days. So I think they were really in good after I left for at least five years, which I did not like. Right. That made me very upset. Yeah. I wanted them to bomb the next day. But it's also not what I'm interested in. I can hate traveling. I'm a Western show. Really? I hate. Did you live in Thailand? I lived in Taiwan. Taiwan. And I can hate China. I hate Taiwan. I hate Eastern culture. I hate them all. The mall. Right. Like deeply, I deeply hate them. Why so deep of a hatred? They're just not us. Did that develop when you were living in Taiwan? Sure. Maybe. Sure. Here's my new thing. This is a new thing I have this week. I hate closeted. It's why I hate closeted. It's 2025. Why are you lying? It's like lying about being circumcised at this point. Like why are you wasting my fucking time? My uncle was a closeted. He died in the closet. And I realized I never really knew him. Like he would be very gregarious when he was drunk. But outside of that, he'd be like, stracking the straight guy. And I'm like, OK, well, I never got to know you face. And I used to spend the summers in Scotland. So like we had thousands of hours just flushed down the toilet because you were scared to be gay. And I totally get being scared to be gay in the 50s. Gotcha. 80s, 90s, 2000s. Right. Off. Off. You don't have to be scared to be gay now. Now it's you're going to be certain. I mean, not be gay if you're in school. If you're 11 and you're like, I think I like girls. You're going to go through conversion therapy. Yeah, not sure. Maybe in New York. We'll show you pictures of. So I tell you, I tell you like it. So yeah, duplicitous people piss me off. And I like that down here. That's why I'm a Western chauvinist because Western culture is like, especially like Northeast American culture is like, the funnier face on my face. No, that's how they talk. See it a big war there. Yeah. Like, dude, what can you not like freeze that or what is that? Like put a dental flosser in it. It'll fall off or something. Like we say what's on our mind. And you know, Europeans aren't really like that, but Eastern people are just not like that. And I think that's more like New York culture. It's not really like all of America, right? Like the West Coast, they're like, they're weird, disingenuous. All about being a bastardized version of us. I don't know what happened there. New York is more like we can make fun of anybody. We'll shoot on you and laugh at it. Right. Like Joe Rogan says, it's like women and men. Men will talk shit about you to your face and then behind your back. So you're the greatest guy that ever lived. Yes. Women will flatter you to your face and then talk shit about your mind. Right. Yeah. That woman culture is Eastern culture. It's Asian culture. It's I don't know about Russian culture, but it's like all other cultures. And I was like, I saw this woman in Taipei when I lived there. And she just got fucking pre-holed by a car. Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video back to the show. And she was bleeding like a stuck pig. Oh, God. But they don't show emotion in Asian culture. And Taipei is Taiwan. It's capitalist China is communist. But they act the same. Just one group has more money. But still the same people. And she's standing there waiting for the ambulance blood is gushing out of her leg. And she's just like, and I'm like, go out. Say out. Right. Your knees falling off. But they don't they have they call it honor, but it's just like dishonesty really. Yeah. What about the guy fucking lit himself on fire or the Vietnam War and just sat there and did even fucking blink. Yeah. That's the epitome of that. Right. Like yeah. You know, like we're doing that now. You wanted that guy to be screaming. Yeah. But we have that now. We're that we're taking on Eastern culture. How many burners have we had this year? We had the dude in front of Trump's trial who lit himself on fire. We had the guy in front of the Israeli embassy who said free Palestine, lit himself on fire. And then all the lefties were like, you're a white dude. And I'm like, they don't like you, man. Yeah. You burned yourself alive. And they're all like, you don't have the right to fucking co-op. Dars revolution. Magic light yourself on fire. And you go to heaven or hell, I guess. And people like, no, sorry, why do you not on my watch? And you're like, I thought that was pretty good. Lighting myself on fire. I guess I didn't make the cut. Right. Okay. Sorry. Which should I do next time light my whole family on fire? What specifically were you doing in Taiwan? Why were you living there? So when I graduated high college, which was a dumb waste of time, there were no jobs. And I'd been a bike messenger in Montreal, which was I'd rather French kiss my dad than do that again. And that was fucking. You imagine the winters in Montreal mountain bike going through the snow at five in the morning? No, fuck no. So you could make 20 bucks an hour. Back then teaching English. Minimum wage was five bucks an hour. So you could make fucking bank and you go there and Chinese people just come up to you and they're like, you'll be at a fucking drug store buying toothpaste. And like, I talked to you, please. And they give you your dress, their dress. And you set up a point. And so I had a whole schedule of these people. And I came back with like 10 grand. Which doesn't sound like a lot now, but when you're 22, I was a fucking billionaire. And I was there for about six months. You know, it's weird. I could not get Asian pussy to save my life. How old were you? 21. Really? The facial hair. And I need facial hair because I don't have a chin. So I make a fake chin and a hair. It's a Potemkin village of chin. But Asians hate hair. They're freaked out by it. But so you get any Asian pussy when you're there. Zero. But I had my pick of the whites. Because those are the white guys. The white there was three. I fucked them all. It's possible. The whole population. Do you want to fuck this one girl who would get goose pimples when she came? Goose pimples. Oh, yeah. And I haven't experienced that before since I experienced that before. I used to I had to saying King Chinese. Every time something went wrong or some bullshit with them. Goose pimples. Oh, wow, and how it experience that before since I've experienced that before. I used to I had a saying King Chinese Every time something went wrong or some bullshit with them and she dumped me for being racist and I'm like You know, they say white black people can't be racist because they're a minority. Mm-hmm. I was a minority Can I say fucking Chinese in China? Hmm, and I believe Taiwan's in China Um, but yeah, it did very well with white pussy there, but yeah, could not fucking slay any yellow Hmm What crime and the whole thing with vice so when in 2008? I believe it was that is when oh, these are great I'm gonna have one too The whole time per month a Tom energy Magic funny. It's just a brain stimulus. It's just Xanax and Adderall in green water They get busted three years later massive scandal Definitely not fucking out of all Here you got a podcast on Adderall it's the worst experience ever I Wouldn't know what that's like anyway next question The guy probably sounded like a freak Anyway, so many questions. Why don't we try to narrow it on? Anyway, what says Are you an out of all right? No, no, could I get another beer? I? Was debating on eating ones did I walked in I won't give away your location Yeah, but I walked into a bar this morning at 11 a.m. That one right there. Yes, that's a great bar And they go you want to shot as I walk in Yes, sir, they just looked at you and thought you wouldn't need to show well apparently it was the tequila Raps mm-hmm. We're in town and they buy a bottle and then they give everyone free shots Mm-hmm. I It's a great bar by the way. It is a great bar. They're my buddy's local There's their their food is surprisingly good to which is weird. I bet you food today. It's a gay Fucking nasty food is a fed. Yeah food sleep is for queers. I fucking slept maybe two hours last night Me too, and I woke up this morning feeling like I got ran over and By a truck and then dragged 20 miles and I was debating on fucking I went I had my buddy up And I was like yo, I might need to get an out of all you got an out of all for me I drove and met him and he gave me an out of all and I was like Had it and I was looking at it. I'm like I'm not gonna do it. I'm not gonna fucking do it. You never do a whole It turns me into a fucking Emotionless robot Yeah, you know, I took you know HRT whatever it's called where your body produces more to stostro Oh testosterone. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I inject themselves with testosterone, right? But it's not that it's it's not you putting into a saucer and you're telling your body to make more I Was too much of a pussy to go full to saucer on so it's always what you're doing like like a Boosting your own testosterone is that what it is formal replacement therapy is no less It's HGH I think oh a human growth hormone maybe that's what is anyway Do you inject it in your body? No, no, it's a pill. Oh, okay, so you forget the acronyms It's a it's a it tells your brain to make more testosterone Okay, and because I got these buddies like my buddy stinks. He's a retired cop And he's he chest presses 350 pounds Wow He's a monster and he'll drink like 50 beers and not get drunk. He's like yeah, you got to do it And he goes you can't have kids anymore. You fucking balls turn into peas But who cares? Well, it's that time you wife even fucking saw your balls Exactly, and I'm like these are all strong points So I didn't want to go full-tee so I tried that shit and started going bald immediately Yeah, and this is what you got great hair for you. How are you? I'm 55 great hairline So we're at what we're losing it here is that hairline real or did you get surgery? I it's my pubes. I had my huge skin growl. Okay, and I did it myself. Okay. That's almost never done. Yeah, I'm presuming cream It looks right six back and slice No, that's my real hair, but But the thing I didn't like is I would come home and my kids felt like my my wife felt like my girlfriend And then my kids felt like my girlfriend's kids Like I was like, hi buddy. How are you today? All right. Did you play your baseball or whatever you guys do? It's like I'm not doing this. That was when you took the pills. Yeah, okay, but I think like it's just like Viagra It's sitting there on the maybe shelf. Yeah, and I may have I may become a testosterone guy But I'm waiting till it's an issue like Anthony Kumea. Mm-hmm. He was Fucking getting injected in the ass like a maniac. Yeah, and I would hang out with him. He'd drink too much And I also noticed when we would hang out he'd be like look at that ass And I'd be like what there'd be something woman like 40 feet away and then he ended up getting a quadruple bypass So Anthony Kumea. Yeah, really. Yeah at what age? 60 you think it was from doing the testosterone. I do think it was no there's no way well this genetics Yeah, there's the boozing. Yeah. Yeah, but he was fucking going hard You know, it's a big thing with like 20 year olds like like really young kids now like it's a high school That's fucking terrible high schoolers go to the gym. There's one of you super yoked So they fucking buy testosterone behind the gas station and they're all fucking injector. Okay, stop Women don't want super yoked like women don't want David Beckham And I'd also like to say as a guy who used to be young we don't want fucking like Lonnie Anderson lingerie like Tom boys are extinct right? That was my bread and butter when I was at 15 years old That's how you start getting into girls right? She has overalls in a red baseball hat And she likes baseball and you're gonna date with her and then be smooch and touch one tit When you get into your 20s you wanted to wear lingerie and scrap grass with high heels She was in all that shit, but it's a stepping stone Mm-hmm and they've aggregated tomboys from the fucking gene pool Now they just go. I'm a man. They cut their tits off right and now there's a cover time magazine said extinct And I had a tomboy on the front. No, it didn't it did win a month ago You're making this whole that up Jamie. I think you're making the shit. I wish I was I Wish I was and time magazine's pretty left Yeah, now you're you've made. Oh my god. It's fucking real. Holy shit that girl I was obsessed with that girl my whole life You know as young and also on TV. I mean, yeah, there's nothing wrong with the only one There's a hot on boys. You had welcome back Carter's wife like Jen X in the 70s. Those were our gals We wanted to kiss them on the lips the first two exist since the 90s. Is this Is this like is is time going anti-trans? Well maybe yes, I think they're also saying Tom was coming back which I hope they are like Call me old-fashioned. I don't want you to mutilate yourself and cut your fucking tits off right Have you ever seen a tit a tit yeah? I've seen one or two. It's a very elaborate piece of machinery Did you know I'm watching my wife feed a baby with one everything Did you know when they're feeding a baby the tit goes a lot of iron here? Let's produce more iron in the milk crazy. It's a lab. It's a live lab Yeah, yeah, yeah, it's not an earlobe right and they chop that off and literally throw it in the garbage It's crazy in the name of you know feminism. I think all that's the pendulum swinging on all that shit, isn't it? Yes, you're right, but people are still getting canceled. I mean really sure and there's all these holdouts I mean LA Hollywood the comedy scene in the West Coast. They're gonna fucking they're sort of like The the Japanese military when they know that The war to ended I saw a great video recently where this woman was like There's a certain demographic who transition their kids and they're never gonna admit they were wrong because you cut your daughter's tits off It's like a girl who got an abortion. She's never gonna be pro-love because you've gone so far If you become pro-life you have to admit that you killed a baby Right, so they're pro choice for life and I think these parents that cut her tits off Yeah, they're like it was definitely the right thing. Yeah, or else I maim to my child which is what's worse than maiming your child There's not much things. I guess maybe mass murder maybe I can fox has trans kids Yeah, she'll like seven seven of them. Yeah Statistically impossible. It's insane and that's the so that you did some big trans piece back And that's what that was the camel the straw that broke the camel's back for you and vice No, not at all. No, so the straw that broke the camel's back with me and vice was Viacom we were merging with Viacom and they go to like this guy There was a guy Brian Grayden I think his name is and I had the do's and don't so there's a lot of gay jokes in there And so I was always like investigating radical shit and then I think I went to this I know I went to this Amron American Renaissance conference and there I think Brian Grayden was like see see what he's up to and You know Shane was my childhood friend. I hired him to do sales We were buddies from here 12 and he was like in Canada Shane and Sruish were both like fuck man That was way too far and you're getting out of control and I would have been like okay We were handshake guys But they gave me a legal document and I just couldn't get over it So when they reached out the olive branch or when Shane did I was still so mad about the lawyer letter That I was like fuck you and then when I was I take a long time to get over things So like a month later when I was ready to forgive him he had already this is after the breakup No, this is leading to the breakup leading to the right yeah, this 2004 okay When I reached out my olive branch he was done Like this is like whenever you hear about this like like what's your name at? This is so strange times because it's always been a wild phenomenon I mean people who are grew up as friends for so long and then one of them just fucking cuts all ties all communication everything Well at 90% of the time it's mistimed olive branches So he reached out his I snapped it away and then when I reached out mine It was dead. He snapped his away. That's really what it comes down to and there was a woman in New York Times She's the executive editor. What was her name fucking Laura? Of a bit of it or something and I said to her once I go What it really comes down to is you didn't have beers with pinch pinch was the? Arthur Salzberger Jr. That's why the Japanese get drunk with their employees You got to get drunk with your coworkers you guys should go get pissed like once a month When you don't do that, I don't know you drift apart when you get drunk with your coworkers You you re-established connections and you realize oh, you're a human being right when you don't do that You you drift apart. Yes, and that's what happened with us We were like three amigos. We bought a house together in Costa Rica. We were party together every all the December You know all of January all of July and then I fell in love with this woman and I left the the trio And they think they I don't think they you know openly resented that but it was like who the fuck is this guy and then they go on a golf trip with Johnny Knoxville and shit And I'm like I'd rather just be with my girlfriend and right you know go skiing or something right so that was the beginning of the end all of branches smashed and Yeah, we never recovered from that so the more the story is if you if you have a big company and Then and then and then and then there was the pressure from corporate via comp to get rid of me I want it But I could have survived that if I hung out with those guys more and drank more Did you see that coming with them like when they started courting that VC money? Did you like how how clearly did you see that coming? That's a great question and the funny thing is my role was always being their worst nightmare Like I was the Grinch the sole Christmas like from day one we used it in Montreal days we would go to the printing press when we were a newsprint and we had to wait like six hours at the Press to check the reds and the yellows and the greens. I think it was bullshit. Whatever you do more green Please like I think it was just a gesture, but anyway, I would draw. I'm a good cartoonist I would draw the most horrifically insulting cartoons of them and Saruch looks like Gonzo from the Muppet show and I would draw like his bags under his eyes and I would I would take me like 10 minutes and I would show him and they'd be like Jesus Christ that is so Horrible and then I draw Shane is this big fat useless tub of shit And I would show him and Saruch can take it on the chin, but Shane is very sensitive and he'd be like you know what the ducks will expect on you And I'm like this fat tub of shit looks bad on me And he's like yeah, it shows how you see people So I was just like the screwdriver belt buckle on the street English like I was always the bad guy Yeah, it is silly Batman villain kind of way so There was no really writing on the wall in that sense because that was the culture and in fact with five That was that was the would you say that kind of attitude and that mindset was the whole soul behind vise, right? And I that was our business plan our business plan was Gavin and the Sid vicious guys were Kentankerous nightmares and then the sales guys hated us They were like mom and dad right and we could never be friends And I remember when I tried to transfer that to vice UK They would do these advertorials where it's a five-page article about tiger beer and how awesome it is and I'm like Do it No person reading this is like well, I guess For I should be love's target beer. I guess it's a delicious beer and they just found it upon themselves to talk about Target beer for five pages No, dude. It's clearly they paid for this fucking shit. Mm-hmm. So We had this Kentankerous relationship and it was fucking fun I gotta say like I have this joke where I add the word care into everything Where people like hey man, I just got my diploma and I'm like hi I just got my diploma in care Because I don't care that you got your diploma, right in care. Yeah, like care was the con the constant thing Sorry, I'm late. Sorry. I care. I don't know. It's always there. It gets funny 37 times into it. Okay So this I remember one time there was this sales guy Kavi White was me and Jesse Pearson who was the managing editor at the time and the sales guys walking by the cool section The editorial section we made the advertising guys the nerds in the other section Right and there was literally a wall between us so he's coming out and he's with some radio guy and he goes hey hey guys are more like oh, hi and He goes this is the radio dude. I was telling you about Who wants to advertise with us and I go where does he work? C A R E FM? and then we all died because we don't care and That chips away after a while especially when you get to via calm levels. Yeah, and eventually it breaks and Yeah, they were like I don't like this advertising hates at editorial. I mean we'd still we still drink beers with them on a Friday night That's my dad's thing my dad always said I'm a terrible person to work with I'm a great guy to drink with and That's always been my philosophy work should not be fun Besides this right so like work sucks What the fuck are you doing get your notes together and then you know Friday at five? Let's go to the bar and I'll hang out with you were buddies But we're like working on the chain gang. We're like chipping rocks right but like You were a you were in charge of all the content with all the content. I always read tar I was literally retards We had Ari the rugged man the rapper. He had severely handicapped kids I mean siblings. Oh Like broodles and we just got work for you. No. He was a friend. Okay, but we did a Like a advice column right I was I would answer questions as a retard I was women. I was a black guy like because they said you're writing as in diverse enough So I just became all the people that they wanted us to be black female Retarded whatever you want. That's the best way to handle diversity. Just have a white guy do it That's your pull quote That's fucking hilarious. Well, there was like There was and I've heard this described by Hamilton. He says there was like three who's Hamilton Morris Was he after you? I'm a smarten. Oh, Hamilton Morris Hamilton was he did he come in there after wings? Bill I don't really think I know well interesting Maybe he came in after you you have you ever have an Hamilton's pharmacopia Nope, oh that's the guy who did like the drug videos. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, the chemist couldn't know unless you got a stand-to after I left I was so resentful that I would see that logo which I can only tolerate like now Right 40 years later. Yeah, yeah, so I wouldn't watch any of the shows right Was there a video when you were still there? Yeah, we guys were already doing that. Oh, yeah We went David Cross and I went to China and We We had a company make us apple pies called all American apple pies with an American flag in them And when you pull out the American flag it's plays a star spangled banner with like a little machine in the apple pie Wow, and it said American made on the south in China in China. Yes We did a million funny things are we went to a bar once when we were there and We met the owner and he's like what do you guys doing here? We go? We're in a band The fucking government doesn't want us here because we're too revolutionary and they took all our equipment So I guess we can't do our tour and he goes you can't play here You can play your show here and I would give you all kindly go. I wake up drum. We got we got bass I was lying obviously right Jake was one of the guys. Oh really yeah, so we had a show the next night I was on drums Like Jake was like Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait like we just said no clue what you're doing No, we none of us can play instruments and David Cross is like yeah, yeah, yeah, we're totally rocking. Yeah, yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, that's hilarious At one point we did a Sketch that was purely spontaneous. I bought a racist mask With like long fumentu things and a chinky eyes and I'm trying to buy like a watch in the market in Beige of Shanghai and The guy's like oh you got to pay like off 20 bucks and I'm like oh I get what's happening because I'm guy gin, right? I'm a fucking white guy So you're gonna give me the white prices Yeah, I know what's happening here fuck you and then I go around the corner I put on the racist mask But I put the like hat back on in the jacket So I come back and I'm like oh, oh, oh, oh, oh like with big buck teeth The guy was funny enough to get the bit with no introduction and he gives me a total crazy rebate On it and then I buy the watch for like two bucks. Oh, Jesus. Because he was funny enough to understand I didn't know Chinese people could be funny, but well we did like a hundred of those dumb sketches and Shane and I don't know the high-bashed it. It was vice. We were you're asking me about pre-video When I was a pre-pre-split when I was there right right right right right right right right? Yeah, we did tons of stuff. I mean I was the head of vice TV I was in charge of that we did a pilot with Johnny Knoxville and a pilot with David Cross You know what's funny about Johnny Knoxville uh Those guys have ball-fucking in there like DNA. Yep. So you'll be at MTV Talking of Brian green or not Brian green the the fag I talked about earlier or some like major player at Comedy Central Jeff Tremaine Johnny Knoxville all those guys when they're like waiting in the hallway for a meeting They're all like this at all times. They're always covering their balls covering their balls Like it could be a funeral. Yeah, it could be like we could be meeting the president getting the the congressional medal of honor And they just be like Waiting there because they flick fucking balls. Oh my god. It's just in their DNA now It always protect their balls one time. I was with Knoxville and Jeff Tremaine at That lemme bar in LA Hollywood something Hollywood bull whatever it's called anyway, Tremaine Steve O leaves his phone on the bar and Tremaine picks it up He caught starts calling his ex-girlfriends. Steveos and he does a perfect stevo. He's like hey, I miss you so much. I'll pay for your fucking uber Get down here. I want to be with you so bad And Steve was on a date so as he comes back from the bathroom like all these exes start appearing Oh my god Dude those guys are advanced is that how spike Jones got into the whole vice loop. Yeah, that was good through you spike Jones got in the vice loop I saw adaptation and I go that's the we went to a premiere And I go that's the greatest film ever made I connect to nursing the oh my god It's in my top five really yeah, but I don't want any spoilers But there's a scene where what's her name? Meryl Streep or something she's on a porn site Because her boyfriend filmed her and I go it's like greatest movie I've ever seen But why would Meryl Streep? Character Meryl Streep's character except being on a porn site That's not her personality like the woman who are okay with being on porn sites have like neck tattoos And they do crack they're not like classy brats and it bothered him a lot. He was like fuck Always guys if you're watching screen all movies through me. I will tell you I will tell you the hole in the plot But then I felt like Shane and Eddie they kind of like stole spike from me. Oh really didn't like adaptation So and then they started vice film which yeah So when you when you guys started courting those BC code that word courting courting yeah, we bought viacom flowers and chocolates Are you serious? No actually you want to know courting Back in the the news print days in in Montreal The record labels were the only people advertising in like weekly we were monthly's but whatever right like think of the village voice That's right. We were These record labels were like we want to hire women too I'm a dude so I'm too busy like Getting CDs to the customer and signing bands and doing real shit. There's a woman here what we got to give her a job How about you just buy ads in news print shit? So our boss is in a sense Were these women and they were fucking Cougars and I think one of our co-workers like peers They had a graphic design firm called Helio Zilla And they're like ever noticed that the only way we could move ahead is to fuck these 40-year-olds And I'm like yeah, that seems to be an issue and he goes They're fucking cougars. It's what they're I think he copyrighted the word didn't copyright I think invented the word cougars, but anyway Shane was our sales guy and the poor guy had to eat out these 40-year-olds when we were like 22 And we always said back then we go we ate our way to the top And I don't know why this stuck with me so much, but you know before I hated Shane I loved him And he told me about it some he went to dinner with and she was a cougar and she ran like universe Now I said Asian American. Oh my god. Did you hear your racist? Yeah Do you hear people say Asian? Unfucking believable. That's sad. I feel sorry for you So anyway, they're having dinner together, right? And I'm can you see my hand? No, okay. Can you see my hands? Yes So they're having dinner together. She's eating not looking at them. They all have short hair by the way Which is what if you're fucking woman from behind? And she has short hair. You're looking down at a 12-year-old boy I got into bed with a lady Now a 12-year-old boy you read me That's why I would say the ladies Fucking grow your hair out. I don't care how thin and gross it is grow it up. But anyway So they're at dinner and They're eating and she her hand is on the table and she goes like this You know what that means? What was it mean put your hand in my hand? I don't know is that the holocaust? Like that's the worst thing I've ever heard and to this day if anyone goes like this to me I I'm like the Hulk I just go chew And I start killing everyone in the room Like and he didn't want to be there. She showed up in a limo picked him up. Mm Am I not does that sound revolting to you? Maybe I'm not it sounds weird. Yeah Yeah, I don't know. Maybe I can imagine you're fucking a woman Who's old and ugly you don't want to fuck her and you're at dinner with her and Her business is contingent on your business's success And she decides to Harvey Weinstein you we were high for Harvey Weinstein And it wasn't me. It was mostly Shane right right right right but to go like That's worse than Harvey Weinstein. Yeah. Yeah. At least Harvey was like blow me and I'll get you in a movie right did he ever go like Just calling you over like you're just like she's give me a hand to give me your hand give me your hand Yeah How about uh have you seen what's what Candice Owens is doing with Harvey Weinstein? She's been dictating him. I just saw that today Yeah, really yeah. Oh man. I don't know no. She's been I think she's been going at this for months now, but Um apparently you got me too apparently he's innocent. I agree Very unpopular opinion. I Love how fast you were to agree Well, this is him he canceled Oh Harvey Weinstein did nothing wrong nothing he said suck my dick and you could be in a bunch of movies What would happen if Harvey said that to you? You'd be like no, thanks. Guess I won't be in a ton of movies Not on my radar. Thanks. Oh God Marissa told me it was like he said if I don't fuck him. I won't be movies. Okay. Get another trade then Yeah, I feel the same way. He's holding a gun. I feel the same way about P Diddy He'd be 37 times. Oh my god. That's horrible. What kind of cage were you in? I would go home and then I would come back for the next Okay, what did the police say? Oh, I didn't go to the police. Mm-hmm. Okay. Get the fuck out of here And this is where it gets real controversial Jeffrey Epstein couldn't care less Now um if you find a 12-year-old Jeffrey Epstein couldn't care less. I couldn't care less But oh, you know, you know, you know, Jeffrey. I don't give a shit Now if you find me a pre-pubescent girl That was there against your will by all means I want to murder everyone involved with an m16 and bury them under the fucking yeah Jelhaus yeah, but like a voluntary 17-year-old well, I'd like to beat up her dad but All these post-pubescent sex party shit I think it dilutes the actual child trafficking Children yeah, they are being shipped all over America right now to the tunes of hundreds of thousands Well, it was that with the Jeffrey Epstein stuff. They were shipping over like 12-year-old. Okay If I looked that up, I couldn't find it, but show me a 12-year-old and now I'm mad Jean Luke Bernell the fucking The French modeling agency guy was shipping over 12-year-olds to Epstein Island. Okay. I'm a young girl. You show me a 12-year-old. I'm in You see I've seen his 17-year-olds. You see that I don't like you know how many fucking 17-year-olds the Beatles fucked Oh my god. That's so funny. Have you seen you? I'm sure you've heard all the songs right? What's the kiss song? Yeah 16 Sexy and 17 the Beatles that there was a girl there's a um a Rick James song too There was a very hot Puerto Rican girl the Jimmy Page kidnapped Uh I will concede she's one of the prettiest women I've ever seen big fucking fat lips, but David Bowie fucked her she was 14 at the time Led Zeppelin fucked her Jimmy Page kidnapped her and she's in a book called groupies I don't like that It's not at the top of my priority list because it was voluntary, but uh, I want to focus on fucking Children there's children. There's 350 Not at the top of my priority list because it was voluntary, but I want to focus on fucking Children there's children. There's 350,000 missing children from bidens Let's focus on that please and I'm dubious of all this Weinstein Epstein Did he stuff where you're just like ah, there's sexual transgressions. No, no, no There's adults being gross. We're like this dumb bitch had to lick come off some male prostitutes back Gross don't want to hear about it. Then there's fucking children Right, right, right. Can we focus please right? Yeah, the did he say the did he thing is like who gives a fuck? I could not how many gay or I assume that was going on your rich right right probably on the deal Sure your fucking drinking come off some dudes forehead. Mm-hmm. I don't what I'm actually mad. I have to hear about it Yeah, no, it's definitely distraction from the real disgusting Scoop no some whistle blower who worked at a what's it called h and h human h h are She goes we kept shipping kids Mexican illegal kids to the same address and we knew that address with a sex trafficking address and I said to my bosses and thank God for this woman being brave enough to go to James or keep with this She goes I said to my bosses. That's a sex traffickers house and they said yes I know but we only get sued if we keep kids too long, which is kind of a Biden thing We have to keep the machine moving and she said sex traffickers don't sue So if we can keep the kids going to these homes where they get time at eight nine ten eleven We don't get sued so we're good and we're doing our job This is again women in the workforce like they get they get so devoted to their job that they're like yeah Let's kill some kids. They always say I'm often a tangent now, but they always say like women should rule the world There'd be no more wars. Yeah, we tried that it's called paganism They sacrificed babies and virgins to their stupid fucking Grass-gods who did the pagans pre Christianity like in Ireland and All over Europe. Yeah, so I don't want to go back to that. Well, they still I mean they sacrificed baby even Christians In early Christians were sacrificing babies. That was just part of the world back then wasn't it? Human trafficking was like ubiquitous in antiquity. Are you an atheist? No, not atheists. Okay But I'm not a Christian. What are you? I'm not really. I'm like I'm a unique. I'm a religious eunuch I'm Muslim. I'm a Muslim. I'm a Muslim. I hate when they say Muslim You were a Muslim. No, I had a Muslim on the show. What do you call him a Muslim? I call them a muzzy a muzzy. Oh, yeah, I'm not compatible with you didn't you used to say Jesus was a fat I did say that yes, not proud of that Why that's just trying to be controversial. You're just trying to I was an atheist back then you're trying to get people going Yeah, I said that I just trying to be rude. Oh, okay. Yeah Um, I mean there's evidence Abraham Lincoln was a fat. It's kind of back then I was you know in media and what you want to think outside the box Podcasts are gay. Mmm. All right. Sure. Just trying to get people riled up Yeah, you want to say something like like Jonathan Swift with his a modest proposal We said the Irish are overpopulated and they're starving. Let's have them eat their babies Hmm, I was just trying to beat I regret it very much, but uh, I was an atheist until my daughter was born I said this on Joe Rogan show which is now deleted, but uh, he deleted it. Yeah, both my Joe Rogans are deleted um, I saw her off to the spot if I saw her heel and The fact that that she was a baby the fact that her little heel She's 18 now is going to like change and develop and always be the perfect amount of padding and then And that sounds too rational and then I I honestly felt God When I was in bed Blow me no, I'm just kidding. That's a joke. That's a joke. Don't don't make me my plane crash No, I was in bed with my wife and I I felt God and I woke up my wife and I went I love God Really? Yeah, so there's a rational. You woke up. I woke up. I'm a silly. I told your wife. My daughter would been like this beat like 2007 and I woke up and I go I love God And that's kind of like they always go how could you prove to an atheist that God exists? You could show him like the shroud of turn and all this data But he really got to kind of feel it and God was like I'm here and I've been because of the miracle of watching your child be born. I think there were two separate things One was a rational Thing where I saw her heel and I was so impressed with what God has created But then secondly was purely spiritual and it was God coming in and being By the way, I'm right here. Hello. That's how he talks. That's interesting Hey, dude. I was waiting for you. It took you so long. So do you go to church every week? I did After I got canceled though, I live in a very liberal neighborhood. Oh, really and When I would bring the family church was all like so You know, it's funny you hear this I'm actually biting some of my stand-up, but You hear about black people and like when I was young They would touch my hair for good luck And you're like that sounds so bad like this And they go like code switching. I have to code switch where when I'm with my cousins I'm like yo, what's up motherfucker But when I'm at work, I have to say hello. How are you? So maybe the church you'd have to code switch. Yeah, we all do that bitch Uh, and then I realized I'm in like I'm black in 1945 I'm married to a white woman in 1945 they vandalized my car They throw fruit at my fucking house. They zig-hial me when I'm out with my kids They ostracized my children just like the black girl at school that had to be escorted to the school That's my daughter like she was eating lunch alone And this is after the whole Proud Boys This is going strong since 2018. Yeah, and Anthony Kumi actually made up this joke where I like I get to the like kids baseball games like I'll be at one tomorrow And I could see the liberal whites just proportionally Jewish, but whatever and I could see them like oh The next year And my attitude is like I'm like a fat black guy in 1939 And it's like I don't want no trouble all right. I just I'm like crumpling up my bucket hat I just I just want to see my boys game now. I don't need no trouble. You you're all enjoy your game As your kid not have any friends All these friends are black believe it or not really. Oh, you come full circle. Well these classes can't liberals They're actually racist so they don't like the blacks exactly they're into eugenics system It's the horseshoe theory. Yes. So they've met so my house is Harlem and not just my 12 year old but my 6 year old black and he black black Now there's their middle class blacks who live in a white neighborhood, so it's not exactly like fun But whatever but But I just think it's funny that the ones that don't give a shit Well, I don't say read Huffington Post right right right right right right right right right right right right They worked their asses off to move to a white neighborhood So they're like too busy kicking ass and taking names to deal with like what does that fucking What does MSMBC say about proud boys? I don't know if they know I'm a proud boy, but But it's funny how I get to these baseball games and I can see the parents like Yeah, and I go like 10 feet from them And I just sit there ringing my bucket hat like hooded one no trouble now. I'm with just a watchin my boys Occasionally there'll be some like white guy who speaks to Negroes who will come over to me And they're like hey, hey Gavin. I'll be like look man. Don't you don't need to come over now. Don't do it. Don't do it Save yourself. Yeah, don't you be wrecking your life? I Have a couple guys who own restaurants in town. I'll like just come out the restaurant. I'm like no no so I don't want to be wrecking your restaurant. I mean no need grow coming around there Eat my fried chicken. How's it made you paranoid? Yeah Yeah, sure as I got him as I got used since the when this hold of bakka happened what 2001 I'm sorry 2018 when I did the parody of otoia yamaguchi killing the head of the Japanese socialist party which is on my website sensor dot TV is this the the talk you did yes at the Republican show just a joke, but the The left was getting a very bad reputation with antifa and everything so They needed violence from the right and I actually got a call from a Jew named Mike who I kicked out of the Proud Boys were going to Charlottesville and He goes dude. They're looking for a photo op tonight. I know I'm out, but They want violence from the right So here's what you got to do bring pillows and when Antifa attacks you you'll be in a pillow fight So the Proud Boys did bring pillows. Yeah, they that night There was like I've done talks at that place before the Metropolitan Club and there was like zero protesters and it's always like a hundred people all my shows are like a hundred people and This night was like 500 people protesting they glued the locks they smashed the windows They called the old lady who runs the Metropolitan Club and like you're a fucking whore Like a call from all over the country. Oh, yeah call from all over the country too. Not New York um And then there was this dude John he showed up and he was a journalist he got the shit beat out of him by Antifa They stole all his equipment 12 of them jumped him Gavin Wax who now works for Trump He was there with his buddy and they go holy fuck Antifa's jumping a dude They grabbed them. They got the cops involved. They arrested four people Kyru so Caleb Perkins Finnbar Sloan him one of those dudes was in the Thomas doc right I don't know I think one of the guys got arrested. He said he was in prison watching them. Oh, yeah No, no those I'm getting to those guys. Okay, so they arrested all these Antifa dudes They go to court lawyers appear out of the ground like corn When you arrest Antifa and they're just like these are guys are innocent Free to go so We're kept in the Metropolitan Club. They dispersed the crew all the protesters are gone and the protesters were weird They were like a brown turtleneck with a blazer. Yeah, yeah, you're from Turkey, dude You're not America. You've been hired. They had this banner like Asian over motties on our turf It was like a big cloth banner that was a hundred feet wide embroidered. What is that? $13,000. Where'd you get that together? They're throwing glass bottles of piss at us, which are the the P. Didi Siroc bottles Which are probably 80 bucks each. I don't fucking know like the Siroc So they they must support the vodka and piss in them and they're trying piss at us So they leave the pillows at the fucking venue Because everyone's gone they go to the subway to go home Antifa didn't leave they went around the corner They flank them. They jumped the Proud Boys They go you want to go? Proud Boys go yes Proud Boys are losing at the beginning The other guys start showing up. They win win 17-second fight they the cops say to Antifa do you want to press charges? They go fuck you pig I just got punched in the face like 70 times. Oh, sorry Like where were you and The cops go okay. Well, there's nothing for me to do here. There's no mutual combat. Right So the whole thing's dropped They record to the bars that night Max and John are joking about it and it wasn't a big deal It would be like me telling people tonight that I did your podcast not that it's not a big deal But like where were you I did Danny Jones podcast. Oh, okay I wouldn't be like you guys are not gonna fuck up a litmus so We forgot about it that night and next day de Blasio Fucking Cuomo everyone is tweeting hate has no place You know how they always get their little word like with the fucking trump and South Africa where the word was ambush and they all say ambush So it was hate has no place in New York. They all kept repeating that Like dozens of tweets from all the top brass in New York And those guys are yanked into court four years in prison One of the guys was brown. We call him brown. David. He's Indian And he was one of the three and they go you're looking at four years with these guys And he goes I think you're bluffing I think you're gonna make this whole thing about white supremacy And you can't use it on me because I'm not white and you're gonna chicken out so he like All in poker James Bond shit And they were like Okay, you're free to go Really? He's gone And John kensman's wife is black as black can be she's not black like Cosby show black she's like oh the fuck oh what the I love her but she's like Black woman from the South side of chica And she told me because we would go visit them every few months We drive for like six hours six hours there six hours back And she was like when I was at court with them I would go piss and all the cameras I could hear the cameras as I walked to the bathroom I could hear like Of John and then when I came back and sat with him camera stand And at one point he was like get the fuck out of here One guy from the daily news I could look up his name He gets down on his knees like James Brown and shoots up so this becomes this And it's a zigile And I had my buddies going dude why is your boy zigile and it's so fucking dumb. I'm like he wasn't Wow And this is all so it wasn't Until 2021 the January 6th thing until you got all censored off all the platforms right? No, it was that night. Oh, it was oh, it was on October you got in October 12th 2018 Band from Pinterest Mailchimp Shopify Fucking Australia. I got a piss. Go piss Here's the thing what I get that there's like suburban activists like moms But as far as the right and the left goes suburban Activist moms. Yeah like they want to terrorize your kids and stuff They want to terrorize your kids. Yeah So as far as the right and the left goes the right has a problem with lack of unity We're like oh you support Israel fuck you you're dead to me The left has the opposite problem where they're like oh you some kids well we could work it out Huh, just trying not to do it again So when when I was vilified when I moved to the burbs during this 2018 shit Like the suburban moms got word from Antifa that I'm a Nazi And they were like I got it from here So it went from like banners on the highway inches He's talking to this banners on the highway saying like a fascist lives here Yeah, two like the local moms putting signs on our lawns and signs everywhere and all sides and your lawns Oh, yeah Dude, I I could do a whole podcast on the insane shit they did my babysitter when my kid was four my babysitter's parents Told her to quit Because She's working for fascists. No, sorry my babysitter's Boyfriend's parents told him to tell her to quit. She said no, he dumped her Jesus Christ 17 year olds imagine being like if I was 17 and my dad was like I need you to stop deep nut chick come She's a fucking slut by the way I'd be like totally done dad. Yeah, she's totally dumped Anyway, I'm not to see the movies with Kim like why don't I? I at my the place that repaired my computer got boycotted into into extinction because they fixed my computer and Their obviously fascist if they fix my computer so you don't want to put your computer there They'll get your banking information Immigrant from Portugal, but god so that was the kind of you know barrage of attacks. Yeah Um, but it was based on antifa propaganda Yeah, and these these left wing moms are Perfectly so the analogy I would use is new Canaan Connecticut is a right-wing place Imagine a family move. This is about 20 minutes north of me Imagine a family move to new Canaan and the Nazi skinheads were like These guys are lovers they're fucking race mixers put signs on their lawn and ostracize their children's and the Children's and the conservatives moms in that neighborhood were like got it Thanks Nazis were on it So the weird thing is like antifa and suburban moms Yes, we're on the same page. Let's work together whereas Nazi skinheads and fucking conservatives Take each other's guts. Yeah, I'm not saying they should like each other but The level of unity on the left is fucking bizarre. Well, I mean, Nazi skin. There's no Nazi skin. Well, you know I'm being hyperbought. Yeah, any kind of Like grippers for each I just like okay grippers if grippers told new Canaan moms that this neighbor's a bad neighbor New Canaan moms would be like who the fuck are you you're into frogs get out of my face right? Yeah, the whole thing is strange. It's like it seems like every couple years the whole thing just morphs and shifts into something else it seems like the Like even like the whole idea of Right and left is constantly fucking changing. It seems like Well, yeah, but that's not oversimplified. What's really happening is the whole Centrist thing is moving to the left and if you have Obama and the Clinton's politics of 2004 you're a radical right-wing lunatic. Yeah meanwhile, you're left to center on any normal spectrum So they just keep pushing it farther left and I think what's happened post I'm gonna go back two months post two months is You move the over to window too far to the left Your fucking insane We're not joining you anymore That might be bad use of over to window you you move the political spectrum too far to the left and We have nothing in common with you anymore. Look at who the left has to offer I don't know where you are in the political spectrum, but I look at like AOC Bernie Sanders Ilhan Omar like Gavin Newsom absolute fucking clowns Yeah They need their debt. There's definitely a void there's a There's a gap there and they think it's Joe Rogan They're like why do we why are we so unpopular? Probably because Joe Rogan controls the young people's brains. No, dude Joe Rogan was a lefty by the way you ruined your brand and he moved over to our side barely Yeah, the reason that everyone hates you is because you you have no policies you have no No, no views. You just have fucking radical weird losers. No, it's white people. It's like a fake puppet show and What's it gonna say I was gonna like I was explaining the um No, I was talking about unity on the left versus disunity. Oh, I remember I was gonna say no Wild idea imagine if the left Was able to get Candace Owens to move over to their size and they fucking made Candace Owens their leader and ran Candace Owens She's too radical. She's way too radical It would be a smart move though, wouldn't you sure good luck with that with her going against that you're here? She's saying things like McCrone's Wife is male which she she may very well be yeah, you might be right on that, but she's she's she's Alex Jones She's very outside the box check where you go. That's the stupidest Crazy thing I've ever heard of then you look it up and you're like, man Mm-hmm. That's actually pretty true. I discovered her. You know you discovered. I discovered Candace Owens Really and then I became a pariah as she was moving up I tried to get her on my show and she said no and then I When I started my new website since her dot TV as I had some investors where they go Let's get right in left talking again, and I go dude. I tried but okay How much money you got they go what let's spend a hundred grand trying to get the left to talk? So I got Cornell West I watched that that was great. Yeah. I got Candace also none of the right people charge me money Michelle Malkin was like hotel and plane and culture was hotel and plane Candace was like how about 15 grand and I was like Well, I did discover you, but okay, you know, we're never speaking ever again And I never spoke to her ever again What year did you ask film that the Candace Owens one Candace Owens court? Oh last one let's say three or four years ago You want to know a secret about that? Yeah While the cameras were off Candace was like we have a problem. I Think I'm paraphrasing here, but I think she may have said we have a IQ problem Time up blacks that's paraphrasing, but it was something like that and then Cornell goes Yes, but you get one of these brothers in front of a soundboard and he just makes absolute magic. Oh, that was in the show However, that made it to the show that part the IQ problem. I keep it in getting but he said something about Yeah along the line. I kind of agree with them in that Like it's terrible to say it's white supremacy to say whites are better at systems and blacks are better at other things But they got some of the coolest shit that they're good at Music jazz rap whatever sports. Yeah, yeah, those are very cool things. What is what are whites and the argument is this is white supremacy? What are whites arguably genetically better at systems? That's not cool. That's like being a wood chakra beaver Like we're better at making sure these mics work. Is that really? Am I allowed to have that? I can't have that like for example, I'm on the plane on the way here this morning and The fucking announcements are so relentless. It took all my willpower not to go Shout out like we are coming through with a cart. All right. I'll can I wait to the cart shows up Fasten your seat but no smoking. Did you know that? You can't smoke really? I thought it was 1972 And I could just sit here smoking away with my little ash tree It's so far. They still have the fucking signs there. They have to tell you do no smoke. It's it's 40 minutes of announcements And they're fucking loud and I felt like if there's a white man in control of that scenario He'd be like guys the announcements are getting a little abrasive. Let's take it down and not okay No more minutes a white man word control if white man or in control of the announcements on a plane Is one of my most controversial views Um We'd get like a tenth of what we get they repeat themselves too We're gonna come coming by with a jet blue card. He said that All right, you said that and I think that white men are good at going All right, no more Coffee in the front room It's blocking people when they walking right. You know what I mean dumb shit like that dumb system stuff But uh They've been kicked out of those jobs So now there's the lunatics are running the asylum and we have 40 minutes of fucking announcements And that's also why you see people getting canceled because they get a call that A racist is working in our bees and there's some woman there is like uh-oh I better bring this up to HR And HR is a woman and she's like okay fire him But like a Clint Eastwood type of man would go yeah, that's not what we're doing. That's ridiculous. Anyway, get back to work Right, so the fear of whites white supremacy is led to whites abjicating their throne as good at systems guys and Systems are suffering and we're in a competence crisis now where complex systems are falling apart And no one knows how to fucking run an airplane anymore So let these guys back at the helm or the other problem with systems is Politics is a system right so white men should be disproportionately represented in politics Sorry, we're just good at it. It's not cool Politics is like taxes capital gains tax state tax. You know what borders should be where Interest rates. I don't know why after you're bad about being good at this boring shit. You can fucking slam dunk Run with that right? Asians they're great at duplicating White systems and making a car better than the car we made. Mm-hmm. That's cool But yeah white males have to be ashamed of systems and I think that's going away though, don't you think that's starting to Like I said early don't you think this whole white's blaming it white supremacy for everything was white supremacy is the problem You paint everything with white supremacy that broad brush is like it seems like the culture is like cultural shift happening We were absolutely right more people are but take take a sock the size of this building and Fill it with sand. Okay, and there's people at the front of the sock being like we fix this and they're marching forward and they're doing a great job You got 50 foot of sand sock Dragging through the parking lot You got Hollywood leftist comedians like the end of that sock Trump's gone by the way in a thousand days The end of that sock. I don't know We're gonna get it through the fucking The finish line before Trump's gone. Yeah, that's a good point. I Worked out. I did the math the other day. So Biden led in 12 million Trump has about 1300 days left 12 million divided by 1300 is 8,000 we need to deport 8,000 a day to get rid of the illegals that Biden brought it We still have a 30 million that were there before Biden started opening the gates So to get back to zero is 8,000 a day. Well, we we started supporting the protesters at the universities now if you're doing if you're protesting That's real on. Okay. We got one. You think that's a good thing. Yes. I'm gonna slam a flow So you think if you protest if you're a well, it's not a laminar's laminar. Oh, and a hypocrite. I'm done with being consistent I stole this from Jane Norton No more consistency for me. Mm. They're not being consistent. So I'm not consistent any I'm not I'm a free speech absolutist if it's my kind of free speech I mean, I'm exaggerating, but I'm kind of not Like we're at war with Islam that the we're at war with Islam. Yes. Absolutely. Yes No, the Christian world the West The West is how is the West at world at war with us because Christianity is on the decline in Islam is on the way up And that's bad So it was Islam on the way up numbers I mean America would I mean the world was two-thirds Christian a third Islam. Yeah What is the number there? Let us be breakdown between Muslims and Christians in the world They're about to beat us there. Yeah, and their religion is archaic They put women in garbage bags. You know, why do you think they hate Christians? They hate everyone Don't you think they don't you that convert or die don't you think they hate the the most uh extremist Muslims are the one they're they got their all the All the intervention Thanks to bombing is sometimes are often justified one in four Really? Yeah. I think that's true dig it up boys In places like Pakistan. It's gonna be like come up with that stat They interview the question on the questionnaires. Do you think suicide bombing is sometimes or often justified? And of course CNN will chip over themselves to explain that question but um My other big problem is with the moderate Muslims Like why are you not out there criticizing matter? question. But my other big problem is with the moderate Muslims. Like, why are you not out there criticizing medical Islam and little side note, I forgot to mention there are when Max and John were doing that shit and they made John look like he was Z. Kiley, where was the right wing media? Where was daily wire? Where was Breitbart? Where was near post? Where was any right wing media going? These guys are getting real roated. They just avoided it like the plague. So fuck them, fuck you, not you. And to go back to the moderate Muslims, like what you need to speak out about radicalism, I think if there's a terrorist attack like the West Side Highway or whatever you want, you deport every single person in that guy's family, the cousins, everyone. And that way, when you hear ricotta melada, moshan talking about, you know, bombing the Boston Marathon, you expose him because you don't want to go back. That's what they do in Russia. They deport everyone remotely involved with the attack. And that's the only way we're going to get moderate Muslims on our side because the only way to fix Islam is to get the moderates with us. We can't fix it. What are we going to do? Tell us some have been a lot and he's a jerk. Is he still around? He might be some people probably believe he is. I hope he's okay. I want to do a book reading. You were in New York City on 9.11, right? Yeah. I was rough. What was that like? Well, we're starting a whole new podcast. But one of the weirdest things was my black friend, Derek, pretended his mother was in the building, pretended he lie. It took me 10 years. I was walking on the street and I was like, oh, he was lying. I'm not 100% positive. But it's, yeah. I'm like, probably having Scottish parents is there so honest that when people lie to you, it takes you like 10 years to go, wait a minute. Because he told me she was doing photocopies on her, like, top floor of the World Trade Center. Photocopy machine broke so she went downstairs and went across three to a kinkos and she saw the building collapse from the kinkos where she was doing your photocopying. And her purse was on her desk still. And I'm like, oh, okay. And then I went, wait a minute. There's no lower Manhattan is so fucking densely packed that your GPS doesn't work. Right. The satellite can't find you. Right. There's no like Bay window where you're doing photocopies, just watching buildings collapse. But I fell for that. But anyway, it was a fucking intense day. We saw it. We thought it was a fire, obviously. I was with Andrew W. K. You ever heard him? Of course. The night before we're doing karaoke, Matt Sweeney, and Andrew W. K went back to his, where he was staying in Brooklyn with his guitarist, Jimmy, something. I forget the guitarist name. But he was watching on his TV. He goes over to Jimmy's bad. And he's like, dude, you gotta wake up. The fucking world trade center's been attacked. And Jimmy goes, Andrew, what the fuck do you expect me to do about it now? And Andrew was like, I guess nothing. And then Jimmy went back to bed. No one away. So Andrew watched it by himself. But I was with my who's now my wife. She's my girlfriend at the time. And it went from fire to collapse. I didn't see the first plane. I definitely saw the second plane with my own eyes conspiracy theorists. Absolutely. Well, you don't like the conspiracies. Well, I like I actually that's a great whole other Pandora's box. I was always like, look, it's Muslims, terrorism, blah, blah. Yeah. Yeah. And then, you know, not even COVID, but I think a lot of intelligent adults are like, well, I'm open to everything now, not flat earth. But I'm open to like they knew it was coming and they let it happen. I believe that's what happened with Pearl Harbor Gulf to pumpkin or whatever. If that even happened. Yeah. Um, I October 7th, I think Israel allowed October 7th to happen. They'd had enough of this pitbull next door. I wanted to start barking at their fucking kids when they came home from school and they let the gate open and they let the pitbull bite one of the kids so they could kill the pitbull. It could be wrong. But that's what I believe. I've noticed that people, this is a little theory that I have. And I was just talking to the dude who wrote the looming tower that became a show of St. Plurist. Right. But he, I have this theory that basically like the people that were closest to 9.11 that were like there on the day or had family members that were in the building or like were super emotionally connected to that event are the ones that are like allergic to any alternative theories. That was definitely the case. Yeah. And the people that are more disconnected who lived maybe in the opposite side of the country who were born later, they're the ones that are more open to like, oh, there was fucking. But that's also that can be a fault where they're like, there's no way the second plane went in. There's no way there was any planes. And I'm like, no, I saw the fucking second plane. I saw the first plane and I saw them collapse. My, my whole thing with, with 9.11 was I wish George Bush had said, we're starting to rebuild the, the world trade center on September 12. Is that sure to say Gavin? Oh, David. We rebuild it. And then my goal would be for British people to go. There's no way that that ever happened. I mean, they've done, they've taken a bricks and they've done carbon dain and those bricks would have same bricks within 1950. So the whole and that's good. It's a great accident. Thank you. I like that because I want the terrorists to go fuck these people don't even think we did that. Because right now it's this, you know when you have like a bug in your eye and you twist a napkin and you're like, that's what it looks like now. And it was $13 billion over budget. It was like 10 years past due date. So it's a giant testament to our incompetence and the effectiveness of a terror attack that cost 50 grand. So it is a beautiful shrine to Islamic terrorism and how incredibly effective they can be. I mean, they, that's their Mecca. They should go there and pray at how awesome they are. That wasn't my idea. I want a new and I said that to a farmer and he's like, you want your fucking kid working in there. And I go, I don't care if it's a silo for rice. I don't care if we store used computers there. I don't care if it's populated. I just wanted to exist because it's a symbol that you can't, as a suicidal tendencies, would say, you can't bring me down. But apparently we can be brought down. Yeah. Yeah. I think it was a, a lot of things were true at the same time. I think we definitely wanted an excuse to go into the Middle East. And I think the, I mean, obviously there's a lot of shit that came out with like Israel, not Israeli, but the Saudi intelligence people were here. Like they knew that there were Saudis here learning to fly. They didn't give a fuck about learning how to play in some crazy. Joe Biggs, Joe Biggs was a cowboy at January 6th. His father-in-law was at the training camp for the terrorists. Which training camp? The flying school for whatever one of those Tallhets who did it was one down here. And he was like, I got a bad feeling about this whatever. Yeah. My instincts are probably wrong. Right. And he's not feeling bananas about himself since then. Yeah. But I think my theory and it could be wrong. That's a beauty of, I'm glad that we're all skeptical. That's a good place to be. But my theory is that, you know, the, the World Trade Center had been attacked before. They lost like two security guards. And I think George W Bush was it was passed on from Clinton. And he said there's this guy, someone been lead and he's probably going to attack the World Trade Center. Probably like kill four people and have a little fire. And then we can go destroy the Middle East for 10 years. And he's like, let's do it. And then when he's reading that children's book, someone went up and was like, it actually ended up being like 3,000 fucking people. And he's like, wow, okay. So not three. That is a lot more than I had bargained for. Holy shit. And then we had a retarded war for, yeah, forever. Yeah. And I was thinking about the right and the left. They both want these retarded wars. They're, they're both complicit in these. Yeah, right and left. Like it's like politicians. Yeah. You had a uniparti. Right. Netanyahu would love an war in Iran. All these rhinos would love a war in Iran. Like it's it's hard to think of of politicians who don't want global wars. Ron Paul, JD Vance, maybe like this three. And you would think like comparing Islam to Christianity, like these other countries, these Middle Eastern countries, they are all bound together by this. You got piss. You're the fart. Oh, oh, wow. God damn. That was a joke. I have like a fart machine in my pants with a microphone and I push the button. Oh, really? It sounded like a fart. Right. It sounded just like a fart. Yeah. That's a lot of technology. Smells like roses too. That's a thousand bucks. Oh, it sprays out a fake fart smell. Oh, that's amazing. Yeah. 1,200 bucks that cost me. And the fart juice, the packets are 800 bucks each. Really? Where do you buy from my from your asshole? Sorry. Where are we saying? I forgot. Oh, the warmongers Muslim, well, the Muslim countries, they're all bound together by they're all they they all are subscribed to the same ideology and religion in America. It's not like that. It's more fractured. There's, you know, there's it's it's not the I don't I don't know the majority. I would be curious to know what is the the breakdown of religions. Well, if you can't have really read pulled me on this in his book Death of the West, which came out the same year as 9-11. And he's like, how the fuck do you fight someone where death is a victory? Yes, exactly. That's like that. We see coffins with American flags and it breaks 100% of American hearts. I don't care if you're left wing right wing. You see those coffins come out and you go, it the Arab world sees that and they're like, fuck, nailed it, dude. We don't have any people that are so devout in their religiosity or their faith that they're willing to strap a bomb to their chest. Correct. They do. Yep. How do you fight that? And we have uniforms. Are you are you aware of of like Peter Thiel and you know, your friends with my breakfast at his house. I'm gonna ship my pants. Gay Christian billionaire. And there he is like hardcore Christian where he's now, there's articles about this that have been coming out where he's holding these giant conferences in Silicon Valley, bringing all these folks in Silicon Valley in and just preaching Christianity and trying to right trying to paint everything Silicon Valley is doing now with like this Christian lens. Fantastic. Is that bad? You don't like that? I don't I don't know. I don't have no. I don't I love it. Or good. I just think it's interesting. Yeah. Well, think of how many guys to come to prison and their lives are shit. And then they, they start reading the Bible at a boredom. Yeah. And they get their whole fucking lives together. My brother wasn't in jail, but he was, he was lost. And he started getting into the Bible and you know, his marriage is fucking rock solid now. He's making money. So I think, I think the best way to save someone is the Bible. Hmm. It's a great way to go. And you see these people who eschew it and they're like, we're having sober October. Yeah, that's land, dude. Oh, we're meditating. Do you do the thing? Yeah, that's church. Do you do the thing on your show where you paint the cross on your on your forehead? Like the guys on Fox. Yeah, I get my ashes every land. Yeah. And then I don't drink, I don't drink whiskey or any, I don't drink hard liquor for Lent. Wow. I found a hole in the plot. You're allowed to have it on Sunday. So I sit there looking at my watch on Saturday night. I'm an 1159 rolls around fucking makers mark. Bo bo bo bo bo bo bo bo. And just get hammered from 12th. I usually pass up by 12 10 because my immune system systems down. But yeah, I do Lent. It's great. What's great about Lent is it shows you what you're addicted to. Interesting. Or no, no fap, right? No, wait. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You're a lot to jack off. Right. You're a proud boy. Right. So you don't jack off ever. Well, I may have fallen from grace once or twice. But the rule is you can ejaculate within a yard of your significant other yard, a yard with her consent. So you can't jerk off while your wife's asleep. But it's safe. She's pregnant or menstruating. She could reach over and tickle your balls and you jerk off. You're still establishing a connection. Oh, right. I see. But jerking off to porn is demonic. That woman, that woman was by her father and her uncle. The guy she's fucking is gay. They're bad. That's just a fact. Really? The manning guys and gay porn or guys in porn guys is straight porn or gay. Really? Yep. Wrong. They're in the game. Oh, well, that's a different generation. Oh, okay. Modern porn. They're all in mess. And the analogy. I was used. They're all mess. Yeah. That's how they last so long. So imagine a gay mess head was banging the victim of a assault on the road outside right now. And like 30 dudes up. Oh, yeah. You like that. Yeah. You probably like that. Isn't that the most horrific thing you can conjure up? I don't think they're on meth though. They're on meth, dude. Yeah. You've done that. Or all, Adderall gives you like little like baby hard dick. Yeah. I tell you, you start fucking. Then it's a coconut smasher. Ask anyone. Ask anyone. That's Adderall. Ask anyone with Coke. Coke may gives you like different. No, no, Coke. You're not getting it up. Mess. They fuck for days. That's AIDS, by the way. AIDS is for mess. Because these will fuck for 40 hours straight. And I know a homo that got AIDS from that at a circuit party on meth. And I'm like, I go, what happened there? And he's like, oh, we fucked. It was like 36 hours of straight fucking. I go, Craig, if two praying mattresses went like this for 36 hours, their bug dicks would be shredded. Yeah. Like go like this for 36 hours. Yeah. I'm going to have a postulate hole in my face with like blood leaking out. It's not natural. No. But yeah, that's all part of their own meth. Mm. Meth is a fuck drug. You didn't know that? I had no idea. Meth is for fucking. I know that Nazis did a lot of meth. Yeah. Well, they fuck the Jews pretty hard. Yeah. Yeah. But then they lost I ultimately lost the war because they got too, they blitzed. And they fucking ran out of meth. And then they all were like, ramped up for weeks. And then all of a sudden the meth ran out. Then they were all like, oh, we killed them. We killed the Soviets, I guess one that Stalin went that war. We just sheer numbers. Yeah. This magic mind gives you a little grassy aftertaste for a while. It does taste like kind of like grass, doesn't it? Yeah. But you walk you down with the beer and you won't taste it. Okay. My fucking daughter, I love cans. Instead of wearing my clothes. So I put on my windbreaker, my barracuda, Harrington. And I'm on the plane. I'm like, that fuck is and I smell like a teenage girl. I've got her dumb, like, team perfume all over me. That's not a great story. And then she died this morning. I know you thought that story sucked until the ending, right? Uh, did you drink on the plane this morning? You just started drinking early? No. No, I got here at like 11 great part next door walked in as I told you they gave me a shot. And then the beauty of Proud Boys is no matter where you are, you can be in Timbuk too. And you're like, Hey, guys, I got four hours to kill an onboard. Mm, gee, gee, four trucks show up and guys are ready to rock. Uh huh. It's the best, especially in Florida. There must be a chapter every 100 yards here. Really? Yeah. You can go over as close to here. Yeah, five minutes from here. Five minutes from here. Yes. No way. It's great. Do you think you'll ever get your social media back? Absolutely not. Never. And I've talked to insiders. It's crazy that you can get band McConaughey's on there. Right. Well, I run a terrorist organization. Oh, yeah, for God, you were labeled. But that was by the Canadians, ladies and gentlemen. Doesn't matter. It's right. Everyone's, here's a key with life. Everyone is scared of getting fired. Yes. Like Jack Kevorkin was killing people, right? He was doing euthanasia. Yeah. And no one cared. But then he went on 60 minutes and he bragged and he was like, I do euthanasia. It's illegal. The FBI was like, dude, you're going to get me fired. It's my job to make sure you don't do that. So he got arrested and put away. Um, dreams for security. Yeah. You can't. And I think most police work is like, if you shoot someone and you drag him into your house, just don't make me look bad. Like, if you shoot someone in the back that's robbing your house, and they fall in the driveway, I'm going to get in shit because I'm the captain of that particular precinct. But if you like drag him in and you wrestle with him and get blood on yourself, then good. And they don't care what's true or not. Most people just don't want to get fired. Yeah. That's very true. So except for you, you don't give a fuck. I like getting fired. It's, it's become my past time. You stay straight. You stay true to your art. Sure. Yeah. Well, God has provided me with plenty of guardian angels because I'm, I think I'm making, I'm making up for the fact that advice. I was like, fuck, and just party and do coke and fuck tons of chicks. And that's a fun thing to do when you're 20s early 20s. And then I really had kids and I was like, what the fuck? What a waste. Those party years, like when you have kids, you go, what was I doing? What a ridiculous pantomime that whole thing was. Yeah. And now I've devoted myself to telling guys, put a ring on it, make a baby. What are you waiting for? You want her but with bigger tits? You've been, you've been with her for two years, dude. I have a lot of friends from high school. Most of them actually, most of my friends, I really don't have many, most of my friends that are like my real friends. I've, they've been with my friends since like eighth grade and a lot of them still don't have kids. Yeah. And they're like, they're pushing 40 now. I think that is the trauma of divorce. They go, because they always go, I'm glad my parents split up. They're flooding all the time. Yeah. No, you were deeply traumatized by that divorce and you don't want to mimic it. You don't think love exists. You don't think devotion exists. And you're scared. You're going to do to your kids what your parents did to you. Yeah. So I don't want to create kids. Why hurt them the way I was hurt? But when we were kids, you'd see the divorce kids and they're like, I got two sets of presents, man. I got dads, presents mom, presents. Yeah. Sure. That's great when you're 13. But it spreads out. And I swear to God, just like you, I look up my high school friends in the 80s and 50% of them have kids. Yeah. That's not good. And people blame the Jews and they go, oh, the Jews have taught us to hate ourselves. Okay, whatever. They really blame the Jews for that. They blame the Jews for everything. Yeah. I think that's definitely a new thing. Divorce magically traumatized. Gen X, Gen X and down divorce was trauma. My parents divorced when I was really young and I never thought I never wanted kids to tell my wife hooked me in. Can I go now? I'm talking to my wife when she was, it was like the day after she turned 19. And I was like somewhat successful for my, I was like 23, maybe 20 years. What were you doing? I was doing, I was doing documentaries, filming documentaries and like doing advertising, like making commercials and stuff like that. Cause I was like, I was like, I was like, I was like, I was like the poor kid who I was able to convince all my rich, cause I had a lot of rich friends and I was able to convince all of their parents to hire me to make commercials for their companies. Great. And so I was making, and people will go, yeah, he had it handed to him. He had, he knew rich kids. Okay, you go make a commercial for the rich people that he was handed to. You know what I mean? A lot of the kids, though, a lot of those kids with rich parents, they ended up, it didn't amount to anything. Yeah. Um, but I was like, I was making decent money in my early twenties and then I met, I met her and I was like, what do you want to do when you grow up? She's like, I just want to be a mom. I want to raise kids. I'm like, how you fucking loser? Yeah. Why, why give away what feminism gave you? Like, you don't have any ambitions. You don't want to, you don't want to have a career. You don't want to be an entrepreneur. Like that's what that's what I was thinking in my head. And then when we had our first kid and I realized how fucking amazing that was, how liberating that was to have like somebody who dedicates every fiber of her being to want to create a good human, where I can keep doing my bullshit and not have to worry about it and not have to worry about raising a fucked up traumatized kid, then I realized how fucking magical that was. Yeah, it's, it's been taken away from us by all this bullshit hipster left wing culture. And you make one and you go, what the fuck was I doing? I'm glad I did Coke from 9 p.m. to 9 a.m. rather than make a life and go to a kid's baseball game. Like what if, and the Coke night, you don't remember one second of it. It's gone. Meanwhile, my kid's baseball games, I could tell you, you know, that that he didn't get a double because they threw it to home. So it was actually technically a single that we did get on second. They've robbed us of that. And it was boomers, honestly, it was a boomers. Boomers invented divorce. So it wasn't the Jews. Well, this is the problem. Like Jews are exceptional whites. You look at the noble peace prizes. You look at the fields metal in mathematics. You're going to see a wildly disproportionate number of Jews. Why is that? Well, one reason might be in Jewish culture, they value intellectualism, especially Israelis, but like in Arab culture, who's the toughest guy, you get the hottest chick. That's this kind of true of glass. We didn't culture too, where my parents are from. Because my dad got a really hot wife because he was a brawler. But in Jewish culture, it's you, you're an academic. So you'll meet like a rabbi or a really smart Jew and his wife will be a fucking smoke show. That's their thing. So what you end up breeding is low tee, high IQ people. Right. And that's interesting low tee, high IQ people. Yeah, Arabs are the opposite. They're low IQ, high tee. Oh, sorry, which is what's so weird about the Palestinian is really conflict. Like you have these, there's genetically the same fucking people in. Oh, no. Oh, no. I just, there's been a study done. They're literally getting the same. So a Palestinian will launch a rocket over to the Jew side. And the beauty, the idea of thing with terrorism is you go like this. And then the people over there discuss that for like a week. That's, that's what terrorism is. I just want to do one little thing and make you all scared for months. Yeah. So they'll launch a rocket there. And the Jews are like, well, what did it mean? Maybe we should have said, blah, blah, blah, blah. Maybe well, an Arab is just fucking like, blow their head off. And they're like, whatever, I'll kill you. So they don't pontificate the way the Jews do. And I think we see that with them. Well, that's because of well, they're low IQ, you think is because of the end breeding, right? I think it's the culture of they don't value intelligence in the Arab world. Yeah. They value, they value machismo. Different. Yeah. There's definitely different cultures, definitely different values. And I'm sure there's been an evolution of the gene pool over the years. But I know there, there was a study done, like a legitimate study that proved that their genetics were exactly the same. Like they come from the same people. I think it's the Canaanites. Yeah, they come from the same people. But look at like, ask a Palestinian what a 111 plus 17 is. And Israelis are inventing pills that have cameras on them where you take it and then you watch your, your, your digestional track. This is why I don't think Israel should receive anymore money. And a lot of Israel's are this Israelis are the same way. To like we have cell phone technology, we have medical technology. We don't like the stigma this it's only three billion. We don't want it. We got our own money going on. Like Israel's not propped up by America. Israel has got its own shit going on. Definitely. Yeah. But we are spending them billions of dollars for their war. Like we're sending them tons of money. Yeah, stop. Stop. And it's not like like online. You see, like you were saying everyone paints it with like, I said, like the Jews are doing this genocide. It's all the Jews. And then you have all these people like Candice and, you know, whole white people around around the internet where it's like, there's a legitimate on X. There's like a huge fucking, I mean, I hate you calling people Nazis. But like if you look at these people's profiles, they're hardcore. Yeah. I think I think the real impetus behind that is anti white racism. But it's not like, but it's at college campuses at least the whole fuck Israel free Palestine. That's anti white racism. They, there was, there's Sudan, there's Syria, there's a million been released conflicts that no one is remotely interested in. Yeah. Yet when there's a white on brown conflict, all of a sudden they give a fuck about foreign wars. I don't trust you. I think it's and it's just proportionally perpetuated by secular Jews, the whole concept of fuck white people. So you have these anti white white people, mostly at a lot of the mirror Jews too, the kids are Jews. Like these, these Jews are sending these secular Jews are sending the kids to Harvard, Yale, Shane Andrews and Scotland, the kids are coming back going fuck Israel. So they've created a golem and I don't think they know what to do with it. And I'm sitting here in my Jewish neighborhood going, you said it was me, you said it was the mega hats. It turns out it's not us. Turns out it's your allies, overly educated Marxists, refugees, Palestinians, blacks, all your heroes want you dead. And I've been sitting here just like this the whole time. And you kept putting Nazi signs on my lawn. Wrong bad guy, fuck heads. Hmm. Well, yeah, I mean, I've had a lot of, I've seen, I've talked to a lot of Jews. I have a group of lot of friends who are Jews and I've had people on here who are literally Jews from Israel who are like, they call themselves anti Zionists Jews. Oh, yeah. They don't agree with you. It's really understandable. It understands that too. I mean America, that you read like Israeli press and it reads like David Duke. Yeah. It's like, there's super conservative Zionist Jews in Israel, but there's ones that want the wall taken down. Right. They fucking hate this war. They love Palestine. Right. It's like, it's like, it's like much more wide range than here. Yeah. It's like, it's like the war after nine, like the Iraq war. Like I'm an American, but that doesn't mean I want to be associated with Bush, Cheney. Yeah. Like those people, I guess how they see Netanyahu got a piss. Yeah. That's why I say Netanyahu. Go piss. Where do you piss? You have a secret pisser? Yeah. Well, fancy. I do. I, I'm dubious of guys who are really angry at me for liking Jews because they kind of smell like Jews. And every time you like get to the bottom with some major, suspicious of you for liking Jews. Yeah. I think they're Jews who are, they want to keep their enemies closer. So when you like see a real sting on like a white nationalist group, that leader tends to be secretly Jewish. Interesting. Yeah. So don't trust like some super Nazi dude, because he wants to recruit Nazis so he can have his Nazis in his pocket and, you know, right, keep your enemies close. Well, everything's an op nowadays. Nothing's real anymore. Dude, fucking, I saw this thread on AI. And it wasn't just only fans girls that are making a million dollars that don't exist, but like a standup comedian going. guy and it wasn't just only fans girls that are making a million dollars that don't exist, but like a stand-up comedian going I went to the zoo and it they only had one animal there it was a dog it was a shit zoo. The guy was fake the joke was fake like everything was fake. Yeah. This is actually good news though. Is it? Yes. Because we become so addicted to our phones and only fans and dating online and then seeing the girl and she's ugly whatever that soon people are going to be like well fuck the phone I need to see you and he's to talk to you. Like sales the old days in the 70s and 80s a salesman would have to get on a plane like plane strange and automobiles and going like say this is my Budweiser cans what do you think and pitch admin yeah like or Chris Farley right like you have to sell it and now that everything is fake online zoom calls like no I need to see you in person yeah I just smell your fear of mounds and see if you're full of shit yeah I think you're right about that. You talk across and said that to me once he was talking about some guy we both know and he's like that guy's gay and I go where the fuck did you get that from I'm known him for 20 tucker yeah 25 years and he goes I saw the way he kissed his wife and I saw the ways daughter looked at him when he kissed his wife gay and tucker's very funny and raunchy outside of TV yeah he's sort of like he's like uh he's sort of like Dave Portnoy kind of a guy like oh he seems more like a fat boy yeah like a like a like a who's he's found him down uh any powers he's like a smart Kenny power is nothing like Kenny power yes he is the fucking opposite of Kenny so he goes that guy's gay and I'm like how do you know and he goes this other way and I go that's not evidence dude let's see kisses wife you saw from one second and he goes we've been around for quarter million years okay if someone wants to kill us we sense it the ones who can't sense it they're extinct so we meet people face to face we have smells we can tell who he wants to fuck us who wants to kill us who is in a threat who could be a good path that's evolution we're constantly like smelling really dogs yeah smelling people that's funny so when I say this guy's gay I'm not just basing it on one second I'm basing it on 250,000 years yeah well tucker that's coming from him he comes down dude he doesn't believe in evolution he believes in a evolution spake in what sense I don't know he said it on Joe Rogan he's like evolution oh we believe well there's there's this nuance to that right like course there's people say giraffes have tall necks because the ones with short necks got less food but then there's the creationists that say god made short dress tall dress super tall dress and these guys died out I don't know it seems like six to one half into half a dozen of the energy can I get another fucking beer please yeah I have another beer he's a great guy tuck did you see his interview with Putin yeah see I love the power Putin was ribbing him about trying to apply for the CIA tried to apply for a job at the CIA yeah yeah yeah I got a lot of friends who think tucker is an op maybe the thing about these ops everyone thinks everyone's an op on the end but you got to look at what they've done like say Charlie Kirk was a fed right the good he's done for red-pilling young people I don't care if he works with Satan and goes back to hell every night like we win he's red-pilled I'm gonna say millions of people millions of young men so if you're a fed then you're doing a real bad job and tucker too like the government the federal government is definitely pro Israel tucker is pretty anti Israel he's very happy canon paleo conservative especially recently yeah it's just interesting seeing like his podcast and all the people that are going his podcast now and like you know he's doing all these like like woo-woo topics like talking about UFOs and like interesting trust and child traffickers it's like completely like kind of like a way like a he's going on a way different road than he was going on when he was on Fox let's just understand a little too an extent I don't want to talk my own they're not controlling his own but I did say back when he was at Fox I go I sent him the data and the data is people will pay seven percent of the people who watch you for free will pay mm-hmm I go you're getting like three million views yeah seven percent of three million is over one hundred dollars I don't know the exact math it's time to I'm not saying he quit Fox because of me but I I think I helped him realize how and I got this from Joe Rogan Joe Rogan said to me when you have a substantial following it's stupid not to charge and let other people get rich off you like even YouTube why are you getting all my fucking money right so if you can get up to like even a hundred thousand people who want to hear what you have to say mm-hmm it's time to fucking yeah like where is your your just YouTube YouTube Spotify so you're like the second they don't like you which could be this podcast this could be it let's give me the last one this could this might very well sort of damnically is like yeah I decided no one can hear you anymore right right and if I was like you I would just not give a fuck and let them band me yeah I got kids to feed I have to I have to I have to plan in the kids to the talk I see your views I wouldn't be here if you've used one good you could pay your bills with the subscription service but we have patreon I've heard a patreon I'm familiar patreon I remember people go to watch the money censorship yes is your band from patreon of course do what I'm banned from Mondays when I go to bed at night on Sunday I wake up it's Tuesday morning I have no idea how that happened did all these all these bands happen on the same day yes October 12th 2018 so they all got together until it's band got it was before the midterms they were looking maybe I didn't finish that story before the midterms they were looking for right wing violence Mike told me to bring some pillows the Jew I fired for being a Nazi we left the pillows at the studio 17 second fight four years in prison for max and john and I became persona nograta overnight I was a rock star in the suburbs because in the suburbs they're all nerds and they're like oh you're from New York City like my kids were all born in New York City yeah so we were all very popular and then one day my daughter was like eating lunch alone literally within 24 hours and you know it's funny about it they're like let's say my daughter's name is market which isn't Margaret's dad wants Maria to be deported like their fear was their mates in rich white suburbs they love diversity of servants that's why they always go what you don't like diversity you can have smallian food one night you can have Mexican food the other night you can have so you you're talking about a variety of people serving you right it's for the elites yes diversity it's a diversity of servants yeah I think you're totally right about that um you think you and chain lover uh you get back together be friends again absolutely not never fuck no and now I mean it's so extreme it would be funny it would be like funny it would be like Jesus meeting Satan do you ever like have a do you ever like think like later night one day be like man it'd be so nice just throw the water under the bridge Budweiser under the bridge I sometimes have dreams like that actually I sometimes have dreams where Suroosh and I and chain her friends and then I wake up and go blah yeah I have one I only have one friend like that that completely burned the bridge that we never talked again really close friends and uh we actually became not friends recording a podcast really yeah well what was the beef about the beef was about we're doing a podcast with a guy who uh was explaining that he believes racism isn't real and my good friend from high school I kind of believe that it depends that's a subjective way to phrase it but whatever he says it doesn't exist in America there's no such thing as racism in America as anti white races is what he was saying yeah okay and he go and he was explaining how uh his wife who was Filipino her mom wasn't allowed drink at certain water fountains you know back in the day and there was segregation like there's Jim Crow like there obviously has been racism in America in the past and they're deaf they're sure is absolutely echoes of it today still and he was like no there's not and they were going back and forth and then my friend who was sitting right there he uh he said you know what I can't be here anymore and he got up and tried to walk away and then the guy who was sitting here was like what do you know what are you walking away for like what do you do we're just having a conversation with a little uh and my friend who's extremely you know artsy fartsy graphic designer liberal dude married to a Filipino lady he was like no fuck you and this guy was like super jacked like six foot five x military guy like me yeah exactly same guy yeah and um my friend standing back there and he turns around and he goes he goes fuck you he said and they the exact thing he called him I remember it like it was yesterday he said you're a fucking backwards UFO believing piece of shit military asshole right right in his face a big guy or the big guy said that to the my girlfriend said that to the big guy oh my god and the big guy got up through him to the ground my friend got in the here like right here right there not like camera is on camera yeah I never released it oh you kind of release it dude that's gold I didn't want it yeah it's gold right if I wanted the views I could get them but I didn't I just it didn't get him it felt it felt gross and he was in the fetal position like this while this guy standing over him about to beat the living fuck out of him I pulled the big guy off of my friend and he eventually got out so me and my other buddy who my actually I forgot to mention I had out my other buddy here we were all three really good friends from high school we went and grabbed a 24 pack of beer went to his house tried to like talk him down be like yo it's all right bro everything's cool don't worry about it whatever he calls me after that the next morning calls me he's like hey we can't be friends anymore yeah I can't be a son here humiliation he was so fucking embarrassed and he's never been in a fight before yeah well let me guess he has no brothers he has a big brother yeah he has a big brother was the big brother around or uh his big brother was in prison for like seven years okay so was this big brother in his life because I know this early when you play fight with guys who don't have big brothers money they will they get like real fucking violent right no he had never been like a legitimate fight before like that you know I mean you can tell because if he would have done that to a guy at a bar he would have got the living ship beat out of him if you say guy the wimp or the whip big guy if you point in some big with some guy who's obviously has a hundred pounds on you is like jack that of his mind on steroids and there's like an ex military guy you don't call him a one oh one piece of shit military asshole you're gonna get curb stomped the worst you do with those kind of guys it's like all right all right you're the big tough guy I get it right you know Norton said to uh Jesse venture he was like okay you're Jesse venture you're the tough guy whatever whatever he wasn't like what you're gonna do bitch right yeah he's embarrassed hmm it's like I still think about my friend all the time I'm like man I'm like we were like brothers yeah it's a weird thing with dudes man when you split up like that yeah and girls too it's not like girls don't fucking have a best friend forever that they lose for some weird like my wife lost all her friends because of proud boys oh really and uh shilly she's trump like she's she she has PTSD now like she's not interested in friends and I'm like uh our neighbors want uh an auction where we get to go to an Italian dinner together and they have four tickets and she's like yeah I don't want to really get a root canal she's happy she started boxing and stuff really so she's she's her head screwed on straight but just like blow jobs enough unfortunately but um doesn't like giving them yeah well she doesn't get them she doesn't have a penis right but uh that's nice that's good yeah that's one of my favorite things about her actually I I write that out our anniversary card still loving that you don't have a penis those are my pet peeve when it comes to love making oh god that's fucking funny uh but it is interesting how these couples you know these friendships split and it's never over anything real I mean with vice we're talking about hundreds of millions of dollars right it's fair that we want to murder each other right right I would give them a friendship for a hundred million I hate those guys yeah but uh but you got paid out good I did pretty good you were a third of the company right and the company was valued at at least what hundred million dollars back then yeah at least probably more than sure and I've made I mean I had an ad agency after that that made it ton of money we sold it to have us and then with the the subscription service it's 40 000 subscribers paying ten dollars a month because we murdered Anthony Kumi yeah okay and he gets half of that but uh we do very well with that but like most of my money just sits in the bank like my dad offered me his apartment in Florida yesterday because he's thinks he's dying and I'm like you know eventually and I'm like okay does that hurt my like it's that could affect my taxes I don't try I'm not sure I want your apartment in Florida well there's definitely less taxes than Florida being dirt poor sucks yeah but once you get to like it's just a stressful over a 100 grand we're all basically the same like Jeff Bezos is on a fancy yacht that's great I don't think like you can rent a boat for the day you can you can yeah you can spend a thousand bucks renting a boat you know what I mean I it would be cool to have a private jet but you can buy first-class tickets yeah so I'm not denying that poverty is a bummer but once you get to like middle class yeah so you could have like a million bucks and live like you had an 100 million well my my my my my most prized possession is my 2000 Jaguar it's an XJR it's worth 17 thousand dollars um if I totaled it GEICO would probably pay me seven it's not considered valuable and I fucking love that thing yeah it's the last of good looking cars before they started turning into cough drops what year was it again 2000 2000 look up that 2000 Jaguar XJR let's see what it looks like we'll color is it black all cars should be black yeah there it is that's my babes I call it Jesus because I get the total it twice black Jesus look at that fucking thing yeah that thing is pretty said jaguars look like absolute shit now well they're all electric yeah or even like they have that they have that electric jaguar that makes the fake sounds that fake exhaust that what's worse than that plays the music it's like crazy sound effects on invented shoes we're going back in time or you see crocs so much but why don't you because they're convenient oh my god are you washing your boat if you're not washing your boat you're not wearing a crux at at the airport we're at 70% crock rate in the south Bronx with the blacks they're at they just this month they hit 100% crock rate really 100% like it's Friday night you're going out with your wife not that blacks have wives but fucking not the blacks how wives everywhere you fucking go blacks are wearing fucking crocs and not just blacks my kids everyone they're friends a guy who's like a 400 pound New York Brooklyn Jew who now lives in Florida guys he's probably he has like 500 million dollars with a real estate he's like a slum lord and he's so fat all he can wear is crocs he says that is what we hear shit I might have to get the airport bro what time is it five eighteen okay all right let's wrap it up my flights it times it leave seven seven okay yeah well I gotta go now okay I gotta go now let's wrap it up all right that's all tell people where they can watch your stuff on YouTube or not you too I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm not sure dot TV you cannot watch me on uh shit I'm late you cannot watch me on anything but sensor dot TV that's why I'm there well you'll be able to watch you there's interviews with you on YouTube I love done which is nice at least you're not there and that why are there a few maybe yeah okay um sensor dot TV I'll link it thanks for having me great guy great show fun times course thanks for coming good night world