So what it is now a little over 25 hours after Donald Trump won the majority of the popular vote about half the Latino vote Over one majority of the Electoral College Just all all three branches of government amazing. Yeah both houses of the Congress and the executive branch What how did that happen? I think it happened because it was a rejection of what the modern left has put on offer Which in some ways was a great favor to the rise of this country You need something to actually provoke a rebellion like the one that we had. That's right I also think that it is a feature of the leader who actually led this entire movement It was very personal to Donald Trump, too. Yes, and I think that's one of the things I've appreciated is that I wrote this like the morning after the election of the afternoon after and And it just felt right to me. He's not actually the thing that I've learned as I've got to know him over the last year much better Is he's not an idea log or a policy wonk and he doesn't pretend to be one right, but he is a badass actually they're nice badass the nation needs a bad ass as its commander in chief right now and Democracy kind of works actually in the end like the people really knew what they needed and they showed up in Groves to put the right person in office and so I just think it is kind of one of these rare inspiring moments in History where the people knew what they wanted. They would not be shaken from their will He would not be shaken from his will and I loved being in Mar-a-Lago that night where it was just kind of interesting Where everybody else is you know myself too included is just like really joyous about what's happening and I'm sitting next to Donald Trump And he's sitting there and he's just yep This is exactly how it was supposed to be wait till it comes in all right now We're going to the convention center and this is where I was destined to be and what else put here to do And I think the people of this country right now want somebody who has that level of Self-confidence and conviction to bring that back for the country And so anyway, I just think it was a kind of a beautiful moment of democracy working It goes beyond policies just like the persona of the country is actually what we recovered Yeah, I mean, I've spent eight years watching Republicans Kiss Donald Trump's ass in public. Yeah, I'm always feel a little nauseous. I love Trump just personally because I know him well But I hate hearing people say it is it's all fake. It is it's like now. I just Got shot I just I realized I'm not only do I really like Trump if I'm amusing and all I really respect Trump And I mean that when I'm saying it I'm not I'm no reason to kiss his ass Yeah, and I mean that and I I felt that I think I think actually for me that's been a bit of a Journey as well as well as I know as well as you know him anyway, but at this point in time Yeah, he's the right guy to lead the country exactly He's actually the right guy to go through phases of Taking maybe I'm being too honest, but you know taking Trump seriously Trump is eccentric. I mean that's just a fact And you know he got elected in 16 Not accidentally there are reasons he got elected, but he said to himself many times in his true I was there he did not expect to win And it was kind of this you know on the road with a grateful dead kind of thing, you know It was shambolic, you know what I mean This did not feel that way at all. It felt purposeful. It felt like he was Living out his destiny and then dashing's destiny. It felt very heavy That's how about that night. It's like it's like a conviction that this is my destiny. Yes This is the nation's destiny and America has this great tradition by the way We believe in our own manifest destiny. Yes. It's just like we had no reason to believe it We have no you know basically we have no logic behind it Yes, that we know that we're born to be the greatest nation that sets an example for everybody else of what's possible for a human capacity Yes, this is the country that does it and we had no reason to believe that other than the fact that we do and I think that that's the kind of leader we need right now to bring that back and that's Donald Trump as a person So in some ways Trump's story is America's story Trump's comeback is now hopefully America's comeback and I actually I just think it's gonna play out that way in the next couple of years the national spirit's gonna be back You'll see in the composition of the electorate by the way a lot of young people that was probably the biggest demographic shit I guess just came in a tidal wave of force which I was particularly passionate about seeing this time right to totally agree and and you know, I think it's just this moment where we're going through a great kind of Spiritual I mean spiritual in the religious sense here. I mean the civic sense a bit of spiritual Revival of American identity and like that was that was the pinnacle of what we saw on today night There was a moment I think right around the time he was shot and Elon endorsed him within moments Yes, I think as it was looking back, you know a pivot point the whole thing But where I think or I myself felt this way like why are we on the defensive people who voted for Donald Trump? Where we embarrassed there was this very successful effort to make people feel ashamed for supporting Trump and it worked for I mean eight years anyway and then in one moment it just evaporated and you saw like 22 year old sorority girls. That's right. You know with trump hats and you're like wait a second You know when's embarrassed about supporting Trump anymore. They're wearing a trumpet at midtown Manhattan Totally who would do that nobody would have done that three years ago. I think I think it's a beautiful thing for the country I mean it started a little bit with you saw it in the business elite community of an Elon was endorsement was obviously huge But I think this has been percolating for a little while. I like I was really probably the thing I was most Gratified by after the election is the next morning the number of either calls or messages I got from Real serious business leaders. Yes, billionaires in different domains or whatever Yeah, they didn't have to do this But a few of them shared with me look I think you were an important part of giving me the permission to support Donald Trump 100% we're gonna need a permission to at least stand up against whatever leftly North of the docks, you know, they couldn't have and and I think a lot of other people played important roles in that as well I mean Elon probably the biggest role in giving people that permission You know, but you're from exactly that world and like just to be super blunt You're from you have the credentials that mark a member of that class Yeah, and which which mattered to some people and in terms of giving them the well It's our whole mission is based on them. Yeah, right? And so And J.D. To some extent is like this David Sacks sure And you want above all but you're definitely in that world and You know, they made a concerted effort to make certain that people like you would never it meant to liking Trump That's right and and even it's liking Trump and standing for a rejection of the left-wing Orthodoxy the last you know four or five years that reached a fever pitch and peak So I'd step down for my job You know I first met after I stepped down for my job as a biotech CEO and you know I wrote my first book for me that was actually kind of cathartic and then I just wanted to other people to be able to experience that as well To be able to like spread the possibility of what it feels to actually speak your mind in the open It's like a it's like a Liberating experience is a good a deep personal sense liberating experience And I actually just wanted more people to be able to experience that what's the point of having a billion dollars If you can't even express your opinion in public agree, but now I think that that's mostly it's like actually mostly behind us Can I just push a little bit on that point though? I mean you and I talked a lot before you ran for president and I remember thinking you know Most people imagine that if you make a lot of money you made a lot of money young That that gives you the freedom to say whatever you want, but of course the opposite turns out to be totally the opposite Right so the more you have there's no f you money. That's right. There's only a few poverty the richer you get the more vested You are in the current system the more you have to lose and So I did think you were very unusual in that you made all this money young and you're like yeah I'm kind of happy to first of all stop making money for a while you didn't seem addicted to it. No, they'll get addicted to it No, wait, you know what I mean, she spent it Right, you can't blow a lot of it. Yeah, there was something great about that, but why did Why were you different from like everyone else you went to Yale Law School with? Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, all over classmates, you know Yeah, it's just the two of us I could tell you there's some I won't even I won't even tell you about the email chains Where they still have the class email list. There's a lot of funny stuff that goes on. They've lost their minds over Myself, oh, hey really? Oh, yeah, yeah, it's actually it's actually kind of hilarious You guys were in the same class. Yeah, we're in same class Me, oh, sha jd were all classmates and my wife was at med school at the same time so we were all we were all friendly Where was she at med school? Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, which is really funny you all misused your credentials Exactly the bestowed them so I have to ask you to pause so you're on the Yale Law School Which for those who aren't don't follow the most prestigious Law School and then I'd say I think it's fair to say but also probably the most insane in some ways Yeah, I think all of this is fair. Yeah, so what's the what's the email chain? So each class just has their own has their own like kind of like listserv where they will stay in touch and After the Springfield stuff right so people were going people were going totally nuts and eating Eating the cats. Yeah, or you know in the pets right so so they were going totally nuts And then there was this like long thread of What charity people were going to give to in Springfield town? They otherwise would never visit never have heard of never have given second care to to say Okay, here's what we're actually going to do to help this community and they started to have everyone piling in well I'm going to make my donation and I'm going to make my donation here and It was it was so nauseating that but there was actually a very keen effort to get the New York Times to report on it So the New York Times did report on that of course the New York Times has their own agenda in wanting to report on this because it's a I want to make money No to stop to to particular causes in Springfield to virtue signal the fact that we're not on the JD Vance Donald Trump side of this and as Yale lost as fellow Yale law school alums who came from that same class We're going to actually make a concerted donation to send a different signal that we're on the side But you and JD are actually from Ohio. Yeah, actually. Yeah. Yeah Actually, I actually spent a lot of my youth in Springfield actually know actually know a lot about this I'm tempted to pull up the email that I that I sent so I sent an email to the group I never I haven't commented on this list is served in like five years like I've no or ten years probably I haven't posted a single thing, but I kind of entertained myself watching this stuff from time to time So I actually also went to Springfield myself actually this so this is a well, it's rewind back So when all this was playing out I said I kind of want to go to Springfield and check this out I have a lot of family that's lived there in the past Some family there who lives there now. I spent a lot of my youth there. There's this place There's a there's a sub a place that I used to go to like, you know when I used to play tennis at Whittenberg Every summer which is the University in Springfield So I've spent a lot of time there growing up So I said I live like 50 minutes from there right now in Columbus a group in Cincinnati I live in Columbus Springfield's literally on the way right in between Like let me just go check it out So I just was having white dinner with my wife and a couple of friends in Columbus And I just put out a tweet I said I'm going to Springfield Want to see what's happening? See it for myself and No plan for like an event or anything like that But some guy then replies and says I have an event space. It can hold 375 people We show up in Springfield. This is what like a month or month or two go and all this played out And you know, it's just 375 people. It could hold 2,000 people show up But they could hold 2,000 so the rest were lined up outside and people just wanted to be heard Did I see evidence of cats and dogs be eaten? I didn't see evidence of that What I did see evidence of was a woman being chased out of a store with a machete her dog by an illegal immigrant Who was in this country which didn't get reported on by the news at all But was a function of a woman who actually came and told that story of her daughter Who was literally being chased with a machete out of a grocery store called the police and the police didn't show up for hours And they didn't follow up with an investigation either so that people deserve to hear police did nothing That's what she said and I have every reason to believe her and so Anyway, against that backdrop I also wanted to do something positive for the community having having shown up in Springfield There's obviously a strain on local resources So I wanted to make a donation and as you said, I've lived the American dream I wanted to make a hundred thousand dollar donation, right? And so to help that for my family That's an easy thing we were able to do to help a local community. Where's the strain? So we find where the local strain points are access to local primary care and We tried to make a donation in conjunction with my trip, but the organization Did not want to accept the donation that our family was about to give them. So they've talked about Springfield We need help. We need all the people who can to help support the community And yet here is somebody who is living on Ohio has lived the American dream I want to actually use a small portion of what this country has given us To help a community that's important to me in the area of health care where there were a lot of strain resources in part because of the large numbers of people who are You know who've been you know moved to that community And I didn't even have the ability to help the community that way. Why? They didn't provide a great explanation. They turned down a hundred grand donations. Yeah. Yeah. Well, what who would do that? I mean an administrator I suppose, but because of the politics. I can only I can only I can only assume I can I would say I heavily doubt that if I were You know shared brown or something like that that they would have turned down a similar donation in a time of need So anyway, I talked about all this when I visited Springfield, but afterwards I just I told people that I was going to help Support Springfield. So I decided to I wanted to follow through on that So we found a couple of other charitable causes to donate to you know in totaling $100,000 to help Springfield and one of them was a crisis pregnancy center I'm pro-life and we wanted to at least to help people Get to you know strains on the system. It's a different area of health care where we thought there were strains on a system I actually surveyed a lot of people in Ohio and in Springfield privately who I knew where could I have an impact and they gave us They gave us this as a resource. So anyway to bring this back to the original story we have This law school listserv where they've made a donation to I think it was like It was a left leaning group that had a lot of a lot of woke stuff on their front page I can't tell you which exactly one it was. Yeah, DEI all plastered all over where it needs to be and they made the donation They got a bunch of people to sign on and every time somebody donated They would they would reply all and say I have also donated And there was a certain pride and sanctimonion that they got the New York Times to report on it They got MSNBC to pick it up. So there's a lot of media around that's crazy Comparatively not quite as much money being raised even but that's that's that's beside the point And so I'm on this list having to sort of see my you know inbox Repeatedly flooded with every other time somebody made a donation I just said a note because maybe there's people who have a different point of view from supporting Exactly the cause they put up. So I included a link saying you know To for those who want to support Springfield here are some other alternative causes that you might wish to support my family And I were pleased to support the community They lost it with respect to a crisis pregnancy. They didn't actually they didn't like it. What did they say? You know, I think they they They called it a They saw it as a insult actually they felt personally insulted that I was going to exploit their Good feeling about Springfield of the attention they wanted to draw by supporting it by offering a very different kind of cost But a beautiful thing happened because this goes to the same trend you and I are talking about There were actually a lot of my classmates So I know lean left of center who then came out and we're just like well Have you ever considered the fact that we might also have classmates who have a different point of view on these questions And you may not just want to be donating to one particular side of this cause and there was just a debate amongst them So I didn't I didn't really get further involved in this I rarely post on that list That was just a two-liner that I had to share to offer To enjoy you and JD personally on the list. You know, I don't read I don't read most of the emails. I think I think there have been a lot of unfriendly things said yes So you got to wonder about that whole world. Yeah, I mean so Trump would depend JD went to Yale So you still have two guys to live elite degrees. Yeah in the top. Oh, by the way, I don't think the I don't think there's any Far from being shame in that like I'm very I had a great experience at Harvard and Yale and we learned a lot of stuff Yeah, I think independently I got a better education because of a lot of these people leaning left you get questioned more than the I bet that's right. Yeah, but there's also over the past several years There's been a lot of evidence that those schools You know, probably aren't good for a lot of the kids. They're not the same places. They were kids who go there I mean you're obviously you've got a strong personality you know what you think you're not Depending on other people's approval obviously. You don't seem to care that much Um, but you know most people young people really do care what they're heard things and for those kids like a lot of them get destroyed and become completely Irrational and into the you know the witchcraft of transgenderism or whatever They become like not really functioning people and and you just wonder like how long does the prestige attach to those Institutions particularly in say China which keeps them afloat. Yeah, that's maybe not. Yeah, I'll put like below Yale A lot of these schools are dependent on absolutely rich Chinese. Yeah So like when does that end when do we stop genufo before these places either they're going to Massively change what they are and what they represent or they're gonna go the way the dustbin of history They are right they kind of are so so the thing is there's a difference between even these places now versus 20 years ago It's just it's just like not the same place in the same institution Harvard Yale always lean left always have had a very you know certainly Self self-important view of themselves. That's always been the case But they were they were institutions certainly when I was there. I could dig from experience where alternative ideas were tolerated There was good debate. I actually learned a lot from being pushed by classmates who had different points of view than mine I evolved in some of my views. It's a beautiful thing. That's what's supposed to happen through a supposedly liberal arts education That is not the institution of Harvard or Yale or countless others like them that exist today There's something dramatic has changed as they have lost their north stars no longer at least Data does of let's just say six months to a year ago. Maybe a lot's gonna change We're no longer committed to the pursuit of knowledge and we're committed to the pursuit of affirmative social goals like Harvard's top goal It seems is to drive social change in the world rather than to actually educate their students Yale has completely abandoned the idea of free speech that the expression of certain ideas Is itself a kind of concerts and active violence in a way that they no longer Tolerated on their campus now. I think all of that's gonna have to change because otherwise you're gonna actually produce a bunch of Let's just say if feet graduates that aren't gonna go on to actually accomplish very much Which gives the next generation very little to incentive to want to go through those institutions That's exactly the first place and so you know what's gonna happen You know either either they're gonna become increasingly irrelevant and Go through this process of elegant decay that they're in right now Either they've all been die. So those are the two choices. I would just like all of us. Yeah, it's true So Christmas is coming and winter is coming and that's the perfect combination for cozy earth cozy earth is a company that makes exactly what it sounds like Products that are close to the earth and that are quite cozy And you should consider them this Christmas They have the best sheets available. They're made out of bamboo believe it or not and It's hard to believe how great they are until you try them. We have and they are great They're great fit for everybody in their shopping list. What sets them apart Well, their fabrics are temperature regulating. That means they keep you cool and cozy Or warm and cozy depending on the temperature and they have a 10 year warranty So if anything goes wrong with your sheets You get free ones go to cozy earth.com slash Tucker use our promo code Tucker fuck to 40% off If they ask tell you tell them the Tucker Carlson show sent you everyone here uses those sheets and loves them So what are the effects of Trump's win? Hmm. I think it's a renewal of national self-confidence actually I think that we're going to be more Sure of ourselves as Americans. I think we already are I think the idea that people are you know a lot of people who would have either felt uncomfortable saying this a border Donald Trump Or didn't even think they did but now realize that they actually value would he represents Have a greater sense of conviction in themselves have a greater sense of conviction in America I think that's probably the most important thing I mean gold dropped a hundred bucks an ounce in like an hour. Yeah, it's interesting And it's gold of course to bet against the US dollar And so the stock market went exactly in the opposite direction actually and so in a market's reflect confidence and I think the revival of our self-confidence is the most important thing actually Because everything else we could talk about the issues that you know fixing the border restoring law and order Enforcing the law ending rampant crime in the country growing the economy All of those things require a certain level of self-confidence in America requires a certain sense of spine In who we are to be able to say okay An economy grows when people are willing to take risks You're not willing to take risks to create a new business or to grow You know or to invest in new venture unless you have actual confidence in yourself and your ability to do that Same thing with respect to the rule of law You have to believe in the validity of American rule of law to actually stand by it even when it's actually hard or unpopular to do so Same thing to say that our own border actually means something you have to have confidence in a nation To believe that that nation is worth protecting if you actually don't believe in what's inside Then there's no real reason you have to protect it physically either So I think the revival of our national self-confidence is the most important thing Donald Trump has delivered And I think it's going to deliver for the country and if we get that back The rest of it's actually pretty easy. It sort of falls into place more or less automatically I would say But along the way they're all I mean they're all kinds of obstacles and the first obstacle is finding the right people to staff the government Yes, yes, which was it and Trump has said this himself Including to me like that. I before you got elected in public. I didn't have anyone to run the government and there were a lot of bad people wound up In positions of real authority Will be different this time. I think it will actually I think it will because First of all, all human beings Donald Trump included has learned a lot from that first turn I think that if you have somebody who Had never owned for office before and I'm particularly sympathetic to this I ran for president without knowing what the heck I was getting into and it was very much a Fire first aim later strategy for me over the last year when I ran and so I can Deeply empathize with Donald Trump's first run for president. But not only did he run for the first time He actually won the first time as well and to be able to get in there as you said I wasn't there but it sounds like without even that much of an expectation of winning I think this system was able to strike back before he and his team were able to get their arms around the system And even still accomplished a lot. I mean, I think that First term was you know, I said this when we spoke the other day But it was like the most successful president of the 21st century Which is Setting a very low bar because the other presidents in the 21st century have been awful George Bush Joe Biden Barack Obama or the others and Donald Trump was on a big use of the best of that batch But I think the idea that there's only there's something you can only learn by doing it I mean even running for president. There's only certain things I could have learned about that process by doing it Now let alone leading the country. I think there's only certain things Donald Trump could have learned by actually being in that position And so this time around I think he is Laser focused on making sure that the people he puts into those positions actually share Broadly his vision for the country broadly share an allegiance people make like this some kind of bad thing But an allegiance to him personally. I'm sorry if you're running a company You can't run that company as a CEO of the people who work for you actively dislike you or wish to undermine you personally Well sure even if they believe in the company's product It doesn't work if they actually like actively hate the CEO So I don't know why the liberal press actually likes to make a big deal out of the fact that Donald Trump wants people who Also share a personal allegiance to him and our mission aligned I think both of those things are required for a functioning position as a vegetarian because under Trump the FBI was always showing up People's houses and stealing their cell phones and carding them off to oh wait no You know these people are to tell a terrion. Yeah, it's actually I know a lot of people personally And friends with people who've been the target of FBI raids including today Alfie oaks Who's a wonderful man? He we would have visited his restaurant and he's a tacheop. Yeah, and in South Florida Naples Man, I don't know. I don't know. I think about the alleys. I'm sure in the United States I have no idea kind human being who was immensely He just took such great care of our family in the short time. We spent one wonderful person I was shocked to so spoke in conservative and outspoken Trump voter Which is your right to do in this country? Of course. He was a COVID dissident um, and He was raided by the FBI today now. I just texted him. I I um, I don't know what The charges are the pretext is for rating his house, but I'm willing to stake my credibility on Since I know him so well, um, you know, don't think Alfie oaks is doing anything that warranted an FBI raid And I doubt he would have been raided to not been an outspoken Trump voter. So hey these people are scary They're going to be thrown out of power. Um What does Trump do with the mandate that he has? I hope as much as possible. It's quickly as possible I think that the same I think the lesson from last time around is if you don't move fast the the beast ultimately will you know Will swallow Any individual whole of course and so I think he's ready to go in with real determination this time around to move quickly move fast I think we need to wins behind our back early on You know one of the things that I think we learned from last time around is a lot of this is just early momentum Right you've let's say we have three all three branches. Let's say we've got Judicial branch. We have a great judicial branch right now at the top of the Supreme Court the best we've had Certainly in our lifetime But you combine that with the strong electoral mandate for the presidency a strong decisive majority in the Senate Hopefully get a good Senate majority leader picked and then and I think Rick Scott would be great for that But that's is it's a big John Cornin. Yeah, I think Cornin is an aggressive liberal and if Donald Trump wins the popular vote in John Cornin of Texas who is way more liberal than a lot of Democrats I know winds up Senate majority leader. I mean that's just it's crazy That's just assume a few more of those correct pieces fall in place and then even a majority at least an impeachment proof house I Think that we got to go big. We got to go fast two major issues right out the gate one is already the one that Donald Trump's been talking about The entire time you know he's pumped up about it and he is not gonna mess around with this is to fix the illegal immigration crisis and actually seal on national borders and he is Laser focused on that. He has made no secrets about that. That's his top campaign message He's gonna keep that promise and I think he's gonna keep it fast starting on day one That's number one and there's a lot to say on that, but it's hard to say What hasn't already been said about what needs to be done? It's just about getting in there and doing it So that's mass deportation number one is millions of illegals out of this country and sealing the border along with it But I'm actually far more intrigued and interested for the long run in what I think of as the second mass deportation That we require which is the mass deportation of millions of unelected federal bureaucrats out of the DC bureaucracy And I do think that is what's going to save this country. You can't do that I think you actually can you can't fire we can all be fired I've been fired many times. I'm sure you just lost a presidential race like we've all the only group that cannot fail that has Actual tenure is not Harvard Professors not even. Yep. It's not even. Yeah. It's federal bureaucrats. No, Amy wax just got You know tenure is no protection or all compared to the protection of federal employment So the one difference is first of all we have president who I think has the spine to actually step up and do it But the second thing is we actually have a not to get to you know in the weeds here But we actually have a legal landscape with the current Supreme Court that allows us to do What couldn't have been done in the last half century? They have a moral right to work From home. Yeah 10 hours a week at our expense at a far higher Wage than the average America. Oh absolutely. So the funny thing is they have a moral right You can't you can't complain about you actually brought up a really interesting dimension of this if you literally just mandated that they have to actually Show up to work Monday through Friday Anoretical idea. They don't they don't go to work actually good number of them would quit that way right right that's step alone So you don't even have to talk about you're in a mass firing mass exodus Just tell them they have to come back five days a week from 8 p.m. To 6 p.m Like many Americans most Americans who work hard to earn a living in this country just show up physically to work You'd actually have about a 25% thing out of the federal bureaucracy right there. So that's an easy first step Next step is so the Supreme Court would they've laid out right now is they've basically said in so many words That most federal regulations are unconstitutional close to in so many words That's what they've said if Congress didn't pass it right so basic principle here is the people we elect to run the government should run the government That's not the case today. The people who write most of the rules were never elected to their And the Congress makes the law. That's what the Constitution says, but that's not exactly how it works today And the Supreme Court thankfully has had a major problem with that So it was this case West Virginia versus EPA two years ago There was this low-per-right case that came down this year that overturned this horrific doctrine called Chevron deference Which said that the It's Virginia versus EPA two years ago. There was this low-per-brite case that came down this year that overturned this horrific doctrine called Chevron deference, which said that the courts have to defer to the agency's judgments on what the law actually says. The Supreme Court's torn all of that to shreds and basically what they've said is if it's a major question, if it's something that affects people's lives, economically, or relates to a major political issue, it cannot be written into existence by somebody who was not elected to office or who can't be voted out of office, it has to be done by the people who were elected to write the laws. So it could be voted out if they write bad laws. That's a beautiful thing. And I think that those were size-making to their own policy. They used to be describing democracy. That's actually the essence of democracy. That's the essence of self-governance. So we've had those cases come down under this Biden-Harris tenure. But actually, if you have somebody who takes over in the presidency now as we're going to on January 20th, who takes a posture of executive humility. And this is the key part, right? Because people will say, oh, Donald Trump's going to go. If he's going to go shut down these agencies, that's executive fiat. No, no, no, you got it mixed up. The executive fiat's what's been happening for the last century, really in this country, but over the last four years included, unelected bureaucrats by fiat legislating what otherwise should have gone through we, the people, and our elected representatives. So the Supreme Court's already said told the executive branch of the Internet, you can't do that. Actually, a lot of that was illegal and unconstitutional. All we need right now is an executive branch that says, hey, the Supreme Court, you've told us a lot of what we're doing is illegal. It violates the Constitution. So we're not going to do that anymore. And that requires us to take any regulation, any federal regulation that fails these standards that the Supreme Court has given us in West Virginia, New York, and Loper, bright. And there's another case called JARIC, as he resists SEC that one relates to slightly different issues. But the Supreme Court standards, all of these regulations that fail that test, we're just going to listen, they're not on void. And we don't have to listen them because we already know they're actually null and void in illegitimate. Anyway, but we will put the public on notice to say these tens of thousands of regulations that have been written by federal bureaucrats, they're null and void because they were never written by the people who we elected. Now if you have 50% fewer regulations, that creates kind of an industrial logic to say that, okay, well, then we don't need 50% of the people around anymore either. And the way these rules have worked in the past is they have this, you know, this well, right, the civil service rules, the civil protection rules that say you can't fire these federal bureaucrats. That's been the historical, you know, accepted dogma. Actually, if you read the law of care for late, it doesn't work quite that way. That applies to individual firings, right? To say if I fire you, you have a special protection to say that I either politically discriminated against your discriminative for some other reason, or if you fire a bunch of people with discretionary firings, if there's a disparate racial impact or a gender impact or whatever, you could be sued on a million grounds. But if it is part of a mass firing, what you call a reduction in force, it was just like a mass firing, those actually fall outside the civil service rules as they exist. So if you go in that order to say that, okay, the Supreme Court's already told us that all of these regulations, not all of them, but an overwhelming majority of them are invalid. He goes straight down that list and say we have 50%, 70%, 80% fewer regulations. Then you look at the four million people civil servants or whatever and say that, okay, if we have 80% fewer regulations than we need 80% fewer people to enforce them, that simply makes sense. Then you have the industrial logic for right there under current law mass downsizing just the scale of the federal government. And part of the problem is these things are deeply related. When you have a bunch of people who show up to work, who should have never had that job in the first place, they start finding things to do, actually. And that's what gave us that regulatory morass in the first place, like the Federal Reserve. I mean, if you just fired, you have about 22,000 employees in the Federal Reserve. If you fired 90% of them, there will still be 2,000 left, which is arguably on the high side if you have a Federal Reserve whose sole focus is restoring the stability of the US dollar, which I do think should be the sole mandate and sole purpose of the US Fed. Same thing with respect to you, go straight down the list. What else does the US team say? What if 22,000 employees do with the Fed? Oh, they do a lot of calculations. They do a lot of conjecture. And it feeds their hubris a little bit. So markets, and I worked at the hedge fund those first job. I had for seven years out of college and understand the way in which people will huddle around divining what the exact meaning is of a comma at the end of Federal Reserve minutes. Does that mean that they think that the economies overheating so much that they have to raise interest rates that feeds the kind of hubris of the bureaucrat to make them think that there's some kind of genius and some kind of actual savant that merits this attention. But the reason the market actors pay attention to what these Federal Reserve people say is not because they have some sort of expert knowledge that's actually meaningful. They're actually looking to see effectively how they're going to screw it up in the process. And so academics took over the Federal Reserve in the late 1990s and it only has one big lever, right? Well, if you do, if you leverage actually they're able to pull. Yeah. I mean, just one big lever broadly means how much money you feed in or suck out of the system. Yeah. That's true. But they've used that in ways that have been badly destructive for the country. Yeah. Because here's like an example of how. when the academics took over the Fed in the late 1990s, like one of the things that happened, and this was a kind of managerial class in this agency. And that's the three letter agency in some form, the FED, right? Well, they said was, okay, if wages are going up, this is a long story if you want to get it. But we can give you a short version. If wages are going up, that that is a leading indicator of inflation. So wage growth was a bad thing. So the way you fight wage growth is by tightening monetary policy into wages going up. Here's a problem with that. Anybody who's running business knows this, okay? Wages are the generally the last thing to go up in the business cycle. If things are going really well in the business cycle, the last thing most employers want to say, you know, I'm not saying it's the right decision or the wrong decision, but most employers, the last thing they want to have go up is the wages. So wages tend to be actually not a leading indicator of the business cycle. Wage growth tends to be a trailing indicator of the business cycle. But you have the academic mindset of the Federal Reserve that said, that's one thing we can measure that we can observe and feel smart about. So wage growth, we're going to treat that as a leading indicator of inflation, even when it's a trailing indicator. Well, what does that mean? They tighten monetary policy precisely into a natural downturn of the business cycle, which gives you the boom bust and then what comes after a bust is, of course, the bailout. So you get these boom bust bailout cycles. That's exactly what happened. You could say in 2000, you could say in 2008, you could see some version of it, you know, even in 2023, although that was a little bit more subtle. And so anyway, that's a whole rabbit hole about the Fed, but it's an example of when you have 23,000 people show up to work who should have never had the job in the first place. They start finding things to do. And when you find things to do, that ends up being destructive rather than helpful, which means the root causes, you got to get rid of the presence of the people who populate that bureaucracy. But in order to do that, you need this industrial logic. And that industrial logic, in my opinion, is what the Supreme Court has already given us, which is this mandate to say the executive branch, the fake executive branch, the administrative state has written all these rules by fiat. Most of them are illegal, like they're actually unlawful. They're illegitimate. And so if you have an executive branch that says, okay, we're going to recognize that most of these regulations are illegitimate. There's your blueprint for then shaving down the size of the federal bureaucracy, which is then the permanent solution to stop that bureaucracy from perpetuating this kind of illegal rampant action. And I think that's the stuff of how you actually save a country. Everything is that might sound. It's not boring. And I think I've never heard in all the, you know, my whole life in Washington, anybody suggests that this is a process that could really be stalled or reversed, the process being the growth of the federal government, which is just being so horrible. Because the purpose of the institution is to protect itself and expand. Take a law of physics. It's a place to get. Every institution exists to protect itself for its own benefit. That's its purpose. And it's demonstrable in its behavior. So, but it's so obvious. It's so overwhelming. It's a largest institution in human history. I've never heard anybody say, you know, we have a shot of like, lapping off 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 80%. Yeah. I mean, that would change everything from our foreign policy to our economy, to our culture. You really think that's that could happen? Yeah. I think it could happen. I think it will there will be trade offs. I had not going to paint some sort of exclusively. Well, one of the trade offs is you're going to have a crash in the economy of Arlington, Virginia, which is well deserved. And maybe a boom of the economy elsewhere. And long overdue. You know, why shouldn't Arlington and McLean and Loudoun County share the pain of Gary Indiana? I don't understand or Springfield, Ohio. I actually I'm going to take the bright side of this. As I say, you're the apocalypse. I mean, I'm in the golden age mood, right? Yeah, no, sorry. I'm sure the golden age, but you could feel the resentment. It's two sides of the same coin though. They go right together. Send these people to Gary Indiana or the Springfield. We don't need external external individuals to the nation. Yeah. To actually fill those open positions. We have three million of them sitting in the greater Washington, D.C. area. Who know, they could say, well, are those people really going to do those jobs? Maybe they should. Actually, they could be far more productive than the destruction that they're doing to the country right now. It is a fact that we have more open jobs than we have people in the country. That's often one of the back door arguments made for mass illegal immigrants in this country. But actually, okay, you need, I think for rule of law reasons, you need deportation of people who are in this country illegally. But if you get three million people out of the federal bureaucracy in Washington, do you see they are Americans? And those are available candidates to actually provide a little shot in the arm to the labor market. Why should the agencies be moved to Baltimore and Gary? To the extent they exist. I think they should absolutely be moved. Absolutely. I think many of those agencies should not exist. Many of them that do continue to exist absolutely should be moved to other parts of the country. So I don't think the social general office should sit in Washington, D.C. I don't think you should have much of HHS more broadly. I don't think that the Department of Agriculture should sit in Washington, D.C. I think there are countless agencies, the Department of Education. I think you're wrongfully insulated in Washington, D.C. now, certain of those agencies like the Department of Education should not actually exist. So I wouldn't want to start this process of just saying, okay, let's move them out of Washington, D.C. Some sort of polite, gentle way of avoiding and sidestepping the thing that we actually need to do, which is bring a jackhammer and a chainsaw to the whole thing. But even those that do continue to exist, you would actually have a lot more accountability to the people and probably even some kind of stimulus, if you will, in parts of the country that wouldn't mind a little bit of that growth, getting out of D.C. and come into their their own backyard. These two things go together, though, because if you actually did take one of those agencies and say, hey, you have to show up to work five days a week and actually you have to go to typical Kansas, or Cincinnati, Ohio instead. You'd actually have a good number of the people quit anyway, which avoids the severance costs. So I kind of like that method is you could kind of get two in one right there is thinning it down and moving it out. But yeah, move the agencies out. You should fire about 75% of the federal employee headcount. Immediately on day one, you could go, you could ease into that pretty quickly. Agencies that are redundant can be reorganized, that should exist. Department of Education is a good example. Shut it down, send the money back. Workforce training can move to the Department of Labor and loan collections can move to Treasury. There's just a mass opportunity for a mega reorganization and thereby downsizing of this bureaucracy. And it's a one-way ratchet because it's not like if another president comes back, they can write that back into existence by fiat. They'd actually have to go through Congress to do it. And so I think this is a, to call it once in a generation, under states it might be closer to once in a century or once in a nation's lifetime opportunity to drastically reorganize and reshape and drive structural change in the federal government. And I'm pretty pumped up about that actually. Would you be involved in this effort? I'd like to be. Yeah, absolutely. God, it was the centerpiece of my presidential campaign. I spent a year and a half of my life. It was probably the most, I mean, I took a lot of positions on a lot of things, but this is probably the single most useful and certainly personally important to me, part of the policy aspect of my campaign last year. And yeah, I have been involved, let's just say in recent months. So this is laying out what the blueprint should look like. This is the draining the swamp part of the operation that we were promised, but never got in, I know you've talked to the president elect about this and many other topics. You think he's on board for something this far reaching. He understands this is the root cause of the cancer. He's, he said, drain the swamp for a reason. You could talk about all the reasons why that was hard to do the first time around. One of the reasons is we didn't even have that legal landscape from the current Supreme Court. And he made some good Supreme Court appointments that allowed us to have this landscape. So now I think he is dialed in, understands that incrementally tinkering around the edges of these agencies. It doesn't work. There's a temptation to say if you just fire the person on top, that somehow that's going to fix the problem. No, you know, get James Comey 2.0 or whatever to fill. It's absurd to same seat. But I think if you're willing to actually strike the Leviathan at its core, I think that that's actually what it's going to take to save a country. And I do think he gets that in a deep way. Turns out that what you do online is not private, not even close. media brokers are tracking and creating a profile of everything you do. That would include your spending habits, your values, your beliefs. Here in the United States for some reason, they're allowed to sell all of that information. And that means the big corporations buy and sell everything about you and then give it information to others who use it against you and to control you. How do you push back? How do you hold on to your privacy, which means you're freedom? Well, we use ExpressVPN with ExpressVPN 100% of your online activities rerouted through secure and encrypted servers. And that means it's impossible for your internet service provider to know what you're doing or for outside parties or governments to sell your data. ExpressVPN hides your IP address. Databroakers use that IP address to build a profile on you and then sell it to whoever they want. But without it and without all of your online activity, Databroakers can't do that. They can't add it to your profile. You are free to do what you want online without prying eyes spying on you. ExpressVPN is pretty complex technically, but it's very easy to use. It works on everything you own, your phones, tablets, smart TVs, computers. You can use it on eight devices at once so you can share the privacy that you've received with your entire family. Right now you can get an extra three months free when you use this special link. Go to expressvpn.com slash Tucker, an extra three free months of ExpressVPN. It's ExpressVPN.com slash Tucker. Federal employees are the core audience of CNN and MSNBC. So I don't think they're gonna be. Yeah, of course they are. Yeah, who's watching that crap? What happens? I mean, right. That's a good copy. I'm not obviously, but apparently people are the watching the view. What happens? They're watching Jimmy Kimmel or whatever his name is. What happens to all those people? I mean, if they reach the point of like being so totally discredited that they can't continue. So here's here's to my view. When I talk about the bureaucracy, as I think we need to bring a chainsaw to I actually draw a distinction between the bureaucracies, its own self-propetching organism and the individual three million people who populate it. So there are certainly some people who are in positions of authority who are just individually bad people, absolutely, that need to be purged from the federal government and get out and back into normal life and maybe they can be rehabilitated, but they're going to be, that's not going to be the job of the new government. That's going to be something that their own spiritual advisors have to help them through. That's a separate category. But I think that's a relatively small minority of the three plus million federal civil servants who I do think are probably deadweight or more than deadweight because they're actually inadvertently even doing things that are not harmful to the country. I think it's the machine itself that I think is a big part of the problem. A lot of these people are people who individually believe that they're carrying out some sort of good. And it comes from this sort of organizational conceit, which is basically skeptical of self-governance. It's as old as human beings are, as the idea that you can govern yourself was mostly a radical idea that most people thought was laughable and crazy. That's why we fought the American Revolution over the exact topic that you and I are talking about here because the basic view is that if you leave it to be the people, you'll burn yourself out of existence through global warming or climate change or you'll harm yourself before you even know it through racial equity failures or climate change failures. That's the equivalent of what the old European worldview was, was that the idea that we the people could be trusted to govern ourselves and express their own opinions. That was crazy. That's why we fought an American Revolution. Well, it turns out that that ugly monster is just rearing its head again saying that, no, no, no, you actually can't be trusted to self-govern. So we'll tell you that you are to give you the satisfaction of believing that you live in a republic. See, that was actually they could think of rewrite the American Revolution through revisionist lens and say, okay, you can't tell people they live in a monarchy. But if you can at least keep the parts of a monarchy that are required for society to continue to exist, but fool people into thinking they live in a democracy or self-governing republic, that's almost good enough. And that comes with some inconveniences because sometimes it will actually even behave a little bit like a democracy at times. But in the core questions, at least if it was unelected people who actually made those decisions, that machine is actually what protects humanity from itself. And so the people who occupy those positions are individually people who believe that they are doing the right thing, not even for themselves or that they're trying to harm their fellow citizens. They're doing the right thing for their fellow citizens. I'm thinking about the average civil servant working at the FDA or the SEC or whatever. They believe that if it weren't for them, the silent, the Bruce Wayne figure that they are, right? The hero that Gotham deserves, that's how they think about themselves. And individually, I guess you could say that that motivation as much as there's a conceit embedded in that, like they're not individually irredeemable people. I just think that they have become part of a machine that is irredeemable. And so I don't know, maybe they'll continue to watch Jimmy Kimmel. They're like a separate issue, right? They've culture issues in the country. But if we view the bureaucracy as its own target, separate apart from the individuals who comprise it, I think that's going to allow us to be more successful and be allow us to, I think, sell it to the rest of the country and not in a fake sale, but like a true sale to say that we don't hold this against the individuals who are working here, who have put in 20 years of work to the federal government. Well, we owe it to the rest of the people of this country that the job of the federal government is not to employ these people. So where does the rubber hit the road on that? Here's one where you could call me soft for this, but I actually think this would be advisable. Actually, I think this would drastically increase the probability of success of this happening, but I also think that it doesn't really dilute what we're doing. It doesn't have that our purpose. I would actually favor rather generous severance arrangements with those individuals, right? Like we could debate whether that's a year's, a year and a half, a year and a half would be extremely generous. You could say that well, then you're eating in a similar cost savings, not really in the long run. You're still saving a lot of money, for sure. But the whole exercise wasn't really about saving their headcount costs anyway. The biggest costs of employing the people in this machine is the action of the machine itself. So if you've debilitated that for a year and a half's worth of severance, well, I mean, what's that? It's like a year and a half's worth of not having done this in the first place, pay that as down payment to actually make that happen. That by normal employment standards is actually really generous. Like if you're working at a company and you're not doing a great job and someone fires you or even if you're doing a great job and you're part of a division that's no longer part of that company, you're generally not going to get a year and a half's worth unless you're the CEO. You're not going to get a year and a half's worth of pay. It just doesn't work that way. You might get two weeks. You might get two months at most. So to treat these federal employees far more generously than they would have been in a private sector circumstance. There's probably people watching this who would think I'm being soft for saying that. No, I think we're actually, I think that's the right thing to do because it will allow us to do this in a way that separates this as a personal vendetta against those side of the individuals, who themselves have their families and their kids and whatever, to say that we're solving more of a structural problem. And so that's how I kind of separated Tucker is especially economically on the severance piece of this. Like I want to go in, I want to go hard. I want to go aggressive, but I want to make this less about going after the individuals, they're still free to watch the view if they want. You know what? They can have a year or a year and a half's worth of that all salary. I mean, I just matter. It doesn't matter. Like it just doesn't matter right now. Actually, I love that. Yeah. And they'll sue and they'll take it to the Supreme Court. This also why this has to be done now, not only because it's the window of the electoral mandate we have, I think the current Supreme Court is on our side in a way that it never has been since the advent of the administrative state, which is around 1920. Like in the last century, we have not had a Supreme Court that has been as aligned with the vision that I'm describing to you as we have now. And fast forward in another 20 years, we probably won't really. I mean, realistically in the next 20 years, there's going to be somebody who you and I don't agree with who's probably going to be elected president. And there's going to be Supreme Court justices who either die or get swapped out in that timeframe. So this is a, again, back to a once in a century, maybe once in a national history opportunity to really drive deep structural change in the federal government. Improvement. So here's how I would stop it if I were on the other side and opposed to this. Yeah. I would have a war. I mean, we have the, I mean, the federal government is at its current size because of war. The main physical effect of the Second World War in the United States was the construction of the world's largest office building, the Pentagon. We have DHS because of a war. That is a game of existence, of course, in the, nine, 11. Yeah. So, yeah, war increases the size of government. It changes attitudes, it changes your society always in terrible ways in my opinion. But certainly it changes it, but it creates an environment where people don't question, because people were afraid. Yeah. And so they feel like they need government. So, um, the ultimate big government is the, you know, there are a lot of money spent in the last year on war with Iran. Like people won't war with Iran. That's the war people want. Donors want. I know for a fact. So, um, if we get a war with Iran, then we're not cutting, we're not cutting the government at all. Interesting. I would give that some thought. I mean, you're, one of the things that's also true is that massive Leviathan we're talking about probably, I gave that we go into this esoteric example about the Fed, but one of the best places, and best examples of that is the State Department as you well know. Right. That is when you think about the swamp and the elected bureaucracy and the people who set policy, we're never elected to set that policy. I mean, the State Department's probably even a far better example than the US Federal Reserve. There are too many good examples to choose from, but that's State Department is disgusting. Yeah, that's probably should be high on the list. Yeah. No, it's got some sort of mandate to make the world gay or something. I don't understand what where it came, I mean, the point of the State Department is to conduct diplomacy on behalf of the United States. It's not to change cultures around the world to fit the more ease of Bethesda, Maryland to actually. Well, I think it's behaved like most organizational bureaucracies. It takes on a life of its own. And so that's again, another example of an agency, just another agency really that needs to be, we've got to take the same attitude to say that if you get a bunch of people showing up to work who should never have that job, they start finding things to do that are generally damaging and that could include even not only in our own soil. Oh my gosh. Not as well. Oh, it's I mean, my dear, the war state is upstream of the welfare state in some ways to because it even relates to the immigration crisis. Actually, more so in Europe though, I think it probably will eventually be directly linked to the immigration crisis here too, where part of Europe's mass invasion, if you will, of illegal entering Europe is actually the consequence of US disruptions that we created in the war in Syria. Absolutely. Yeah, that's exactly right. No, we did that. And so that's a state's welfare state. We're different from Western European countries, but if you view the West more broadly and the rise of the welfare state in the West, the warfare state actually creates the need for that welfare state, which then actually creates the magnet that keeps the illegal migration pattern coming. And the labor, you know, the real labor shortage in this country is in the Pentagon. The recruitment goals. And so they're going to start waving in illegal aliens and giving them automatic weapons. Do you think that's, do you think that's first that's happening going? Yeah. And so then you then you have, you know, late Rome where the Germanic tribes are populating your history. Yeah. Yeah. It's terrifying. Okay. So that's how you about the election. Yeah, it's so dark. I can't even think about it, but that's where we're going. Um, okay. So within hours of the election of Trump being declared the winner in this last election, numbers appeared in the internet, which are accurate, which I know you've seen that showed the vote totals in the last four elections for the Democrats. Yeah. And in three out of the four, the number, including this one, the number hover between say 59 and 65, um, million votes. And then you have this weird anomaly in 2020 where it was 81. Huh. So how do you go? I was such a compelling candidate. That doesn't make any sense. I know. So this candidate, his vice president, she received, she, Kamala Harris received, they tell us Wikipedia tells us received 81 million votes in 2020. And then somehow she received 15 million fewer. What happened to those 15 million? That just does not make it. I just dare anyone to explain that to me. What is that? I mean, look, I'm, I'm not a scholar on this stuff. Oh, I will tell you what I would say. What I would say. So I think a good number of those on the super positive side of this, a lot of those people are the people who are given the permission structure. But whether those people and I will put that to one side, but there are a lot of people who actually did vote for Joe Biden, who could not stomach voting for anyone other than Donald Trump this time around. I think it's great. Yeah, but Trump's numbers stayed the same. Yeah, Trump's numbers had stayed the same. True. For through three elections, pretty much the same. Um, and let's just, let's just cut to the chase on this. We won the election. Here's what we do. Single day voting on election day as a national holiday with paper ballots and government issued ID to match the voter file. And I would also add while we're at it making English the sole language that appears in a ballot. Yes. And you know what? It's a beautiful thing. Puerto Rico does it this way? There's other countries that do it this way. I think that that's something that we could actually do the country that sent a rocket out and caught it on the way back. Yes, we would be able to actually run elections on a single day with paper ballots and send dominion packing. And the fact that there is resistance to this, let's just say the policy proposal on offer. Okay. Trump's talked about this. Single day voting on election day, make it a national holiday that actually brings people together. Paper ballots, government issued ID to match the voter file. I don't, if that is, if that is objectionable, that itself raises doubts about exactly what that is going on. So I don't think Kamala Harris want, you can check this, but I'm pretty sure Kamala Harris did not win any states with voter ID law. Oh, is that right? Yep. And she didn't lose any states that don't require voter ID. So that's really interesting. Ha ha ha. No, I'm not saying there's a connection there, Vivek, but you're following this ions. So I just don't understand. And again, I've been in 18 hours or whatever of depositions from voting machine companies to disgusting companies. I was not named it either suit, but they hauled me in and tried to wreck my life just for, I don't know, I guess disagreeing with them or something. Smartmatic and Dominion disgusting companies. Why do we have electronic voting machines? No one will say this because they're afraid of getting sued by these companies. What's the justification? What I haven't followed the industrial history of this. When did that come into, when did they start using them and what was the justification? The justification was that they're more efficient and faster, more accurate and faster. And it turned out, it's like, it takes a lot longer to get our heads. No. So India, I think is the largest country in the world. I think they, we reset the population numbers recently. If it's not the largest, it's one of the largest by popular second largest. I think it's largest now here. I think it's the largest. And I largest democracy for sure in the history of the world. And I think they finished counting in one day every time. Is that correct? I think it is pretty fast. Yeah. It's just doing pretty fast. As I said, even, I mean, like you look at a territory that is it's even Puerto Rico. Like runs their elections with such. I think it is pretty fast. Lot of people do it pretty fast. As I said, even, even, I mean, like you look at a territory, the eyes, it's even Puerto Rico. It runs their elections with such, executional excellence compared to the rest of the United States. And they keep the power grid going. It's unbelievable. It's unbelievable. And so what do we say this time around? This had to be by such a decisive margin that a landslide minus some shenanigans is still going to be a decisive victory. And that's what we got. So my view is we can, and there's going to be such a temptation to do this is we actually won. Like we're actually in a winning position right now. So like I more or less could care less for the Kamala Harris or Joe Biden pastor or like I just don't, it just doesn't matter. That's the spirit. What I care about is like how are we actually going to fix it in a lasting way, like in a way that just lasts for a really long time. I think there would be enough of an opportunity. I mean, think about the majority word now commanding in the Senate. I think we can do this nationally where you make election a national holiday, put it on a single day and at least for federal elections because states election, state elections are on by states, but at least for a federal election, all 50 states have a bit of bare minimum standard of single day voting, paper ballots, government issued ID to match the voter file period. And I think more or less we've solved the problem of public confidence and elections for the long run. I think you're solving it. You saw right there. That then I'd like to offer. I'd like to I'd love to hear the best possible argument offered against that. I haven't really heard one. Yeah. Black people don't have ideas in this country. Yeah. I think that that's a racist supposition. Actually, so you know, and then they will all lead racism for somebody who actually thinks anything different than the actual most racist thought on the matter. But I haven't heard a good, compelled most black people favor voter ID laws. Actually, most people favor voter ID laws. So should not be surprising that most black people also favor voter ID laws. And you know, I think if somebody's on their way to, you know, if there's some as drive it, somebody's as analogy that's pretty good. It's driving on their way to vote and they actually get pulled over. They say, no, no, no, no, wait a vote. That's your way out of actually a speeding ticket. Because if you're on your way to vote, you don't need to vote or ID. But if you're driving anywhere else, you do. It's kind of a funny little paradox. So most it's common sense. It's called common sense because most people it's everywhere tend to have it. And I think most people agree on this issue. We now have enough of a mandate. So I think let's just, let's just fix it. We are proud at TCN to offer quality long form programming films, documentaries, short series. And we've got a new one rolling it out. It's a six part documentary series called All the Presidents Men, the conspiracy against Trump. It's made by our friend, the documentary filmmaker, Sean Stone, all six episodes available now at Tucker Carlson dot com. It's an in-depth look at what happened in the first Trump administration, 2016 to 2020. And while the rest of us sort of busy watching TV behind the scenes, permanent Washington, particularly the inter agencies and the law enforcement agencies under the indirect, but pretty clear command of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton set out to systematically destroy not just Donald Trump, but the people around him, people who supported him. And this series explains exactly what happened. It's worth seeing as Donald Trump starts his second presidency. This series has interviews with the people who were targeted and presented in a way that will help you understand exactly what happened. How American democracy as democracy was undermined by the people who claim to be defending it. It's in this series. And it's absolutely worth it. All the presidents men, the conspiracy against Trump out now on Tucker Carlson dot com. So how did you when I saw you in Florida, an election night with Trump and clearly like him, he clearly likes you. You know, running against somebody for office is not a natural environment for a friendship to sprout at all. It was, you know, Jeb Bush was not there. Yeah. Yeah. How did you end up liking Trump? How did he end up liking you? Why do you have such an easy friendship after running against him? I think we're both unusual individuals in ways that caused us to gel. Actually, I didn't see the point in running, I ran against Trump for sure. I made my case for why I thought I was the right candidate. I think that there's, I was the youngest person ever to run for US president as a Republican and I do think that there is an opportunity to lead and bring in a new generation in some ways as we have nonetheless in the last year. But I didn't do the Trump bashing thing. Like it just seemed seemed kind of lame. It seemed really fast. He was the best. But is these things right? Everyone starts out so it gets intense. Yeah. And we had our, we had our sharp moments over the course of the campaign. Sure, but it wasn't, how did you do that? How'd you not get mad? They all get mad at the end. No, it was interesting. I guess the whole thing wasn't an exercise that I took super personally anyway. I think when you take this stuff too personally it becomes exhausting. But for me it was, look, I feel like I have a calling for the country. I'm running for something. I'm running for my vision. You know what? Along the way, because it was deeply consistent in my vision. I respected Donald Trump. In a certain sense, if you think about like a family business or something, right? You have, you can have a guy who started it, the quits it to his kids at some point along the way. There are some bumps in the road in terms of how that happens and when and when's the right time for the torch to be passed on. Those would be legitimate disagreements arguments within the context of family business. I know many people who have been in that similar position. And so in that sense of carrying the American torch, we can have like a reasonable debate about when the right time is for that to be able to pass on to the next generation of leaders or whatever. But I came from a place of actual deep respect for Donald Trump, the whole time that I ran because one of the reasons why is it was a fact of the matter that I was self-aware about myself. I would not have thought about running for US president had Donald Trump not actually done it as a first time outsider in one in 2016. I don't think that that, I don't think that idea would have occurred to me. I'm an entrepreneur. I believe in achieving things that have been achieved before. But that particular thing, I just wouldn't have even considered that possibility had Donald Trump not run one and been a successful president. And so I said it on the debate stage that Donald Trump was the greatest president of the 21st century. And I think it actually caused more anger from the other candidates on that stage at me for the rest of the race than Donald Trump or I ever had with respect to the majority. They didn't like that very much. Who didn't like it? Well, I think most of the other people on the debate stage, actually, how many were there? This started with like 10. The last debate I had was for us, for us, for us up there, that was interesting. There was so many things I would do differently. But that's the story for us. No, it's not the other day. I think the hardest part was in the short windows into a campaign that you have interfacing with like 300 million people. I think even the people who are in physical rooms with me understood me at a different and deeper level than the 99.9% of the electorate than ever was, but who saw the few windows that they had to see who you are. Now, the debate to one of the things I learned about them is that this different for a general election debate, if you're going against Trump versus Harris or Trump versus Biden, people watch that and for good reason, I'm glad they did. But in a Republican primary debate in the early cycle where there's like 10 people standing on a stage, most people don't actually watch that debate or see what happened for themselves, but what they do see is the distillation of it. So the clips, but even the verbal descriptions of actually what happened, that's what they get is the synthesis. So the audience functionally of a primary debate isn't really the electorate. It's two groups of people. It's the gatekeepers in the media and it is the people who fund campaigns. Like that's the audience that actually matters. I mean, I'm not saying short that way and I'm saying I wanted to work that way, but functionally if you're looking at moving the ball forward in a race, that is the group that determines whether or not that event actually advanced your campaign forward towards victory. And at a certain point in the campaign, I mean, you and I actually spoke a few times over it, including over conversations like this we had while I was running. You know, the conclusion I arrived at was here's my strategy. I'm going to tell you what I actually believe right now. And 99% of the time, that was the same thing that I believed four years ago, 1% of the time it was not. I tell you what I believe right now and I'm going to tell it to you straight without filters. And it felt like that should be a winning electoral strategy. I'm not sure it's the winning electoral strategy, but this race was just so different from any other one because in retrospect, there's literally it's foolish for anybody myself included to think that anybody else was going to come out of this process other than Donald Trump as the nominee. And it's because the moment right now that we're in the people of this country know what they need when they need it and they needed a guy who had been there, who had was strong enough, who wasn't necessarily an ideologue, but who was a badass who actually had had the experience and was ready from those learnings to be charged up and go back in and actually take it to the next level. So they knew that and I don't think the outcome was going to be any different of terms of who the nominee was regardless of what I did, but there was still a lot of a lot of learnings through the process. Now things like I could have done better. I don't know, I don't know, I think that being unsparing as I was, I think I that I wouldn't change, but to be able to combine that a little bit more with if there's a way for me to allow a lot of people to sort of know me the way that like my employees at my businesses know me or my closest friends know me. I would I would love to think about how to do that. Donald Trump's actually really good at that. Yeah. Yeah. And I think that he is he's like the best at it and watching him even in the years since I left the campaign has been eye opening. It's been kind of inspiring actually and it's made me think a lot about he's able to take in a 20,000 people in a room at a time, but also 100 million people not in the room at that time to really get to know him like who he is and feel like they actually deeply know him as a person as opposed to just his policies. I think it was really good at allowing a lot of people around the country to know what my policies were, what my specifics of were my vision for America. I found it a little bit hard to figure out how to let people on the other side of right. No, no, who you actually get it. It's difficult. That was that was like kind of one of the one of the reflect Trump is more self deprecating than he gets credit for quite self deprecating. It's actually really funny. It's actually really funny. It's actually really funny. It's really funny. The other night in last week at the campaign, he was pivoting against the Trump voters or garbage buttons comment. He shows up in a garbage truck wearing that. Thank you were there wearing a you know, day glow vest and he comes out on stage wearing a vanity and he says by staff told me they want to meet him. Where is that one? They said to me makes you look thinner. Yeah. I like that. And I said anything makes you look thinner. I'm for it. It's true. It's hard to say stuff like that about yourself. So what about I've just wondered like one of the sort of ongoing side skirmishes that I trying to pay too much attention to, but it's a little mesmerizing. Is the the never Trump movement? Oh yeah. What's going on with that? Well, I don't think not anything actually. And I'm interested because they're all people I know. Yeah. Yeah. Because I'm for you. Yeah. And they're so they're just so repulsive to me. Um, but what are you just going on? I think there's a kind of well, there are psychological door. Or sad. Right. It's like a condition that needs to be treated with like 100%. I have priest or something. Totally. Yeah. If you're, you know, whatever Dick Cheney's repulsive little daughter or Jonah Goldberg or said, you know, it's like you're not, they're just not impressive people. They were exercising a 30 far beyond what they had earned in my view in the first place, both of the products of nepotism. And they're just mad that their world ended, whatever. But here's the, I don't want to be mean about it, though that was really mean, but true. It's not honest. It was true. Uh, but the, in the closing days of the campaign, the Harris people kept telling us there are a lot of people like that. There are a lot of Republican women who weren't going to vote for Trump because he's too repulsive. They won't tell their husbands. They wouldn't tell their husbands and they're going to vote for Kamala Harris and it turns out like the never Trump world has gotten so much attention. Mm-hmm. But there's like no one. I've heard no clothes. Absolutely. There's no one there. Totally. Yeah. It was, it actually ended up just being a mirage. That whole thing at the end started, that actually really got under my skin a little bit. Like the whole thing about going to the ballot box and vote differently than your husband. Like that was a pitch that was made. of hurting the family and hurting the marriage, encouraging a spouse to lie. Yeah. You could, you could vote differently, but like the idea that you want to do it secretly creates this some kind of, I mean, so it's the ultimate division play because identity politics divide the based on its divisions. It is the division's the natural exchange of action. The division on race, division on gender. Totally. Division on gender within the household because they're fundamentally against the household as a unit anyway. That's for sure. And so that was, that was, that was probably the thing that pissed me off. Well, I don't even understand it. I mean, I, I know someone really well was saying that it. Wow. We're voting differently in our household. And I, I said to my wife, if we had, we're going to vote for different people. First of all, I would say absolutely not. We're not going for different people. So that we're not going to vote if we're going to vote for different people. And second, we're going to take the weekend and talk for as long as it takes to get on the same page. Yeah. And maybe I'll change my view. Maybe you'll change yours, but we're going to align because we're married. Yeah. We're going to even understand that. Yeah. You're on the same team. 100% yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So basically they're encouraging people to not only split the team, but to lie about it. And actually that's a lie to your husband. Yeah. Well, that is the Democratic Party just distill it's the lie to your husband part of the week, man, unhappy woman party. Oh, it makes me, there's something really sinister about that. There's something sinister about it. But it reveals, I mean, that's what it's something sinister about it, but it's also, I mean, that's transparently what the agenda is. Of course. And so that was in some ways the tactics of the politics of it revealed a big part of what the whole project was like. It was like they were always telling you during COVID or during the BLM riots, the real insurrection, which is what that was. You know, go home and lecture your racist uncle or grandfather at the Thanksgiving team. That was again. That was again, that was again, destroy your family over what your ideological obligation is. So you think the culture changes? I think it has to. I mean, I think if we get our job right here, let's say we're just going and dismantling nuke and, you know, the administrative state actually fixing illegal immigration in this country and actually having secure national borders, reviving our self-confidence. I can't see how the culture doesn't change. And in some ways, actually it's a cultural change that might even just be the wrong framing of it. That is a small part of the story. I think it's always the culture has already changed. And the best evidence of that is what we saw last couple of days. What we saw on Tuesday night were by the way, the time you and I scheduled this to sit down. I was kind of skeptical because I thought we're going to be like sitting here looking at like TV screens and like counting ballots in Pennsylvania or something like that, which would have been a horrific way to spend time. But the fact that we're not doing that and that very night, we actually knew the result in a way that nobody anticipated suggests that we actually have already had the culture change in this country. And it was just revealed to be so. Whatever happened to Joe Biden, is he, I mean that I, I'm not making fun of him. I feel sorry. I do see it too. But I've never seen anyone disappear faster than Joe Biden. You never heard a word. I wonder what his attitude is towards the Obama family right now towards Barack Obama because Joe Biden certainly would have been a more compelling candidate than Hillary Clinton in 2016. And so this guy's had this life dream. His work his entire life became a senator was elected like at the age of 30 or 29 or whatever. And then when he's elected and he was turned 30, who has inspired his entire life over the span of decades beginning long before I was born over 50 years for this for this. I mean, like significantly longer than I was born, this man has been a US senator and a spire to be US president to say that finally when his turn came around in 2015 after faithfully serving as a vice president or whatever to say that no, no, for eight years. Eight years going through that ignominy and then to have Hillary Clinton to say no, no, it's not your time. And then finally he just says, okay, after Hillary loses, I'm just going to do this myself anyway by Heller High Water. That's a whole separate discussion gets his way into the White House. And then to say the same guy comes back and who knows if the reporting on this is true, effectively threatens to have him constitutionally removed from office and to lead a go unless you bend the knee. The same guy only to then watch again, the woman instead who in this time was nominated, Austin was really good at this time in Scallera's fail at the very mission that you otherwise run. I cannot even begin to fathom what that, what that feels like. He is surely the happiest person about the election result on Tuesday night in America, right? Because he's at least personally, maybe him or Jill Biden. Yeah. Why are the, or had to have been the two most, you know, shadow and Freud relieved Americans so country, but it's it's in how is he doing? I don't know. Does that help if you're going through like a state of cognitive decline? Does something like that as painful as that is? Does that sense of agreement and desire for vengeance actually kind of sharpen you? It does because it did seem like he actually got a little bit sharper actually after he was yanked up. It's like part of him, like part of him came back, right? And so his wife were red on election day. Oh, did she? Yeah. I mean, he wore mug of hat into it. So it's not like they were, they were hiding it too much. But, you know, it's, it's just a fascinating thing. It's neither critical nor not. It's just, it's just interesting sociologically and just psychologically. What about the rest of the party? Like if you, I mean, well, you failed you ran for president and didn't get elected. And I know for because I talked to you about it, there was a time after you thought, okay, you know, what did I do right? What did I do wrong? Were you take on a stock of your own behavior? Because that's, that's what it is to grow. That's called adulthood. Yeah. Is there a moment like that for the democratic party? Do you think I hope there is actually I'm kind of rooting for that because that'd be better for the country. I mean, the number one person who's responsible for whether or not you achieve your goal is you actually. There's a lot of other factors you can play. Of course. But in the number one determinant of whether you achieve what you said out to achieve is you. And that's applies to the level of an individual. And if your team is in a political party in American politics, then that's true for, for your team, right? They, they were responsible for their own failure and demise. I saw some interesting things over the last day. And it hasn't, it hasn't been as like monolithically crazy as I expected. I expected everybody just in lockstep in the same way to go the same direction of, you know, threat to democracy, authoritarianism is reached America. And we're seeing certainly a lot of that. That's like 90% of it. But I think there were, I think some thoughtful moments of reflection of, you know, a few folks, like I think I don't know this guy, but someone sent me his tweet. Does this, is it glacial center of magic? Yeah, yeah. He had something thoughtful like I, my campaign, I had 10 truths, 10 things that are true that I lay out that was kind of the centerpiece of my campaign. Yeah. You might remember, they said to me he had nine today, but like he left it, like he forgot number 10 was the joke that somebody sent me. But actually I read them and it was they were all smart and reasonable. You saw this. Yeah. I don't like that. Why glacial is at all. But I don't know. I saw I saw the non fan and I'm willing to admit that all nine of them were great. Yeah. It's like the US government exists for the benefit of its citizens. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. It was stuff that was not too dissimilar from what you or I might say that our vision for what you totally agree to be. You know, I disagree with some of the stuff on there, the framing of it. He said something about climate change. Like I just think the whole agenda is artificial. He said, well, climate change is real, but it's not a goal in itself. It is a means to the end of doing what's better for humanity. And I said that framing was I agree was at least like as a framing matter, the right way to look at it. And so if that's evidence to say that even within a period of 48 hours, you can at least have thoughtful voices on the other side who are willing to look themselves in the mirror, admit failure, inquire about the nature of the screw up and maybe even begin to offer some path forward. I think that actually leaves me. I'm just, you know, I'm, I'm, I've all the times you and I've gotten together. I'm probably like the most hopeful mood. I've actually ever been in right now. And I'm hopeful for the future of the Republican party. I'm hopeful for the future of our country. But like a weird part of me is almost hopeful for the future of the Democratic party based on or. Oh, I agree. Oh, there's that or they're going to have to go the way the Harvard and Yale that we talked about earlier. Either that or they die, right? So it's either evolved or died as someone who's been fired a lot. I can say there's nothing better for you than failure. Yeah. You know, there's, oh, it's the fact that it's essential. Yeah. Because you'll never reassess, you know, winning succeeding, I, I think exacerbates your worst qualities totally because it covers them up and because hopefully it affirms your hubris and like I'm successful because I'm so great. Yeah. That's not entirely true. So this time of year, we are focused on our families because we're apt to be with our families celebrating together. And it's the time of year where you might ask yourself, what happens when you're gone? What's left behind? Well, protect your family's future and peace of mind with a product called policy genius. Policy genius has one goal to make it easy to find and buy life insurance. So your loved ones have something when you're not here. Something they can use to cover debts and expenses of something unexpected happens because unexpected things do happen. With policy genius, you don't need to struggle to do this. You can find life insurance policies that started $292 per year for a million dollars of coverage. Some options are a hundred percent online and that lets you avoid unnecessary medical exams, which is always good. Policy genius combines digital tools with the expertise of real licensed agents. You compare quotes from America's top insurers side by side for free and their no hidden fees. Their license support team helps you get what you need fast. You can get on with your life. In thousands of happy policy genius customers left five star reviews on Google and trust pilot. So secure your family's tomorrow. So you have peace of mind today. It's easy. Go to policy genius.com slash Tucker. Get your free life insurance quotes and see how much you could save. Again, it's policy genius.com slash Tucker. One last question. E1. Yes. No, him. Yes. I think we've known for a while. You're from similar worlds. Tell us what you think is significance in this election was and what is significance will be going forward. Huge. I actually haven't known him for that long. I only got to know him last year. He, he gave your dinner. I was at while I was running for president. We really hit it off. I, I like people who are extremely intelligent and he is in the category of extreme intelligence. He's somebody who is able to not only able to but requires himself to be doing multiple different things at the same time and he's better individually at each of those things because he's also doing those other things at the same time. But I think that his significance was twofold. One is he really expanded that permission structure we were talking about earlier for people who are elite in America, people who define their status based on the number of dollars in their bank account, which I think is probably the wrong way to look at your own status as a human being. But you know, we all have our biases. The richest man in the world and the most successful self made man in human history can publicly state his support for Donald Trump. Then there's nothing stopping me from doing so. Exactly. If I believe that's right, and he's pretty darn smart actually. So if this guy both can do it from a social perspective, but also is as intelligent as he is to send rockets data space and back more intelligent than the US government has, you know, ever if he can kind of do the analysis and say that Donald Trump's going to be the right choice for the future of the country, then you know what? Maybe I should do some simpler thinking of my own and have the courage to arrive at the same place. So in terms of blowing out that permission structure, like that was certainly what I consider to be one of my responsibilities over the last year. But the person who really blew that out, Barnon was Elon when he came out publicly in Doris Trump. And I love the way he did it because it was clearly he was just moved by the fact that, okay, he was maybe thinking about it. Who knows? Who knows where exactly he was in his journey right there? And he and I talked at various points, but I don't know that he was going to come out in publicly in Doris Trump and the way he did, but there was this supernatural event. I do think it was it was a divine moment in American history where we referred it in natural disaster by about two centimeters. And he'll understand okay, it's done. I'm doing this. He's an American hero and I'm endorsing him. I thought that was number one. Number two was on just the execution of it too. And this election, I mean, Pennsylvania was it turns out Donald Trump would have won regardless. But Pennsylvania was the key that allowed us to really secure this victory and to just go in and say, got a lot of political consultants and a lot of people in traditional Republican party apparatuses who have, you know, tried to figure this stuff out and say, no, I'm just actually going to figure out myself directly and understand here's low propensity voters. I'm going to personally go and talk to them myself. I'm going to spend nine figures or whatever it was in the end. I think it was at least nine figures to actually make sure that we get the job done and then get the job done. I think was was essential actually to this victory. And so I hope he's an essential part going forward of saving the country and using this mandate to shred to pieces that federal bureaucracy. And I talked about earlier and I hope he's, you know, doesn't lose his interest in American politics for a long time to come. You know, you and I think have been on the side of, because you hear this objection now coming up, which actually infuriates me about, oh, what about all of a sudden now after 14 years of being silent on this from the left, we don't like this influence of money in politics. Well, okay, some got outspent three to one exactly. Read a one exactly exactly in the swing states, right? So, so long as we have the game and I think that this is something for our side to, you know, man up into as well is if you're going to play the game, like you got to compete actually. And we can't just win this against the so called successful or elites or whatever. No, actually we are better off if we have our own cadre of superhuman heroes who are able to with their own unique skills, be they cultural leaders or business leaders or whatever to have our own version of our, you know, special forces. I mean, I don't like most political donors. I know them all and most of them have creepy agendas or they just want to be get their picture taken with a politician, which is like a very low motive in my view. Yeah. You on not unique, but he's very unusual and that he doesn't really want anything. Yeah. There's really one thing. I mean, he certainly doesn't need anything. That's what I'm saying. He has a lot to lose, but he certainly doesn't. No, he doesn't want anything for himself. Like he's not in it. Obviously not for the money. Yeah. And there's something you're noting about it. He was not a conservative. I mean, the whole Trump phenomenon is if you take three steps back, unifying. Yeah. As a unified moment, worth it actually is in Brooklyn voting for Donald Trump. Yeah. You had Muslims in Southeast Michigan voting for Donald Trump. It was awesome. You had sugar cane workers, the people who cut the cane in Florida and the people who own the ranches, all voting for Donald Trump. You had North Georgia, you know, white red necks and you had black men in Atlanta, all voting for Trump. Totally. Above them all is Elon Musk who's like just sort of this figure who's above politics. He's for Trump. I mean, there's something. Yeah. It was part of it was it was in some ways in some ways you could say like, what was the causal link that he played it if you were in your analytical hat? I think it was huge. There's also some broader sense in which this was just destined to happen. Totally. This was all just playing out. Oh, I'm with you. Like we're going to have like a false analytical hubris here by just like dissecting exact. No, no, but it was just it was just all destined. It was just going to have just going to know and this was all part of it playing out. And you know, it's just like you know that. I mean, you're there when they won. You know, even even just over the last year. I mean, I mean, yeah, I'm not. I mean, it would mean to quit the sin of flattening into your face. But I think one of the things I liked about. Well, even just over the last year, I mean, I mean, I'm not, I mean, I mean, I could the sin of flattening your face, but I think one of the things I liked about our conversations. And you know, I, you know, I fashioned, you know, fashion myself as having some of this as well is just having like a little bit of an intuition of where things are going a little bit like just like just get a pulse of the country and to sort of see it. I think you and I had conversations over the last year where I think we were both on the same page about early on last year in like spring of 2023 being both convinced that Joe Biden was not going to be the nominee. Yeah. That's right. And then you said it many times. And there's some darker, there's some darker ones in, in the future. I think sadly predicted, but we're wrong about by two centimeters. Yes, exactly. Thankfully. And, you know, even the idea that this is going to be a landslide, you could just sort of feel it, right? Totally. It was just, it was just in the ether. And so in some sense, like at our, at our very best, we might kind of smell it coming, but it was coming either way. No, I think so. And so I think the more we remember that that actually is, I think what's uniting actually once you see that that's really uniting the idea that it's not being done by us actually. It's being done through us. Like that's a liberating feeling. And that's since you and I or any other everyday American is united with, you know, Elon must to Donald Trump like we're all part of, I think a higher plan. It's being done through us. This was coming. It was going to happen one factor or not. And you know, in some ways, we're all just playing our little piece of a role in, in playing out what was going to play out all along. I can't improve on that. That's the greatest summation I've heard of. This election is over. Thank you very much. Good seeing you now. I see you.