All right, Billy Carson. Thank you for coming back, man. You are a popular guy. Hey, thank you, man. I'm glad I made it. So, what have you been up to, man? You've been traveling the world? Where you Where you been in all over Egypt? You've been all over You went to India, right? Cambodia. Cambodia. Cambodia, yeah. to Cambodia. We took a huge tour in Egypt. We took two tours of people to Egypt in October. So, I stayed there the whole month. And it was about 100 140 people, two tours, all throughout Egypt, you know, Luxor and Dendera, Abydos, everywhere you can think of. Took them on a lot of private visits, hidden chambers, hidden doors that have been sealed for 30, 40, even 50 years. One place was sealed for over 100 years. We took them down there. Going underneath pyramids, underneath hidden shafts, and different crypts at different locations that have been sealed. So, taking them giving them a real private experience. And then, right after that, 2 weeks later, taking another 20 people on a private tour of Cambodia. Angkor Wat, took them to the largest temple complex in the world. Which people kind of don't really understand the power of Angkor Wat. The moat that goes around the temple itself, more mass than the blocks that built the Great Pyramid was removed to make just the moat around Angkor Wat. Think about that for a minute. More mass than the Great Pyramid was moved. And the way that they set it up, they knew how to capture the rainwater coming down from the mountain to create a moat that could sustain itself and also irrigate fields for growing crops, all at the same time, through from one flow of water. You can't do that type of digging and moving of mass if you don't know the end result. So, you're talking about the fact that these people had foreknowledge, they had advanced knowledge and advanced engineering skills to know beforehand that before they move this kind of mass, the result's going to work out for them. You don't just say, "You know what? Let's try to move this mass and see what happens." You know that it's going to work because you have foreknowledge. It was engineered, right? Yeah. Engineered. Angkor Wat. Yeah. Wow, man. Massive, massive temple complex. is that the body of water right before it where they removed That's the moat in front of it that goes around it. Just like you know you see the old castles in the middle of the moat that protects it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. And uh there's over a thousand temples there in in uh Cambodia. When was Angkor Wat allegedly built? That This is a good question. They're trying to say that Angkor Wat was built less than a thousand years ago. Which to me is almost laughable. The king that took ownership and claimed that he built Angkor Wat, he only lived for 45 years. That's number one. Number two, you've got to mature to a point where you can make decisions like building a massive temple complex like that. And I doubt that with the amount of ornate glyphs that almost outdo all glyphs throughout entire Egypt on one building can be done within the time frame of his lifespan. So, I seriously doubt I believe that he inherited what was already there, that his team went and cleaned it up, removed the jungle, cleared it out, maybe even repaired or replaced some hieroglyphs, branded his name on the building, but I seriously doubt that he's the founder and the builder of Angkor Wat. I believe that he inherited what was already there. Hey guys, I want to ask you a quick favor. Over the last few months, almost 70% of the viewers of this podcast are not subscribed to the channel. The most important common denominator that allows me to keep creating these podcasts every single week is you hitting that subscribe button below the videos. I want to thank every single one of you who watches and supports these podcasts. I would not be able to do it without you. Please hit that subscribe button if you enjoy it. Now back to the show. We hiked about 50 miles in the jungles of Angkor Wat going all the different temples. Really? It's a lot of When you go on our tours, I mean, you got, you know, it's 150 miles we did in Egypt alone in October. But, these sites are amazing. You can, you know, there's a mountain that we hiked up. When you get to the top of the mountain, they shaved the top of the mountain and turned it into a a sleeping Buddha. And, uh, I just saw one image there from Angkor Wat where they had, uh, that famous movie was filmed there. I think it was the Temple of Doom or, uh, the one with the, the young lady. What's her name again? Lara Croft? Oh, Tomb Raider? Tomb Raider was filmed there. Oh, really? Tomb Raider. No [ __ ] Yeah. Yeah. Great place, beautiful. Now, hard to get to. It's about 38 hours flying from Florida to get to Angkor Wat. It's hard to get there, I'm not going to lie. Now, Cambodia is right in that between Vietnam and Laos, right? Yes. Yeah. Yeah, you got to land The best place to land is land in Bangkok and then fly from Bangkok, 1-hour flight to Cambodia. So, you're going to book a flight to right there? That is Ta Prohm. Now, here's what's very interesting before I got to get you this image for this podcast. This image here of Ta Prohm, this face, Uh-huh. there's a very similar face on an amazing anomaly discovered on Mars. So, that face right there, extremely extremely similar to a rock anomaly discovered on Mars by, uh, Perseverance rover. I'm sorry, not Perseverance, but my Curiosity rover. Curiosity rover? Curiosity rover. On Mars. On Mars. Yeah, it's it's Mars is such a crazy I just had a guy on here like 2 weeks ago. He's, uh, an an a astrophysicist. Yeah. Um, Brian Keating. And, he made I mean, he is kind of a little bit cynical about life beyond Earth. He doesn't see His claim is there's no evidence. There's no hard evidence of life. And he made the analogy. He's like, "Danny, what if I told you that there was a planet in the Goldilocks zone of a star on a solar system that was teeming with life. And then there was a planet very close to it that could have easily inhabit life that was also in this Goldilocks zone. Would you say there was any life or absolutely no life?" And you would say, "Of course there would be life." And he's like, "Well, okay, the perfect perfect analogy to that is Earth and Mars. Earth has teeming with life and Mars there is zero evidence of life." And it's kind of bizarre. Yeah. It's really bizarre. A lot of the new science data has come out about Mars now. So, first they were just saying Mars was a cold dry rock. So, I kept saying if it's just a cold dry rock, why are we spending literally collectively on the planet as a planet trillions of dollars to go there? Right. Trillions. Why would you keep spending money to go Who's approving these checks? Mhm. Then when I saw India raise 3 million to send a um a satellite there, I said, "There's something really going on." When you look into the new science data, you find out that first they were saying cold dry rock. Now they're saying flowing water. Now they're saying lakes, hectares worth of lakes of water. Now they're also saying it's salt water. Brine, right? And they're saying now that wow, we can see where rivers were and oceans were and there's still huge pockets of massive amounts of liquid water. And then all of a sudden they're saying now, before they were saying no oxygen, now they're saying, "Oh, there's oxygen. If you're like 10 ft or below, it's almost breathable. It'll It'll be like being about 14,000 ft above sea level. Like being in Tibet, so you know, so to speak or the top of Machu Picchu, which we can acclimate to just fine. Right. Then they were saying no, uh your DNA would unravel because of the radiation because there's no magnetic field. Then they're saying now all of a sudden, "Wait a minute. We do discover a magnetic field. And but even though it's a little bit weaker but because of the planet's rotation on its axis which is about the same speed as Earth. Right. And it's moving around the sun it creates something called bow shock that bends the cosmic rays around the planet preventing them from getting down to the lower levels of the surface allowing DNA to flourish on the surface. So, we keep hearing all these things about Mars and then the deeper you look into some of the images on their own servers, you start to seeing things that look like plant life that look organic and then a lot of structures that uh that resemble things from ancient civilizations, quite frankly. But now when you read the ancient Sumerian tablets, you discover that they had this working class called the Igigi. Mhm. And in the in the Atra-Hasis epic and the epic of Gilgamesh and in the uh Enuma Elish in the seven tablets of creation, these Igigi beings were working on Mars and Earth at the same time building two breakaway civilizations con- currently. And they were tasked with that load and they got mad about doing that amount of work. They wanted to stop working but they worked for about 200,000 years before they revolted against Enki and Enlil and Anu. But the fact that you can see the similarities on Earth and the similarities similarities with with what looks like potentially uh you know, collapsed structures on Mars, it tells you there's one architect or one architectural plan that came from one place. Both places have the same architecture. In Avebury in the UK, there's a place uh in Avebury where you can pull down an ordnance map. It's close to Stonehenge. If you take that ordnance map and I'll send you a copy of it, you can overlay it on top of Cydonia and it perfectly aligns the mound which is an artificial mound built in and masses amount of massive amount of land moved to build a mound there and two tracks and paths that lead up to more anomalies that were man-made on Earth. When you overlay it on top of Cydonia, the image from Cydonia, it matches those anomalies perfectly. So, who made a replica of an area of Cydonia on Earth? And Cydonia means Cairo. So, Really? Yeah. Yeah. So, we're talking about the same the same builders. I was just reading I just finished rereading this book called Area 51 by Annie Jacobsen. And she was talking about in Nevada the atomic test sites where they eventually they stopped detonating bombs in the atmosphere and they started doing them in like these vertical shafts. Um and they were detonating thermonuclear bombs in vertical shafts like beneath the desert. And that's also where they did training for the Apollo missions out in those deserts for those guys. They had to get geared up and like and and reenact or like rehearse their missions. And what's crazy is the craters that are made from those thermonuclear bombs detonated underground are exactly like the craters on the moon. They look just like that. Yes. Yes. And that was one of the crazy things that Buzz Aldrin and Edgar Mitchell noticed. Yeah. When you look at the moon images, and I've studied the moon, I mean, so countless amount of hours. I've got so many moon images. There's a famous dome structure that I discovered that made it onto TV on two different shows because it's undeniable a dome structure on the moon. Now, that came from the Apollo 11 video. So, it wasn't an old photoshopped image or anything anybody could touch up. It came directly from the archives from a downloaded video stream of the LEM coming back to the command module. Now, what's interesting is when you look at the moon, those craters are never in any particular angle. In other words, if I'm floating free floating through space and I've got things coming at me, it would hit in angle and then make a track until it comes to a point where it stops and then it would create a crater. Mhm. All these things are straight down, perfectly straight down. There's nothing that slid and moved into a particular angle to create an implosion. It's all an explosion. It looks like all implosions. Like what you're talking about, you have these craters that seem to be all almost the same depth. How is that even possible? that's crazy. And so I went to usgs.gov and I downloaded some imagery there. I sent it to a friend of mine who runs Mars anomalies. He teaches the expert on looking at these USGS usgs.gov ground penetrating images. These came from the Arecibo before it collapsed and broke, you know, a few years ago. From what? The Arecibo satellite array that we had in Puerto Rico. Okay. It's no longer in functioning, but we have images from it still. There was one of the largest satellites on Earth that were able to take radio images of planets and so forth. Mhm. Well, we used it and pointed it at the moon. And guess what we found out? Underneath the surface of the moon, there appears to be some gigantic what we can only assume might be metallic or beam-like structures 30 m beneath the surface. So is it is it that they only stopped there because that's as far as you can go? I mean, we don't know. But what's interesting is they all seem to almost have the same depth. And there doesn't seem to be much of um uh debris around the rim. Mhm. Where's all Where did all that debris go? There's enough gravity to pull it back down, but it just seems to be gone. So what are those? Now, we have a black box audio, which I'll send to you so you can play this. In the black box audio from Apollo 11, one of the astronauts, I believe it was Neil, said, "Look at those convex domes down there." Or convex craters, I believe he says. Now, convex, I believe he said convex. Convex means it's like this. Yes. Which doesn't make any sense. Then he says, "I bet the people down there never get out." And that's on the redacted printed uh statement. They didn't redact that statement and it's also in the audio. So, that's made it into documentaries that I've done because I discovered that. So, I'll send you a copy of that. You can play it in this in this podcast. But, what's interesting is that's a pretty blunt statement to make and knowing that it's being recorded and then they actually let it stay in the documents and the audio, the black box audio from Apollo 11. Can you find that on YouTube? Uh you might be able to. You might be able to. But, I know I have the download link in my Anunnaki group Okay. that I can get it to you. Yeah. Pretty crazy. That's very crazy, man. Yeah. And I think I have the link directly to the source on nasa.gov as well. I just had a guy on my podcast about a month ago. He um I don't know if you've ever heard of him. His name is Chris Bledsoe. And he he has these crazy experiences where he sees orbs all the time. Like, he goes out into his backyard. And he has these orbs that follow him and he films them and he posts them on Instagram. And nobody knows what they are. Wow. That's interesting. It's It's really interesting. And And he believes it's spiritual. He believes they're angels. Um and he's got this this great book called UFO of God where he talks about his like life story and how how he started witnessing these orbs and then he started seeing like this apparition of a lady. Anyways, he started getting attention from NASA. And one day a guy from This is all like documented and confirmed. Like, he is like the most incredible. The crazy thing about him is his story is so phenomenal, unbelievable. I mean, post these videos every day. I I He came down here. We went to the beach and he summoned these [ __ ] orbs from the beach. I I watched this [ __ ] come out of the ocean. Wow. And I don't It's on video. It's not just like hearsay. It's It'll be literally filmed it. That's incredible. And the the craziest thing about it is that there's all these people from NASA, CIA, and the Pentagon that started showing up at his house and talking to him and interviewing him. One guy, his name was Hal Povenmire, who showed up at his house one day and said, "Hey, is Chris Bledsoe home? I just wanted to hope hope to talk to you for to talk to him for a little bit." And his son answered the door and and let the guy in. He's like, "I just drove from Cape Canaveral, Florida." The guy and he drove to I think they were in um Fayetteville, North Carolina. So, he drove from Cape Canaveral to North Carolina. And sat there and interviewed him and his family for hours. And kept coming back over the like a couple times a year to ask him questions. And he was trying to confirm if the guy's story was full of [ __ ] or not. Started interviewing people around him, family members, friends, other people who claimed to be witnesses of his event. And um long story short, this guy becomes like close friends to the family. And this guy, Hal, turns out he was the guy who was in charge of mapping the moon for the Apollo missions. And I guess one day they were having dinner and he's like he asked him, he's like, "Hal, he's like, is what they say about the moon true? What's the craziest thing that you could tell me about the moon?" And he's like, "There He He asked him about like the dark side of the moon. Like, is there stuff on the dark side of the moon? And he goes, "There are structures that are ancient on the dark side of the moon. And that's all we know about them. He's like, "There's structures there and they're ancient." He didn't tell him anything more than that. And they're shaped like mushrooms. Wow. Well, I downloaded a lot of images from the Clementine mission. So, I was looking into the moon and I discovered a top secret prior top secret mission called Clementine. And I said, "I wonder if there's any images on this?" And they had been declassified, so I got the images from nasa.gov. Now, what's interesting about these Clementine images, when I saw the word the name Clementine mission, I already knew right away what was going to happen. This thing never came back. Remember that song? Oh my darling Clementine, you were lost and gone forever. I already put two and two together and sure enough by the time I got done with the end of this document, this thing had supposedly hit something on the far side of the moon and it never returned, but it transmitted all this data, gigabytes of data of images. Crazy images. So, this Clementine was a low lunar orbiting mission that went to the far side of the moon and documented that there are structures on that side. If you remember during one of the Apollo missions when the astronauts were orbiting the moon and they got to the far side, you were out of radio communication range. But all of a sudden somebody hacked into their comms from that side and it sounded like music. It sounded like people chanting in their ears and they were all freaking out. It's on the black box. Right. Right. What? You hear this? You hear this? What What is it What is that? And it filled up the whole capsule until they got back in the communications range again then they were got reconnected to Houston. So, there's something going on on that far side of the moon. It's very It's very freaky. Yeah. And it's a It's a fascinating thing to dive into, but it's like The guy with the orbs is incredible. Yeah, like yeah, his his story is insane. Because there's somebody in my document, my Black Knight Satellite documentary. Yes. Yes. And he talks about the orbs and he says that he was able to write some type of a code and frequency that was able to hack into some of them that they're controlled, he calls them, technology and says they're like advanced probes from another civilization and that they're watching us utilizing these uh these orbs. That's what he claims. Yeah. This guy So, I had another friend, like a CIA friend of mine, a former CIA guy who is now doing this show on History Channel and they brought Chris Bledsoe onto an episode of it. It was It was called um, Beyond Skinwalker Ranch. Oh. And they like put this crazy contraption on his head where it measured his brain waves, uh an EEG. Mhm. And they like set up all these crazy cameras all over the ground to try to film these objects and figure out what they were. And they they basically they couldn't figure it out. They weren't satellites. They they measured or they tracked the footage against like satellite mapping and FAA chart like FAA records whatever like where the planes were flying and where the satellites were. Yeah. And they confirmed it wasn't planes and it wasn't satellites. So they they still haven't figured out like what exactly they are, but he has this crazy like spiritual biblical story of what it is. And he he saw this this woman. He's had these visions of these of this woman who told him there was going to be a great change when the what is the star the star of Regulus lines up in the gaze of the Sphinx, she said to him. Deltagliece? Huh? Was it Deltagliece? The No, it was the star of Regulus, which is the heart of the Leo constellation or like the the brightest star in the Leo constellation. you. That So when that rises in the morning on the dawn in the gaze of the Sphinx, she said there would be a great shift Mhm. in humanity or something like that, right? That was what it was, Steve? you know, because uh Yeah, the star of Regulus. of Regulus, okay, yeah. Uh yeah, Leo. Well, you know, the Great Sphinx is is aligned with the constellation of Leo, but where it was two processional periods ago, 36 to 38,000 years ago, the same time that Thoth claimed to have built the Great Pyramid in Egypt. And his father told him to build the Sphinx and put his face on it. Now, the face was changed later on to his nephew's face. That's why the face doesn't fit the body. It was never the face of a lion. And this other Sphinx the face of a lion. Never the face There's other sphinxes in Egypt with much smaller but with human faces on them. When Thoth And it's proportional heads to the body? Proportional. That's right. So, Thoth and his brother, Amun-Ra, they were clashing. And then his father said, Enki said, "Look, you go to the other side of the planet. You go build something." He went to Mesoamerica, built the whole Teotihuacan, Chichen Itza, Coba, all those locations. That's why Teotihuacan is a mirror of Giza. Right? The three pyramids line with Orion. The pyramid of the sun is the same exact size of the base of the Great Pyramid at Egypt. And the height is exactly 50%. Both are built on top of aquifers. It's the same architect. And so, he's doing that. Then his brother takes over, you know, early of his They rule on processions of the equinox. But his brother took over before Pisces fully came in. And he He then refaced it to his son's face. So, that's the nephew of Thoth, the Atlantean, face is on the sphinx or the son of Marduk, aka Amun-Ra. That's the face of the on the sphinx right now. It was recarved. Marduk's son is the face that's on there right now. That's correct. And it was originally the face of who? Thoth. He's known as Hermes. You know, he's known as Tehuti in in Africa, Jeuti, you know, in in in Australia, he's known as Thoth the Maui. He's known as Odin, you know, to the Greeks and the Romans and so forth. He's known as Mercury. Mhm. I mean, you know, he's Quetzalcoatl in Mesoamerica, Lord Pacal, Kukulkan, Viracocha. Many many names, same person. That's Thoth? Yeah, the first emperor of China, Wang Di. Same person. Yeah, your book, The Epic of Humanity, you the one that you and Matt LaCroix did, is a fascinating. I read it last night. Um I love the the way you guys broke down the history of the Anunnaki. Thank you. Thank you, man. It's It's fascinating. So, but we maybe we should like talk about that right now. I I know we we touched on it briefly on the last podcast. But it's fascinating how there's all of these ancient tablets. Like the Enuma Elish or like the Emerald Tablets and all those tablets around the world that are in these museums that all have such similar stories of these these two gods who were here and they created demigods that were supposed to what? They were supposed to um terraform the Earth is what they were doing and then they got they got fed up they got overworked and they went on strike so they created humans. Yeah, yeah, so that's it. That's it. Now, it's a little bit deeper than that obviously that's very surface but that's true. So so when did this according to these tablets, when did this start? Yeah. It started around 450,000 years ago the breakaway civilization. 450,000 years ago. That's when they arrived on this planet. They came here about 450,000 years ago. At the time that they arrived Alalu who made it through the the hammered bracelet which is the asteroid belt. At that time the asteroid belt was still very chaotic because the asteroid belt is an exploded planet. An exploded planet that used to have the name of Tiamat. Before Earth even existed you had you had Mercury, Venus which was in the position we're in now and then you had Tiamat. Earth wasn't here yet. Tiamat had two moons. It probably had more than that but the two we know of is the moon we have now and Mars. Mars can be backtracked even modern astro mainstream astrophysicists agree that Mars was probably a moonlet that orbited a much larger planet based on the orbit the weird elliptical orbit that it has. Really? Yeah. So, what happened was you have our moon and you have Mars a habitable moon orbiting Tiamat. Tiamat in the Enuma Elish in the seven tablets of creation literally gets impacted by um another object that was orbiting another star. So, our our solar system had gravitationally attracted an a rogue a rogue solar system, so to speak, and it was a collision that happened which made Tiamat explode. When Tiamat exploded, now, here's something interesting before I go that far. In the text, it says that Tiamat's glory rivaled the sun. It was a water-bearing planet with land and life. Now, who wrote that? How did they know that this planet had land and life and that it and then and that it rivaled the sun's glory? That in other words, when the sun shined on it, it beamed back cuz it had so much water and it was so massive. It was six times large larger than Earth. Somebody had a view of this planet from somewhere in the solar system. But anyway, so, it exploded, a huge chunk swung away with all that land and organic material and recoalesced as the Earth. The moon then was put into place to balance the wobble. Right. Mars grabbed its own crazy elliptical orbit around the sun. That's why we have we can only rendezvous with Mars when it's in I think it's in perigee every 2 years. Right, right. Because of its weird distances that it you know, just that it has with the with the with our with orientation to Earth. Right. And so, um Earth has weird anomalies inside of it that go back hundreds of millions of years. And people are like, "How did this hammer, this 200-million-year-old hammer cuz they can tell by the depth in the in these mines, how did this pottery get down here, 300-million-year-old piece of pottery?" It's not from Earth. It's when Earth was part of Tiamat. You're looking at a relic from a whole another civilization when you were part of another planet. Nobody's talking about this. That's the next thing that I'm going to be talking about in my next book. We're talking about Earth They found artifacts that We've got artifacts that date back 300, 400, 500 million years. Like which artifacts specifically? There's vases, there's hammers, or things that look like hammers, or tools that have been discovered deep in these mine shafts, and you can tell the years by the depth of the mine. Are you referring to some of those vases that Ben Van Kerkwyk has been measuring? I'm not sure. I don't know about him measuring anything, but you can look these up. They're They're mainstream artifacts. So, Ben Van Kerkwyk, he has been working with Chris Dunn, the guy who wrote the Giza Power Plant. Power Plant. Chris Dunn, I love him. Yeah, yeah. He was here a couple like a couple months ago. And we did crazy two-part podcast. It was fascinating. His son is an astrophysicist for or astrophysicist. His son is an aerospace aerospace engineer at Rolls-Royce. Right. Yeah. And so, Ben was able to get his hands on a couple of these dynastic Egyptian vases. Mhm. And they brought them to Rolls-Royce, and Ben and Chris Dunn's son and their whole team of engineers put this thing in this laser device that measured it within like one one millionths of of a centimeter, right? And they found out I mean Stephen, you can pull up the uh the the diagrams of it that they found, but they measured it and they they measured each angle and compared each surface against each other. And they found out that thing was perfectly symmetrical within one like less than a human hair. Yeah, less than a micron. And it's made out of granite. Mhm. The one of the hardest stones on Earth. Right. And and yeah, what they figured out was there's no way they could have made this without a computer. That's right. You need a computer. Mhm. You need a tool that we don't have right now to make these these fine holes. You see those indentations there where the handles are? Right. To do that and to even do that rim on on on stone that solid and that hard, Right. you need a very special type of tool. We would need Find the article, Steve. The article that we pulled up last time with Ben was really good. We would need a large giant diamond bit. Right. to have a lot of water and things for cooling. Whatever they used was way more sophisticated than what we have. And that that vase is like it's as it's almost as thin as the cover of your book. But like the Right. The to be able to do that without breaking that is so incredibly difficult to do. They're super experts at stonework. I remember I just came back from Egypt and I was inside the serapeum, which I believe is one of Anki's Halls of Amenti, the rejuvenation chambers. Those things didn't have bulls in them. They never found a bull in any of them. Right. That's bull crap. Right. But they're so clean on the inside and the inside of those boxes, those magnificent, you know, 100-ton granite boxes is is polished. Right. Smooth as glass. Right. Perfectly 90° angles. I was using our, you know, the phone, you can do the level. The level was perfect everywhere you looked. And so to do this type of work, this fine work, and even that megalithic work, it takes a very special skill and a very special understanding of stonework and a a special type of a advanced tool along with some type of computer. You need something guiding it. It's not done by hand. Nobody's sitting there with their hand doing this. do that with copper chisels. No No chicken bones and copper chisels. No. This is real advanced technology that we still can't duplicate today, which is pretty incredible. Yeah, that's that's mind-boggling. Yeah, so one of the things Chris Dunn was pointing out about these vases and about those boxes in the serapeum is he was like comparing it to engine cuz he's a he's a former engine aerospace engineer himself. He was comparing like he what he was saying is you don't need perfection unless there's a a a a function. Yes. Right? There's you don't need to make something that precise unless it serves a purpose. Right. So, that's what he the whole thing is like what was the purpose of these boxes or what was the purpose of these vases? Why? Was it Were they that perfect just because it was easy? Like is it easy for them to make stuff with that perfection that out of that kind of stone or was it very, very important that it had to be that perfect to achieve a certain function? There's a couple of options. One and it could be a combination of three. One is philosophical. This episode of the podcast is brought to you by Rocket Money. Ancient civilizations on our planet were a paragon of organization, never wasting their resources on the unnecessary. Every grain of wheat was accounted for, every block of limestone used for the pyramids was meticulously planned, and every drop from the Nile River was carefully accounted for. If the ancient Egyptians lived among us today, how would they be sure they weren't wasting money? They would certainly be users of Rocket Money. Rocket Money is a personal finance app that embodies this ancient wisdom in a modern tool. It helps you find and cancel all those unwanted subscriptions with ease. Just imagine if the Pharaoh had the power to cancel chariot maintenance monthly with a single tap. And it's not just about canceling subscriptions. It's about monitoring and controlling your spending. You can see all your subscriptions in one place. No more digging through bank statements or suffering these long grueling calls with customer service people. This is a tool even the most organized Anunnaki god would have envied. They'll even work on getting you refunds on subscriptions that you haven't used. They're very skilled negotiators. Rocket Money could potentially lower your bills by up to 20%. Just snap a photo of your bill, send it to them, and they will handle the rest. The bottom line is Rocket Money has already helped over 5 million users save an average of $720 per year. That's over $500 million in canceled subscriptions. Don't let your money get buried and hidden like the Dead Sea Scrolls. Take control and cancel all those unwanted subscriptions by visiting rocketmoney.com/djp. Remember, that's rocketmoney.com/djp. Simplify your financial life today the same way our ancient ancestors would if they could. Back to the show. When I went to Cambodia, not this time but the time before, I was fortunate enough to talk to some monks. And the monk was was talking to me and showing me these these young monks that he had like they were kids. I didn't even know they started as kids. And they were cleaning and sweeping and I was like, "Man, the floor's already clean. The garbage is already, you know, they're you got them cleaning it again?" I was just joking with me. He says, "No, we have to do everything to perfection. Even if it's taking out the trash or sweeping the floor, it must be done to perfection." Mhm. Has some advanced race advanced to the point of philosophical concepts that everything must be perfected. If you think about living your life doing everything to a level of perfection, how much more improved we would all be if that was our main focus, perfecting everything. Not becoming OCD, but actually working and focusing on whatever task we're doing, doing it at our best and highest level, right? And so, that could be one thing. The other thing is that the technology, whether it's some type of a nano tool or whatever they had, it made it so easy for them. So, it could be a combination of that because of their drive for for perfection philosophically that they created a technology that creates this level of perfection. So, that they now eliminate one process of overthinking. We have the tech that can make it just like it's supposed to be. And the third is the function. All of these crystal, granite, and diorite crystal boxes Yeah. and vases, they all have a certain level of higher background radiation coming out of them. So, if you take a Geiger counter to these things, you'll find they're still emitting radiation. If you go with a Geiger counter to those Serapian boxes, you'll see radiation levels way higher than background. Oh, yeah. Really? Wow. And so, when I was there the last time I took people on a private visit into a sealed door, we couldn't get in the door because the director of the site forgot that we were coming that day. So, then he called our guide and gave it the approval for us to smash the lock. So, we smashed the lock. He said, "As long as you buy another one." So, I said, "We'll buy another one." We went into the room, the biggest box you've ever seen, three times bigger than any box in a regular serapeum, and it's got a radio-radioactive sticker on it letting you know it's radioactive. So, all these things are function is energy. These things are transmitting a specific type of energy, radioactive energy, but also some type of other exotic energy I believe is combined. And there's one other thing to this, they're all mostly crystal. 50% 60 40 to 60% is crystal. Now, crystals are sentient living beings in my personal research. They can replicate, they can communicate, they can send and receive information. They're alive. They can grow on their own. They can duplicate. So, I believe that another thing that they did was they incorporate they used stone that had crystal because in their perception they were creating living machines. Okay, so the statues, they were alive. These vases, they're alive. Those boxes, they're all alive because they're loaded with so much so many tons of crystal. What is it? Is it quartz crystal or Quartz crystal. Quartz. Yeah. What do you think the purpose of those boxes were? Oh, Halls of Amenti. So, if you read the Emerald Tablets of Thoth, my first book Compendium of the Emerald Tablets, I break it all the way down. He had these boxes in these underground halls that were discovered underneath the Great Pyramid exactly where he says they were in his tablets. And in these halls, and it was just one of this just one of the locations. They had them all over the Earth. They would actually create their own bodies. He said, "We for- we fashioned our own bodies." So, they would make they either take a stem cell and turn it into a clone of themselves or they didn't take other bodies. They said they made their own. And then they would put a body in a rejuvenation chamber, which is the box. And then they would transfer their consciousness from the body that's been used up into the newer body. And they would they say that we would walk amongst men, but unlike a man. And so, they would be here walking around, and you wouldn't even know that they just been transferring their mind from body to body. And each one of those boxes had bodies in them, and the body would sit there for 100 years, and they they would walk amongst men in the body for 100. And Thoth says he did it 100 * 10. So, if you take 100 * 10 plus 100 years of each body sitting in the box, talking 100,000 years potentially. So, you're talking about beings that achieved the level of immortality, not because of their their gods, but because of they had they had advanced technology that allowed them to transfer their consciousness into another body. Wow. He calls the Halls of Amenti in the in the Serapeum, I believe, is one of the Halls of Amenti, but that one belongs to Enki, Thoth's father. That is bizarre. You know, Chris, I was trying to get it out of Chris when he was here. I'm like, "What were the He was He was like, "I don't have an idea what the boxes were for." I'm like, "What?" He's like, "Oh, I don't know if I want to say it." He was When he was talking about growing crystals and using crystals. Um that's bizarre. Now, in your book, you mentioned that some of these Igigi were working for like 3,600 years to terraform the Earth or something like that. So, so going back, you getting back to we had a got a little bit off track, but we were talking about the the origin of the Anunnaki was 4,500 years ago. 450,000. 4 Yeah, yeah, yeah. I'm sorry. Yeah. 450,000 years ago. Yeah. And they came from somewhere else, right? That's the meaning Anunnaki means not from Earth, right? So, they came after there was a bigger planet that was six times the size of Earth. It somehow smashed into something and created the Earth. Right. So, after that, why why did they come here, and and how did the tab did the tablets say exactly why they came here? If you notice in our book, The Epic of Humanity, there's the most tablets ever referenced in any one book in history, first of all. This book has more references to more tablets and and excerpts from those tablets. And the reason why we're painting a picture that all these places from around the world and all these tablets and scriptures and papyruses and cylinder scrolls are connected to one race of people that came from the Pleiadian star system. And they hail from the Pleiades. And the in my new TV series called Anunnaki Ancient Secrets Revealed, which is coming out very soon in Regal Cinemas and then it'll be on Forbidden TV, you'll find out that there was a galactic war in that sector of the galaxy. And this war was so crazy, they were using something called a Brahma Honda weapon, which can destroy any man on three worlds. We're talking about a real death star that existed in ancient times. This weapon, once it was released, you couldn't withdraw it. You couldn't bring it back. There was no way to cancel it. And you can operate it from something called a tablet of destiny. And whoever had their hands on these tablets of destiny had control of the galaxy and it was stolen a couple of times. So power had been jumping back and forth. Imagine if you were here in this on this Earth and somebody blows up Saturn. We want to get off Earth because big chunks are coming our way. Right. So there were something called space refugees, my personal opinion. This is not in any text. This is my opinion now. These people fled. This is how we got the Orion, Aldebaran, Zeta Reticuli, uh you know, the dog star. All these other places became began to get inhabited. Earth was another targeted location as a breakaway civilization. Some of these beings, according to the Enuma Elish, landed on a planet orbiting a brown dwarf called Nibiru. Mhm. And some people say, "Oh, Nibiru was never in any ancient text." Um yeah, look at the oldest version of the Enuma Elish. It says Nibiru and it says Anunnaki. The oldest version. Uh much later in a newer version, which was a few thousand years later, another copy was made by Amen Ra. He changed Nibiru's name to Marduk cuz he wanted to be the destroyer. Uh so anyway, that's another story, but the point is these people decided, "Look, we we're finding we're looking for breakaway civilizations." Us on Earth right now, human beings, if we just think that we're going to stay here on this planet forever, we're fooling ourselves. We need to also look for breakaway civilization. We got to create a breakaway civilization for ourselves. Our sun is already had middle age. It's going to die in 5 billion years, which seems like a long time, but that's a blink of an eye on geological time scales. Earth is going to get swallowed up as it turns into a red giant because we don't have enough a mass of sun that can create a Yeah, our sun will expand into a red giant. We don't have enough mass to for it to turn into a supernova. So it will expand into a red giant, then it will shrink down and collapse into a white dwarf. But it's going to incinerate Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Gone. Incinerated, right? Right. So we need to start thinking if we if we want the humanity to progress. Not only that, we've only been here been here on this planet uh you know, as a human being and Homo sapiens for 200,000 years at this level. A blink of an eye. Less than a blink of an eye. Mhm. In any geological time at any time any geological disaster can happen here and that could collapse our entire civilization. Even if just one solar flare can turn us off and we'll be done. So we have to find a way to get off planet, which is why this is big push for Mars. It's about creating a breakaway civilization, learning how to do it right, making mistakes along the way and learning from those, and then branching out even further into space. That's the plan. And so these beings came here because they're like, "Look, we got to find a break a breakaway civilization." They were scanning Earth and they discovered from the um from the scattered light that like same way we scan for um uh for elements, they discovered there was gold and other resources on the planet coming just from looking at the light of the planet. Same way we do now in astrophysics. So they said, "This is a great place." So one guy risked his life to get through the hammered bracelet and made it through. Then he radioed back to Nibiru and said, "Hey, I found everything we need right here." And then they started sending people down a little bit at a time and they started building. And when they got here, Enlil, on a crystal tablet he showed to his sister, it says, "Ninma, he showed her the building construction technique that's going to be on this planet." He said, "For all time." He already had it laid out, how he was going to build the cities, how he was going to build the plumbing, the the the you know, the the everything. Everything the the way the city grid was going to be laid out. It was all on this crystal tablet. Now, what kind of tablet is a crystal tablet? Right. Sounds like an iPad or something. Yeah, in my opinion. Who sits around writing sci-fi stories in the you know, uh 6,000 years ago? So, somebody wrote this because they were told to, and I believe that what they wrote was exactly what possibly happened. I think we're getting as close to the truth as we can possibly get. Now, when they began doing all this building and all this work, we were already here. We meaning our cousins, human beings cousins, not Homo sapien sapien, but the prior version of us was already here. Now, this prior version of us, in my opinion, was probably more in touch in uh more advanced spiritually. I think that we had bigger bones, bigger bigger skulls, bigger brains. I think our skulls have been found all over. I think they've been misunderstood in some cases, maybe even for aliens in some cases. But Mhm. but that they had probably bigger pineal glands, probably could communicate silently, not technologically more advanced, but just more in tune with nature. A lot of abilities that we should have, like understanding how to feel the magnetic field and sense the magnetic field and navigate through that magnetic field like animals, we've lost that ability, but we know in a laboratory setting, we still have it because our our our um the crystals in our brain orient to the magnet. Yeah. So, we still have it, we're not in touch with it anymore. But what happened was they said I have a friend who who moved to the Amazon, and he said as soon as he moved to the Amazon and got disconnected from from from civilization and from technology, he said all these crazy instincts just came back into him. Yes, I believe that cuz he needed time to be away from all of that. Right. let your body recoalesce into what it truly is. This is the most powerful, you know, machine that probably exist in this sector of the universe. And so, what they said was, "Okay, well, these people are here, but we're not going to mess with them. We're just going to continue to build what we're doing." And the Iggigi built and built and worked and worked for about 200,000 years. And we were already here? We were already here in small pockets around the planet. Okay. And just indigenous peoples, you know, just living our lives as, you know, cave people and things like that. Nothing advanced. And then, like they probably saw us just as animals, you know? And then the Iggigi got pissed off, as you know, in the Atrahasis and also in the Numlist. Two different stories, two different time periods, same story. Now, okay, so can you explain exactly what the Iggigi were supposed to be? Were they Were they part of the Anunnaki? Did they come here with the Anunnaki? They came with the Anunnaki. They were the workers. They were In other words, you know, if if I'm going to go out and and buy a huge plot of land and say, "I'm going to build a city here." I'll probably call somebody like Chris Dunn and say, "Hey, man, I need an engineer, right?" Mhm. This guy know but engineer is going to say, "Well, I need bricklayers and stonemasons." And then stonemason say, "I need electricians." So, these were the people that knew how to do the grunt work. They knew how to build the structures based on the instructions or the blueprints. Right? So, these are the people. They were builders. And they were Anunnaki. Now, Anunnaki doesn't mean they're all one particular race of people. It means they were people who came from heaven to earth. Anybody from space that comes to earth is an Anunnaki. The civilization they built is the Atlantean. But even in the tablets, it talks about some of these people coming from different planets or stars, which means that they probably most likely were a mixed race of people. And I have evidence to prove this and I'll tell you in a minute. So, they got pissed off. They decided, "Look, we're working too hard. You guys are treating us almost like slaves now. We want to um we want to get a break. We want some relief from this work. And even that we Not only that, we want women. They were pissed off they didn't have any women. Really? So, this is where the sons of God fell from heaven. They came from Mars down to Earth in Genesis. And they took women with them back. So, they But in the Sumerians tablet, you get the full story where they go to Adam's Calendar in South Africa. They encircle the camp of the God, which is Anu, the head the head of the Anunnaki at that time. And they get ready to do war. And Enki, Enlil, and Anu come outside to get their guards out there. Everything is tense. And they said, "Look, man, we're tired of doing this labor." And uh you know, we need a break. That's Adam's Calendar there in Africa where one of the oldest gold mines was discovered. And it dates back to 200,000 years. Isn't that interesting? Really? Yes. Pretty crazy stuff. But what's interesting is is that these people you know, these Anunnaki people, they said, "Okay, well, we're going to go to war then cuz there's nothing we can do. You guys got to keep working." And then Enki says, "Wait a minute. I have an idea. There's an existing being on this planet, existing. We can add our essence to it." So, this is where they took one of the Igigi, took some blood from an Igigi. And they It's not really quite clear how they did it or what they did, but in some way it seems as if they combined that with the genetics of one of these hominids, our cousins. And they made a clone. Mix of Igigi, mixed hominid. Somebody they can control. In other words, they can communicate with, they can teach to a certain level. They can get them to do the workload. They can instruct them and they would listen. And so, they were doing this genetic modifying. And uh and they got sounded like they sacrificed one of the gods. Right. They call it a sacrifice. I don't know if they really would have killed it outright. It could be a term a term that's used to specify draining the blood out. Right. Okay. I would be surprised if they really actually killed cuz when you get to that level of technology and advancement, the fact that you would kill somebody to turn to make somebody else live, it seems a little weird. It seems more like a huge blood transfusion or or some type of a organ donate. It was something. I don't know if the person really died cuz it never really says if they died or not. The word sacrifice could be a word used when you don't know what word exist in that spot. Right. Right. You know, it's potential. Now, that's potential. It could be a sacrifice. For real. I'm not sure. But my hypothesis makes me leads me to believe probably a little different. Uh cuz they're just too advanced. So, they made this clone version of hominid {slash} E G G. Got it to work. But so they start they started making more in these Hathor birthing houses which the Hathor birthing house like at the Temple of Dendera, the Temple of Isis, uh and all these other places are there. They're still there. The structures are still there. I take people to see them every year. Now, what was interesting is these um these these people, they couldn't produce babies on their own. If you take a lion and a tiger and you mate them, they're going to have you're going to have a liger, right? But you liger can't make any babies. No matter how much time you try to mate it, it won't be able to have any babies. It can't If it's a male, it won't be able to get anybody pregnant and if it's a female, it won't be able to get pregnant. Really? Yeah. Why? It's the genetics. The genetics work to a certain point and then they fall apart. Just like if you take a a horse and a donkey, you get a mule but mules can't reproduce. For real? Yeah. Did you know this, Steve? No, I didn't know that at all. I thought if it if you can make a thing, then they can make other things. that's how I thought that's how like like breeding [ __ ] Like how they how they made the golden retriever by like breeding different dogs together and Yeah, certain certain combination of chromosomes don't reproduce. So, you have to The horse and a donkey will make you a mule. Okay. But a mule can't make another mule. Wow. interesting. You know, and so same thing I think with these clones. And so, they started getting frustrated because they weren't making enough clones to get the amount of workload done. They wanted them to reproduce on their own. And so, that's when Isis says, you know, I have an idea. I'm going to take the baby to term. I'm going to give birth to the Adamo. So, she takes an egg out of one of the existing hominids. She does something with the DNA and the genetics inside the egg, what we call today making a zygote. She puts it in her womb. That's artificial insemination. And then she takes it to term 10 months. And there's a cylinder scroll with her holding up the baby saying, "My hands have made it, the Adamo." That means first man. So, now we have the first genetically modified perfected version of Homo sapien sapien. They tried to mate him with these other clones. Didn't work again. They said, "Damn it." So, they then took some DNA from him, made another a female. And then mated them together and it worked. They said, "We got it." So, then they started making Adams and Eves in these birthing houses. Adams and Eves Adam and Eve weren't the only two people on Earth. They were When they got here, there were already probably hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of people already here. Okay? And then what happens is if you take two people and you think you're going to get eight billion out of two, doesn't work. What happens if you start having sex with your sister? Right. And then she gives birth and then those babies get have sex with each other. You're going to have genetic mutations and by the third generation, they won't even be able to be dead be They'll be stillbirths. Right. Right. Not enough genetic diversity. So, they created Eden, E D I N, and Enki, he was known as Satan, the lord of Eden, in the text. And he would watch over this Eden. He had guards with with weapons to guard the Why would you have to guard this place with weapons? And he had people in there and he was having mating times. They have specific times that they can mate and couldn't mate. And it was like breeding breeding people. And they were working on perfecting it. And uh when Enki came and told Adam and Eve who they were and how powerful they were and that they were the same level as them, that's when they realized that they weren't dumb. That was the app- the the the apple was knowledge. And then Enki Enlil comes back and gets pissed off cuz he discovered what happens and he said then he starts calling his brother the devil, "You don't listen to him. He's evil." But that was to distract the people to keep him in charge of the people. Uh in the in the myth of Adapa, if you read that ancient tablet, the myth of Adapa, which is Adam, you discover that he's been told that the way that we were genetically genetically modified by Enki, he added a little extra into us that even us, we human beings, Homo sapiens sapiens, have the capability of superseding and excelling beyond, far beyond the Anunnaki when we reach our full potential. And it was programmed into us. He said also the knowledge and wisdom is already programmed into our body, into the DNA, that at a future time we'd be able to tap into it. That's in the myth of Adapa. Woah. Yeah, powerful stuff. And when uh Adam discovered all of this, he tried to commit suicide. He was kicked out of the garden, as you know. He tried to drown himself in the um in the in the waters. And the guards came and pulled him out of the water, wouldn't let him kill himself. Um and then as you know, they had Cain and Abel and Cain killed Abel and then Cain tells God, "Well, he you know, God is Enlil, Yahweh." He Who's he talking to? He's talking to Enlil, known as Yahweh in the Bible. He says, "You're going to get out of here and uh for what you did." And and and and Cain says, "Well, the people out there are going to kill me." That's what it says in the Bible. Well, what people? There shouldn't be anybody out there. Right. Oh, there's people out there. He goes, "Don't worry. I'm going to put a mark on you and that way they'll know you're mine and they'll never touch you. And you'll find your wife when you get out there." Which is exactly what happened and he started the Canaanites. So, people were here already. Adam and Eve were not the first two people on Earth. Two people didn't produce 8 billion people. That's a farce. Uh even even in mainstream, you know, um science when they talk about this one uh you know, this one hominid that they discovered in Africa, everybody came out of this one lady. Come on. It's this ridiculous a joke. It's an absolute joke. Uh genetics doesn't work that way. We all know that. Chromosomes don't work that way. We all know that. And what's interesting is you have a civilization being built that started off from by genetic mutating an existing hominid species on Earth to create a worker race. A worker race that was enslaved but didn't believe they were enslaved. They did two things. They installed a worship gene in the human genome and scientists have now found this worship gene. When this gene is turned off, the person has no need or want to want to worship outside of itself for him or herself. When it's turned back on, the person has a feel of a need to worship something on the outside. When it's off, we go inside. So this worship gene was put in. They were masquerading as gods. They needed to put that in there to keep us loyal to them. So we would do the work thinking they would be giving praises to the gods. And then the second thing is as you look at the Emerald Tablets where it's talked about everybody was spread out spread out around the planet and people were told to go around the planet and and rule over different areas. I believe that the reason what makes you a Caucasian, makes me a black person, what makes a an Asian person yellow, what makes an indigenous American person red is a genetic marker. That's the marker. In genetics, I started digging into this. I said, "Why is this color difference?" In other words, I my I shouldn't be this skin tone because my my ancestors were digging in the you know, working in the fields of Africa or walking in the sands of the desert. It's ridiculous. That's the theory, right? It's because because working out being out in the sun all day produces more melanin to protect you from foolishness. Right. What I discovered real science in real books in in colleges, you go look it up. It says that there's a 2% variance in genes between races of people. They're all the human race, but there's a 2% difference. Now, that 2% difference is so big on the genetic scale that it would take multi-millions of years to happen naturally through natural evolution, but it happened in 200,000 years. So, what the scientists are saying is it happened artificially. They say they don't know how it happened artificially, but this is an artificial mutation. But when you look at the Sumerian tablets, you discover the Tower of Babel incident, it really explains what happened. When Enlil, who's known as Yahweh, comes back and sees humans building a tower into the heavens in one of these cities, duplicating what the Anunnaki had built, he gets pissed off cuz he realizes, "Oh, man, Enki got me. These people are too smart." And he says, "I got to destroy this." So, he destroys the tower. In the Bible, he destroys the tower in the in the Sumerian tablets. And he says, "My seed shall not abide in man forever. His years shall be 120." That's the first thing he Did he cut our years down to 120 years? And what's the maximum lifespan of a human being in the most pristine condition according to Harvard University Right. uh professors? 120 years. Then, the next thing he did was he separated humans and put them in different places around the planet, just like the tablets say. And then, he confused the languages. So, that we couldn't communicate and collaborate anymore, which is why there's all these different crazy languages. And then, on top of that, he put a brand. There's a brand. Whoever rule over area, brand your people. We know that those are your people. Brand your people. But we know those are your those are your people. So, there's this separation, this divide and conquer tactic that's a super ancient divide and conquer tactic that happened long, long time ago to separate and divide humanity into these sects and these different compartments. So, for what reason, though? To keep us from collaborating, to keep us from living longer, number one. Keep us collab Keep us from collaborating with with each other. And look how it's worked. Look how these invisible lines we have on this planet till this very day are still here. Yeah. If I If I go to uh Mexico, I'm an alien. If they come to America, they're an alien. Yeah, we're still blowing each other people blowing each other up because of [ __ ] religious ideologies. It's crazy. So, we're walk I walk across this invisible line, I'm going to be killed. I'm going to be shot. Look what's going on in Israel and in Palestine. So, it's the same They did it. They What they did, it's still working till this very day. That's how powerful it was. And we have fallen victim and prey to genetic modification and dogma that has really held mankind back from achieving its maximum potential in a much shorter period of time. We're still going in that direction, but we could have been so much further along if it wasn't for the dogma and the genetic modifications. Who was the guy who actually first deciphered these tablets? And do you know like the process he used to figure out what these different markings meant? Uh there was a few. George Smith. George Smith was one of them, yeah. He was from like what, the 16, 1700s? 1800s. 1800s. Assyriologist. Yes. And uh working at Cambridge even as a young lad like in his teenage years. This guy grew up around professors deciphering texts and tablets from all around the world. And uh he gave one of the most profound uh translations of the Enuma Elish way, way, way back before Zecharia Sitchin was even born. You know, you had E.A. Speiser was an American um uh you know, uh linguist who had translated uh the the Sumerian tablets way before Zecharia Sitchin was born. Mhm. Uh and there's so many more people. So, there these tablets have been deciphered, the key codes or how to unlock the cuneiform have been discovered because there was trade routes between different uh countries in that region, and they were communicating with each with each other. So, they were able to decipher the language. Uh and so, the language is not a dead language, not a hard to decipher language. No. I I have books on how to how to read cuneiform off of Amazon. You know what I'm saying? Oh, wow. And now, if you go to the UCLA CDLI online digital cuneiform library, it's a lot of mouthful right there, you can go there online for free and take virtual stones, Sumerian stones, off the virtual shelf and drop them right into a translator and read them for yourself. Woah. That's [ __ ] cool, man. need me anymore. All right? So, you can come up with your own idea or understanding of what's being said there. What's up, guys? I'm super psyched to introduce to you another product that I've been using for years now that was also recommended to me by the world-renowned nutritional scientist, Dr. Dominic D'Agostino, and it is called Keto Brains. Keto Brains nootropic creamer is a way to perfectly dial in your morning beverage to bring you razor sharp focus on demand. I start out every day with Keto Brains in my cup of coffee to combat the midday slump, and I use it for pre-workout. Keto Brains nootropic creamer has efficacious doses of focus-inducing Alpha-GPC, lion's mane, alpha wave-promoting L-theanine, and ketone-stimulating C8 MCT powder. And all of those high-functioning nootropics are packed into a delicious, creamy coconut powder. It tastes amazing, is a keto nootropic powerhouse, and it tickles all the right neurotransmitters to give you the flow and jitter-free energy with absolutely zero crash. There's no dosage tricks involved, it's just one scoop is a full serving, you can put it in your coffee, your tea, put it in your water, whatever you want, and you get 30 full doses per package. There's no pills, and there's absolutely no waiting for it to work. It kicks in like that. You can keep your brain razor sharp, primed, and ready for action with Keto Brains nootropic creamer. Whether you're an entrepreneur juggling multiple projects, a student studying for exams, or you're an athlete that's trying to optimize your training, Keto Brains will not let you down. All right, here I'm going to list all the ingredients contained in Keto Brains and what they do. It increases ketone production via AG C8 MCT powder. It increases acetylcholine and HGH production via 300 mg of Alpha-GPC. It increases GABA and alpha wave production via 250 mg of L-theanine. And it increases BDNF and NGF via 500 mg of lion's mane mushrooms. And these are all carefully sourced and third-party tested ingredients. This stuff quite literally increases acute brain function, protects your brain and mitochondria long-term, and last but not least, it makes your coffee delicious. If you're interested in Keto Brains and you want to get a big discount, just go to the link in the description below, ketobrains.com, and use the promo code Danny 20 when you check out. Again, that's ketobrains.com. Hit the link below and use the promo code Danny 20 at checkout. Back to the show. Didn't they also find scrolls that were hidden at Wasn't it the Dead Sea scrolls that somebody found that was hidden in a cave and a bunch of vases or something like that? And they had to like There was I think pictures or footage of them like taking these different scrolls and trying to match up where they went like in the puzzle piece based on the DNA of the cowhide? Yeah. Yeah. That's what they were doing. And that's how a lot of the biblical text was discovered. So, the biblical text is 90% copied from ancient tablets, papyruses, and cylinder scrolls from all around the world, not just even in that region. And so, the Bible was written between 100 AD to 900 AD. Long after the people been talked about were long gone and dead, okay? Yes. Yes. It's pretty interesting. But what they did was they were copying from the cuneiform into their writing and then on different types of parchment papers and so forth and then putting them in jars. And so, over the course of hundreds of years, these jars would be discovered, and they'd open up these jars, and then they'd be like, "Oh man, we found another piece." And that's how these books of the Bible were discovered. And over time, they were curated into finally a canonized book, and they would say, "Well, we'll leave these out. We'll put these in. We'll leave these out. We'll put these in." Right. Right. Let's make it work for us. of Nicaea, they they they remixed the text. it's a remix of a remix of a remix. Yes, exactly. That's all it is. How do we dominate? Well, we'll put slavery's okay in here and then we'll be we can be slave masters. You don't You can enslave any race of people we want because it says it's okay in here. The Bible says it in the Old Testament and the New Testament is slavery is okay. They even Jesus' words in the New Testament says slave slaves obey your slave master as you would obey me. Love your slave master as you would love me. What? They do you think Jesus really said something like that? This guy is supposed to be this right love and light and all of a sudden that's in there. Come on. We're talking about text that has been remixed by flesh and blood human beings to do what? To dominate, control, subjectify people to enslave people. Yes. And so that's why I'm not into religion. I'm into spirituality. I believe there's a God. Mhm. But I do not believe in any religion whatsoever because I believe religion is dogma and that religion is all about divide and conquer and it robs you from being who you truly are. Understanding the powers already inside of you. Instead of that you rely on outside sources and you keep begging and hoping and wishing and relinquishing your power to outside versus going inside and and realizing the true power that's already inside of you. Mhm. Yeah, I mean is it possible that some of these stories in the Bible are like at some level were events or people that actually really happened and what you read in today's Bible is just a 10,000 year old game of telephone being played. First of all, Jesus that name didn't even exist, okay? The J didn't get discovered or created till the 1600s. That's number one. So the 1600s was not that long ago. So where did where does Jesus What they're saying is Esus. And what does that mean? It means hail Zeus. And who is Zeus? Enlil. So when people say they're calling on the name of Jesus, they're saying hail Zeus. They're not even calling on God or somebody who they think might be the son of God. They're calling on Zeus. Which is an ill from the Sumerian tablets. So, there's so much You have to understand how wordplay works and what they do because they understand cymatic frequency and vibration. When you speak, you're creating cymatics. You may think one way, but your cymatics are what control the atmosphere and control the elements. Your speaking, your power to actually speak is what controls and shapes the world around us. And so, when you begin to speak these things unknowingly, you've been deceived. And so, you know, even saying amen, you're saying amen because Amun-Ra ordered everyone give thanks to him for everything that exists at the end of every prayer. Well, you're saying thanks to one of the most brutal ruling killers that ever ruled on this planet, who actually started a war just to take over kingship early. So that he can rule, and you're giving thanks to Amun-Ra. Saying amen is like saying thank you Amun-Ra. You're not saying thank you to God. It's better to say "I say" or something like that. Right. So, people that they don't know because they don't research and dig deeper into the translations of these texts. And even if you look at the Sinai Bible, there's 14,000 differences between the Sinai Bible, which predates the King James version. And in the Sinai Bible, there was no crucifixion. To me, proving that the crucifixion was added. We know that hell was added in about the 16 or 1700s. And we know that in the 1835 or so, I believe Darby added the rapture script. So, we're talking about a really super remixed and modified, changed, you know, book that people are basing their eternity on. They're saying, "Look, I'm going to go into eternity because what's in this book." But they know nothing really about it. It makes me wonder like what kind of stuff they have buried in those Vatican archives. Oh man, they got so much. is hidden from us? Woo. Listen, in those Vatican are 5 mi of underground Vatican archives. Right. That's a lot. There's been a few people that have come out talking who have had access to these Vatican archives. They can't say specifically everything they saw, but one guy did come on a documentary on History Channel years ago and talked about the fact that they had bones of beings that weren't human. From their perspective, they weren't human bodies. They had books and texts down there that nobody's ever been able to read or access that talk about technology, flying devices, and all these other incredible things that were hidden during the Inquisitions because during the Inquisitions, they were suppressing technology heavy because they wanted to keep their boot on the necks of the people. The Inquisition was so brutal, they killed over 80 million people over the course of 700 years ordered underneath the Popes. That really held us back because we should have been on the moon in the 1800s if it wasn't for the Inquisitions. That alone held us back from from technological advancement. Do you think some of these early humans like you mentioned that they had they were more enlightened or they were more spiritually connected. Do you think that it's possible that what whether it was an advanced civilization that was like an early version of us or that was more alien-like than it was us, whatever it was. Do you think it's possible that they had a more senses than we had or had like an ability to tap into other dimensions or had more of a perception of what is beyond what we can perceive as reality? I believe that 100% and I'll tell you why. I went and did a walkabout in the in the Australian Outback with Aboriginal elders. And their verbal handed down story for thousands of years is that they were seated on this planet. I then go and I visit with the Hopi and the Lakota tribe of the Americas. Their verbal handed down history is that they were seated on this planet by the Star Brothers. I'm like, wait a minute. Two different parts of the world, total opposite sides of the planet and I'm getting the same exact story. In the Outback, there's glyphs that are Pleiadian. Nobody has been able to decipher these hieroglyphs to this very day. Nobody any university anywhere can decipher these hieroglyphs. The Aboriginals say they're Pleiadian. So, what's interesting is the Aboriginals and the same thing with the indigenous um you know, Americans, they have these abilities still within their tribes even today and I can only imagine how strong they were back then where they could navigate through the magnetic field. They can feel and sense nature. They can communicate uh psychopathically with each other. They can you know, uh in some cases they talk about even being able to move things with their mind. So, imagine the true power that we really had back, you know, thousands and thousands of years ago. No technology. Only being able to be one with nature and tapping into all the other DNA that's called junk now that really isn't junk. A new study just came out discovering they said, "Wait a minute." Now, I've been talking about this for about 10 years. All my workshops and classes I've been teaching I keep telling people we don't have any junk DNA. Two years ago they come out with this study that says, "Wait a minute. This DNA is not junk. It's really has It really has a lot of functions in it." Now, they're tapping in trying to figure out what all these functions are. But see, we're so technocratic now in the technocratic age we've been disconnected from that. Who did that study? I forget the name but we could probably look it up. You can probably Google it and find that study. find the junk DNA study still. Junk DNA study, yeah. The junk DNA is not junk anymore. And uh it's pretty incredible because that means that we have a lot of information stored in our body. Mhm. And they also find that See, there you go right there. Scientists have discovered that junk DNA performs a vital function in ensuring that chromosome bundles correctly that chromosomes bundle correctly inside the cell's nucleus. This function is necessarily for cell survival and appears to be conserved across many species. So, they're finding more and more and they're digger the deeper they dig, the more they're going to find about this junk DNA. What does that say, Steve? Researchers have also found in some sequences of junk cha- Wow, easy for you to say. In some sequences in junk DNA act as genetic switches. Yes. Which What does that mean? Which determine where and when genes get expressed. So, it sounds like triggers, basically. Triggers. So, it triggers that you will then that these genes will then get developed or be used. Right. So, if you want to turn on somebody to be uh uh you know, like it says, a schizophrenic. There's a gene for schizophrenia. It could be turned off or on. Right. gene, which they don't want to put on the Google. They could turn that off and on. It can be Maybe that's why I'm not religious. My switch I turned mine is off, you know? Um and all these various things in the body switching on and off different genes. If you got a gene for Find the worship gene. Just just ask Google. You have a gene for multiple sclerosis. Right. Right. Right. Yes. Yes. Some of them are dormant. Yeah. Right. So, if they can master, this is another key to, quote unquote, a version of immortality. Mhm. Being able to master switching genes off and switching genes on, now all of a sudden you're not coming We're not coming down with these crazy illnesses and diseases because those genes will never be activated. Because we once we learn how to master accessing our junk, quote unquote, junk DNA. We will be able to control the gene expressions. And once we can control them, then sky's the limit. Forget the universe is the limit. Wow. According to the God gene hypothesis, spirituality has a genetic component. The VMAT2 gene is one component of this, contributing to sensations associated with mystical experiences. There you go. There you go. Have you heard of Rosicrucianism? Yes. Yeah. That is fascinating. Yeah, I know. It's pretty crazy stuff. there's people apparently that are able to Some people do it through Kundalini Yoga. Some people just do it through meditation. Some people do it through whatever. They have rituals that they can practice to where they try to tap in to a whole 'nother realm. Mhm. And some people attribute it to creativity. Some people claim that they think of problems before they go to sleep and then they'll go to sleep, they'll wake up and meditate and they'll have the answer that'll come through the muse or something like that. And they're able to tap into this Yeah. other layer of consciousness. Yeah. And it's it's all very parallel to this idea or this religion called Rosicrucianism, which I just learned about recently, which is fascinating. It is. Rosicrucianism has basically taken taken their uh their concepts and ideas from ancient religions and ancient texts and ancient mystery teachings. In the ancient mystery schools, they literally taught this. Understanding that there is a quote-unquote uh Book of Life, if you want to call it that. Now, what is this Book of Life that Thoth talks about the Emerald Tablets? That's the oldest time it's referenced 38,000 years ago in the Emerald Tablets. The Book of Life is this field, this energetic field that stores all information. So, right now both of us are sitting here, we're thinking, right? Our brains never turn off, they're thinking. If we can connect an EEG to our heads, we connect to a computer, we'd see our thoughts on the screen. Why? Because our thoughts are leaving our skull in the form of light waves. Light waves that we can't see cuz we can only see 1% of the light spectrum, but nonetheless, they are light waves. So, we are emitting light waves, but what's on the wave of light? Every thought that leaves, it's actually piggybacked with data. The data of your conscious thought is being piggybacked on top of the light wave as it leaves your skull. Just like on a cell phone, a microwave is the light wave. And it's coming to my phone right now. My phone is sending out on the microwave data. It's piggybacking up to the tower. Same exact concept the way our brains work. So, we're sending and receiving information all the time by piggybacking our light waves. Now, when they go out into space-time, they never go they're here for they're they're on the energetic grid. They're permanently here. There's no way to get rid of them. Now, what if your mind quantum entangles with information in the field from somebody else's thoughts. If you have the capability to quantum quantum entangle with it cuz you get on the same frequency and you can actually discern the information coming in, you can get knowledge. What we discovered in in science and neuroscience is that the brain doesn't create consciousness. It downloads consciousness. Right. And that's what a lot of these Rosicrucians talk about getting these ideas from our downloads. They talk about getting downloads. Correct. Downloading is real. When I took that course at MIT in applied neuroscience, Dr. Tara Swart was the professor. That's exactly what we were taught in the class. Really? And I have her on podcast that I did with her talking about this. We did a pod We did a whole work a workshop together, a private class together called spirituality backed by neuroscience. I'll send you a link to it. And this is taught about at MIT? At MIT. Spirituality taught by neuroscience? Spirituality backed by neuroscience. Backed by neuroscience. Exactly. Because the science is the background explaining what's happening on the spiritual side. What they've discovered is that the two go together. They're not to be separated. That we understanding now that in the quantum field, the quantum field and the mathematics is literally explaining spirituality. And spirituality is a result of what's happening in the quantum field. When you separate it, you're lost. When you put them together, you get the answers. Mhm, that's fascinating. There were I remember there was a study on they had like some monkeys that were on an island somewhere near Australia and they figured something out like they figured out a way to use a certain tool or or they figured it was a maybe it was a new food they discovered. wash their food a certain way. Yeah, okay, you know about it. And then and then simultaneously across the world another group of monkeys figured out the same thing at the same time. Yes. This is because that information went into the field and those monkeys are on that particular frequency because their thought patterns are the same. Just like when there was an an invention in one part of the world, somebody else has the same invention in another part of the world almost at the same time because the information's out there and somebody else grabs it and brings it in. We're always sending and receiving information. They found out in the laboratory George Church, Professor George Church, um he did an experiment with with DNA. He did an experiment with DNA. He said, "Okay, let's see if DNA can store information, all right?" So he was able to take one of his ebooks and he actually was able to convert the digital zeros and ones into ACs, Ts, and Gs and downloaded onto DNA in a volume. He said, "Man, it worked. I got my book onto the DNA. Let's see if I can replicate it." He replicated his book 80 billion times on 1 g of DNA, one drop. 80 billion times. 80 billion times. And then what did he do? He said, "Okay, let's see if we can get it back." So then he converted the ACs, Ts, and Gs back into zeros and ones and uploaded it back to the server. So he knew now that DNA can send and receive information in a volume. And so they said, "Wait a minute, this is incredible." So now they found out that one human body can store over 13.5 billion years of data just in your DNA. The secrets to unmasking this entire universe is in each one of our bodies right now. We just have to tap into it. All the data's in there. And so because they've done this, they now Microsoft has made the first DNA hard drive. So that you have a hard drive to use. Yeah, components so you have the biological component and the and the and and the hardware component combined together. So things like teleportation is going to be possible now. Okay? Because what's stopping us from doing teleportation of uh of animate objects like a human being or animal or or this cup. We can only teleport molecules at this point. We teleported from Earth to space and back, by the way. When did we do that? That was a couple years ago. Really? Oh yeah, we can teleport all to the ISS and back now. But it's only, you know, small particles. Teleporting molecules. Yeah. But now Steve. with this kind of database with storage capability we'll be able to remember every location of every atom in your body, all the spinning rates and everything else, all the frequencies. And we can teleport you somewhere. With that kind of storage space on one a hard drive the size of a cell phone can do it. With that kind of technology. Think about that. So by getting into this type of uh a bio component technological component hard drive using DNA as the storage medium sky's the limit on what we can achieve. As of November 26th, 2021, teleportation is not known to be possible. However, scientists have used quantum mechanics to teleport small particles across great distances. That's an old one, too. That's an old one. In 2017, Chinese scientists successfully teleported a photon from the Gobi Desert to the Micius satellite, which is 310 miles above the surface. The scientists have used a process called quantum entanglement, which is complicated physics process that allows uh for the instantaneous teleportation of small particles. Tel- Quantum teleportation is a scheme for information transfer, for not the transfer of matter. It uses Okay, I see. Now, it uses entangled photons to teleport quantum information from one ensemble of atoms to another. Yeah, if you keep looking you'll pretty wild. That's wild, but you'll find the molecule when it's it's more new it's a much newer article, but yeah. They can do a molecule now, which is pretty cool. They can do molecules. That's These are old articles. 20, you know, 2017, 2021. They They're really getting advanced with this and teleportation is going to be a real thing. Now, when you when you get teleported, you got to remember you die. Anything that teleported doesn't doesn't exist. A teleportation is a copy. Oh, really? Yeah. Yeah, that's why in like the Star Trek Enterprise series they were like afraid to get into the teleporter cuz they they knew that that means that version of them is ceases to exist. So, you're destroyed in one place and you're reassembled in another place, but the reassembly part process is is a copy. But when you're when you come out the other side, your copy, do you have the memory of before? Because the database will store everything in the way and exact format and location that needs to be. There was a short film like that that the technology I mean it's a short film, but the technology was that you can transport anywhere to any star and they would do that to go on vacation and at the end of the short film it showed that after the guy had left, he was still there on the platform and he was like, "What's going on?" And then they drop him into a vat and like chew him up and make another clone out of him. Oh my god. Yeah, you're a facsimile when you teleport. But then, you know, also through the same technology we're going to be able to really develop food replicators. They've already got some very simple ones that are using 3D building to model like they're taking actual atoms and using 3D built 3D modeling 3D printers to model food, but we're talking about within the next 10 years we'll be able to create food processors that can replicate meals. Yeah, I heard that about steaks. Like they're they're able to replicate meat. Yeah. Yeah. This is going to get really interesting because I mean, if they're able to do that and it's exactly the same thing. Like if they're able to analyze it and compare it and say this genetically genetic created 3D printed steak is the same thing as the one that came out of this living cow, why wouldn't you do that? Well, you can bring food to the furthest reaches of the world where people are starving and hungry. You could put a replicator inside their hut and they can have food. You know, so um it changes the playing field though. It brings it takes a civilization that's third or fourth level and brings them up to one level, right? You taking you taking third world and fourth world bringing them to first world and some people don't want that. So, if we don't take back control of our planet, all these crazy incredible technologies will still be oppressed and only elite the elite elite few of a few will be able to get access to them and the people who really truly need them will still suffer. Imagine we can just go to the grocery store here in America and buy food. But okay, let's say I'm rich enough to own a replicator. So, I can say, you know, I just replicate me a dinner tonight. But meanwhile, halfway around the world somebody's starving. And they can use that replicator, but they'll never get it because of economics and laws and governments and and and you know, and corruption. So, we have to take control of this planet in some way. We have to break down this entire global cabal and we need to be able to get the things to the people who actually need them. Mhm. Do you I mean, it's it's it's wild to think that we exist here with so much technology and we've advanced so far where I mean, just 3 years ago AI came out. Now people are using that [ __ ] to make YouTube videos. They don't even have to do anything themselves. They they literally program AI to do everything from their thumbnails to their the recreate the video, recreate the music, the voice over. There was a whole Andy Warhol documentary that was just made where they used AI to recreate Andy Warhol's voice for the voiceovers. Incredible. And now there's ad agencies who literally use AI to tell them where to put the logos on commercials and how to cut the commercials to work right. And simultaneously in the Amazon and in different different islands around the world, you have these uncontacted tribes. Right. I know. It's the craziest thing. That murder a human as soon as they see him. Oh, yeah. I remember that. That happened. Yeah, it's wild. It's um So, the fact like like think about that. Was it like that back to 20,000 years ago before the Great Flood? Was it Did we have like super advanced people that created power plant pyramids that used electron giant electron harvesters to use microwave energy to power the world and fly flying saucers at the same time have cavemen? You had people walking around naked at the same time. Right. Yeah, literally. You're literally do If you look at If you go to the Cairo Museum or the Egyptian Museum of Civilization and you see some of the oldest uh relics in there, some of the oldest artifacts, you'll see some some statuettes of what would be called considered the poor man. And they're they're naked. They have no clothes on. Because in those times if you were poor, you had to walk around naked to make sure you weren't stealing from anybody who had money. So, now they had electricity back then. They had advanced technology. They had advanced tooling, which we just saw, right? From from the engineer, Mr. Dunn. Mhm. But at the same time, people are walking around literally butt naked. My god, bro. So, we always see this thing where we have people in position of high power and dominance and control over the masses and they hold down and put a boot on the neck of a certain number of people. And that's got to come to an end. Could you imagine if they did that again? Oh, man. If we got to like if this [ __ ] got so far out of hand where just like the rule like the the rulers of the world started making everybody if you make less than a million dollars a year you got to start walking around butt ass naked [ __ ] Like, oh my god. And listen it's see it's hard to it's hard to not see like just everything is so it seems like humanity is spiraling out of control if you watch the news or if you pay attention to anything in the media today. The only solace that I get is if I look at, you know, these ancient civilizations and I see where we came from there, how we have kind of in a weird kind of way overcome a lot of the oppression that was there from these other people, these beings, these Anunnaki beings. Uh because there was a war another pyramid war that happened where these people said the evil wind is coming and it was making people's hair and nails fall out, bleeding from their eyes and nose. Sounds like radiation poisoning. We know in Mohenjo-Daro in the Indus Valley the the the whole the whole town turned to glass. They were made from sandstone bricks turned to glass. That means 3,000 degree plus temperatures. And the evidence that can be seen all throughout that region where there was some type of a war, most likely in my opinion nuclear. It wiped out a lot of people. These beings for whatever reason they got the hell out of here. They said we're going to get into our ships and forbode we're going and then left us here as an abandoned seed colony um to kind of fend for ourselves. Uh but you know, so we've gotten to this point now the dog mother they installed eons ago is still running the country because it's in the minds of these quote unquote leaders and it keeps getting passed down. But at some point we as humanity, the we meaning the 8 billion people, we have to stand up to this 1% and say we're not going to play your game anymore. We know that we can do this because the whole pandemic proved to us that we can shut the whole world down and guess what we're all going to still live. We're alive. We came back. Businesses came back. Everything came back. If we collectively did that and said, "No, we're going to turn the off the world now. Now, we're going to turn the world off world off and we're not going to turn it back on until we renegotiate what we feel needs to happen on this planet." But, you know, the thing is the divine conquer the to confusion of languages. I'm this race, you're that race. You're over here, I'm over this invisible line. I got this invisible line. And so, we have this divine conquer and this dog being our brains. And also, we have the fear factor. So, combining all that together, you have the perfect storm keeping us separated when we need to come together now more than ever to take back control of this planet. Yeah. And Yeah, there's just so much there. If we don't take back control of this planet, they're going to start selling us time. I guarantee it. Selling us time? Well, now they've learned how to master the telomeres. So, now they know how to keep you living longer. So, now all of a sudden, "Oh, you want to live to be 100? Oh, well, it's going to cost you this and that. Or you're going to have to do this, you're going to have to do that." "Oh, you want to live to be 80? Oh, well, you know, we'll we'll see what happens in your retirement plan. We'll put time in your retirement plan." People are already paying like millions of dollars to have their [ __ ] brains put in cryo chambers after they die. Yeah. So, in the event that technology comes to the point where you can put your brain in a cyborg in the future, they can bring you back to life, put you in a new body. Right. That's insane. Yeah. And you know, they walk around I had a guy in here. He was a scientist. He walk he had a dog tag Yeah. that he got from the place that he paid a half a million dollars to. Yeah. And when he dies, like where the medics when they see that dog tag, they know, "Call this company, chop this guy's head off and put it in a in a ice bucket." Get him in there. Yeah. Interesting. But, that comes from the emerald tablets. They just haven't mastered Even if you look at the Egyptians, they were lied to. The mummification that you see in Egypt and these and these fancy sarcophagus and these tombs, Yeah. when you go in a tomb, which I take people to the Valley of the Kings all the time. You see these elaborate tombs, all this elaborate artwork. But before they were robbed, all the jewelry, all the riches, all the money, all the gold, the the the the cats, the wives, the maids are all in there with you. You Everybody got When you go, everybody got to go. Well, why is that? If I'm going to go to some afterlife, I know that this money and gold ain't coming to the afterlife. See, they were told that the mummification process was about saving the DNA to be brought back to life at a later time, just like the guy who came in here. Oh, wow. Over time, it that the secret of that got lost, and it became this mummification, we're going on the solar boat, and blah blah blah. The real implication of this was we're going to come back, cuz these people in the beginning, the beginning pharaohs, they were the sons of these Anunnaki gods. They were half human, half half Anunnaki. We promise you we're going to bring you back. You're going to be immortal. We'll bring you back to life. So, keep everything here, hide it good. That's why the That's why the tombs were hidden. They come back to life, they, you know, oh, I got my gold. It's in tomb number 15552. Let me get my key so I can get my gold and get all my riches back out, cuz I'm a rule again. Never happened. But that was the premise behind it. It was about preserving DNA to be cloned and transfer yourself in into a brand new body here in this realm, nowhere else. What was the story you mentioned it briefly last time that there was a guy who did the research that found out that human DNA is a little bit different than monkey DNA, but there's like two extra or two missing chromosomes or something like that? Yeah. And there were telomere caps put on that like shortened our lifespan. Right. So, Where does that story go back to? It goes back to the Sumerian tablets. Okay. You know, and it goes back to the geneticists say it happened about 200,000 years ago. The Sumerian tablets talk about an incident that happened when when Enlil, aka Yahweh, says, "I'm going to cut humans' lifespan." And so they took out chromosome number two and they fused it together and they put a telomere cap on each side. And that telomere cap has buffer material, genetic buffer material, and when it runs out, your body begins the death process. Now, what they did at Harvard is they took some mice and they discovered how to stop the telomeres from degrading or using up all the buffer material so fast. So, they extended the mice three lifetimes, I believe. Three life They gave them three extra lifetimes or two extra lifetimes, so they had three full lives. In other words, they they extended them so long that they normally would have lived if they lived that long for real, it would have been the equivalent of three lives. So, now they know how to do this in mice, which means they can do it in human beings. And if they can do it in human beings yet? Do you I'm pretty sure they have. You know, we have a lot of mad scientists out here in these especially in DARPA and the military. Yeah. I was one of the scientists. I've tried it myself. Right. You know what I'm saying? So, but the thing is how do we control um how they give us access to it. Right. and so all of a sudden, that's why I keep saying it's so vital to take control of this planet because they'll start selling us time. And rich people will live longer and people who are poor will die sooner. And so, you'll have a planet full of extremely wealthy people living to 100, 200, 300 years or maybe even more, and the poor people, you know, well, you won't make it to 80. Yeah. So, last night I was watching your thing on the Black Knight satellite, yeah, and that is bizarre, man. And there's lots of videos that talk about that and legitimate people that were like working on the space station who photographed this thing. Yeah. And Stephen, you probably find a find some real photos of this thing. It's called the Black Knight satellite, k n i g h t. And so, can you explain what this is and what your what the mainstream theory of what this thing is? So, the Black Knight satellite is this object that is actually orbiting the earth right now. What's interesting is the mainstream knew it was there for a very very long time. And those are some really good pictures. The one on the top left is accurate. That's a great photo. The one right next to it to the right, that's another one zoomed out. That's taken from the ISS. That one's a real one, too. So, you can see that this object is massive. Now, they're trying to say it was a space blanket. So, we debunked that inside the documentary that it was a space blanket? Inside of the um inside of the ISS, there's this area where you have these trunnion pins and you have this kind of a heat protection blanket that goes on two trunnion pins. Uh-huh. It's about uh from me to you and about maybe this wide. They're trying to say that that thing floating through space is that. So, we debunk it because we actually do a comparison in the documentary and show that no, it's not this space blanket from the ISS. It's or the from the space shuttle, I'm sorry, from the shuttle. It's something totally different. Not from ISS, from the space shuttle. It's something totally different. And so, this is the object that they estimated one time on NASA at 15 tons. Now, when it first was discovered in more modern more recent times, in the '80s, NASA and Soviet Union went on high alert. Russia went on high alert. They were like, wait a minute. They thought we were both doing something to each other from space. And they realized orbiting the earth. Right. But, they said, "Wait a minute. We can't launch 15 tons." And they were like, "Well, we can't launch 15 tons. But, what is this thing?" So, they flew by it with an STS mission, a space shuttle mission, and took high definition photos, which are still on nasa.gov today. Oh, you can find them online? They're right on nasa.gov. And NASA labeled them, I'll send you the links to them, direct links. NASA labeled it space junk. Really? So, nobody wants to touch this thing. They don't want to say what it is, but it's been there for a long time. How do we know this? First of all, Nikola Tesla claims that received a signal from this object. This is a long time ago now. We're talking about the late 1800s. Then, the signal is again call it the Black Knight satellite? call it the Black Knight. That that's that's a much newer name. Okay. It It got that name much newer. How did he know that he was receiving signals from this thing? First, he thought it was from Mars. Then, he thought it might have been from something much closer to Earth. But back then, when he was getting these radio signals from space, cuz this thing is emitting a signal, a frequency. There was nothing else here. There were no There was nothing, no satellites. We had no technology except for what he was making. So, what was this frequency? So, he He then assumed it might have been coming from something much closer. Then, in 1953, two ham radio operators picked up this same frequency, and they started began to to mark it down, taking note of what it was what what the frequency was, and the tones. And they didn't know what it was, either, but it was coming from outside. Then, in 1960, it made Time magazine. What was interesting is in 1960, Russia and America began the space race just before that. And Russia was building Sputnik, already had one going up. So, every All eyes were in space around the low Earth orbit, trying to figure out how do we get something to orbit this planet. And during this process, they discovered this thing was there. That's why it made Time magazine. Another astrophysicist said, "Wait a minute." Duncan Lunan said, "This thing is real, and it has a frequency coming out of it." And he deciphered the frequency, and said it was leading to the Epsilon. It was saying Epsilon Boötis constellation, or Boötis constellation Epsilon. Which is pretty interesting. I said it's pretty interesting. So, fast forward again, an NSA document gets released and declassified, talking about the fact that how to com- how to communicate with ET, and it talks about these frequencies coming from space. And it says, "Boötis constellation, Boötis Epsilon." Same location. So, I said, "What the hell is this Epsilon thing? What is this Boötis?" So, I started looking up. There's a constellation called the Boötis constellation. Mhm. And in this constellation, there's a largest void that we know of. A void meaning not even space dust is in this area. It goes on for light-years. So, I'm looking up that now. I go, "How in the world can there be nothing in this space?" Is like dark matter or Just nothing. Not even dark matter? Michio Kaku hypothesized that it might be a cloak an advanced cloak civilization. I said, "What?" So, now I start digging deeper. I go, "Wait a minute." I look into ancient texts now. I'm like, "There's got to be something here." I said, "Who owns um uh the Boötis?" And it says Enlil in Wikipedia of all places, which they can't stand to put anything out that gives you any inkling of Right. real, you know, real knowledge. Everything is pseudo science. Right. But, they had sources that that led back to real tablets that said this, so they had to list it. Mhm. The sources are on, you know, there. So, it went back to real tablets. So, the the Boötis constellation and Epsilon is attributed to the ownership of Enlil. When you look at these tablets, it didn't surprise me cuz these people, these Anunnaki people, they own planets. They own moons and everything. He owns the constellation. And so, um or maybe he rules over it in some weird way. Mhm. So, I said, "This is crazy." So, when you start analyzing, okay, let me go back. Ancient texts are saying war, they left, they fled. Would they have possibly dropped an an a probe in orbit to watch us and monitor us and transmit back to them what's going on here since they left? This thing was in a polar orbit. We couldn't do a polar orbit at the time this was discovered in a polar orbit in 1960. We couldn't do a polar orbit. all the all the satellites orbited the equator. That's right. And a polar orbit, what does it give you? It gives you the ability to see everything going on in the planet cuz as you orbit around the planet polar, you know, pole to pole, and the planet rotates on its axis, you can take swaths of data from the from the planet, topographical data, uh you know, uh resource data, human population data, everything, and then you can make you can put it into a computer and you can see exactly what's going on. And they'll have something called an all-seeing eye, where he knew everything going on on the planet at one time. And I'm saying the only way you can do it was a with a polar orbiting satellite. That's the only way you can actually do that. It all started to make sense to me. So, it became a big hypothesis. So, I started researching it deeper, and then I got some experts together, and that's why I made the Black Knight Satellite documentary. I believe that this thing is transmitting information back to Boötes via quantum entanglement communication. Cuz Boötes is light-years away, so that means it would take a long time at the speed of light. However, if you quantum entangle with a communications device back at Boötes, you can transmit the information instantaneously. And the reason why I believe they won't touch this thing is because what if it has a self-destruct mechanism or some type of a defense mechanism that we don't know of? We don't want to activate it. We don't want to touch it. What if it sends, "Hey, they're messing with me." and all of a sudden here comes the cavalry. So, they just They just leave it alone. Don't touch it. It ain't doing nothing to us. We ain't doing nothing to it. But, interesting, the location of Boötes from that frequency is the location it was in the sky due to the precession of the equinoxes 13,000 to to 14,000 years ago or so. So, this thing could potentially be 13 to 14,000 years old, which is right around the time of the Younger Dryas incident on Earth. Now, we don't know, though. I mean, if we were we could study it with like a drone, couldn't we? Couldn't we send like some sort of other satellite that was remote controlled up there to get kind of close to it and follow it and and I'm pretty sure you can. I mean, you know, it depends on what they allow how close they allow you to get. They meaning, you know, they have their own self-defense. They have their stargate system making dick and spend anything they want in space. You know, probably if you don't go on your particular approved flight path plan, they might just blow you out of the sky. You know, whatever you send up there. Right. you you can get an approved flight path, but I doubt that you can rendezvous with this thing. People would have done it by now. That is freaky, man. Yeah, but it's there. It's up there. It's orbiting the planet and it's changed course a couple times. Now, ice particles and blankets don't change course. So, this thing has got maybe it's got AI in it. It's intelligently controlled in some way. But, we you know, we're these people are a million years ahead of us. They're a million years ahead of us technologically. And so, we we got so much learning to do and you know, the best thing to do is just don't even touch it. What do you think about where humanity is heading as far as like how we're advancing in technology and and with AI? Mhm. And with just everything in general. Is there is there anything that is prophesized or talked about in any of these ancient texts on like what happens next? Well, if you look at some of the ancient texts like the Epic of Gilgamesh, which is the full story of Noah, they fashioned an artificial being for Gilgamesh to go on his hero's journey. That was a made being. It was a mechanical being. It was some fashioned being. They made him a cyborg or Really? R2-D2 type thing. Yeah. Yeah. Now, wasn't it said I thought I maybe I read it wrong, but in your in your book, the guy who does the traveling around the world after the floods was the son or the descendant of the ruler of one of the first cities. Oh, that's Gilgamesh. Gilgamesh, right right right right. Gilgamesh who became a king as well. I think he became the king of Uruk. But yeah, um he he was a real being. He was half human, half Anunnaki. But because he was half human, he didn't have immortality. They wouldn't let him live forever. He was huge. He was strong. He was a giant. He had massive amounts of knowledge. But they kind of gave him the runaround. They told him, "You want to learn about immortality? Go see Ziusudra." That's Noah in the Bible. So, he goes to seek out Ziusudra, but they fashioned him this um this being so that he wouldn't be lonely on his journey. Uh he eventually he's never granted immortality. They told him, "Because you got the blood of a human, we're never going to give you immortality." Uh basically, "We're never going to tell you the trick of how to transfer your mind into new bodies. We're not going to let you clone yourself or anything like that." Right. But uh they do that. So, they had the capability, but also when it came down to this situation with the war that was going to break out, um there was a suggestion I forgot by one of the women, one of the Anunnaki women that, you know, about making fashioning uh workers. And they were like, "We tried that." Something to the fact we tried this on the home world, and then the tablets broken there. Hm. So, I almost think that it's alluding to the fact that they had tried this type of uh you know, fabricated being situation, and maybe it didn't work out properly. Because they also talk about in the tablets using these WMDs, weapons of mass destruction, that were now forbidden to be used on the home planet, but somebody snuck them and brought them here and hid them in the mountainside, which eventually used thousands of years later in a war on this planet. And the And the That's what it says in the Sumerian tablets. Hm. And so, it's possible that they had considered these AI type uh robotic beings, but realized that when they when those AIs wake up, they realize they don't need us anymore. So, it probably was some type of a big battle that occurred, and they probably fortunate that they even won or were able to survive it. And the same thing can happen to us. I really think that we have to have some type of parameter on this AI, because I think there's so many great things that can come out of it. Uh even robotics, you know, helping uh paralyzed people, people with disabilities, freeing the burden of man, so we don't have to do the the the hard labor anymore. But if you take away the labor jobs, then you got to take away our bills. And they're They're doing that. We're going to re- replacing everything. Even truck dri- Everything is going to be replaced. Even restaurant workers will be replaced. Yeah. But then what about their bills? So, we're going to have a a whole, you know, slew of unemployed people that don't have any other skill set, and they're going to eventually be tent cities all over the world. So, we have to If we're going to replace their jobs, then we have to take away their bills. We can't free their burden and give them the bills at the same time. So, something has to give, you know, um so we're We're on a precipice. It can go either way. It really can. Yeah, it makes me wonder like another book that I read by Annie Jacobsen was her uh she had a whole book about like the history of DARPA and how how uh advanced their technology was compared to what we knew in modern society. Like they invented GPS, they invented the DARPAnet, which was the internet like way before we knew. They were working on brain chips like Elon's Neuralink back in the '90s to create super soldiers. And, you know, it just I think about it all the time. Like what I wonder how much farther advanced the US government is with AI and all this stuff that we have no clue. They have the DARPA They have the DARPA has the Avatar project. And the Avatar project, they have actual field robots, and where a a soldier is in a bunker somewhere, maybe even a thousand miles away, has a symbiotic consciousness link to the robot to control that the robot has AI plus its own link so it can make decisions and you can control it still. Mhm. If the robot blows up, the soldier doesn't die. The symbiotic link is is disconnected. They have the craziest tech Yeah. that you can only They have something in the in the spa- in space on a satellite called the rods from God. The rods from God? from God. This is a satellite that I know of that exists. This satellite has 20-ft tungsten steel rods on it. These tungsten steel rods have no warhead, but when it's positioned over any country or any city, it can be released to within a millimeter of the point where of impact and it'll decimate that entire region using kinetic energy. Stephen, you got to find this. fallout. Really? Yeah. The rods from God. It sounds terrifying, but it sounds way better than thermonuclear bombs. way better. You can blow up I mean I'm saying way better. Look how we're talking. I mean you know, it's it's better than nuclear fallout, you know? Right. Yeah, the rods from God is a satellite weapon. Rods from God is a hypersonic space weapon concept that involves dropping a tungsten rod from orbit. The rods are 20 ft long and 1 ft in diameter and weigh 24,000 lb. When dropped from orbit, they can reach speeds of up to 10 times the speed of sound. See? You're talking about forbidden knowledge, man. Scroll down. Yeah, we Don't worry out there other country Don't worry countries out there. We're not fully We're not going to drop these on you, but yeah, they got them. They How do you think they get these countries to fall in line with what they want them to do? Imagine you're a country and you want to do this, you want to do that, you want to be able to do whatever whatever you want and you know that this thing is hovering above you and we say, "Listen, if you do it, we're going to drop one." Okay, we're we're we're we're not going to do it. We'll stand down. We'll stay third world. We won't rise up to second or first world. We'll stay back. We'll stand down. They'll give them a little bit of money. Give the leader a little bit of money. Maybe install a puppet dictator. You know that thing's up in your head. The craziest scary thing to think about is some of like the the crazier dictators around the world like in North Korea. Oh, yeah. Who hide nukes in satellites that pass over the United States multiple times a day. I know. And what it would take for some unhinged dictator to send a nuke which could set that could be a domino effect in nuclear bombs hitting all over the world and just [ __ ] destroying humanity, sending us into a nuclear holocaust. Well, this is why Have you heard of that I don't know if I think it's just a conspiracy theory, but it's a fun one. It's a project looking glass Yeah. about how there was in area S4 in Nevada, there was some sort of device where they could go into and time travel. And they found out that there was then then we're talking into like the multiverse now. Where there was back a long time ago one version of reality went in a way where there was a a nuclear holocaust or some sort of some sort of thing that basically ended humanity and the survivors went underground because there was so much fallout over the earth they could not survive. So they had to go underground and they evolved underground for maybe millions of years, hundreds of thousands of years. And because they were not in the sunlight, they were living in darkness, they evolved into being what we see now as those gray aliens with the big heads and the big eyeballs. And that's how they have because they evolved underground, that's what they eventually looked like. Wow, incredible. Yeah, that's what's in project looking glass. If you look at some of the incidents that happened here in not only America, but around the world at a lot of our nuclear flights these flights are nuclear bases where silos are located, they call them flights. Um I remember when these former nuclear physicist, uh the people who used to arm the nukes, the soldiers soldiers that used to guard the nukes came forward in a live press club in the middle of the afternoon on CNN one afternoon about two decades ago and talked about how these UFOs would show up at these flights and deactivate the nukes. Mhm. Yep. Now, the hardest job to get in the world is a guy who has the codes to the nukes. So, when this guy gets up and says, "Look, when I was working there, verify this guy worked there, and these things came, they deactivate they deactivated nukes and I had to reactivate them." So, that's telling me they sent us a message that they're not going to let us destroy this planet. And there's also there was a fun there was actually there's a debate about it you can find on YouTube. There was a general or a high-ranking military guy who was at the Air Force base in California, Vandenberg. And there was a rocket that was sent up with a mock warhead on it. And he says that he saw some sort of object fly up, hover around it, shoot laser beams into it, and complete and and the rocket just fell into the ocean. That's right. That's That's right. I know exactly who you're talking about. And his story has been out for a while. It just keeps going on cuz people want to interview him more. But, I heard him talk about this probably about 8 to 10 years ago. Yeah. What is your opinion on on everything that's coming out right now with these modern-day UFOs and this guy Dave Grusch coming out and saying all this stuff? I think Dave Grusch is telling the truth, personally. Uh which is why they don't want him to keep talking, you know? Um he says that we have bodies not of this world. We have, you know, vehicles not of this world. I believe that. What the Pentagon and the military are doing is they want to control the narrative because they're getting ready to uh continue to produce these these um these technologies that mimic or look like some real UFOs. In other words, really unidentified flying objects, but they're ours. And there's a lot of them that are ours. Just some that are not not ours. But, they want to control the narrative because you remember the Gulf of Tonkin incident where we faked the whole lie about what happened and all of a sudden that let us get into the Vietnamese War. Yep. Imagine we have one of these flying triangles like a TR-3B or some UFO that we created, we fly over one of our own warships and shoot it so that we can make everybody afraid, say now we need trillions of dollars going into space weapons. Now there's a whole space weapon industry being funded by tax dollars that doesn't even need to exist, but these fat cats with these $10,000 suits are going to get richer and richer and richer making weapons for things and threats that don't even exist. So it's a real crazy situation. I think that they're controlling the narrative to make money because there's no more wars to fight. There really are hardly any more wars to fight. We've already dominated, we took over Argentina, we took over the Middle East, you know, we we know nobody really cares about Africa, they know they got I mean everywhere you can go and get some kind of resource, they've done it. In Africa, they've already gone and set up corporations in all the places that have all the resources. That's been finished a long time ago. There's nowhere else to go to start any big wars to generate trillions of dollars in war money. So the next big race for money is space race. And that's why you have the Space Force, and all of a sudden, don't be surprised if you see one of these UFOs or UAPs shoot at one of our own ships now justifying the need for more laws, more restrictions on us, plus more money going into into the space weapon industry, which is going to be a trillion dollar industry and we're not even going to question it. We're going to we're going to happily give them the money. They don't have to hide the money now, no more black budget mix-ups. We don't know where the 18 trillion went, you know? Like Donald Rumsfeld, no, we know where it went, it went to the Space Force because we have to have weapons to protect the planet. Meanwhile, they're using those weapons, they're pointing them right back at this own planet with us still on it. So that's the trick behind this whole thing. It's a it's a fake space race for a space war that's probably not going to happen. Do you you think there's some sort of like objective with like some sort of deception going on with people like Dave Grusch coming online and or coming on going on the on every single talk show going on Joe Rogan talking about this stuff. And I just the guy is so intertwined in intelligence. It's just like I I'm it's hard for me not to be skeptical of the guy. It's possible that he could be seeding more information, you know? I mean This stuff goes so deep and it's so compartmentalized. Yeah. And they place so many psyops on us. Right. It's hard to tell what's real and what's fake, which is exactly what they want. They want us off balance. Cuz if we're off balance, we're always guessing, you know? Like right now, we're guessing. Uh and it's exactly what they want. Because when you're off balance in the boxing ring, what happens? You get knocked the hell out. Yeah, I mean, what do you think happens to to religion? You think I mean, if they come out and say, "Yeah, there's other race of beings are here. They're walking around. They're communicating with us. We made a deal with them." Like Tucker Carlson says. Like how do people react? What does that do to society? Do we stay divided? Do we keep How does that Like if that is real, Mhm. how do you justify spending trillions of dollars to blow up people for extreme religious ideologies? If they're You know, how relevant is that? You'll see two things happen. You'll see a big split and a divide. You'll see a lot of people half the people go towards no religion and drop religion, which is a multi-trillion dollar industry. Yeah. And then you'll see another group of people another 50% of the people will become extremist and believe and swear that these are the demons that are being prophesied about coming to get us and these aliens are we're now taking we're we're working with Satan. And Satan's going to get us and this whole demon thing and this Satan's and his demons and the the fallen army of of heaven is coming down to to to beguile us. So, you'll see this divide happen between non-believers and zealots. And that's kind of what's probably going to happen. Yeah, I mean, even Tucker Carlson was just saying on some on some podcast that he thinks that he taught he says he got some sort of like top secret information that he hasn't even share with his wife according to him that says that this whole phenomenon is a spiritual phenomenon. Well, you know, that I believe that this it's not just a physical phenomenon. So, you have 3D that we're in, right? Third density. I believe that we're seeing UFOs and aliens that exist and have engaged mankind according to these tablets in this third dimension. They they live here. They've been here in this universe with us. But then also They're here on You think they're living on Earth? Some of them I think are still here. Yeah. Maybe even behind the scenes pulling pulling the strings. They're puppeteer They're puppet masters and we're the and we're the puppets. But then also, you have these other beings that are in are in this third dimension, but they're also very nice and they really want to see humanity progress. I think the ones that are here are hiding from them. But then let's go deeper. Okay? We're living in a multi-dimensional universe. We know that this universe has at least 11 dimensions. We talked about this the last time on your podcast, right? I believe that there could be maybe even these orbs could be multi-dimensional. What if these orbs are coming from a higher dimension and transiting transdimensional coming into the third to uh to observe and to collect data and send it back to whatever dimension they're from. There could be beings from higher dimensions that know how to phase shift their subatomic frequency to match the frequency of our universe and walk right in. Right. There could be all these apparitions and things and all this paranormal activity could be higher dimensional beings coming to observe or for whatever reason whatever their agenda is, we don't know. So, you could have multi-dimensional, transdimensional, you have physical third dimensional beings and I believe all three are happening at once. Yeah. And the fact they're coming out of the oceans is interesting, too. Because if you wanted to if there was a all-out nuclear war the people that would survive the longest would be the guys that are living on those nuclear powered submarines underwater cuz they would would the fallout. They would live at least until they run out of food or water to drink. Right. And these new nuke subs, they actually can take water out from the ocean and desalinate it. Oh, really? Mhm. And they even have a sub that can take in the ocean water and convert that into hydrogen and use hydrogen for fuel. They even have new hydrogen-powered um uh ships now. So, they can just stay on the ocean indefinitely. They can just suck in the seawater and through electrolysis, you extract the hydrogen atoms, push it into a chamber for combustion, and you got unlimited fuel. Which is where everything's going. EVs are going to die. EVs will be only for commercial vehicles. Everything is going to go to hydrogen. Everything. Hydrogen? Hydrogen. Not nuclear-powered? No. I'm talking about hydro for as far as sit civilians. Mhm. Everything is going hydrogen for for transportation. For personal transportation will be hydrogen. They'll be The world is going to get back away uh severely. I mean I mean hard turn from EVs. Have you seen that movie it was called The Adjustment Bureau? The Adjustment Bureau. Yes. With um Matt Damon, I think it was. That that is frequently it's when you think about like the way that movie was done and how little changes like little things that you can do or like how like how just making altering someone's decision during the day on like if they miss the bus or not can alter like history so much. And you think and and you compare that with like the history of this country and how close we've come to nuclear war in the past. I had a guy in here yesterday who was like talking about the history of of JFK and how if it wasn't for JFK and MLK, we wouldn't be here today. And how um the story about how JFK actually became president, which is fascinating. How MLK basically is the reason that he got elected. Wow. Because and and like all like all the generals that were surrounding JFK were trying to put like were trying to invoke a secret nuclear war. They wanted to nuke China and Russia and Laos and all Cuba and all these places all at once, which would have would have been the destruction of humanity. And it came like it was so close to happening. Yeah. Yeah. And it didn't happen because of these like very very like in the moment decisions that Kennedy made or like people around him made that split decisions. There wasn't like like plans. They didn't they didn't know what was going to happen. Right. And the story about MLK is fascinating on how they got before JFK was elected, the African-American vote going back to Lincoln was always Republican. Mhm. And right before they JFK was getting elected, he had his campaign managers they had a a separate secret building behind the their main like headquarters where they got all their donations and talked to people whatever because they wanted to get the African-American vote, but they couldn't let the white southerners know about that because they lose their votes. Right. So they had these covert um like preachers go to all the churches around in a bunch of states around the US and hand out these flyers. But they had these preachers it was like they they weren't connected to JFK at all, right? It didn't look like they were a part of the JFK campaign. They were just like showing the people at these churches saying like look this guy's going to help us with civil rights, we have to vote for him. Yeah. And that was during the last week right before the the the polls were supposed to come in. Right right before everyone went to vote. Yeah. And it flipped seven states where the African-American vote went Democratic and he barely won that election in the last week of the campaign. And if it wasn't for that, it was very likely that Humanity wouldn't We wouldn't be here sitting here talking here today. We'd be a dead planet. And there's probably thousands of dead planets out in this Milky Way galaxy right now that didn't make it past the nuclear age. Thousands of them. And I think these beings out there know it, which is why they showed up at our nuclear sites and decided to deactivate nukes and nukes and show us that you guys don't really have all the power you think you have. And I think that this planet is a jewel in the suburbs of the Milky Way. And I think that this planet is going to be protected. That's just my personal feeling, which is probably why all these little slight things just seem to happen just the right way to allow us to escape you know, what seemed like it was going to be complete destruction. I remember in school you know, in the 70s being told to ball up and get under the desk, you know, and this is what you got to do when the nuke goes off. And I'm like, what? This house is going to desk going to save me? I'm going to be dead anyway. I mean, you know, the kids would be all got to get underneath the desk and everything else and and this Cold War and I started digging and researching the Cold War from back then. And I said, man, this is such a great money makers. I just knew from back then in the 80s when I started really digging deep into the Cold War that it was a way for both countries to make a lot of money from the people. And they and create industry, which is exactly what they did. They fueled industry and a lot of money off of the Cold War propaganda. But at any moment, it could have popped off. We just, you know, and it still could, but I think now it's it's a little bit less likely that it will happen. But we really we really need to um you know, I don't know how we're going to do it, but these nukes, they got to go. Even the Anunnaki had that problem. It's You see, that's something that I have trouble wrapping my head around because you think of our timeline, like from where human beings are now and the way we're evolving and the way we develop new technology. The most innovation comes out of war, right? And aerospace and all these military contractors. The most money goes into military contractors innovating like DARPA, right? Like innovating these crazy doing all throwing billions of dollars into this blue sky research to develop new things and test new things. Psychokinesis, remote viewing. If there's a 1% chance it'll help us with intelligence, we'll throw millions of dollars at it, right? Yep. That's the primary primary way that we innovate today. Is is it's fueled by wars. Yes, exactly right. I'm wondering is like it's hard for me to fathom that if there was some enlightened spiritual highly technical civilization that existed way before us, is that the same way they evolved? Like were the pyramids built Yeah. with the same mindset? I think that we're living in a cycle in a in a cycle of advancement that our cycle on this planet is probably been duplicated with many different species of beings, sentient conscious beings, through many many worlds throughout the entire universe. And so we're going through a phase. This phase is to everything. Just like this phase is to growth of a seed to a full sapling or tree. We're in this same exact phase. And I think that one of the things that a civilization goes through is learning how to split the atom. First of all, finding out that the atom has a unparalleled source of energy inside of it. And then being able to learn how to split it and create a chain reaction. And so I believe that this is something that's standard a standard growth process. And through this process just like in some versions of microevolution, where I believe in microevolution, not macro but micro, you'll see that things will branch off in different ways. So, some civilizations will go this way, hard hard right, and collapse. Some Some civilizations go left, and they survive. And I believe we're right in the middle right now. We haven't gone left or right yet. We're standing right in the middle, right on the precipice. We have a choice. We can go right and collapse, or we can go left. Um which is why a lot of billionaires want to leave this planet. They want to get the hell out of here. They want to go to Mars. Do you um have you seen or heard of Chris Dunn's new book called The Tesla Connection with about the Giza power plant? He like basically updated his whole theory on the pyramids. I It just got delivered. I had cuz I had it on pre-order, and then when I was out of country all this time, it came to my house. I finally opened up all that pop piles of mail and saw his book there. Yeah. Yeah. So, he reworked his whole original theory on the Giza power plant. And he made now in a nutshell, his theory is that it was a solid-state electron harvester that harvested vibrations deep within igneous rock, deep within the earth, like with earthquakes. You know, like with uh near fault lines, there's this phenomena where people will see like balls of like plasma light come up into the into the atmosphere. And he had a NASA scientist talk about this. This guy actually did a TED Talk where he talked all about how these uh these lights that would come up through fault lines, they would come up days or weeks before earthquakes, and they were indicators of how to avoid destruction and death with earthquakes. Like if So, if you start to see these balls of light coming up at night near fault lines, you know to get the hell out because there's going to be an earthquake. And they did studies, and they found out in fact, yeah, they did they found out yeah, there were earthquakes um following these balls of light that were coming up into the atmosphere. And it connects with his whole theory that these pyramids um I think it's 14 square acres that the Great Pyramid covers. There was that subterranean chamber under the pyramid. I mean, you've been there many times. I've never been there. Oh, really? Yeah. They opened it for me. We went down. Yeah. So, he So, his theory is that there was a a hydraulic hammer or something in there that would go off and create seismic vibrations within the earth and that would somehow resonate up through the Grand Gallery into the King's Chamber and then there was also around the pyramids, apparently there's these cavities in the ground where they would pour some sort of chemical and the shafts that go out of the pyramid, those would fill up with liquid hydrogen and they were sort of like microwave emitters. I believe that. I talked about that in a lot of my lectures over the last maybe 8 years. Really? Yes. I talk about the fact that those shafts were there cuz the way the Queen's Chamber's set up, you can see that it's set up for at least like my my perception of it is that it's set up to extract hydrogen from the water that would run up in there from the aquifer that used to be underneath the pyramid and the shafts, they're pointed and aligned perfectly with star systems. What do we use right now in astrophysics to try to communicate with ET? We use the frequency of hydrogen to send our messages. Oh, I didn't know that. Yes. So, I believe that we were sending messages to Aldebaran, to Orion and all these other Sirius that we're aligned with on those particular alignments with the Great Pyramid. We know these alignments are real because it's even mainstream you know, science to send communications. This is a report on earth. This is where we are right now. This is what's going on. This is how developed we've done blah blah blah blah blah blah kind of a you know, a report as to what what's going on, a communication back home to these different star systems. And so, that's what I believe those shafts were for for for that. Plus also the fact that the pyramid itself was generating power. I think the Great Pyramid is a multi-functional stone computer and power generator. It had multi-functions, not just one or two, but probably 10 or 15 functions. Yeah, and he apparently there was like a big explosion that happened, like a hydrogen explosion that happened within the King's Chamber that sort of like blew it all apart. And when they're apparently that was like during maybe during the Younger Dryas when one of those cosmic impacts came through, there was too much energy. There's a picture of me standing right next to the to the granite box on the inside and the corner I'm pointing to it because it's broken off. I'll send you this photo. Right. Right. You can look across the room though and you can see where it hit the granite wall and made the exact same indentation from the corner piece and destroyed the granite wall in the corner. So it flew about 20 ft across the room and smashed and broke solid granite in the same exact corner piece angle. Yeah, I I show people every time I take people into the King's Chamber that's the first thing I show them. Man, if I was Elon Musk and I had all that money instead of buying Twitter, I would just try to get like reverse engineer that pyramid and figure out what that was. I know. I know. Right by the pyramid. You know who who owns the rights to the interior of the Great Pyramid? NASA. What? They They own the what? The rights. I was told by one of the guides a couple years ago that you know, get as much as you can coming in here because if they say that they may one day shut off access to the King's Chamber. I said, why would they do that? He said, well they're afraid that you know, it's going to the pyramid's earthquake or something could make it unstable. I'm like, this thing has been here for thousands of years. It's not going to become unstable. That's foolishness. What's happening is they've discovered something technological about it and they want to control it. So. NASA owns the rights to the interior of the Great Pyramid. Yes. That's spooky, man. They also own the rights to a section of the Grand Canyon. So there's a certain took a helicopter down into the Grand Canyon. Uh they said we can't walk to this area. I That area I heard had some old carvings or something would be over in this area. So, I started trying to walk that way. And this guy pops out of nowhere with all black on, black hat, black military outfit with no logos, and AR-15, and tells me, "Halt, you can't go any further." I'm like, uh "Why?" I said, "What's going on?" Uh didn't they tell you couldn't come over here?" I said, "Well, they did, but I'm thinking, you know, I just want to see, you know, what's over here." Right. Right. Right. And he says, "You can't come." I said, "Well, why? What I said, can you just tell me, sir, like why can't I come over here?" He says, "NASA owns the rights to this section. You can't come over here." At the Grand Canyon? Grand Canyon. Do you have any theories of why that is? This got to be technological. Starts and something with space. And then also, where where else? Chaco Canyon. Same situation. They actually own the rights to those those round former things that look like they might have been domes or whatever. But now there's no dome, but you can see those round circles. Where are those at? Chaco Canyon. That's in um That's in uh South America. And so, it's like, so wait a minute, what's going on here? How in the world are What are they doing? As soon as India sent that that satellite to Mars Mhm. and took a color image of Mars, the real color, with the oceans and the water and everything of Mars, the director of NASA flew straight to India, and the next thing you know, about a month later, they're signing a deal. There's a whole press release about it. And they now put them under their umbrella. And the next thing you know, that image, they put something called false color on it, turned the whole thing red. Oh, wow. Now, the newest image of Mars just got released. I have an image that I took with my Celestron uh telescope, and a new one just came out. This new image of Mars How long ago? Just the other day. Really? They finally let somebody see what Mars really looks like. That's it, right there. So, and I'm going to send you the one I took years ago on my Celestron uh 130 telescope. earth.com. Steve, you could if you could find it find out it's called "Planet Mars Captured in True Color for the First Time Ever." It's on earth.com. Oh, sweet. Wow. What is all the blue supposed to be? Water. Really? Guess what they just said about Mars recently. They said that the soil on Mars is better for growing crops than the soil on Earth. Yeah, look at this, man. How do they know that? Let me see if I could find my image of Mars. So, if we're trying to make our species interplanetary to start some sort of breakaway civilization in case the Earth we we kill ourselves or destroy the planet, wouldn't we want to go to the moon first? Isn't that the most logical first step? It's too close to the Earth. So, you see if you look at what happened to Mars, Mars was orbiting Tiamat. At least according to the Enuma Elish. Let's not say according to mainstream science. Right. But, there's a there's a hypothesis I have that this information is true because one side of Mars is completely charred and the other side is the most smooth the surface in the solar system. So, why is that? Well, you could see that they had a global flood number one. And why is one side charred? On Mars. One side is charred, the other side smooth because the side that's charred when that planet exploded, a huge chunk of mass crashed into Mars charring and burning one side and causing a global flood around the backside and then slung it into that weird elliptical orbit that it's in right now. And so, Mars, you know, the the moon is too close. Mars is really kind of too close. Mars equator shifted 45°. It's like this because why? That mass that hit it from whatever hit it and created a pole shift of the crust of the planet and shifted the equator by 45°. We know that in mainstream science. So, you want to work to Mars and then move out from Mars. The good thing about Mars is there's a lot more resources there than on the moon. Like there's water, there's elements, there's gold. You need gold for technology. There's a lot of gold there in veins. There's also um atmosphere. There there's there's uh there's weather patterns and weather cycles and rain cycles and everything else. So, you can go to Mars and there's less gravity on Earth. Like if you and I went to Mars, we'd be supermen. You can pick up a boulder and throw it. You dunk on a 20-ft rim. Because our gravity, our net gravity from the way our bones are structured is based on Earth's net gravity. Mars is smaller than Earth. So, when we get to Mars, now we are we had grown up here on Earth, our our strength is magnified by a third on Mars. John John Carter. Carter. John Carter was like real and that aspect of the movie was real. The difference between the strength here and the strength there, running and jumping and all that, that's real. So, it's pretty interesting. Uh now, if you had kids there, they would grow up underneath Mars gravity. The first generation would be strong, but not as strong as you. The second generation would be equalized to uh Mars gravity. Right. We'd adapt and evolve based on Mars. On on the way. Now, that's my uh picture that I took with my Celestron telescope you see there of Mars in the summer. So, I took that years ago. Years ago. I think I took that picture about 6 years ago. So, uh I could send it to you. Yeah. So, what's cool about it is uh clearly you can see it's not a dry, cold rock. Yeah. Yeah, it's glowing. Yeah. And many people have now taken their same photos because they got inspired by me and posted them on the Celestron site and other other blogs and astrophysics forum and astronomy forums because they're saying, "Yeah, this is crazy. This guy was right." I'm like, "Yeah, I'm right." That's Mars. Wow, man. A good old Celestron telescope. Get it at walmart.com. You get that thing at Walmart? Yeah. Really? $500. Wow. We need a Celestron telescope in here. Yeah. And it has a star finder in it, so it makes it easy to find all the stars. Oh, really? Yep. Oh, that's incredible. Just just key the code in. Boop boop boop boop and it goes boom, there you go. Wow, so it finds stuff. Yes. Too easy. So, yeah. So, um what is your next book? You mentioned briefly earlier before we started that you had a new book coming out soon. New book, Fractal Holographic Universe. The Fractal Holographic Universe. What's that What's that book? What How do you explain that in English? Well, you know, I discovered that the universe itself is working on something called fractal holography. And this was discovered a long time ago by Benoit Mandelbrot, who discovered the Mandelbrot set of mathematical equations. And this equation was picked up by Pixar Studios when they discovered that that equation that very short small equation can literally fuel an entire creation in software. It allows the characters to come to life and almost uh let each scene appear as is needed, just like we live in this third dimension. He discovered that our third dimension runs off of fractals and that we're living in a fractal holographic matrix. And that everything the next frame appears as we need it. So, right now we're sitting in here, we can't see the street, but as soon as we walk out of this room and head towards the street, the street appears. The street isn't really there, it exists as a wave of potentials until a conscious observer collapses it into a solid structure. Like a video game? Like a video game. And to back this up, Professor James Gates Jr., um he also discovered with a team of theoretical physicist and experts in supersymmetry that the fundamental ether of space-time itself is running off of something called the dinkra codes. And these adinkra codes are three-dimensional mathematical codes that represent error-correcting codes. The same exact codes that are in search engines browsers and websites is fueling and running this universe. So, you combine those two things together, we're living inside of a matrix. Now, what is the matrix made of? It's made of light. How do we know this? Through the um through the LHC, the Large Hadron Collider. You smash particles together and atoms together, we know that they emit light. We know that at the deepest level, everything is made of light, and that when because of the double-slit experiment, when you're not looking at matter, it operates as a wave, a wave of light, a wave of potentials. Until you look at it, it collapses into its own solidity again or digital matter. So, they said, "Let's look deep into the heart of matter." And the deeper we look, the more we discover that you can see the whole in the smallest piece. Not only that, but the only thing you lose, the deeper you look, is you lose some resolution. So, we know now that we are all immersed, fully immersed, inside of a matrix of light. And it goes deeper than that. Where did this matrix come from? Where's it being broadcast from? Scientists in the laboratory discovered how to make an eighth-dimensional quasicrystal. And then they po- pointed this quasicrystal in a particular angle, which cast down a fourth-dimensional quasicrystal. And when they put that in a particular angle, it created a sphere. And that sphere is what we're living in, a sphere of light matrix. We're living in the shadow of a higher dimension. Not a shadow of a dark shadow, but a shadow of light from a higher dimension. That's where we're located. And this this dimension that we're in, this universe that we're in, is made of this fractal holographic light, it is um probably not base reality at all. We're probably not even close to base reality. 14 students at a university created a game uh called No Man's Sky. Yes. Unlimited 80 quadrillion worlds in this program, unlimited life forms, and the game never ends. They were talking recently about what if we inject AI into this software? That's on one DVD. You put AI in there, now these beings are alive. Hey, who made us? Where where did we come from? Who's our God? Uh when what's the when did the Big Bang start? The Big Bang is when we turn on the console. So, now all of a sudden we're creating universes. And so we'll be the Sims. The Sims will be conscious with AI. The Sims are going to create programs and software within the software within the program. And then they're going to create the universe. I think there's many layers to reality. And I don't I don't think we're close to base. I think that we're just one of googols of actual simulations that are running simultaneously. There now these quasicrystals, those are like people take those seriously. Like I've heard that there's scientists and people at NASA that are using quasicrystals to like use those for medical applications. Medical applications, quantum computing, you name it. This is a new wave, quasicrystals. What actually is a quasicrystal? It's a crystal that has particular angles on it that in a particular resonant vibration that gives it the capability of resonating at higher frequencies even in the higher dimensions. So Where do they where do they get the are they made? Did we make them or do we find them? They found a way to artificially create these. Which is pretty interesting. So they artificially created a eighth-dimensional quasicrystal. And if you look it up, you'll find some pretty interesting articles about this. How are they making quasicrystals? Do they make them in lab like in a lab? laboratory. Yeah, in a laboratory. Really? Yeah. Yeah. And it's pretty crazy stuff. But from that they accidentally found out that through these quasicrystals they said, "Oh, wait a minute. Now we see what's going on here. We're actually living in the shadow of this dimension." Which is pretty pretty wild stuff. Can you find out like how they're making them, Steve? Like or where they're making quasi crystal quasi quasiperiodic structures with a type of symmetry that is not allowed for ordinary crystals. Unlike traditional crystals, the atoms in the quasi crystals are arranged in a pattern that repeats itself or that repeats itself at irregular intervals. And they have a specific vibration. That vibration that they're resonating at is access is higher dimensions. There's a great YouTube video about this. I don't know if you can even get a snippet or a clip of it to use. But, if you go to YouTube and type in you know, eighth-dimensional quasicrystal you get something pretty interesting. This young lady uh they're talking about it if it's still up there. Maybe that's been years since I looked at it. Probably haven't looked at it since 2017. Um but, it's pretty interesting stuff. Look at you. Look at me. There I go. Right there. Right away. That's on That's on That's on this podcast. On your podcast. Of course. Of course. Your 100 million view Klee Irwin. Okay, Klee Irwin. That's who Yeah, we had a guy that works with him on here. Yeah. Okay. Well, Keep scrolling down. I'll scroll down. There you go. That girl right there. That girl? Yep. I want to tell you about crystals. You might be surprised to know that a crystal isn't an expensive piece of glass or a chandelier in some fancy dining room. The word crystal simply means a pattern that is periodic. Look at this checkerboard pattern. See how it continues to spread out infinitely in each direction? That means it's a periodic pattern. So, that's a two-dimensional crystal. This is another two-dimensional crystal. And this is another. You can also have three-dimensional crystals. By the way, this 3D glass is called crystal because its atoms are actually arranged in a crystalline pattern. So, see how I'm projecting this three-dimensional crystal to a two-dimensional image on the sand? See how the 2D projection looks distorted because of the angle of the projection? Mhm. That 2D image also has a pattern, but it isn't periodic. So, it's not a crystal. But, there's a deep connection between the 2D object on the sand and the 3D mother crystal. This distorted 2D pattern is called a quasicrystal. A quasicrystal in a certain dimension, in this case 2D, is a projection of a crystal in a higher dimension, in this case 3D. A group of physicists in Los Angeles is working on a new physics theory where a particular 8D crystal, yep, that's right, an eight-dimensional crystal is projected to 4D at a very particular angle, which forms a 4D quasicrystal. And from this 4D quasicrystal, Mhm. they derive a 3D quasicrystal, which they believe is the fundamental substructure of all of reality. Wow, that was excellent. That was a very well done. Yes. That was the best I've had any anyone's ever described that to me. Yeah. Is there a way to test this or a way to prove it? Uh well, I mean, that's what they're doing. I mean, they're spending millions of dollars in grant money on that every single day. So, I think they know what they're talking about. Yeah. Good lord. This is why I'm writing the book because it needs to be told. People need to understand that don't If are you know when I say holographic universe people instantaneously believe that that means we're not real. It doesn't mean that we're not real. What I'm explaining to you is we're living in a creation just as all the ancient texts and all the religions actually say. I'm explaining the fundamental basis of the reality that's been created. What is the method of creation? What is it that we're actually in? How is this myth How is this creation built? What is the structure of it? That's what people need to know. Cuz I think when you figure that out you begin to realize a lot more about who you are in life and your in your place in the multiverse. Wow, man. That's wild. Well, I can't wait to to get my hands on that book. Um Billy, thank you for coming and doing this, man. I really appreciate it. It's been enlightening and uh I have more questions I feel like that I had when I started this podcast. But um uh What What do you got going on next? Any big tours or any big trips going on? Where are you You got any new places you wanted to want to explore? A lot of cool stuff. Uh we're going to take uh people to Turkey. We're taking 80 people to Turkey in September. There's still a few spots left if people want to register. Just go to forbiddenknowledge.com and look for tours. Uh first time first tour of its type where we're taking people on a pretty much exclusive we're we're doing private tours. In other words, no tourists will be allowed these sites. They got to get out. When we go to some places we got to kick out the tourists and we have that power. Private tour of Derinkuyu, private which is an underground city that can hold 30,000 people in ancient times. 14,000 ventilation shafts leading to the higher levels bringing oxygen all the way to the depths. No collapse. Going to uh Karahan Tepe, Göbekli Tepe and all these other ancient sites throughout Turkey. It's going to be a mind-blowing phenomenal tour tying ancient sites together from around the world. We're going to show the the iconology. We're going to show symbols that match from different places in the world that show up in Turkey. And then we're going to do uh that's in September and October we're going to do Egypt again, an incredible 12-day tour. I'll be lecturing 7 days on the tour, plus I'll be the guide as well. And we're going to have nine private visits in ancient Egypt. We're going to go to places that people never thought they can even get into. Some place I haven't been to yet because they were locked and sealed for 50, 60 years. Private plated dinners inside of ancient temples. It's a trip that, you know, it'll change somebody's life. Uh we're going to go hiking inside of pyramids, underneath and ancient crypts and so forth. Uh and then don't forget we have the Conscious Awards coming up. Uh the Forbidden Conscious Awards, the second annual. The first one was amazing. 1,200 people showed up in Miami. This one's going to be August 2nd, 3rd, and 4th. This time it's a 3-day event in uh Miami, same location, the Adrienne Arsht Center. Uh we're going to give people their flowers while they're still alive and recognize them for the work they're doing in this community. Podcasters, radio hosts, you know, um TV hosts, uh researchers, archaeologists, you name it. All right, scientists, everybody. And uh we can hold 1,800 people in this one. That we moved to a different venue in the same location. 1,800 people can fit there. 3-day event. Celebrity ball basketball game to raise money for underprivileged children. The next day is going to be um uh a speaking conference in the evening that same day going to be a VIP yacht party. And the next day is going to be uh um a book signing meet and greet. And then that afternoon red carpet photos and that evening will be the award show. That's incredible, man. Yeah. You know how to do it big, Billy Carson. You got to do it big, man. That's what we're here for. We're here to turn heaven to earth and we're here to live now, not later. I'm not going to wait to die so I can live. Everybody, thank you for listening. Thank you for coming. I'll link all your stuff below. Uh if you're watching, stay around. We're going to do a Patreon post show. Uh if you're a fan of Patreon and you want to support us, you can go there, check it out. And uh that's it. Good night, world. Cool.