Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. What's up, Joe? Joe? Good to see you, my friend. I'm here, man. It's crack-elect, man. Life is good. Happy to be in Austin, Texas. Happy to have you. Are you doing kill Tony tonight? I'll show up at Kill Tony tonight. Nice. Of course, my guy. So happy for him. Yeah, he's killing it. He always talks about us. And this is early supporters. Oh, yeah, for sure. Yeah, that guy. He's the best. I mean, that show is on fire. It's a fucking runaway train right now. Everywhere I go, Kill Tony, Kill Tony, Kill Tony, love you on Kill Tony. It's such a fun show. You know, what a great idea. Kind of amazing. Nobody thought it up. Well, he just kind of put his open mics and his roast and his personality and his friends and his built a community. It's kind of amazing. Oh, it's incredible. He's the new Johnny Carson. I mean, think about how many like Adam raised, killing it, selling out giant theaters, all these guys that, you know, came through that show or fucking destroying now. This is our tribe, Joe. I know. I love it. It's amazing. It's a good time for the comedy that I hear that you have a German Shepherd. No. Now, I've a golden retriever and I have a cavalier King Charles Spaniel. Oh, okay. Little tiny fella. Somebody told me something different. No. I love German shepherds, but I don't like it. I have a German shepherds. They're the best. You have to exercise the shit out of them. No. They need work. She loves to run around. Oh, yeah. Big and climb and adventures. They need tasks. They're not like my golden. He's just cool. Just chilling laying on his back at his belly room. Oh, I follow him on Instagram, don't worry. He's the best. I look for my mornings with him. I mean, they're a very low maintenance dog. And he's trained. He's, you could train him very easily, but as far as like, like a guard dog and that kind of useless. My dog. My dog can like sit, stay and run around frantically. I'll be like, run around frantically. It's just run around. Well, they have so much energy. Those dogs are just designed to work. I put her to work for two months this summer on Broadway. She came out at the end of my show and howled with me in the audience. She can howled on cue. We taught her at the same trainer that did Sandy from the show Annie, like from when I was a kid, Bill Bertolone. And he's like, I could teach her. She's like a wild rescue German shepherd from the desert. And there she was like came out, jumped on a couch, hit her mark, turn to the audience. And we like sang. Oh, that's awesome. She had her own dressing room, Nipsy, her name's Nipsy. And yeah, that was the job was all, you know, when the run was over, she was like, no more work. I need something else to do. Yeah, they need things to do. Like people that just have them and have them in an apartment and don't go anywhere. Like that's a crazy thing to do to a dog like that. Yeah. Oh, I look good. Oh my God. Wow. Look how sweet. So she's a rescue dog? She is. Where'd you find her? They found her in a, in a, in a, bummy, a breeder in Reno. Yeah. During the pandemic, I had an old dog. I had an old senior dog that my ex found on the street. And we took care of her to beginning of the pandemic. And, and the ex left, left the dog. So it's just me and this old beat up street dog for a few months. And the vet was like, I got another a puppy, German shepherd. And so the shoes are puppy? This one was. Yeah. So that's great. So now I was like five years ago already. So she's my bestie and all. And we do everything. I mean, I just love her to pieces. Like I can't even get on the plane to come here yesterday. As a part of me was like, shit, I bring her, I run around the four seats for a couple days and whatever. But yeah, it's hard leaving them. It's like I have a kid. They look, she looks at me, looking for the buzzwords. Are we going? Are we staying? Are we eating? I know. They get separation anxiety, big time. And they get very attached to one person. Right. Yeah. Right. You're her daddy. Oh, she's so sweet. She should lay in bed, wait. She never wakes me rolls over, arms up, ready to get. She can't start the day without a full belly rub. Like I almost like hold her legs and play her like a guitar. And she just, you know, tongues out, just complete euphoria. Once a week, I take all her collars off and just rub the neck. And just her eyes start watering and that's so cute. Highly right. I never was in the dogs. I'm slightly allergic. My sister got snapped on by a doorman when we were little. So I was always a little afraid. And then it was just kind of forced on me during the pandemic. It's all these dogs needed homes. So now here I am. I'm a frickin doggy daddy. Oh, I love dogs. I've always had dogs. I will never not have dogs. I love them. I love them. They're just like, it's, they're just these amazing creatures that just love the shit out of you. And especially if you train them from the time they're puppies and you give them nothing but love, like they're so connected to you. And then, you know, it's just awesome. You wake up in the morning and it's always positive. It's always hello. Hello. I wake up with Marshall and he starts whining and whimpering. And he like, I do this thing in the morning. Good morning sir. Good morning sir. Oh, oh, oh, oh, just right. And his tail and he's rolling around on his back. And I'm rubbing his belly and he's giving me kisses. He loves it. He loves he gets so excited to see me in the morning. It's like his, his ritual. He knows the rituals coming. He's going to get all this love. Does he sleep in your room? No, no. My wife is a little bit allergic. So he sleeps outside the room. Right. But he is, he's just a giant love sponge. That's what he is. It's like he loves everybody. Everybody comes in the house. Like he meet you for the first time. He's like, I can't believe you're here. He's just so excited to meet everybody. My dog checks everybody. He's got to like check them out. Of course, Trevor Shepherd, you know, and if somebody has a chemical imbalance or a little off, she lets me know. Oh yeah, you got screwball friends? Yeah, well every now and then, you know, comics will be off in a minute and they'll come over. I used to know that person. I don't know that person anymore. The dog just like alerts me. Oh, that's interesting. Yeah, they're very watchful. You know, they're they're shepherds. They're protecting you. They're protecting their their daddy. She's funny on the plane. Like I've only flown with her twice, but one, you know, once to New York and then once back after we were done on Broadway. And she's like, it was nine months later. She literally knew how to walk on the plane, where to go, where her seat was like remembers everything like a person. They're very smart dogs, very smart dogs. It's one of the reasons why they need someone to exercise. Like the dumbest dogs can just lay around and do nothing. Yeah, but really smart dogs. They need a lot of activity, especially shepherds because they're working dogs. If I leave her alone too long, she'll dig up the backyard. She needs something to do. Yeah, they get crazy. They're like an athlete. Yeah, you know, they just they need work. They need to go. And they don't need a lot of food. They don't need a lot. She's she's like, what do you feed her? You know, I used to overfeed her and give her a lot of table scraps and spoiler. And then I learned more recently that if I keep her to like a a cup and a half of Kibble a day at the vet recommended it. You should get her on raw food. So off food or fresh food? Oh, interesting. Yeah, I I used to feed my dogs Kibble too. I had one dog that got cancer and I read about all these dogs getting cancer and you know, they get fat so easy when you give them Kibble. And it's just because that stuff can sit on a shelf. Yeah, forever. Yeah, it's like you wouldn't need it. Why are they eating it? Right. It's not healthy for them. Sometimes I put a little turkey in the Turkish great real food for your dog is the way to go. I feed my dog farmer's dog. It's it comes frozen. It has to be frozen. Right. And the way they attack it versus the way they attack Kibble, like Kibble is like, okay, they're eating no big deal. Yeah. But they just can't wait to eat this stuff. Like they get excited. Like the little guy, a little Charlie, he literally leaps up in the air trying to get to the counter where when I'm putting the food on his bowl, it gets nuts. They love it. It's real food. It's human grade food. I have to check that out. Oh, yeah. It comes frozen. And also they give it to you the right portions for your dog. So you don't have to think about it. Like you put in your dog's weight, would breed your dog is. And you know, whether your dog's overweight or not, and they measure it out, cow or was. So it's specific to your dog. My dog's weight is good, but I got to get her to stop smoking. She's just got to stop smoking. You know what? It's funny. She used to really hate when I light up a joint. And she was really. She was little. She'd run in the other room. But now she's just like, oh, that's daddy. She'll probably get a little paranoid. I used to have a pit bull that she would get paranoid. But she was in the room. And you got high. And I was realizing, oh, this poor dog, she's getting high too. She was a rescue dog too. I found her she was covered in Maine. She was so sad. She was eating at a garbage cans. It's heartbreaking. Yeah. A friend of mine found her and they took her in for it. And then they called me and they said, do you want another dog? I had one dog already. I said, absolutely. And as soon as I saw her, I was like, oh, yeah. That's so horrible. Yeah. It was so horrible. She was covered in Maine. She had little scabs on her and everything. It all went away within like two months of food. But that dog, because of living on the street, she could never get enough food. She was always like reading garbage cans and stuff. Like you'd have to lock up the garbage cans, strap it down with a bungee cord. She would tip them over and she was never full. Even though she would let get fat, she was never full. Just in case. It was just, you know, she was starving when I found her. I had the old dog first and then the young German Shepherd. So the old one had all these street habits like that. And she taught him to the young dog like the young dog walks down the stairs as if she has a broken back hip. And she learned how to get in the car from an old dog. So two eggs, she could leap right in. She's a kid. But she still goes two paws up and I have to pick her up. Yeah, that's how Marshall does it overprotective like the old dog. Yeah, Marshall, I think he probably could jump in my car. But it's like he knows I'll just lift him up. Because I've done it since it was a puppy. So we do this thing a little thing. Are you ready? He puts his paws on. I go one, two, three. So he's one, two, three. Up. So he gets ready. Did they talk to you? My dog howls with me in the morning. No, Marshall only talks when he wants to come inside. Like give his outside. He'll just bark once at the door. He's really good. He's the best dog. What is his bark, satellite? Oh, let me in. It's like, hey, I'm out here. Come on, you know, he's out till he's not, you know, he's out till he's bored. And then he just lets you know. If it's not in the room. The old dog, if I had to put her like, if like a guy came over to work on the house or something, I had to put her like in a bedroom or a bathroom, she was, you know, big, big dog. She would know on the handles. So I have a house full of like chrome door handles that all have like bite marks in it. The bite is amazing. Yeah, you got to give them things that you want all the time. You know, there's two toys all over my house everywhere. My dog has Marshall has like a big box filled with toys. Yeah. And he just goes in and picks one out randomly. Yeah. What are you going to get? Which toy is he's like looking around, picks one out. And then him and the little dog, they play tug of war. That's adorable. So they get a lot. Oh my God. You knew that they'd get along before you got the. He's the easiest dog to get along with. He gets along with everything and everybody. Jamie's done. Jamie's got a psycho dog. Jamie's got this little French bulldog. That's like a little, a little meat missile. Yeah. He's a nut. He's great. He's awesome. Oh, yeah. He's not. He's just, he's through. Carl. He's three. He's two and a half. He's a little psycho. He's, he's, he's jacked. He's super jacked. Really? It's like this little French bulldog. He's just fucking jacked. And him and Marshall just play insane. It's insane. Like Carl throws himself through the air at Marshall. Cause he knows that Marshall is super gentle. And he just play back and forth. But it's adorable. If a dog is small enough, like a little chihuahua type dog, they can put their head inside my dog, which is open her mouth and let another dog just roll her head inside her mouth. No instincts. Yeah. It's crazy. Just once at the play. It's just nuts that those used to be wolves. They've turned wolves into these little tiny things you could carry around. I mean, in a thousand years, they'll be, are they getting smarter the way humans are evolving? I wonder. That's a good question. I wonder. I mean, I think they would have to be a reason for them to get smarter. You know, some dogs are like the dogs that are trained like a Belgian melonwa. Those are really smart dogs. You know, those are dog military dogs. Yeah. Those dogs, you cannot just leave that dog alone. No. It's like a shepherd times 10. Yeah. They look like shepherd sort of. But those dogs, they're so intelligent. Yeah. You know, they're constantly scanning everything and looking for everything. They know when you're weird. They know everything. Right. Yeah. So those dogs have to be smart because they have jobs. You know, they use them like those are the dogs they stick on like Osama bin Laden screw. Right. You know, they open the door and their breech dogs run in. Incredible. Yeah. My dog's literally I'm comparing to all that. So's mine. She just wants to play. Yeah, these are the only dogs that I've had a couple dogs before. Like I had a dog that was a Shibuino mix and he was kind of a pussy. But and I had a mastiff before that, but mostly I've had like big guard dogs. Right. You know, and this is these are the dogs of first dogs of Heather. They're not garden shit. They got my garden. They guard your emotions buddy. They're just sweet. They're just awesome to have. It's like you just have love around you all the time. And they're never in a bad mood. There's never a day where he's never had a bad day in his life. Every day is a great day. Every day is happy. Even if you're not there. Well, he gets out if I'm not there for sure. But like I pull out the ball. It's always the same thing. It's never like one day. I'm like, maybe he's going to get bored of this fucking ball. Nope. I pulled out that ball. Oh, oh, oh, oh, the ball. The ball's out. That's good. Bouncing around wagging his tail. Jumping up. I got a ball. It's got like the stick. Like it's like a long curve stick. So you get throw the ball. Yeah, of course. And you know, he just starts leaping up towards the stick. He gets so pumped. I'm like, one day he's going to get bored of this. Nope. He's nine years old. He's never gotten bored of it. When I come up to stairs, if she sees that I have my sneakers on, she starts stretching like an Olympian. Let's go. Time to go. Yeah. Dogs are awesome. People that don't have them, I feel bad for them. I'm just seeing a lot of love in your life. Especially like people that live alone. You know, it's like you always have a friend. You always have someone I talked to my dog. Like to have conversations. Yeah. Yeah. And then this Marshall look you on the eyes when you're talking. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. It's a real friend. Oh, he's like the most loving creature I've ever encountered. Do you tell the dog stuff you wouldn't tell your family or your friend? No. Sometimes I'm like, hey, maybe it's you man. I probably should have said that. I love that. Yeah. She has emotional and like she knows when I'm happy, sad, nervous, sick. Mostly it's baby talk. Yeah. He's like, oh, he's my buddy. Yeah. He watches TV with me. He climbs up on the couch and sits on my lap. He puts his head on my lap. The best. Yeah. And when there's animals on TV, he parks his head up. Yeah. Yeah. Because it's a big TV and so he's like, what the fuck is that? Is that real? Yeah. So when the first one came out from the desert, she was like six, seven-month-old puppy, but still a sizable dog, German Shepherd at six months is already like a dog. And the old dog, which was old, you know, on her deathbed, but wise, street-wise, she was on the floor and the puppy was up on my bed. It was her first night in a home. And I put on TV. I put on house of cards. And it was just daunting, kind of scary music. And the dog just watching. And it's like a shadowy figure. It was Kevin Spacey coming down the hall. His character coming down the hall. And as this man was revealed full screen at a big screen, Nipsey did a backflip, fell off the bed and ran and hit him to class it. And the old dog, Matt, I was like, oh boy, she had to pull herself up at her bad legs and go in the closet and tell her to come back out. Listen, it's TV. Whoa. Oh. Oh. Oh. It's almost time for spring break. So maybe you're headed to the beach or maybe you're taking the kids on a road trip or maybe you're just taking some extra time for yourself. No matter what, you deserve a break and a reset and AG1 can help. AG1 is your daily health drink. Just one scoop combines your multivitamin, pre and probiotics, superfoods and antioxidants to help support a healthy immune system and digestion. Plus, it travels really well so you can start working it into your routine even when you don't have a routine. Just slip a few travel packs into your luggage and have a nice flight. I've talked about AG1 for a long time and it's not just me. I know a lot of people enjoy it. It's very easy. It's very convenient and you deserve to take care of your health. Visit drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. For a limited time, get a bottle of Omega 3, vitamin D3 K2 and an AG1 flavor sampler for free. In your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's an $111 value at drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. How's the car? What a fucking show that. Oh, what a fucking show. They never should have done that last season. Once Kevin's basically got canceled, they should have just canceled. It was done or not. Right. Such a good fucking show. That was a great show. It's crazy. I saw him. He was in Israel doing some weird thing where he was like doing like a song in dance routine in a small club recently. Like he's been kind of reduced to doing that for money. Is that reduced or is that part of the comeback? You got to start. I don't know. I mean, it's something. I mean, I guess he's just making money. You know, he's completely bankrupt. He lost everything. It's crazy. Show business. Well, it's not just show business, right? It's also what did you do? What did you get caught for? You know, there's old school dick grabber. Those old school guys. And I wouldn't really like that getting their dick grab like that. Some gay guys do, I think. I think what he did probably worked on some guys. You know what I'm saying? Right. I have a whole different way of interacting with each other that we don't have. But I think with Spacey was like some of those fellows were young. And that's the problem. It's power. It's like in the gay community, there's a lot of guys that think it's okay for young gay guys who are underage to hook up with older gay guys. It's like Milo U and Opelus. Remember him? He actually talked about that on my show. He was talking about when he was 14. He hooked up with this older guy and he's like, trust me, I was the predator. He's like saying that he was going after the guy. I was like, all right. But it's different. In their eyes, I mean, I'm just speaking for gay guys that I've talked to. It's different in their eyes than an adult male and a young female. Right. You know. But Kevin Spacey's a fucking unbelievable actor. The fucking house of cards was so good. It was so good. Such a good show. I'm glad it's still out there. You know, because it was so good. It made me miss and rewatch Westwing. That's how good it was. I haven't I never watched that. I think I maybe watch one or two episodes. It's like an idealistic version of what politics could be. Right. Martin Sheen is like the president we wish we had. Like a really solid. A really solid time ago. He's also controversial. He's hiding a medical thing. It like we got way ahead of a lot of the modern day stories. They're like, Biden. Yeah. Yeah. And his wife's a doctor. So she's helping him. Well, we always have these idealistic ideas of who we want to be our leader. The thing about the Kevin Spacey character was like, that's probably more realistic. Like that guy is more realistic. Like, well, as we get older, we understand you got to be cut through. the road to make it. Mm hmm. It's got to be a certain killer instinct in a president. You're also most likely deeply compromised by the time you get into office, which is the only way you navigate those worlds. Like everybody's compromised. Everybody's gone to that eyes wide shot party. Right. I couldn't get in just for the record. Yeah. Me neither. I don't want to get in. I know. That's a good thing. Dog can kind of save your career because like you get invited to some wild sex party. Like I got my dogs been waiting for me for five hours. Sorry. Yeah, I can't go. Yeah. Meanwhile, it's better to just hang out with your dog. You'll have a better time and you won't feel gross in the morning. I guess. But I think all those people are sociopaths. They probably don't even feel gross ever. I was out all weekend for the fanatics football stuff. Travis Scott's DJing, the three and the more. What is the fanatics football stuff? I had a flag football tournament in LA. It was supposed to be in Riyadh and they had to move it to LA Tom Brady and the fanatics What's the fanatics? It's like, I guess it's a branding company. They do all the jerseys. They do all the, oh, Michael Rubin and Michael Ratner, two friends of mine did this flag football game. And I was just partying. I just took the weekend off and I'm like seeing all the football players and it was just so much fun. And then just as the party is really getting hot, I'm like, I miss my dog. I'm going. Yeah, there's always this thing in the back of your head. Like I got to get home. He's been home alone for five hours. He's been home alone for six hours. I'm thinking about him. He has to pee. He's a good boy. He's not going to pee in the house, but he's probably holding it in. I'm sad. Yeah. And that's like people think, especially comics, you know, we wanted to be up late. It's getting drunk, fucking off, being retarded, doing drugs. You know what? He just wanted to get home. Yeah. I feel like if I had a dog when I was starting out in comedy, I would have been more disciplined. I would have been coming home instead of staying out all night. I kind of regret that a little bit. You regret staying out all night? Well, I mean, you know, you know how it is. You do your set. You start hanging out in the club in the comedy club and drinking or eating or whatever. But there's a certain, I don't know, you go home and you're up earlier. You get more done the next day. Oh, absolutely. Well, it's just you feel better. It's hard to leave when you're having fun. You know, it's also you feel like you're a part of a different society. Society of people don't have a regular job. You got freedom. You're your own boss. I grew up. I lost my parents as a teenager. So I live every day like I could die tomorrow. So I never want to leave. I have ultimate fomo all the time. I never want to miss an event, a party. I went through the Super Bowl. I went to all star weekend. I want to go to the Grammys. I love life. I want to make the most out of it all the time. It works against me sometimes, I think. That's interesting, right? It's the plus side of experiencing loss when you're young. You really want, you really relish life. You want to make the most out of it. You want to enjoy it while it's here. Yeah. Yeah. One of the things I say in my show is I learned early on human beings were made to mourn and move on. You can't mourn forever or a part of you dies. And that's not fair. So it gave me this sort of zest for living. You take that loss as a young person. You're afraid at any second. It's hard to make long term plans. Are your parents still alive? Yeah, it's amazing, amazing blessing. And sometimes when you lose people young, you're afraid that you live in the constant fear that it's all going to fall apart. Yeah. I've lost a lot of friends. Like sometimes I look at my contact list when I get a new phone. And you swap it over contacts. I'm like, oh, fuck. I've got like 20 dead people in my contact list. Some of them I just keep in there. I got old phones where like board names texting me. I just kept the phone. And my camera never thrown this phone away. A bunch of friends who are. I look at pop sagged texts all the time. I listen to Gilbert God prebs voice mail. Yeah, I know what you mean. Yeah. It just brings me right back to that. Those two guys, those are two tough ones. Those are two really tough ones. Well, that's great. That famous picture of me, Norm Gilbert and Bob that Adam E. Gatt took at Jones restaurant in Hollywood. And I show that in my special. And I talk about each one, do like a tribute to norm. I do a tribute to Gilbert, whose family is a big part of my family now. His kids are great kids. His daughter goes to school here in Texas in Austin. And there it is. There it is. And Bob, who just became a grandfather. So they left quite a legacy, those guys. And I really loved them. And they would make me laugh. You know, I would just set them up and they would go. And I would laugh until I was dying laughing. Fuckin' Norm, what a legend. The king. Such a great guy too. Oh, yeah. It's so funny too. And his clips, I don't know if it's my algorithm or what, but you would think Norm is making comedy content every day if you look at my algorithm. Well, mine too. I think a lot of people. So people just share them because you know, you had so many funny things to say about everything. And such a unique perspective, just an unusual state of mind. Canadians. I have a theory that Canadians, I'm from New Jersey. So I feel like New Jersey grew up as an outsider to New York. We had a root-free New York sports teams. We had a listen to New York radio stations as a kid, TV stations. And Canada has that with America. Right. So I think they always feel like comedians feel like outsiders a little bit. I feel like Canadians kind of have that. Harland is Canadian. I mean, Canadian comedians, you could go all day. Tom Bings. Yeah. Jim Carrey. Jim Carrey. A lot of Canadians. Caroline Ray. A lot more. John Candy, right? Yeah. John Candy was a Canadian. Yeah. Martin Short. Was he? Is he? He is. I think so. He's still with us. Those SCTV people. That's right. Yeah. And Martin Short is he had a rough month. He lost somebody very close to him. But he's still one of the funniest people in the world. Oh, he was brilliant. I was fucking crazy characters. Oh my god. How's it a birthday party once? It was like Paul Rudd's 50th birthday party years ago. And I remember I was like, let's do Carrey, Okey. And then what he wanted to start, and most too like shy to like do Carrey Okey first. And Martin Short walked out to the mic, belted out like a sedatrous song, dropped a mic, and walked out to the valet left. And just like jinxed it off and went, fly me to the moon. And he was gone. It's weird when you get older and you realize how many guys have passed. Like, Patrice comes up in my algorithm all the time. And you know, you just watch old clips. I went on a binge a few months back of him on an opening Anthony. Yeah. Just fuck ruthless. He would have been the number one podcast in the world if he was alive today. Patrice? Yeah. If he had a podcast? Because he probably would have. He probably would. I mean, it's a perfect normal transition from opening Anthony to podcast. Right. He would have probably had the best podcast in the world. It's up to guess what never I get to talk about. Yeah. It doesn't matter. He would be dressing him down. He always had the footage. Patrice is a great disc at the Charlie Sheen Rose style we've talked about. Oh, yeah. He went on last. And he was like, we booked him late. He never wanted to do a roast. And he said, I don't know this one. I don't know that one. And finally, I called him one day ago where we're roasting Charlie Sheen. He goes, oh, he goes, I don't know Charlie Sheen. But I think I could do that. I go, you know him. You don't know him. But you know what he, you know. And he goes, all right, I'm coming. He dresses total rock star, like a leather suit, like this whole fantasy petrice in his head. And then the day of the show, he's complaining about his material. He's like, I don't know all these writers. They don't know me. This isn't. Oh, like fantasy Patrice in his head. And then the day of the show, he's like complaining about his material. He's like, I don't know all these writers. They don't know me. This isn't me. Buh-buh-buh-buh. I go, Patrice, fuck all that. Pay attention and roast the roast. Just roast the roast. Make mental notes, clock it all, let them see you taking it in, and then just go on and talk about what you just saw. And that's what he did. No, it was brilliant. Did you see Charlie Sheen's Netflix documentary? I have it. It's fucking great, man. Crazy. It's crazy. Like, he talks about everything. He talks about this first time he smoked crack. Girls give him a blowjob when he smoked crack. How else he's supposed to do it? He said it's the best experience he's ever had. He said he's never topped it. Wow. Yeah. Wow. Makes you want to try it. Makes you like think, maybe. He was a fascinating guest, too. Having him in here, it's like, that guy's been through so much shit, and he's okay. You know, it's like, how's he alive? You know? People are just different, right? Tiger blood? I was on tour with him that whole time. That's right. You were doing that thing with him. So what happened was when he got kicked off a two and a half mend and he went kind of kooky, he decided to do this whirlwind tour. And the first one he did, he tried to go and just wing it. Torpedo of truth. Yeah. That's what he called it. The wing in it one did not work. But then when he started doing it with you and he did it with Russell, Russell Peterson, a bunch of them with, um, with comics, it actually worked. Because like he would have someone to bounce stuff off of and they knew how to be entertaining and keep the flow going. Right. Yeah. And then you got into those stories and it was amazing. Yeah. It totally turned around. The first one I did was an Atlantic city and he called me the night before. And I was in LA at a party and everyone was like, yeah, yeah, go do it. Go do it. So I caught a like six AM. He called you the night before what did he say? He's like, my shows aren't going good. Every I didn't know him. He goes, uh, you know, like all these different people keep telling me, uh, Simon Rex, you know, other friends of his kept saying, Jeff Ross could come out and roast you and save this. So I just wrote jokes all night. You know, left the party wrote jokes called a six AM flu. I walked into his dressing room like an hour before Chuck Zito is literally staring me down, going, don't be too mean to my guy. You know, like they're just trying to scare me. And I'm like, I'm here to like more of a comedian, you know, and uh, Charlie was really cool. And I told his road manager. He goes, what do you need? I go, I need a podium to roll out the bigger arenas. I want to make it like a show and I need a hazmat suit here because he'd been bombing for like a week every single night. I got to come out. I heard there's a Bob scared. I roll out. It's Jersey. So it's my crowd. And I just start roasting him. And it went well. And I was like, if you're winning, because he's always like winning, winning. I'm like, if you're winning, something's wrong with the fucking scoreboard. Old Jeff with hair, duh winning. Look at that. Boy, he looks so skinny. Oh, that's a, that's a look of a guy who does Coke. Look how ripped he is. Jesus. Oh man, he was, he was up all night. We had what he was like. So he was still partying hard back then. You know, it's hard to say how to be. He didn't let me see that side of it. I'm sure he was. There's no chance he was clean. Oh, that's right. He was a warlock. A warlock with Tiger Blood. Right. Violent torpedo of truth tour. Let's kick something. Detroit TV star is boot off stage. So then after that, they see they kept calling and going, you do this day, he do that. It was like more money than I'd ever made it for a one night or so I just started getting on the bus and the plane with them and how many days you guys do? I went up, I went up doing eight. And Russell, how many did you do? I don't know. So he just had different comics. Who else did it? I don't remember anyone else but me. So that's news to me that Russell did. Yeah, Russell did a few. At least one I know of. Maybe there might have been some in Canada I didn't do. Well, Russell's really good off the cuff. You know, Russell's great work in the crowd. I think Russell interviewed him. I think Russell like that like you said. That's how he did it. Yeah, I think that's how he did it because now it occurs to me that he had interviewers on some of them and I had a radio guy and I think maybe Russell might have done a Canadian. That's a smart way to do it. Have someone who's smart and quick just because the stories are so bananas. Yeah. All you need is the stories. Just in he was so open about stuff talking about how much crack you would smoke and I yeah. You know, it's just so insane. And everybody was so happy that someone was instead of hiding from the fact that they fucked their life up. They were like celebrating that they were off the rails and everyone was like, ah, tiger blood. I remember even Diego Sanchez who was fighting in the UFC was saying he had tiger blood. That's how fucking that's how popular it was getting. Yeah, he was he was a thing. Yeah, it was a thing. But it was a new thing, right? It was a movie star who had gone off the rails and was like celebrating it and being open and honest interviews about prostitutes, cocaine, chaos, everything, all the above. Yeah. It was a totally new experience for the general public because before if someone had an addiction problem, it was like, oh, so sad. Right. He was doing a Coke and you know, my life had fallen apart. And then I found Jesus, you know, it's like always one of those things. He wasn't an apology to, he went on a fucking, yeah, 100% and no one had ever done that before. No one had ever done a fuck you tour before. I mean, it was a little ill advised the first ones, you know, when he went on by himself, like that was a terrible idea. Right. You can't just wing it. And when you're on Coke, you think you could do anything, you know, or he would take questions, but just 15,000 people yelling at him. Right. If you're going to take questions, it would have to be a person who's a moderator, right, who has a microphone and talks to another person and is there so they can keep it from going off the rails and a line of people. You can't just have people yelling out things, you know, one night somebody went at his buddy back and he brought the guy up and gave his money back. And then of course like 400 people stood up like, I want my money. Oh, no, he would get it. He was, here's the audience too much. Yeah. Well, you know experience with that kind of stuff. Right. If you think you could just do live audience and deal with 15,000 people's different personalities, then you don't know what that's like. Right. Good luck. Now, we wound up doing eight shows and I would always roast them. So by the eighth show, I had 20 minutes of Charlie Sheen material. Every city I'd add jokes. So that's when I was like, why don't we just do this on TV? I mean, we have the roast and then we did the comedy central roast. Nice. Pitching. Pitching all that. And Mike Tyson was at that one. It's a really interesting career arc with it. Well, if you know his story, he was on the set of Apocalypse Now with his father when he was 10. Right. And then 10 years later, he was doing, what was the fucking movie? His fucking big war movie. Jesus Christ. The term was like, platoon. He was doing platoon when he was 20. Yeah. Which is nuts. 10 years later. Yeah. Next iconic war movie. Right. And he's a 20 year old kid. And then all of a sudden, he's a fucking superstar. Right. He was great in that movie. And he's just off the rails. Just like no restrictions. He's rich. He's young. He's handsome. He's just going crazy. He's doing drugs. But he made it through it all. That's what's nuts. I got to check that dog out. It's great. He's a great interview too. Like, like, having him on the podcast was fucking great. He's really nice guy. He's very cool and honest about it all year. You know, it is also like, hey, you know, I can still act. Like, how about fucking paid my dues? I've been sober for seven years. Like, give me a shot. Yeah. He can still act. He's a good actor. I hope someone does do something like that. Because I feel like if one big movie came along, like maybe Tarantino could put him in. Because he's the master. It's like a viving course. Yeah. Yeah. But what he did with Travolta and Wolf Fiction. Wolf Fiction, like Travolta was dead on the operating table in his career before Pope Fiction. Pope Fiction came along and boom, he's back. Because they realized like, oh shit, John Travolta can fucking act. And that role was perfect for him. Vince, he played this crazy hit man with Samuel Jackson. And that's fucking what a movie. I watched it all the time. Yeah, it completely revived his career. Yeah, he's the, like Quentin Tarantino was like the master of seeing things that other people don't see. You know, he's like, that guy's still great. Yeah. And I think that's like the case with Charlie. Like someone's got to come along and see and just go, I just need to get him a role where he just can really sink his teeth into it and he'll fucking kill it. Especially now at this stage of his life where he knows how important it is, he'll throw himself into it. Right. They'll be fucking amazing. I like some people don't act for a long time. And look what Sean Penj just did. He just, and he came back after God knows how long and just did this totally iconic, unrecognizable strange character. I didn't see that movie. I've heard all these mixed reviews. So whatever. It's interesting to see Sean's take on this soldier. Look, Sean Penj is out of his fucking mind, but that's the kind of guy that makes a great actor. He's a lovely, eight great actor. It's the Oscars to go see. Yeah. Go to Ukraine. So cool. Go hang out. Go hang out. Once you do Coke. To that pure Russian Coke. I can't even think that's what they were doing. That's good. I'm just guessing. I'm just taking a wild guess. But that guy, I mean, how about him? Like goes and fucking meets the drug lord. What's his name? What's wrong with my brain today, Jamie? Um, but the fuck's his name? The dude he met in Mexico. The guy who got arrested. El Chapo. Thank you. Went down in Medel Chapo. And that's how old Chapo one up getting arrested. He wanted to meet Sean Penn. He's on Penn. All right. He brought an article for like Rolling Stone. He like was a journalist. Right. I remember it went to I mean like who what fucking movie star goes down and meets El Chapo. By the way, that shirt, Conor McGregor, bought a shirt that's like exactly like that shirt and recreated that pose with I forget who he shook hands with. But it was like this like funny inside joke that a lot of people didn't catch. It's like, why is he wearing that shirt? People realize, oh my God, he's wearing the El Chapo shirt. Like, he's like, he's like, he's like, he's like, literally doing that. Oh my gosh. So silly dressed as gangster El Chapo. He's like doing the thing. But he did it on purpose. That's, I mean, it takes insane balls to be a world famous actor. and decide I'm going to go meet a drug lord in Mexico and write an article for Rolling Stone. He's an adventurer, I guess, acting as a part of him, not all of them. I mean, he must be me. He's in fucking Ukraine. Like what was he doing? I remember being at a party at he vetters birthday party and Sean Penwalked him with Stormy Daniels. Like he has friends from the most diverse places. That's funny. So Lensky, Stormy. Have you seen Kyle Dunn against face swap things with Trump? Stormy Daniels? Oh my God, they're so funny. So funny. Kyle Dunn again. He's another guy that got revived by Kill Tony or like really got the world got to see him. Like we did, we covered his face swap videos a bunch of times on the podcast and blew them up. But to see him as these characters, like when he plays RFK Jr or when he plays Elon, like that is what really like kicked off Kyle's career. His RFK is so funny. So funny. Is he one so good? That's when he first started doing the face swap. This is the best. My text change always sharing his stuff. His Bill Maher. His Bill Maher is amazing. You know, I tried to play this jokes are funny about it. I tried to play the Bill Maher impression with Bill Maher when he was in there. If you say if you play it, I'll leave. Why do he care? I don't because he doesn't hang out with comics enough. He's out there doing a show hanging out with political people being all serious. It's like you've had to be a what do you call it? A contrarian. I was on his podcast and like he literally, he just wanted to fight about anything. I go, the Ramones are great. He's like, no, they're not. I'm like, all right. All right. How does it rock and roll high schools? Not great. Come on, son. Look the crazy hair. All of it. The Ramones are one of the greatest. The Ramones ruled. They were ruled. Never had a song over two minutes and five seconds. How could you say they're not great? It's the least they go see them in college, man. You don't have to like it, but you got to admit, there's a reason why people love them. Right. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? Yeah, man. People are so weird when they want to say something sucks. Like I was having an argument with someone who was like Taylor Swift's all dumb music. I go, no, it's not. It's not. She's got some great songs. Nobody no crimes. A great fucking song. It's got great song. Anybody who writes their own music. Fuck yeah. Also, it's like, do you think you're smarter than everybody who loves her? Like she's literally got more fans than anybody alive. And you think they're all wrong? That's kind of crazy. Like you just, you don't have to like it. You don't have to like it. But there's like people have closed minds. I met her at Oscar's party last weekend. And she introduced her. I was talking to Travis. She was, I was talking to Travis for a few minutes. And she said, I am telling her. You know, I was a little starstruck. I don't know, musicians are the last thing for me. Like I really respect. And she was super cool, man. And she was really cool, actually. And I told her that I'd went to her era show. And she said she watches the roast. And that's funny. It was pretty cool, actually. That's awesome. I wonder when they make love if they wear helmets, those two. Why do you think they wear helmets? Just saying. It's a little bit wild. You know? Travis and I have a sweet passion at maybe. I hope so. That's what I think. You have your fantasies. I have mine. No. Shoulder pads, cleats. Going for it on Astro to her. He's an ice guy. Is he? Is he been in here? No, never mind. He'd be a good. Good, dude. Yeah. It's interesting when people are public, like a public relationship, like that two super famous people. It's like that's a lot of pressure. And then you're putting it all out there in the world. And like everybody's judging you, like roof. It's hard enough to keep a relationship together. But keep a relationship together. And you have to field everyone's opinions of you. Especially Taylor Swift, because how many fucking songs does she have about ex-boyfriends? Right. It's like, geez. If you break up with her, the fuck a diss track of the universe is coming your way. Yeah, right. Kendrick Drake, fuck that. Just don't break up with Taylor. Exactly. Yeah. But it's like you're doing it in front of the world. And you're inviting all of the shittiest people in the world to have their opinions about you. It's like, it's a lot of pressure. I'm freaking Timberlake this weekend. That really pissed me off. What happened? With that, they released a two or three year old video of him getting a D.U.S. Yeah. Oh, I did see that. Why does that need to be out there? Why does that- How is that a legal thing to take a video of someone being arrested? Like, why is that? Because he's a public figure. Why isn't that private? I don't understand. And it makes nothing outrageous about it. He didn't have toling this guy and bringing up old news. It really bugged me. I mean, there was nothing outrageous about it. I mean, he was very calm and relaxed. And they arrested him for DUI. They asked him a few questions. There was nothing about it that was like, oh, look, it just in Timberlake. He's off the rails. He's acting crazy. So it's like you had a few drinks. Probably should have drove. Drove. Got caught. That's it. Right. It happens a lot of people. Yeah. And whatever. Just because he's famous or whatever. It was an act like an asshole who didn't do anything terrible. And everybody wants like, hey, look at him. He got caught. Right. You have so much money. You still got caught. You know, obviously get a driver, dude. You know, you got to get drunk. Right. Something more. He was pulling around the Hamptons. I thought he was fine. Yeah, that's probably it, right? That's where all the rich people drink a driver. I don't get having to torture somebody by releasing the videos. Well, I mean, all he has to do is just not be online for a few days and it will go away. But it's like, why is it OK to release that? Why is that a public record thing? Unless there's like some, even if there's a case, that should be something that gets released in court. No, they released it as a public information. But what? Right. Why? I don't know. Why? Because he sings. Because we live in a cruel fucking world. That's why. Yeah. We live in a place where people enjoy cruelty. They enjoy, well, it's like you look in him. You know, he's like super famous married to. What's her name? Who's married to? Jessica Beale. Beautiful woman. Yeah. Right? He's got this perfect life. He's rich. He's famous. He can dance. He can sing. He's tall. He's handsome. He's a star when he was young. Fuck that guy. You know, that's how I remember it. He was like, oh, that kid was drunk. Yeah. Yeah. Did you've been drunk before to shut the fuck up? Right. And if you haven't fucked you, if you've never been drunk, fuck you, unless like your dad was an alcoholic and you know, understanding circumstances. But it's like, why is that? Something that people are in. I saw it came across my newsfeed. And I looked at it for a few seconds. Something's like, there's nothing outrageous about this. Did you see Alan Richmond, though? The guy who plays Reacher, he beat the fuck out of some guy in front of some kids today? Mm. Yeah. Or yesterday, it was crazy. That guy's a giant dude. You know that show Reacher? Yeah, I heard of it. He's fucking huge and jacked. And he was riding dirt bikes. And he got in some altercation with his neighbor and someone filmed it. And you know, he's this hulking guy. And I don't know what the circumstances were. Maybe the guy deserved it. Maybe the guy was a piece of shit. Maybe the guy came after him first. But all you see in the video is him beating this guy up. And you know, he's fucking this tank of a man. He's huge. He's like 250 pounds. And he's beating some guy's ass. And then he gets back on his motorcycle. He's doing it in front of kids too, which is kind of crazy. Violence. Well, it's also, it's like, why you, I don't know what happened. So I don't really want to comment on the extenuating circumstances. He was being hurt. Right. He pushed off the bike by the man. Oh, the guy pushed him off the bike. OK. Well, then that guy's just trying to get it. You want to see the video? Let's watch the video. So watch the video. So this is after he already beat the guy's ass. I don't know what I'm not going to show it. So he's punching the dude. Well, the guy's a big guy too. He might have just had a dicky neighbor boy. Neighbors and like, especially if you got a homeowners association, there's some fucking shitheads. So this guy, so if the guy pushed him off the bike, I kind of understand. The guy pushed him off the bike. He's lucky. That's all he did to him. This could be eight year olds. Like, he was a little kid with tricicles. But those little kids that are there too. And he's yelling at him and pointing at him. But if you really did push him off the bike, that guy's a piece of shit. And he's lucky. And he's an idiot. Because like even after he beat his ass, he's still getting in his face. And he's still talking shit. OK. Well, that's a different story. Well, that's good. That's good to know. Yeah, fuck that guy. No push someone off a bike. And it's like his, because the dirt bikes were loud and they were in the neighborhood. Turn your TV up, shut the door. Yeah, right. People are just so into everybody's business. I've watched so many videos of homeowners associations, yelling people for doing whatever, parking an old car in your driveway. Not right. Or just like people always love to tell people what they can and can't do. Right. I've had homeowners associations before. I don't know if you've ever done it. Sure. It is a fucking nightmare. You have to sit down and talk to these dorks who tell you what you shouldn't do with your fence. Yeah. And hire your hedges. Dude, I had a situation once where there was all these rock iron fences in my neighborhood. And I repaired my fence and I replaced it with a different rock iron fence. And they said, you can't have rock iron fences. We have a new rule. It has to be a questing fence. I said, but there's no consistency. I said, the entire neighborhood is rock iron fences. I said, it doesn't matter. I said, well, let's go to court. I go, I don't give a fuck. I go, I'll sue you. I go, I have money. I go, let's go to court. I go, I'm not taking my fucking fence down. And they're like, you're going to take your fence down. I go, you're not going to tell me anything. You're not going to tell me what to do. Just because I go, it looks great. It's not like it's a blight on the neighborhood. The house is beautiful. Shut the fuck up. And eventually I won. But is it, did you have to sue? Well, I threatened to sue and they backed off because they were afraid of suing. They were afraid of lawsuits. Because then you'd have to, they would have to use the Homeware Association funds to do this. And it didn't make any sense. Like I talked to a lawyer about it. I said, does this make any sense? He goes, no, there's a precedent in the neighborhood. Like every third house had rock iron fencing. And it wasn't like, it wasn't good looking. Like it was beautiful. It was news, clean. I had reputable company build it. Something wrong with it. And I was replacing wrought iron fence with more wrought iron fence, just better. It was like the fence was broken. It looked shitty. It was like, you know, they get rusty. Where they connect. And I had to get it replaced. So what on earth was there problem? Just cons. Cons, this is how country they are. I had a neighbor who lived across the street. He told me that I had to trim my trees and thin them out so that he could see the view in the distance. And I said, what are you talking about? And he said, we have a regulation that says, you can't obstruct the view. I go, these trees have been here for 50 years. And then I talked to the guy who sold me in the house. He's like, that asshole was trying to do that with me, too. Just tell them to fuck himself. He's just a weird guy. He said, he built an observation deck at the top of his hill in his backyard. So he could see like the lights of the city and the distance. And he wanted you to cut your trees down. so you're obstructing the view. I go, your house is obstructing my view of this hill. I like to look at hills. Is that what we're going to do? Take your house down. You take your house down, I'll trim the trees. Thought you left this house up. He's like, oh, so it's going to be like that. I go, going to be like what? You want me to cut trees down. So you can see like you don't have a view, man. You're not on the edge of the hill. You're back set. This is what the view looks like from where you are. This house has been here before your house is there. Go eat shit. It's like it's nice and maybe you would have done something. I wouldn't have done a fucking thing. It's not, it didn't make any sense. It's just people want to tell people what to do. Like I was reading this article where this homeowners association hired a tow company to go around the neighborhood and tow all the cars that had expired tags. Can you imagine? Like, you know your tags expired? Like, ah, fuck, I'll get to it. I'm busy. I'll get to it next week. You know, you figure, you just run it around. And then also they tow your car. Like, fuck you, man. Like, fuck you. It's just people love to tell other people what to do. In homeowners associations, when they get power, they become like the little hall monitors of the neighborhood. You know, your grass is unruly human. It's supposed to be two inches. It's four. Like, ah, just people. People love to do that. They love to tell people what to do and what not to do. I have one neighbor who kind of runs the whole block. She puts everyone on an email chain. And she's pretty, she leads with love. But she looks out for everybody. Well, so on with some, looking out, it's not bad. It's just like nonsense. Like the guy who wanted me to trim the trees. He wanted me to thin out my tree. You want me to chop the trees down and go, no, I just want you to thin them out. You can thin them out. I go, what, what are you talking about? Chop all the leaves off so that you could see lights in the distance. It was like the dumbest conversation. And he realized, wow, we're in the middle of the conversation out dumbness is. And then we never talked again. And I would see him occasionally. Isn't there a safety issue with trim in your trees? Like thinning them out. Fire? Well, I mean, where we were, there was the real issue is brush, the real issues, the ground, you know, dried brush on the ground. We were evacuated from where I lived three times from fires. Down here. No, this in California. Yeah. And when I lived in California, the last big fire in 2018, we lost three houses in front of our house. And my neighbor house caught on fire. But I had one, my crazy friend, bud, would not leave the neighborhood. They evacuated the whole neighborhood. He wouldn't leave. He's like, I'm staying. He's like, I'm staying. I'm going to save my house. I'm going to save other people's houses. And he fucking did. He saved his house. He saved, he saved my neighbor's house. Checked my neighbor's house, my roof, the roof is on fire. He got water on it. He called the fire department. There was fire departments that were like trying to put out fires in the neighborhood. The moment they started and they closed his roof down. Because embers will fly and land. I had it in LA. I had to evacuate for one day. It's boogeyman. The fires in California are no joke, man. It's really weird to see when it happens. Because you realize like how nature is completely in control when that happens. Just this storm of flames that comes over the hills. It's wild. It's wild and it cannot be controlled. And once it starts, it's just a matter of trying to contain it. And certain amount of houses are just going to go in a matter of what, depending on which way the wind blows. But that wasn't what the problem was. This guy was just a cunt. Just a... It's a homeowners association thing. It's just like people that think they... There was a... I'm still a part of this email group. I'm still on the email of the homeowners association. One of the guys poisoned one of the people in the home of the association's dogs. Yeah. They got in some sort of a dispute about something. The guy poisoned his fucking dogs. Wow. Yeah. Evil cock sucker. But that kind of thing is these people that just want to control their neighbors, man. It's so weird. One of my neighbors... What's the punishment for that? He should be shot. And you fucking piece of shit. That's like killing a family member. You should have to eat whatever he gave those dogs. You should go to jail for sure. I don't know what happened. I don't know if they caught the guy. They don't... I don't think they know exactly who did it. They had no video evidence. The person who lived there apparently didn't have good security cameras. But it's just so weird. They would get mad at someone for the way they designed their house. And I was like, what do you give a fuck? And he's like, this is like one of my neighbors built a house and my other neighbor go, what do you think about his house? He's like, I don't care. And he's like, I think it's ugly. And this house is going to lower our property values. I go, what are you fucking talking about? Your house looks great. You have a beautiful house. You think people are going to pay less for your house? Because this house is boring. This doesn't make any sense. But it's just people they nitpick. When they have control, when people have control over other people's situation. They don't have control over their own life and their life is just a sloppy mess. They always like to look at other people's lives. And I don't like where he puts his dumpsters. Hater. Yeah. We all confront that all the time. It's not just a hater. It's a hater with power because of homeowner's associations. And from that moment on, I decided I will never buy a home with a homeowner's association. Never. No fucking chance. I don't care how cool they are. Because someone not cool could move in. And then it becomes a nightmare. I will never have conversations with those kind of people. They tell you what you could do with your lawn. Like fuck you. Yeah. Fuck you. When I was a young comic, I lived with my grandfather in the house that I grew up in. And we would never, ever, ever mow the lawn. We just didn't have any money. We didn't care. And everyone in our neighborhood just hated us. They would echo us and yell at us. So I guess I've been the ice sore and now I'm on the other side of it. My grandfather lived in the same house that he bought in the 1940s. It was in all Italian neighborhood in Newark. And then they started doing your boring Newark? No, sure. We're not doing all of the fucker. Let's go. That's where I learned karate. Is that really? Detectives in Newark. Really? Oh yeah. Yeah. People don't know. You're a black belt in Thack one day. Yeah. Yeah. That's wild. Do you still do it at all? I mean, I work out, not with people, but I know my moves. And I do a few in the new Netflix special. I throw some kicks for fun and tell the story about getting a black belt, and starting at six, getting bullied. My mom. I do a few in the new Netflix special. I throw some kicks for fun and tell the story about getting a black belt, starting at six, getting bullied. My mom dragging me to the house of empty hands. That was what it was called. Ronnie Roselli, Newark Detective, teacher me karate, almost like a father figure. Oh, that's awesome. Gamey confidence gave me self-respect, respect for others, taught me that hard work pays off. You know, when you get a black belt at 10.5, you go, wow, maybe I could be something in my life. If I work as hard as I did at that, maybe I could be good at something else too. Yeah, for sure. I mean, it teaches you a lot about like the belt system is really good because you get rewarded for your work and then you see like a tangible result. Instead of just like, oh, I'm getting better. It's like, oh, there's like a ceremony. You have reached a new level. Yeah. Like how, you know, now have to be some of my most cherished memories of those ceremonies. Mm. My dad and mom watching me get my brown belt, blue belt, brown belt, and black belt competing in tournaments all over these coasts. Yeah, awesome. They, well, this is named Gary. This is Karatee. I used to throw toe. Gary Alexander, he threw new East Coast tournaments and I used to compete. I still have a room half a dozen karate trophies. That's awesome. That's the best time of my life. I lost most of my stuff, but I do have a bunch of medals that I still have that are in my drawer by my bed. A bunch of medals from the day, but it seems weird when I pick them up. They don't even seem real. That's from another life. Oh, it's another life. Like I don't even, until I hit a bag or something like that, I almost forget that I could do it. You know, and then I do it. I'm like, ooh, right. I still got it. I like, I like my kicks. I can front snap kick. I can't side kick. I can barely roundhouse at this point, but it's like, one night. I got a belly. There's no real good reason other than I'm just, you know, you ever thought about like starting to take classes again? If I, if I, I do think about it, I probably could. Yeah. You know, you're good at kicking of pushing me to do stuff like that. Could be good for your health. Just take a class a couple times a week. Well, what would I take if I was a black belt and take quando, take tuck mondo, just start taking that again. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you're doing it for exercise. It's not like you're going to fight in the UFC. No. Just go and start, you know, you probably feel it a little bit. And then you remember what you used to be able to do. And so your muscle memory would kick in. Yeah. It start probably watching your diet a little bit better. Right. Drinking more water. Yeah. Taking vitamins then. Next thing, you know, four or five months of gone by and now your basis thinner, your kicks are snappier. You're going to three classes a week instead of two. You know, you feel better. People go, Jeff, look at you. You're looking great. I guess I started taking tuck mondo again. Yeah, it's not a bad idea. I guess I I guess I wouldn't wear my black belt. I would feel like I was disrespecting right then a heart. Yeah. So I'd have to rear in that. Well, you could always take a totally new style and start out as a white belt. You know, you take my kokishin shirt on right now, George St. Pierre, take something else. There's take something near you. But crop McGah like take anything. My manager Amy told me she was your publicist when you are on the cover of black belt magazine. Oh, yeah. A.B. Yeah. Yeah, way back in the dizzy. I love that. It's so funny. Yeah. Um, I mean, I never stopped working out. I just don't it's too much of a part of my brain. Like my mind doesn't operate well. If I have date, even if I just take a couple days off, I don't feel right. I feel squirrely. I feel like I'm not balanced. You know, sometimes I just like to stand in front of a mirror and just throw blocks and just make sure that I like the way that it feels. Yeah. Just do it. It's meditative. You know what I used to love doing, especially when I was in California, I take a couple of long hits and just hit the bag. And just like feel it. Just, just start feeling it. Just bump. I remember my God. Do you remember all those? I remember at least first two, I think. God, I used to hate those things. I didn't think I was young and immature and I didn't understand the value of forms. I used to think that this is pointless. This isn't fighting. I only wanted to practice fighting technique. But now I understand. It's it teaches you body control. Like you, you know, you throw a sidekick and you snap it up in the air and you hold it and you turn and block and all that stuff. Like it teaches you body. It's like almost like a form of yoga. You know, and it teaches you to control your body. I do a lot of kicks in the air now and I do them slowly. Like I, and it, it's really good for your control and your balance. And I didn't think that when I was younger. I thought that was like a waste of time. I thought like really what's important is like hitting things really hard and being fast. And now I realize like no, no, no, no, there's like a lot of value even to help your techniques and to be able to hit things hard. Like do it slowly and just have full control of your balance and your movement. So I like to do that. I like to do like slow kicks and like like that's why I like yoga. Yoga is amazing. Yeah. I feel like that's akin to martial arts. It makes me high. Yoga is like the best. You take your shoes off. Oh, yeah. Your phone is gone. You're so relaxed. You're so relaxed. You're so calm. Yeah. Yeah. Yoga is so good for your brain. Usually on Mondays when I'm here, I would go with Tony to his high yoga. Yeah. Oh, Tony loves it. Yeah. He raves about his yoga. He told me he's been off it a little bit. He has. Yeah. Well, you know, the thing about Tony is like he's so focused on Kill Tony right now because the momentum is so extraordinary. And he realizes that like Tony is really aware that he's in a very, rare moment in his life. Yeah. Where things are going so well. So he's got his foot on the gas. Yeah. Of course. And he's got his new special that he filmed that he's editing right now. Get ready to release. And he's so proud of him. And he's earned it. I always told him he would take a different path than a normal entertainer. He always had this kind of trajectory. Well, he's an odd guy. Yeah. Tony, you swear he's gay. He's not. But he's an awesome person. Like people who don't know Tony, they see like the outside of him. Of course. Like as a friend, he's a great friend. Of course. He's a great guy. I love that guy. I love that guy. He's a great other. He's the best. He was so happy. He was the first one of texts to me when I knew I was coming down here. When I was workshoping my show, he came so I'd lost in. Came to the opening night. I'm broad way in New York. He's like there for his friends. 100%. Oh, 100%. Well, that's the beautiful thing about Kill Tony is it's all about supporting people and giving people careers. Yeah. I mean, he's given so many people careers and pump so many that kill Tony thing is also it is in my opinion. Well, first of all, for our club, it's the cornerstone of the club. It's one of the most important things about the mothership because having killed Tony at the mothership every Monday night lets all these people that are upcoming comedians see what it's like to have one minute that you've polished and worked on really well and it kills. And then you pop and then all of a sudden, it's on YouTube, it's got 11 million views and then maybe it's on Netflix and it's got millions and millions of people watching all around the world and then all of a sudden, people come to see you in the clubs and you're selling out weekends and you're writing and then you get a golden ticket and you got to do a new minute every week, you're regular. I mean, really, my show comes on tonight, it's 90 minutes. It might be the longest stand-up special in Netflix history. Well, your show is like a one man show. It's 90 minutes. It's a little different, right? I haven't seen it, but I've heard great things. Yeah, you're going to love it. I'm sure it will. You're really, I think you're going to like it because it's about us, it's about comedy and the community of what we do. It's a embattled community and it has its like detractors and it has a bunch of haters and a bunch of shitheads in it. But for the most part, like as far as creative communities, it's one of the most supportive communities ever. I mean, it's an amazing, the community of comics, like real comics that are all, that when we meet up in clubs, it's always hug, people think we're all like angry, bitter, like the tears of a clown. It's not, there's a few people like that. And they always make me sad. But the reality is like most of us are super happy to see each other. It's always hugs and laughing and watching each other sets and giving each other tags and telling each other, like, well, that fucking new bit is amazing. It's like, it's so supportive. I was at your club last night. It was like comics come in and say hi. I brought some extra chicken wings. Jamar was there. It was just fun. Moses was doing roast battle. I sat in on that. Then I went outside, said hi to some people, and went upstairs and did a spot. It's like, I don't have a wife and kids to go home to. This is what I do. This is the people that I love. The comedians are my kids, my cousins, my uncles, my ass. Yeah. Why do I have a wife and kids? But it's still my other family. It's like the family of comedians. It's like a band of brothers. It's a ancestors. It's like a weird kind of friendship that it's like only they know what you do. Only they understand that it's like 10 years before you're even any good. 10 years of being like, if you're out there and you're headline in a club and you're on the run, like you fucking put in that work. There's no shortcuts. It's impossible to have a shortcut. You just got to grind. I learned long and I learned over time. I don't want a shortcut. I like the process. That's what I live for. Oh yeah. We have a roast coming up May 10th. It's not about May 10th. It's about I can't wait to hang in the writers room again. I can't wait to figure out who's coming. I can't wait to figure out the seating, who are we going to make fun of? Who's going to be in the front? What am I going to wear? It's the grind. It is the grind. That's exciting. Yeah, there's no finish line. The finish line doesn't exist. You have little finish lines like you do a special, like your special that's coming out. That's a finish line. But it's only a stop. You're stopping to get water. But where is the finish line, Joe? Like, okay, so I did the Broadway show, then I shot it, then I edited. But now I'm here still talking about it. And then in a month from now, two months and I was someone who stopped me at the airport and go, hey, I was my kid with sick. I was in a hospital. I watched your thing and it made me laugh for five minutes when life was, so the spent, all of it is, there's no finish line. No, there's no finish line. If you're sitting around going, I hope I win the Oscar. If your Tom Cruise is jealous of George Clooney and George Clooney is jealous of Brad Pitt, there's no finish line. There's all the, I have a big neon, like you have the neon. I have a big neon in my house that just says, enjoy the process. Yeah, that's where I'm at. Yeah, trust it. Trust the process and enjoy it. And that's the weird thing about when you really so special and then you have nothing. And then you have to like scour your brain for what you wanna talk about. I took like a whole month off of stand up after my last special. Why didn't you do any stand up? Maybe more than a month. And I just thought, I said, let me just think. Just like no pressure. Let me just think. Like what is interesting to me? What do I wanna talk about? Instead of just rushing to try to put together a new hour. Right. Let me just think for a while. You know what I'd come to the club every now and then and watch, watch guys do sets, but I didn't do any sets for a while. I mean, that's zone right now. It's nice. You know what? Scary. When I first finished the special, it was years of material building to with a through line and a story. And then when it was over, I was a little bit lost. Like I'd go to the comedy seller. I was still in New York. I couldn't let go of some of the, and I was like, I need to stop doing this material. And then I felt like I had no purpose. Like I didn't wanna talk about anything. And I said it to my buddy Kai. And he goes, dude, relax. You're between albums. Like he put it in musical sense for me. He's like, you're like a musician between albums. Absorb some new things. See some movies. Go on a trip. Have some new life experience. And then I was like, yeah, that's probably a break. After doing the same thing, the same kind of hunk for years. Your body, your brain, and like think about something else. Absorb new things. Download new influences. And that's kind of where I'm at. And then of course Kevin was like, I'll get roasted. And I was like, all right, I can put stand up away for another two months and just write that. Yeah. So I go back in a roast mode, which gives me, I'm like a dog who needs a job. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. It's kind of the same thing as your dog. It really is. It's like you need a task. If you're just doing nothing, like the idea of like, oh, one day I'm gonna retire and just relax. Like bitch, you'll go crazy. Forget you were roasting Kevin Hart. That's what I heard. Are you supposed to say that though? Yeah. Are you supposed to talk about it? I am. Okay. You're allowed to? My show. Okay, because I was told not to tell people about it. We're doing it. May 10th, baby. Mother's Day live on Netflix. So you're officially announcing it. Yeah. Okay, I could talk about it now. At the forum. Because I was told about it, but I was told I was not supposed to tell anybody. I don't know who'd tell you that. Some people. No, just keep it under wraps. Oh, it's already a thing. Yeah, they announced it this weekend, I think. Oh, hosted by Shane Gillis. Let's fucking go. Nice. That's awesome. That's awesome, right? Fuck it. It is so pumped up. That's awesome. That's gonna be fun. Dude, he's out. You know, he's, these Netflix fucking, the Tom Brady one was insane. That was so good. That was so good. That's kind of like juiced comedy back up again, cause it was so wild. It was like that the jokes were so wild. It was so rock. Yeah. And we had gone through this like weird period of like, people getting canceled for jokes. Right. You know, it's like all of a sudden like, no, that's how that's gone. No, no, no. I said to him, I would, I've been getting big game hunting, Tom Brady for years. It took a couple of years. He retired, un-retired, but I kept him on the line. And finally, we were shooting promos. And I was like, why are you doing this? Cause I could tell, you know, it's starting to heat up and some heavy hitters were signing on. I go, why are you doing that? I wasn't, it wasn't for the money. And he goes, I wanna bring comedy back. I'm sick of the woke bullshit in cancel. I wanna make comedy like fun again. He understood that. And I caught him. I caught him on a Super Bowl Sunday. He was playing the Super Bowl. And I saw him looking at some jokes on Instagram that I posted. And like, and I'm like, this is where he goes to relax. He goes to the roast. And I heard that. So as I was like, he won the game. And I was like, I think it's time. And then we real demand and he did it. And I will admit that roast was harsher than I expect, even I expected vicious. I mean, it was a bloodbath. And I saw it Tommy other day. And I said, it's time to take your win. He was like, it was so harsh. It was tough on my family. I go, I get all that. But you wanted to do it to bring comedy back. You did that. 1.6 billion viewing minutes Emmy nominated against the Oscars and the grant. Like, the Super Bowl have to be. It was the most watch thing in the history of Netflix. You know, nuts that is. Think about how many things are on Netflix. That roast was the most watch thing in the history of Netflix. And it was because it was so funny. It wasn't just because it was Tom Brady, which of course made a lot, but it wasn't just because all these great comics were on it, which of course meant a lot. Right. It was it was so good. It was so good that people were telling people about it. Yeah. And it's like a great Super Bowl. It's going to be around forever. Yes. Netflix leaves it up. I like the Charlie Sheen roast. We were talking about Patrice. Yeah. They're always going to be there. So be there forever. I do think all respect to Tom, I do think this one with Kevin and Shane Gillis is going to top it. Really. I think it's it's not quite a sequel, but it's it's own thing. It's not going to be the greatest roast of all time. Netflix is the place for roast now because his greatest comedy central was you had restrictions on language and content. Right. And it was editing. Yes. Edit. This is a end commercials. Right. Yeah. Right. This is buck wild. It's a buck wild. Yeah. Netflix is fucking amazing. I mean, what are it in the same platform that you have, you could never get bored. If you're bored in this life, like you're bored, you don't have anything to watch. Like are you crazy? Yeah. There's so much shit to watch. On the boring people are bored, right? Yeah. I don't think they're. Or people are uninformed. But even even in this day and age, you could just, you know, do an internet search. Like what's the best roast on Netflix? Right. What are the best dramas on Netflix? What are the best shows on Netflix? There's always something. That's exciting though. It's going to be a big one. Yeah. Mother's Day. Mother fuckers day. Cannonheart, there's a guy like, I don't understand how he has the time to do all the things he does. I do not understand it. I'm a pretty busy person. And I look at people like him and I feel lazy. I'm like, how are you doing this? Right. How do you have time to sleep? Right. And I saw him out with his wife having drinks two nights last weekend. He must sleep like four hours a night. I don't know how he does it. Some people just built different. Yeah. I mean, well, it's growing up poor and realizing that once this is happening for you, keep your foot on the gas. And that guy keeps his foot on the gas better than anybody. And he's ambitious as fuck. He's always got some tequila brand and releasing this. He had a vegan restaurant chain for a while. And so I would have talked about that. Fuck you, you know what that? Well, he likes to branch out and be a business man. Yeah. I just don't understand the time. And then in the meantime, he's doing arenas at the same time. It's like, I'm killing. Yeah. I don't get it. The roast for him is back to his roots. That's what I love about it. It's like the Philly thing talking shit. Chains from Philly. So there'll be a big Philly angle. And we got some of his oldest buddies coming on. It's going to be pretty massive, I think. That's nice. Yeah. Well, you've carved out an interesting path for yourself as the roast master. You know, it's like an old school skill that used to be a big part of comedy. The Friars Club roasts. I missed those Friars Club roasts when they were just like, sometimes they weren't even on TV yet when I was doing them. I just bought a Leroy Neiman painting from, they had an auction of old Friars from memorabilia. And Leroy Neiman painted any young men surrounded and he painted his punchlines like around his one line as around any holding his violin. And he used to sit in the dining room at the New York Friars and Henny and his wheelchair would sit under that painting. And for some reason, it's all up for auction. So of course, I had a grab it. Oh, that's awesome. That's so cool that you got it. Yeah. That's amazing. I missed some of those guys. It's about Buddy Hack. I almost wore a Buddy Hack at T-shirt today. I loved Buddy Hack. He has a Buddy Hack at T-shirt. Somebody made me a Buddy Hack at T-shirt and gave it to me. Yeah, those guys are from a different time. Different time, no television, no nothing, doing the cat skills. Different world. They would do each other's acts, and they wouldn't do whatever got to laugh. Yeah. There were assassins on the road. It was a totally different life. And if you had a name, like you had a name back then, like if you were a famous comedian back then, there was a rarest of rare things. How many of them were there? There was like 10. Shecky, buddy, Nipsy. Two of those guys. Few of those guys. They're not many left. They're really all gone now. Yeah. What happens? That's going to happen to us, Buddy. That's what I hear. Or better than the alternative. What? Stay around forever? No. You either keep going, or you saw the picture, Gilbert, Norm, Bob. The alternative is death. So when I go, I don't want to get old. I go, yeah, you want to get old. Yeah. As long as you keep your body moving, you just don't want to be an old completely incapacitated person. Like that's, especially if it's avoidable. Right. I went through it all year. I went through it after three weeks after that Brady roast. I went in for a colonoscopy. My buddy Jordan had been texting our text chain. Everyone's got to get these kind of a hypochondriacs. I kind of ignored it. So yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. It's too busy. I was on the road. And then finally I went in for a routine colonoscopy. And I waited too long. And they found a tumor in my colon. And immediately, that an hour or two hours later was on the phone of the surgeon. And stage three. And found a specialist, took care of it right away. But never felt doomed. Have you changed your diet after that? I'm getting a lot less red meat. Red meat? Now when I eat red meat, it's like, going to be the best red meat. Why is it red meat? Well, I don't know. I mean, for me growing up in a catering hall in New Jersey around pastrami and prime rib, and he said that that was a big cause of colon cancer. Really? Yeah. And processed foods. Processed foods makes sense. Yeah. That makes sense. So I'm eating a lot less of that. Yeah. I moved over to Turkey and chicken and a little bit of fish. And cut out the processed stuff as much as I can. What about alcohol? You got that? I've never been a big drinker. That's good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a little wake up call. I mean, you have a health scare. Yeah. You have a wake up call. Time to take care of yourself. I just had to talk about this in my show. Like I had my chemo port and on Broadway, on the show. And I was like, still kind of in it. It was like I was having a human experience on stage. And just two weeks ago, I had the port, the chemo port taken out. My sister came down to celebrate and hang with me. And it's like a war prize. Like I hold the port where they put the chemo. Like I have it on my desk now. And let's just say they take out, they put a lot more in people than they take out. So I feel very lucky. I survived at all. John, you're alive. People die with those fucking ports in them. They do. Well, they die with cancer. That's for damn sure. Colon cancer is a very common one. This guy James Vanderbeek, younger to me. I know. I met him. He was a nice fucking guy, man. He came to the club, hung out with his wife in the green room, sweetest guy. It was such a nice guy. And apparently he was struggling back then. I didn't know. He looked real thin. So when you asked me, right when you walked in, how are you doing? I was like, great. It was a wanted question. And you asked politely and innocently. And I was like, yeah, I didn't know that you had gone through that. Yeah. Yeah. Guy, I haven't seen you and when. What was our song? I saw you in DC. I saw you in New York for Kill Tony briefly. Yeah. We didn't let sit down and shoot. We had a drink. Was it your birthday in New York when you were doing Kill Tony? Oh, was it here? One of the book was August. Yeah. Yeah. I remember that. But then I saw you in DC where you were your family. It was quick. But I see, I feel like I see you because I pop into the mothership. But I always pop in on the weekends when you're off. Yeah. But yeah, it was a crazy thing. Man, I've never been sick a day in my life. I've always had that like, my grandfather used to call it world beat or energy. Like I always felt invincible. Never, never thought for a second. It would be me. And then I did wait too long to get a colonoscopy. And they're not a big deal. Like guys are afraid of colonoscopies. Because something's up your butt. Yeah. But in the end, it really is an up your butt. It's a doctor checking you out. That's how it's holding you wake up. They go up your butt, bro. And get the endoscopy, especially for smokers and stuff like that. And like for what is essentially like a one day inconvenience, they can really save your life. It did save my life. Well, I'm glad you cleaned up your diet. Yeah. You know, you got to do that. You are, I mean, I've run into you at Cat's Deli before too. There's another thing I needed to talk you about. What? I forgot about this. Do you brought it up? Do you remember running into me at Cat's Deli with Tony? Yeah. I guess you must have been a town to stand up or something. This was like already 10 years ago. I don't think it was that long ago, wasn't it? I, as an I'll tell you how I know. One of the things when I, when I got booked on disappearance, I said I make a make a mental note. I owe Rogan an apology. And it's not a big deal, but it always kind of bugged me. I came in to say hi. And I was self conscious because I had something wrong with me and I didn't know what it was. And you said, what's with your eyebrows? And I like, I like kind of shoulder shrugged and you were like, is it for a role? And I was like, yeah, yeah, yeah. Oh, do you have any recollection? I do. And I lied. Yeah. Because I was, you said I shaved him off for a role. I was like, oh, that's crazy. What are you playing? I was embarrassed because I had alopecia didn't really understand what was happening to me. And I used to saw that I had a big fro, big bushy eyebrows. Like, I was like the propecia man of the year. They don't like it. And I don't know what causes it. It's an autoimmune thing. It's not life threatening. But suddenly I looked completely different. My fame, like if anyone ever recognized me walking in a restaurant, you know, get a good table, skip the lot, is all gone. Just suddenly and within a few weeks, I was, I remember being at Zainy's in Nashville and just scratching my head and like, big clump of hair came out. And I was on a plane and I was like, there's no hair on my lap. What the fuck's going on? And then within a month, me and Adam E. got and Tony went to the barbershop on Melrose. They came with me because I was kind of like, shake it up. Like, what is happening to me? Am I dying? So I haven't really quickly? It happens all within a few weeks. All your hair fell off in a few weeks. And then when I thought it was done, eyebrows started going. And then eyelashes. So sweat, salt was like, I was like, what the fuck? I didn't even recognize myself. And is there anything they do that reverses that? There's some medications. Dr. Drew actually hooked me up with a research doctor, Brett King. He was at Yale at the time in Connecticut. And I did have some restoration of eyelashes and eyebrows. But the side effects were a little bit scary and they lower your immune system a little bit. So I did that for years. And then when I got cancer, I was like, fuck those meds. I can't do it anymore. Right. And the chemo eyebrows eyelashes gone again. And now I'm literally like, hairless. Like, I have no hair. And you know, you learn to live with it. You know, you got a channel you're in a rock store. Listen, there's worse things that can happen. Believe me. Yeah, I get it. You know. More than anybody. But I had always dinged me because you and I have been friends a long time. We have an honest friendship, comics, brutal honesty, truth. And I looked you right in the eyes and I was like, yeah, yeah, I went with it. I found out slightly after that, the U.N. alopecia or other people because someone else brought it up and someone said, oh, he's got alopecia. I'm like, oh, I asked him at Cat's Deli. And he said, yeah, shaved his eyebrows off or a roll. But I just felt like you probably embarrassed and I totally understood which is weird. Right. They say a lot of these autoimmune issues come from inflammation and a lot of inflammation comes from what you eat. Right. You know, doctor would tell me that wasn't true. So yeah, doctors aren't always right. And one of the things they're not always right about is nutrition and the impact that nutrition has, particularly on autoimmune issues. Most of you doctors have any knowledge or any education in nutrition and the impact it has. Your entire body is built out of and reconstitute. Issues very few doctors have any knowledge or any education and nutrition and the impact it has I mean your entire body is built out of and reconstructed from what you consume Right the same only thing that your body has in order you need a body makes new cells Your body replenish the cells recreates all the tissue. It's only one way to do it It's got to be what you eat. Yeah, it's the only thing what you drink what you eat. Is it and if you're eating a bunch of process stuff that has much of bullshit and preservatives and what causes illegal information with a lot of things allergies cause inflammation Process food cause inflammation excess sugar causes inflammation alcohol There's a lot of things that people eat that cause inflammation but it's really genuinely a thing of a balance of you know your diet and You know what your body has to work with You know if your body doesn't have any nutrients to work with no vitamins no minerals, you know your dehydrated Your drinking too much sugar You know things start malfunctioning and misfiring and then you know there's there's a bunch of different consequences for having high inflammation diet and for a lot of people it's sugar Sugar is one of the leading causes of inflammation especially in the standard American diet because the standard American diet is just Riddled with excess sugar corn syrup and bullshit and preservatives and you body just after a while just gets tired of Processing that stuff and then you start encountering a bunch of issues and I know there's a lot of autoimmune issues that people have had success in reversing by completely cutting out everything other than whole foods Just eating chicken and meat and vegetables and drinking water and that's it Cutting out all the bullshit Yeah, I gotta do better have you ever gotten blood work done? Well now I have to do it all the time Do you do you ever get blood work done from like a comprehensive laboratory that's looking at your nutrient levels and all those different things? I don't know if I've done that we should do that. There's a place in town waste well. I'll send you there Yeah, yeah, they'll they're really good. I mean they do they take a shitload of blood and they do these really Comprehensive blood panels they can scan for cancer too by the way. Well that I've done. Yeah, that's a big one You know because they can check for any kind of cancer in your body well now that I'm through all that I'm much more open to Take care of myself and staying on it and The first time I did that one gone verse. I did that one. I was like cancer's a scary one And I was like boy I hope I don't have cancer. I don't know about it when it came out zero I was like whoa, but I do so much to take care of myself. I use a sauna every day cold plunge I take a ton of vitamins. I'm always exercising. I eat probably like 99% clean every now and then I'll fuck off and Or if my daughter makes cookies, I'll eat cookies, but for the most part I give my body She's really good. She makes a bunch of different stuff today was white chocolate chip cookies. They're really good I had one had one this morning But for the most part it's your body can only use what you put in it There's no other building blocks. It doesn't have anything else right there's nothing else it can draw from and that's one of the Problems is when you don't give your body what it needs it starts taking things out of the tissue It starts taking things that's where osteoporosis comes from you body starts literally taking calcium out of your bones You know you got to give your body the building blocks without that it doesn't know what the fuck to do and slowly But surely you start to deteriorate you know and there's a giant difference between giving your body a nutrient dense healthy diet and not You know and taking care yourself and exercising and not and drinking much water and electrolytes and not There's a giant difference and it's all your body just cannot recreate itself correctly It cannot build itself and repair itself correctly unless it gets the proper nutrients That's where a lot of people's issues come from and doctors don't tell you that like I had a family member. They got real sick and the doctor said they got cancer and the doctor said it does Doesn't matter what you eat. I go fuck that doctor. That's not true I don't believe doctors telling you get cake and just take chemo and you'll be fine That's horseshit. That's not true That's not true because they should one of the things they should tell you immediately is get on a ketogenic diet because one of the things that has been proven is that cancer uses glucose to survive and You know autophagy which comes from fasting is one of the best ways that people can Get rid of errant cells and cells that are you know misfiring Make your body burn off fat use ketones for energy and Just get rid of all the dead cells. Give her all the shit that your body doesn't need And even if you don't want to do that do intermittent fasting You know where you only have a period of time where you eat like give yourself like a 16 hour window with no food and then start eating after that How do you keep your I'd be cranky and that's because your body's relying on carbohydrates, right? So when your body is not relying on carbohydrates your body's burning off ketones you don't have that problem You don't have that crashing problem the crashing problem is from a high carbohydrate diet And I've had that before look I'm Italian so It's carbohydrates was my thing, you know it was all about pasta pizza. I love that stuff I just love it and that's my cheat food if I'm gonna cheat I'm gonna eat Italian subs and yeah that kind of shit, but When your body gets accustomed to that first of all you get a big insulin spike you crash you get exhausted The way to avoid that is to get your body to start using fats and The way your body uses fats is that's you give for fuel and your body adjusts and Then your body does something called gluconeogenesis where it starts using meat and protein and turning that into glucose and When you go through this process It's a shaky process at first like you get what they call the keto flu originally Initially rather where you get tired all the time like oh, this is exo and you work out suffer It's like you have no energy But eventually your body adapts and your body just gets accustomed to using fats and when your body gets fat adapted First of all your brain works better you get an extra gear in terms of like your ability to think and Communicate and it just feels like you have more energy. You don't need naps You don't crash after you eat That's why when you say like you shouldn't eat red meat. I eat mostly red meat. That's like most of my diet That's like 80% of my diet. I mean it's an addiction for me I don't think it's an addiction. I think it's the most major. I think it's the most nutrient dense food in the world The problem is processed red meat right? So if you're eating a bunch of process shit that has a bunch of preservatives in it Yeah, that's not good for you But like a ribeye steak a grilled ribeye steak. There is nothing wrong with that It's one of the most healthy foods you can eat and it has everything you need it has plenty of vitamins It has fat it has all the things that your body naturally knows how to process and people have been eating that food from the beginning of time Yeah, just kind of get educated in it and it's like most people especially particularly most doctors I've had conversations with doctors where they've said you get everything you need from a balanced diet And I'm like fuck you you don't know anything like how much time did you spend in medical school? Learning nutrition was it even an hour was it a day like it takes a long time and there's real researchers who have spent decades Understanding the the balance of nutrient dense foods and vitamin supplementation and and what vitamin Sub-itmentation can cure and fix and what's it's good for and how to balance it out and what vitamins works synergistically with other vitamins like if you're taking vitamin D3 which is fantastic for your immune system You have to take it with K2. You should take it with magnesium as well You gotta you gotta know these things and most doctors they just they talk out of a Talk out of a voice of authority about something. They're not educated in it They're educated in getting people in and out of their offices quick as possible and getting that insurance money That's what they do and most of them they talk like other authorities me They have a gut you sit there looking to this guy looks like shit. He's telling you about health like you're not healthy Don't talk to me about health. This is angry. It makes me angry It really does I get it It's it's infuriating because it's like these people you count on them as authorities and really they're just They're just paying off their student debt. They're paying off their fucking loans They have insane malpractice insurance. They have to cover They have an a giant monthly nut and they're trying to push pharmaceutical drugs on you as much as they can because they get compensated for that And that's what they do and this is the standard American health system. That's real problem. Yeah, it's a real problem And it leaves a sticker, you know, this is the thing that RFK juniors trying to balance Like we are we spend more money on health care than anyone in the world We make more money than anyone in the world and we're sicker than anyone in the world We spend more money than we ever have on health care. We're sicker than we've ever been Go to live in the life. We're eating well. It's on it. It's reading shit You know if we're just eating healthy the people that are just eating healthy have way less problems Way less health consequences way less issues way more energy way more mental acuity All those things because that's how your body's supposed to live For thousands and thousands of years. What did we do? We ate fruit we ate vegetables We ate meat and chicken and fish and eggs and that's what you're supposed to eat. That's real food Most of these things that sit on a shelf you're not supposed to eat those right just like your dog Like your dog's not supposed to be eating a cable. Kibble right, you know if you eat your dog raw food Your dog's gonna go bonkers feed your dog human grade food like farmer's dog your dog will be crazy You will watch how she eats it watch the difference the way right my dog can't wait He's dripping Driping off of his mouth before I feed him. He's like sitting there waiting like stay And I'm putting in the ball like okay You like attacks it like Jamie you were saying that about your dog, right? Like let Carl like when he was eating kibble He wasn't even interested. Yeah, I didn't mean to have it. She may never had a chance to even give it to him You never never ate it You just sit there like well, what do you how do you you're a how do you? Who's been feeding you know, what have they been like how do they get in your body? But I always give my dog a little time When I give her like turkey, you know, putting it sometimes if I have turkey or chicken around I'll put it in her bowl I always give her you know like a cat's is deli when you order to sandwich they give you a little piece Before yeah, I always get her a little piece to get her salivating and she snaps it Yeah, cuz it's real food right that's what people are supposed to be eating two men we're supposed to be eating real food You know We got tricked because things have to stand a supermarket you gotta be able to sit it on the shelf and it's gonna be able to stay there for a few months That's how you make your profit. That's why milk is homogenized and pasteurized I'll try to scare you off raw milk bitch. I drink raw milk every week. There's nothing wrong with raw milk You just can't get it from a shitty farm just like you can't get meat that's rotten just like you can't get sushi that's rotten Every day how bad is that for me ice cream is actually not that bad ice cream when you think about bad things to eat ice cream is probably one of the best desserts to eat because ice cream has fats from the cream it has protein from the milk and It does have sugar So you got a little bit of sugar, but you're absorbing that sugar along with all the fat and all the cream and It probably is way better for it's way better for you than sugar Like drinking like a soda like so like a soda is the most alien form of sugar your body absorbs Your body doesn't know what the fuck this is because sugar in nature comes from like an orange It has all this fiber, you know, and you're eating it and it's a slow digestive process That's why you don't get this crazy spike but orange juice is fucking nuts Like you take all the fiber out and now you just have just pure sugar water and you think you're being healthy Well, you're not okay. Look you get a little bit of vitamins from the vitamin C that's from the oranges But you're not supposed to eat it that way you're supposed to eat an orange Right like apple juice right like my daughter's like very conscious of like food and like what's in it and she She put we went to a supermarket and she's gonna get an apple juice. She's like This has 30 grams of sugar this little thing at 30 grams of sugar like that's crazy That's just you're just you might as well have a Coca-Cola. Right. It's kind of the same thing. Yeah Your body like I think there's a there was some paper that was written recently about ice cream actually being good for you and By far the best of desserts that you can eat Because it's it's milk and cream, you know, it's like there's there's actual food in ice cream Raven every night ice cream not that bad. Look at this can ice cream be healthy What recent studies actually show recent research has sparked debate about ice cream's place in a balanced diet by examining long long-term health studies scientists are exploring whether moderate consumption may have unexpected links to certain health outcomes So ice cream is long in regards classic indulgence rather than healthy food Doo-doo-doo-doo-doo the discussion largely emerged Okay, however in recent times some surprising research has sparked a debate among nutrition scientists by saying that consumption of ice cream May be related to certain unpredictable health outcomes the discussion largely emerged from data analyzed and long-running research projects such as Nurses health study and health professional follow-up study two major epidemiological studies that track diet and health outcomes over decades Research examined dietary patterns among participants with type 2 diabetes notice unusual pattern related to ice cream consumption discussion earned. Okay. What is the discussion? Consuming ice cream more regularly sometimes appear to have lower risks of certain health conditions Especially cardiovascular disease amongst individuals of type 2 diabetes the problem is with Epidemiological studies you're just basically like filling out a form as to what you ate and they track that with like large study groups of people and they try to figure out Okay, that's one of the ways they find out like oh the people that eat red meat more are sicker But that's also like what are you eating? You eating burgers that you call red meat with sugar with a with a Coca-Cola Right and some fries right because that's what a lot of people are eating right so it's not like grass fed steak with Salad, you know, that's not the problem Remember Craig who came in here Craig from Craig told me to say hi. I love Craig. He said steak And I thought about steak. Oh, he makes a great steak. That was my joke when I got calling cancer I told Craig you're gonna go out of business if I'm not eating your steak I Don't think you have to stop eating steak. I mean, I'm no doctor, but I don't I don't think steaks the problem I think all the other shits the problem. I think it's preservatives and bullshit and process food It's just not good for you man none of it's good for you if he could sit on a shelf Like that. How's all these preservatives? That stuff wrecks havoc on your gut bacteria when you're consuming things that are filled with preservatives that those preservatives are essentially killing life That's what they do. That's how it keeps bacteria and mold from growing on the food It's it's a life killer and then you eat it go oh yum yum yum Oh, it's preservatives. So I can eat it. Mean your health your healthy gut bacteria just gets fucking nuked Yeah, I don't think his meat is a problem You know, I was on a USO Christmas tour and I ate worse on that then I would And I go how are they? Yeah, that's something they should fix that is something they're trying to fix that or if K. Junior's trying to fix that I was like they're trying to fix the drugs shakes and burgers and pizza Yeah, it's a lot of process food. Yeah, it's terrible food for those soldiers It's terrible and then you're asking them to go to perform in the most fucking scary thing on earth combat So it made me think maybe it's maybe it's all bullshit if the military's eating these same pizza and pepperoni that I'm eating at home No, they should be more no the what's bullshit is the way they treat those people That's what the bullshit what's bullshit is the the way they take care of them That's what's bullshit what's bullshit is the consideration they give to the diet of these people right you're asking these people to make the ultimate sacrifice You know, you're getting a prison food. That's what's bullshit. Right. Yeah, it's not diet's not bullshit diets everything It is literally everything like I said your body has nothing else Nothing else that it can build itself up with other than nutrients. It's all else You consume it if you don't you're you starve to death right if you don't eat you starve to death So in order for your body to take care of itself, what are you giving it? It's that simple? You drink a lot of water a lot of water. Yeah, you still drink a lot of coffee. I drink less I've been drinking coffee later in the day now I've been like going through my day and not drinking my first cup of coffee till like noon now I've been doing that a lot lately Hmm, you don't need it in the morning to get going sometimes. I feel like I do I enjoy it I indulge if I enjoy it But I don't like relying on things. I don't like having to do things I don't ever want to have that feeling so lately I've been like and I've gone days without coffee just to see what that feels like Sometimes I feel a little sluggish But there's ways you can avoid that too like I'll take neutral picks which is a brain nutrients, you know DNA and It's heat'll cold lean in a bunch of different things. I don't like there's alpha brain that stuff pumps my brain up fires it up It's just you get addicted to caffeine caffeine is very very addictive and I feel like if I can get my day going without it It's probably better. Yeah, I drink a lot less, but I see what you're saying. I love it though. Oh, it's great I love a cup of coffee I landed yesterday Austin Airport like I needed a coffee so bad I'd been out partying the night before early flight and land and you just want to cup of coffee before you even start seeing your text Because you don't want to feel and it's like the first place I go to it's like there's a long line Finally get there and it's like it's a kiosk and I'm like I can't key us I need to just tell someone to put coffee in a cup and hand it to me and I go to another place And it's like they they charge me and then they hand me a cup and go go fill it and I walk away I just can't I get so fricking cranky and I go to the third place finally and it's just like they give you a cup of coffee the kiosk and the The no employees just it all makes me so mad. I want to talk to somebody. Okay. I don't like filling out a Computer when I want something I rarely go to coffee places because I drink black coffee and Black coffee at Starbucks tastes like dog shit, right? It's all burnt and tastes terrible Just not good. I could drink any coffee. You could take old coffee put it on my gue even it's the same to me Is really yeah an espresso that you're oh, I like it. I like this. This is this is fresh. That's black rifle coffee You want some? Yeah, you can in there, dog. That's good coffee. That's real coffee son. Thank you That's coffee. Cheers. Taste that cheers Here's another problem That's good. That's not right. Not bad, right? If you get coffee from Starbucks you're getting in a paper cup and if you get in a paper cup It's not paper you're drinking out of its plastic because the inner lining of those paper cups is basically like a condom Right they've received when they break it down. Yeah, when they well if you add hot liquid to plastic That plastic leeches chemicals into your body that are not good for you. They're called forever chemicals There's terrible for you So like every time you drink a hot liquid that's in a paper cup you're sucking on plastic residue That's gross. Where gross? There's a lot of things that are gross about the American lifestyle I mean if you get coffee from Starbucks or something like that ideally you should bring your own cup Bring a mug bring you know like a little one of those little yetties, you know So it's like pouring right into stainless steel. That's how you're supposed to drink it But who does that who brings a little stainless deal not me? Gettie with them everywhere. No, but me nobody but if you did that you you get a lot less This fucking microplastics in your gut It also wreak havoc on your body destroy your immune system destroy your endocrine system It's their endocrine disruptors so stops your body from producing hormones naturally Which also can lead to host to different diseases Makes me think maybe Charlie Sheen was right after all crack smoke and crack while getting a blow job That's how to do it. You don't think he was worried about the plastics in the pipe Well, there's certain dudes that are built different and they could I mean a lot of people that did what Charlie did would have already been dead a long time ago He's resilient I do hope somebody puts him in a big movie. I like your idea. I like a good comeback store Maybe he's do for another roast. Mm-hmm Be hard now. He's all clean so birds like what did you do 20 years ago? It's like yeah, but now it's kind of doing all right Mm-hmm. He looks good looks healthy. He looked a lot better than I thought it was gonna look Look it doesn't look like guys went through 25 years of crack And he was sick Yeah, what did he have HIV? Oh, yeah HIV is weird. That's a weird one because with the medication they have now you don't really You know you're not even testing positive, but they just tell you you have it no matter what it's dormant doesn't totally make sense There was a guy named Peter Duzberg that I had on my show a long time ago and he was a professor at a University, California, Berkeley and Just brilliant brilliant guy groundbreaking work on cancer But he had a very controversial take on HIV and his take was he didn't believe that HIV is what caused AIDS He said the fact that you have HIV is because your immune system is so severely compromised that HIV shows up That was his take on it. He was ostracized. You got to realize like during the AIDS crisis Do you know who was the guy that was in charge of the medical establishment in this country? Anthony motherfucking fauci same guy and That guy had everybody convinced that we're all gonna get AIDS We're all gonna die and y'all have to take this medication and one of the medications that gay people was AZT problem with AZT was AZT was a chemotherapy medication and it was killing people quicker than cancer was so they stopped using it They repurposed it when AIDS came along and they started giving it to AIDS people because they didn't have to go through this whole process of like getting a Drug certified getting a drug to go through the FDA and all they already had a drug so they said well this drug This will be the drug we use for AIDS like fucking killed everybody they put on it killed tons and tons of people when they stopped using AZT people stopped I you know, that's what Dallas Buyers Club is all about it was all about them trying that movie with magic The conhey it was all about them trying to find alternative cures Alternative medications and being able to access alternative medications He wanted everybody to use AZT and he was like AZT the reason why they use it It's the only drug that is both safe and effective. It's literally what he said back then in the fucking 80s and That's the same guy that sold us his bag of bullshit with the COVID origins and Whether or not it was gain a function research that caused it. He's just creepy fucking guy Hmm, we never really got answers on any of this we will it'll take time But we will and he'll probably be gone by the time it's publicly understood But if you read our afk juniors book the real Anthony Fauci it'll open your mind It'll open your eyes. He talks about how they were testing out in the 1980s they were testing out HIV vaccines on foster kids in New York and killing them Jesus yeah, they tested it on on foster kids Yeah, it's real if it wasn't real. He would have been sued. He hasn't been sued for it Wow, it's a dark book dude The real Anthony Fauci I can't recommend that enough. It's a fucking terrifying book, but that's the same guy that was a part of the way so move AIDS thing The movie is gonna be weird Who would play Anthony Fauci in a movie? It'd be Martin Short. I think it's another Sean Penn tour to Ah Sean Penn was all about the vaccine. Do you miss acting? Not even a little. I was thinking about that the other day You really were in this whole other world Joe Call times makeup Yeah, locking Well, I enjoyed working on news radio and it was very I felt insanely fortunate to be able to work with Phil Hartman and Dave Foley and all those people on that show Stephen Rood and more on it more at your knees Beautiful Andy Dick was incredible Candy Alexander it was an incredible cast of people. I mean, it felt super super lucky But once it was over, I'm like, I don't think I'll ever be able to recreate that Because that was like optimal and I had been on a couple other shows as a guest. I didn't like it And I was like this is Not what I like. I only did it for money, you know It's not my thing and it's a long process dude sick sitcom hours or you know, especially in the beginning day It was like 12 16 hour days who wrote that show Paul Sims and a bunch of other writers, but he was from the Larry Sanders show You know and um he did bard walk empire after that and that's where the stuff But it brilliant guy, but that show was just like I caught they caught lightning in a bottle I got so lucky to be a part of that show and I'm like I could never be on a shitty sitcom after that You know I couldn't be on some fucking you know sloppy Can horseshit you went high brow with fear factor. Well, I took that because there was no actors First of all, I took fear factor because I thought it was gonna be canceled. I thought this is gonna be give me a lot of material They're ever 148 episodes Yeah, it's nuts. Have you seen the new one? No, I haven't but Johnny came on Johnny Knoxville came on to do it I didn't see the ludicrous one either but How long did ludicrous do it for? I don't know. I don't even know that till now. Yeah ludicrous did it. I think was it on MTV Jamie I think he did it on MTV MTV did it for a little while, but I think he did it for I don't know how long But I love Johnny Johnny Knoxville's right. He's the bass a true gentleman sweetheart. Oh, God. I love him so much I hope it does well You know, I hope they don't hurt anybody That's the problem like when fear factor came back on NBC When we came back in 2011 when we only did six episodes They were really trying to make it bigger and better. I was like Jesus Christ. We're gonna fucking kill somebody right you felt like it It felt like when it was canceled. I was happy. I was like Fuck this You're done. Yeah, well that you got canceled because they had a drink come Do you know that? No, you don't know that? What? Yeah. Oh, yeah Yeah, they played horseshoes to drink donkey come Why's they still talking about Andy dick at news radio? No, no, we're talking about fear factor now And anyone drank people come Please he's a gentleman Um, but yeah, that happened. That's what got the show canceled But that this is because they were just trying to make it as outrageous and possible as possible It's like the early you were right at the beginning of that crazy. This is it fear factor donkey juice This is it They had to play horseshoes and They drank donkey piss and donkey calm There was three sets of twins and one twin had to drink the calm. Look at that. That's a mug. Oh, come Oh my gosh, it's so foul. Wow. Yeah, so TMZ. I think Got a hold of the clip or images and said that fear factor was doing this and it never aired in the United States But it aired overseas it aired somewhere in Europe. I want to say the Netherlands or Denmark or some shit Yeah, now you survived good times good times now you're drinking delicious coffee in your pollution hanging out with you I love it. Do you know I'm known you since you were Jeff Lipshitz? I've known you since your best joke, which was Never trust a hooker with a walkie talkie You go out there don't you were like 25, but you're like I've learned a lot of things in my life Yeah, I'd ever trust a hooker with a walkie talkie was that the joke? Um, and no it was I went to college for three years. You know what I learned? How did it go? Don't trust hooker was walking with walkie talkies. I know I don't know me since Jeff Lipshitz, but still by the way, I'm still Jeff Lipshitz How did it go? Don't you guys talk to us about walking with walking talkies? I know. I don't know me since Jeff lit. I'm still by the way, I'm still Jeff Liftsholds. My ID, my passport. Maybe you shouldn't tell everybody. Sorry. We should've hit that. It's at this point. When did you change its a Ross? What year was that? Oh, I could tell you. What happened was I got booked on Star Search down in Florida. Like my first time on TV, you know, we were all starting to get like on MTV and Star Search. Those shows were coming around. And I go down Orlando when they were shooting it back then. And Ed McMan was the host. And he kept introducing me by fucking up my art this week's challenger, Jeff Liftshitz. And I broke out. And it would screw me up. Then the next I'd won. And then the next day, it's like this week's challenger, life shots, he would just screw it up every time. And on the flight home, I was like, I either have to, if I really love comedy, I was like two years in, I go, let me think about this. Ross is my middle name. John Stewart was John Livetz. And he had told me he did it for the similar reasons. Of like, no one can, if I asked you to spell Liftsholds right now, you've been you couldn't. And you'd known me 35 years. So I was like, all right, either I'm going to have to change my name or my whole family's going to, I don't know what to do. So Ross, it just made sense. It's easy. Yeah. It's easy. Jeff Ross. What was that McMahon like? Uh, you know, did you ever hang out with him? I shook his hand and that was the end of it. I didn't get to know him very well. I heard he was an animal. I heard he drank a lot. Yeah. But then I made some joke like that. And people got mad at me online going, don't disrespect that McMahon is. Was he gone by the time we made that joke? Yeah, but recently because they rebooted star search just now. Fuck people online. You can't listen to that. Oh, dude, that's another thing. Sagitt taught me Bob Sagitt like block the haters. Like, you know, we would argue about this because like, he would block people. And I go, well, then they know you saw it. Just ignore him. Let him float out to see. He goes, no, he goes, no, I want them to know that they're blocked. He goes, and I don't want them following me. I don't want, I don't want to say funny things to people who say mean things. He valued himself. I say don't read the comments. I say don't even pay attention. Let them exist in the ether. Well, you're off social right now. Yeah, you told me. Yeah, I post things, but I post in ghost. That's what I tell people post in ghosts. Just post things. It's like people know about stuff or something's interesting. You know, someone sends you something interesting. Like, people should know about this. Right. That's it. Get out. I got better instead of using social media. Seth Green is my neighbor, good buddy of mine, the actor. And he started doing this during the pandemic. Sort of texting or liking people stuff. He FaceTime. It takes longer, but he's like, it's a real connection. Oh, it's a FaceTime. You know, and so it's just even if it's for a minute. What if you have an Android phone? And you're fucked. And my friend Benji, a Flawlow, goes, he quotes Brody all the time. He'll just he'll write, he'll text me. Emojis, positive and a check, positive check in. Yeah. He would just positive check in. Positive energy. Positive check in. God, he was so fun. Here's another guy is on my fucking contact list. That's gone, but I miss. I almost wore my Brody T-shirt today. I was thinking about him a lot lately. I don't know why. And enjoy it. And enjoy it. Has there ever been a comedian who's been less famous, but more his cadence has been more like remembered. It's almost like him and Dangerfield have the most memorable deliveries of all time. Especially for us, for the guys who are around him. He was so, he was just such a unique dude. He would show up at the commie store and pull into a lot of everybody smile. When I first met him, I really, truly hated him. It was literally like the mid 90s Joe, like in New York. And I can't believe I haven't thought about this in so long. The show that it's so funny. The show that's coming out tonight, I started developing 30 years ago, my grandfather died. I live on my grandfather. And it was a way to process it. And it was emotional. And I was doing it at little alternative comedy spaces in New York. And I didn't know Brody. And Brody would sit in the front. He was obsessed with it. Because I was like talking about stuff that hit for him somehow. And he would sit in the front. But he would shh, like overlap or twitch around at a seat. So then, you know, I'm developing this like one man show is like different than stand up. And he's like, he would want to talk to me about it. And he would say like weird things that kind of threw me off. You know, he would notice the differences. And I said, listen, man, HBO's coming to see it next week. Could you just not be in the audience? You're like, OK, I understand. I'm the guy who bothers you. You don't like me. I get that. I go, no, it's not that man. It's just that like you're like, hey, one, eight, till I die. You're distracting me. And I'm not like, you know, I was only doing for comedy a few years. So then HBO comes and Brody, I walk on stage and Brody's in the front row. So afterwards, I go, dude, what the fuck is your problem? I told you not to be like, there were no other seats. I couldn't miss it. And our friendship grew where we both moved out to LA and we became such good friends that I had a comedy central show. He was the warm up. I had to have him around me all the time. I felt safer and better. I think we both grew from like, I was a model in Pakistan, cover of Camel Beat magazine. I dated an amputee. We met on StubHub. What was the word about the Nickelback tour jacket? I was a Moroccan role hall of fame. I saw the Nickelback tour. It was in the Lost and Found. I love Brody. Look up Brody's Stevens. I heard you talking about him the other day about his friendship with Zach Alifanaki. Yeah. And were you there when they did the memorial at the comedy store? No. I had a good line. I don't like those things. I was backstage and Brody's like college baseball coach, high school baseball coach, and all his friends all spoke for like an hour. And then they bring me out. And they go, after hearing all Brody's friends talk for now, I'm starting to understand why he killed himself. That's why I don't like those things. It was beautiful. I prefer to mourn people solo. It was beautiful, actually. Well, Brody was a beautiful guy. That's our world. We got to remember these guys. I know we do. Well, one of the good things about podcasts is the world gets to understand a lot of these people. Here's talk about all these people. I think our world is more understood now in this day and age with a podcast world. And I think it's ever been known before. More criticized, but that's part of the problem. That mean that's part of the process of it. That's normal. But also more understood. Like people get it. They get it. I remember when you're in art form. When you had Gilbert Godfrey, that was great. Killing was awesome. I don't think he fully understood what was happening here. But I remember really enjoying your interview at Gilbert. What do you mean you don't think he understood? He don't start or he done. Right, but he. He. This is. Starn this fast and jumping in. Joe, you know, like impressions. This is more of a conversation which Gilbert in his spectromy thing. You know, it's tough. A lot of yes and no answers. I thought he was great. Yeah, but I loved him. You know, and he knew I loved him. I was always a giant fan of his. So it was like, I think it was pretty easy. I wear a Gilbert Godfrey shirt in the special. That's cool. Hold to be true. He was sweetheart. It's so sweet God. It's so fucking funny too. God damn that guy was funny. I just love watching his sets in New York. The best, especially like in the 90s or no one knew who he was. Like, oh my God. He's such a killer. One of his last times on stage, I was at an improv in Florida. And he came with his family. And he came on as a surprise guest. He walked out and he told this long crazy joke about skull fucking his dad grandma. The crowd. So it is funeral. And it's funeral like a year and a half later. I said, Gilbert's comedy was fearless and ruthless and subversive yet he was so lovable that he could get us to laugh at a joke about skull fucking and dead person. And then I looked at his coffin and I said, not so funny now. I go. I go. I love Gilbert. We've had the very unique opportunity to be around some really truly exceptional people. Rare, rare human beings. And so many of them. We're so rich in our associations with so many completely unusual people. There's one more Gilbert story. One time we were roasting Joan Rivers. I was producing it and I booked Gilbert. And I'm on the phone. I'm smoking her joint. And I go, I got one joke I like, but I can't do it. He goes, what is it? I go, well, you know, like Kanye West mom had recently died during a plastic surgery procedure. It was the background. And I go, Joan Rivers, you know, Joan Rivers, Kanye's mom has a better plastic surgeon than you. And I go, but I can't do that. And Gilbert goes, I'll do it. And that's what I realized I was being a pussy and I had to do it. So I did it. So he pushed me. That's awesome. That's awesome. He's a really special, special guy. We're lucky to do his Jeff. We really are. We're lucky. And especially now that we know all these people that we just talked about that were amazing and are gone. We're lucky, we're still here. Being a comedian is like a backstage pass to the world. We get to see things you never would see as a civilian. It's true. Did I just went to cutter, Jibouti Africa? You're in Jibouti. I think it's a good idea. Jibouti, you did stand up there? For the troops. Chris, Chris, with Device Chairman of the Joint Chiefs. So the Patriot missiles that they're using now is a two of the bases that just got hit just a few months ago. Wow. That's not it. You get to see. And when you're with Device Chairman, you're sometimes you're on FOB's, I call them, forward operating bases. They don't even tell you where you are, exactly. Oh wow. You're 80 miles from the Iranian border somewhere in Kuwait your cutter or Jordan. So cool. Wild. You've always done a lot of stuff with the troops. Yeah. You're doing that from way back, from like the early 2000s. 2003, my first trip to Iraq, which were who I carry. Wow. Yeah, he took me in 2003. Saddam was still alive. I went back in 2005. I've done probably 100 of those shows all over the world. Wow. The Bass Man. That's why I'm a comedian. That's the best feeling. That's the best feeling. They say, oh, thanks for coming. And I'm like, thank you, man. Just forget that I'm like entertaining. You know, you're doing a show for people who are star-friendly and tame. It fills me up. Like it invigorates me. They're not drinking. They're the best crowds. I highly recommend it. That's awesome. All right, dude. Your special isn't out yet? Tonight. Tonight, look at you. A Netflix comedy special, longest special Netflix ever did. You got the Bobby Brown microphone on. I sing. I sing the song in the show. The perfect song in the show. The sweet sour mix. Look at that outfit. It's a suit of armor. This guy, this guy, poor guy, lost his hands in an explosion. Oh, geez. I asked him why his wife never got finger-banged. Jesus. It's a multimedia show about my family, about resilience, about bouncing back. Are those screens in the back wall? A bunch of different screens? Yeah. And they show different things on them? Yeah. The dog saw that's cool. You're going to love this show. I'm sure I'll love it. It's about some of the stuff we were talking about. Like when you take a hit, getting back up, that's awesome. And what's it called again? It's called Take a Banana for the Ride. When I was an ochre miker, I would take my grandfather to his doctor appointments. And then at night, I would go in New York and try to get on stage at the open mics. And my grandfather would give me a few dollars for the boss and tolls in a banana. Take a banana for the ride. Kind of his way of saying, I can't go with you, but I'll narrow it to you on the ride. I just tattooed a banana with my mom's would ride. I love you or I miss you and put them in my school lunches. So I found an old letter with her handwriting and made a tattoo. Oh. So now I always have a banana. This one Eddie Vetter drew. It says born to roast. Oh, that's cool. All right. It's out now. Ladies and gentlemen, go watch it. Jeff Ross. I love you, buddy. Love you, Rob. Thank you. Bye, everybody.