The Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast my night All day Alright thanks for doing this, I appreciate it Oh you're welcome I've enjoyed many of your videos online, so I'm fascinated by these theories that you have And so that's one, that's so excited I'm excited that you're here Could you please first of all, could you tell everybody what your background is Like, what did you start off doing? Professionally I started as an apprentice In an engineering company in Manchester, England And worked through the apprenticeship received my German papers Worked for a couple more years in England And then I was recruited by an aerospace company in America And I'm a graded to America And what did you do for this aerospace company? When I started out as a late turner, that was my specialty A late turner? A late turner Yeah Alright so I was a late hand, right? So I operated You know horizontal lays, vertical lays In England, they had what they call them vertical boring mills And in the States you have to learn a different language right there The cultural difference is between, right? So you pick up different terminologies for things Like, they call over here, they call it vertical turner Like, in England they call it a vertical boring mill And so you're working with machines And when did you come up with this theory about the pyramid? Well, I too, I had been in the States for a while I came over in 1969 And in 1977, I picked up Peter Tomkins book, Secrets of the Great Pyramid And I started to examine that book And one of the things that Tomkins, he asked a very significant question in that book And he said, does the Great Pyramid in trying a lot of science? You know, it's the Great Pyramid, a product of that science Does it reflect that science? And I took that question very seriously And that question was in my mind as I read through the book And then I started to explore some of the references that he provided in Babylography One of them was the work of William Flinders' Petrie And he described lathes being used in ancient Egypt He described very large, core drills up to 18 inches in diameter And he also claimed that they were using circular saws When he's describing this, what kind of metal would they be using? Well, that's the thing, the question really demands that you explore all methods That you are able to, when you satisfy the historical record Say the archaeological record and you say, okay, I'm going to try this Well, that's not going to work, that won't work So we'll try this, we'll keep improving methods and tools until we arrive At a solution to explaining the artifact That's the important thing, that's basically the demands on a manufacturing engineer Which I eventually became So, you know, a customer comes in They bring a part to the company and said, I want you to make one just like this What is the, what do we do? Well, we have to know what it is And to do that, you take measurements You determine materials, how it was manufactured You look for tool marks to see what processes may have been involved in it Whether they would die, whether there's machining marks in areas You look at the wells, did they weld some parts, did they braise other parts And then of course the geometries And basically that's your model, that's like, okay, I've got to make something just like this Right, but when you're making something, like if you're looking at say, some of the stone work It was done in the pyramid where there's not in the pyramid But in some of the quarries where you see these core drill holes Right, like how would you reverse engineer that Like how would you figure out what could possibly do that? Well, that's the interesting question And it's a, it's one that's been a huge debate going on about that And it really goes back to 1984 And I had published an article called Advanced Machineing in Ancient Egypt Question mark And it was published in Analog Science Fiction Science Fact Magazine In August of 1984 See, it's a long time It's not before you were born I was in high school Yeah, you were Yeah, I was junior in high school So it was And you know, Stanley Schmer, Dr. Stanley Schmer, who's the editor of analog Very respected editor selected for publication And we went through the editorial processes, just new changes Stuff like that And then it went out And so what did you, when you look at the core, the drill holes The vases are another, like, very fascinating and real gigantic mystery That's how those were constructed And we'll talk about those as well Is that what it looks like? That's a model of one Yeah And, but the core holes itself We had a debate recently with Graham Hancock and Flint Dibble And one of the things that Dibble had suggested was that they had done something with sand And that that was how they were able to do this with copper and sand And they were able to drill Does that make sense to you? Well, I mean, I've heard that, that theory About how they were done And I know that there has been work done To prove that that theory is the correct one But central to explaining at the actual core If you go back and reread Petrie, he described a spiral groove Around a granite core And he said that it had a pitch of 100,000 per revolution of the drill And so that's what I was going on When I claimed, well, what kind of a process would you need to Can I stop you there? When you say a pitch of a thousandth per... Yeah, for every revolution of the drill It sinks into the granite 100,000 cib in each Okay, so because of that, you know that this thing has to be operating at a certain speed Not necessarily rotational speed But the penetration rate So we cheat with the rotation, it will go how long? How far? 100,000 cib in each Which is almost at one-eighth of an inch So that's pretty impressive when you're talking about solid granite correct Yeah And that probably wouldn't be possible with copper and sand No, it seems like sand and copper just are not abrasive enough No, I contacted a company to specialize in drilling granite And I asked them how many... What is the feed rate? That 100,000 of an inch would be the feed rate of the drill What is the feed rate of your drills when you're drilling into granite? And I got a response from him And he said, generally, you know, our drills, the diamond They're diamond, they rotate around 900 revolutions per minute And the penetration rate is about 2 tenths of an inch per revolution So, 2 tenths of an inch of a 10,000 Oh, 2 tenths? 2 tenths, I'm sorry, yeah, I missed a book So, 2 tenths of an inch is like 500 times smaller than 100,000 of an inch Wow, so these drills that they use in Egypt were capable of drilling with each revolution 500 times more than modern diamond drills that were used by people who cut into granite That penetration rate was 500 times, right? So, it might have been operating a slower revolution, but when it's going through its full revolution It's much more effective That's what I concluded, and I didn't know Now, is this in multiple different drill holes? Or is it one individual sample that they found that seems to operate at this depth per revolution? There have been inspections on several different cores They all yielded similar results And they have all revealed that the groove is a spiral In other words, it's a continuous spiral around the core The most recent examination of those cores was in 2018 by two aerospace engineers Eric Wilson and Josh Gear And they asked the Petri Museum in London permission to examine the cores in their collection The Petri Core number 7, which is the most famous core And the one that has drawn the most heated kind of debate about Can we see what that looks like, Jim? Can you find that one? Petri Core number 7 It's on that, uh, yeah Because this to me, and the vases, obviously, and of course the construction of the pyramid itself Also, the symmetry of the faces There's so many things that are so mind-blowing about whatever they did and how they did it Forget about all the mysteries Just what we know in terms of, okay, so these are these two core samples These are these two core samples, no, they're the same one And therefore, lost technologies of ancient Egypt And essentially, what happened was There was a buck written, I think it was in 1999 It was by Chris Olga, beherald, and Ian Lawson And it's called Geezer the Truth And so what they did is they had contacted, or they had associates They went into the featured museum and examined the core To see if it was actually a spiral So they took photographs of it, and they examined those photographs And they said no, they're horizontal Now there's a big difference when you talk about a horizontal groove And a spiral groove And so I was like, okay, I suspend all assertions As far as the methods that I proposed, for how it may have been done I need to go and examine that item myself And so I booked a flight to England and I, a friend of mine in Cambridge Picked me up at the airport, Nick Anis And we went to the picture museum, and I examined the core The method I used was to just wrap a simple cotton thread around it So you just followed the groove with the thread With the thread, but I was wearing a rubber gloves Well, yes, I was wearing a rubber glove, but I was also wearing a visor with lenses in it The gave ten times, so you can really see where the groove is right Yeah, you would find, you would find, find those items in it Any tool to make a spiral groove So if the lines were horizontal, you would go around in a circle Then you'd have to cross over the ridge to hit to the next circle Yeah, but in this case, it was continuous No, you know, I mean, it was continuous, right, so how did they miss that? That seems like this is such an important piece of history Such a fascinating thing to examine, look at this mystery You have this granite core, how do they do it? There's lines on it Are they horizontal or are they a spiral? And then they just go, it's a horizontal And then you come along with string, and you're like, no, it's a spiral Right, like how does someone screw that up? Yes, I mean, they would say that I screwed it up, obviously But the thing is, Joe, is that, you know, when you're conducting research, anybody, whether you're a scientist or just a, you know, Joe Blow in the toolroom And you say, okay, this is what I found And these are the methods I used, and these are the results Okay, so you said, you describe your experiment, you laid out, and you explained in detail how you did it Wouldn't with today's technology, wouldn't it be really easy to scan it? Well, it is not, yeah, and then they would, so have they Done that, have they definitively proven one way or the other? There, I don't think there is a really high quality scan That would be necessary, I mean, I've learned a little bit about scanning It was just being introduced into manufacturing when I retired Just before I retired, we started to look into it And we bought this white light scanning system But now, this is our so advanced The system's out, and you feed your air in your head And you would feed it through AI, and it would tell you exactly Well, yeah, I mean, basically, you could slice it, dice it, examine it anyway, you wish But you need to have qualified people to do it Not anybody, there's not qualified, could I go in that? Right, so either way, these cores and those drill holes represent something sensational Something absolutely amazing Some 4,500 year old drill that somehow or another was more effective than drills that are being used today Yeah, but you know the truth of the matter, though, Joe What? It's probably the... What is she just telling, then we know And so many missiles? It's probably the most insignificant artifact I've looked at I'm sure, but you've looked at so much in Egypt But to me, it's like a corner piece People are freaking out over it, yeah, how could you? How dare you? Well, I'm sure, because it throws everything into flux, because the assumption is, they did this through intense labor Over long periods of time, and it took forever to do Right. And if they're operating at a pace that's 500 times more effective than a drill that's used by a modern... Have you talked to other people that go into granite? Are there more sophisticated drills that work better? Or more powerful drills that work better than his? You know, you know that the thing is, in manufacturing, and this is a fact You don't know the full scope of what engineers are capable of doing Right. Because you're not in every shop, in every country, in every town, in the world And so nobody... Nobody knows exactly what all engineers are capable of There may be somebody actually reproducing the features on that, I'm not caught somewhere Using some method. Right, you still know it, you don't know But from the person that you talk to, that does it professionally, that uses high-level equipment, His drill was 500 times less effective It was the feed rate was less The revolution could have been more, I mean you said it earlier, I said, could have been rotating slowly Right. It didn't have to spend very fast, in fact it's better when you're machining hard material, grinding hard material Is that you don't? Because heat is the biggest enemy of a tool Oh, that makes sense, yeah, that makes sense, yeah, yeah, okay So what do you think if you had to guess that they were using? I actually created my own core, just to experiment And I learned a lot doing it I didn't use the same method as some of the other researchers that are out there that did it I had a copper tube, and I had corundum with corundum Oh, I say a very, very hard grit that you used to grind into hard material So the copper tube would be flat at the bottom, and then you'd put the grit in, the grit would act as Right, right, and so you'd rotate it, rotate it, rotate it, and you know, I set up a jig of tube And just ground it, ground it, ground it, ground it, ground it Just so that I could see the results of that But one thing, they say the copper was the only metal that was available to the ancient Egyptians But when it came to knocking out the core from the hole, I tried copper, and it wouldn't budge it So I had to use a steel chisel Is it possible that they use something else like heat? You know, I'm actually leaning more towards that Because of the difference in the finish Like if they poured boiling water in it or something, would that loosen things? I don't think water would be it, but the, if you could be difference in the finish, I'm sorry, would you? Yeah, yeah, that is, that, I don't think has been discussed enough Or recognized to be important, enough, is that when you use a debracery, like sand, or like hammering, or something, Or like hammering, or anything, to grind out a hole, or do whatever, you leave a sanded finish, naturally Polished, not polished, sanded, sanded, smoother, is that what you mean? It could be smooth, but it's definitely got a sanded finish And what is the difference in a sanded finish in the finish of a diamond bit? Well, we don't know if they were using the diamond bit, but that's what they do today That's what they do today, so what is the difference between a sanded finish? Well, and, well, you still have the same thing, you're using an abrasive Right, you're keeping the abrasive as cool as possible, as you're grinding away, but you're still grinding it And so your finish is not going to be polished, unless you have a secondary process, where you go in and polish it with a finer grit You don't start with a very, very fine grit, because you won't get anywhere with it Let's take a look at some of those holes, Jimmy, can you show us some of those holes, the drill holes, and granite, and ancient Egypt So here we can see right here, which is absolutely wild Some of these images, I mean, that is absolutely wild Right, I mean, how the hell did they do that? Well, that's what just about, this is like an engineer's playground, oh, they go through there Right, and for, as an engineer, you must be just scratching your head Yeah, fascinating stuff, yeah, definitely Jimmy, click on that, well, there we go, that's a good one I mean, that one's wild, that is just absolutely crazy That is what it looks like, it's an abogorab, and it's an alabaster Have you ever measured the circumference of these things? No Have you measured the diameters, have you measured the, whether or not they're equal circles? Well, they are definitely round for sure Perfect, yeah, perfectly round? I wouldn't say perfect, no Absolutely no, you can't say perfect Right, right, of course, no, so you think it's perfect Right, but, they're round, close enough too And so these, wow, look at that, that is amazing So these circular holes were definitely cut by some kind of a drill That's agreed upon, yeah, okay, yeah So if you couldn't do it with the copper, like when you tried to do it with copper, how long did it take and how much results did you get? Look at this. The circular marks, man. That is crazy. There's a few days. That spiral right there is absolutely nuts. I mean, it just clearly looks like a drill hole. Yeah, I think that's my photograph, actually. Is it? I took that one. So how long did it take you to drill a hole? Probably a day and a half, two days. Day and a half, two days. And how deep was the hole? The hole was probably two inches, two and a half inches deep. Well, that seems like it's doable, then, right? If you could just keep doing it day after day, week after week, you would get a big core. Yeah, and that's basically what everybody concludes. The Egyptologists will conclude that they had all the time in the world to do these things. But wasn't the pyramid of Giza, the Great Pyramid? Wasn't that supposed to be completed inside of 30 years in that hypothesis? I've heard anything between 10 years and 100 years. Yeah. I have no money on them. It's just guesswork, right? Yeah. I mean, there's what is it? Two million, 300,000 stones. Right. And the heaviest ones in the base, what are the heaviest ones? Well, the ones that we know of in the Great Pyramid, way up to 70 tons. And those are the things that are grounded. The granite ones in the King's Chamber. So there's that. So the drill holes, which are just absolutely fascinating. And then this pottery will talk about before we get to the hole, what you think the pyramid is. So the pottery, like these vases that you're seeing about. I shouldn't say pottery. No, they're not. I'm wrong. They're actually solid carved. And they're carved out of very hard stone, right? What is it? They're carved out of? Oh, granite, right? Diet, granite, iron. And igneous rock. And the crazy thing is how well they're done. And if you show it, could you pick that thing up to show everybody? The crazy thing is that it's not only perfectly symmetrical. Again, don't use the word perfect, right? Because it's within what width of a human hair? Well, you can. It's some crazy. Yeah, like two and a half thousand. Is there something like that? Two and a half thousand of a human hair. Are you going to use one of these? Yes, I have. All right. So measure the lip there. All right. See that? Yes, sir. Measure that. And then turn it 90 degrees and measure it. Okay. This obviously is not a real one. You wouldn't be letting me hold it. No, that that is actually a 3D print. About 3D print from the STL file. No, obviously no. Okay. It's a copy of the original. And so basically. So I'm measuring it here and then I'm going to measure it here. So it's essentially exactly the same everywhere, right? Is that the idea? It's within about a thau thau and a half. It's got a little bit of a chip in the top of the way. Yeah, well, you don't. Because that's how it was, right? Don't measure that. So it's perfect in except up to what percentage of human hair again? I would say in chop talk is perfect. In chop talk is perfect. Yeah. But the, uh, but it's, uh, yeah, a human hat, two and a half. So this is how you measured all with this, this equipment. Well, this was a different thing is it's like you couldn't spin this on a potter's wheel. This is what this is where it gets really crazy. No. Because of these handles. Right. Now these handles are also carved into the vase and people would say, what's the big deal about a vase? Uh, the big deal is these goddamn handles. That's big deal. Because even if you just slowly and meticulously with the finest of craftsmanship spun this to a perfect accuracy, just with like high grit sandpaper, you know, where it's slowly over time made it perfectly round and you got so good at it that you get it within how much of a human hair again? About a human hat. Okay. It's a half. Okay. Let's say it's a human hair, which is pretty small. How the hell are you going to do these handles? How are you going to make these perfect too? There's another question that you need to ask to. How do you get the inside out? No. What? How do you measure it to be assured that you're within that human hair? Right. What kind of equipment are you? What kind of instruments do you use? Yeah. It seems like this would be a problem. Like I don't think they had this. And if they did have this, they didn't have this part. How do you know? I don't know. I'm guessing. I don't know. No. No. But we're thinking about what they had. We're not thinking about things like this. We really don't know. Well, obviously we don't know if we can't locate that drill. If you can't locate that drill, like the drill's real, the hole's real. If you can't locate an ancient Egyptian drill. So there's a bunch of pieces of pottery. And all of them have the same sort of similar measurement to them in terms of their perfection. Actually, some of them there's one. I think it's most more precise than that one. Really original. Yeah. They call it the spinner. I think it's that one at the front there. And we rotated that on the road tap, a damsel metal stamping. And we staged it so that we were checking concentricity or run out all around. So we put an indicator in various places and then spun the road really table to check the run out. And that thing, that one's spinner, they blew me away. When you're measuring a diameter, just a straight diameter. And you're checking the run out on a straight diameter. And you have it, OK, that's within 2000. You only have that one axis that is actually affecting the movement of that indicator that you're using. On this bowl, when you're on the side of it on the crown, not right to the top. But just below it, you're at a place where the movement in two axes, two axes, is affecting the indicator reading. So any error that you have vertically or horizontal is? They meet at the top. Yeah. It's going to, you're going to gather an accumulation of error in run out. And how accurate is that one? The spinner. There was probably within a thousand and a half. A half. What does that mean? A thousand. One half of the thickness of a human hair. What are you within a thousand and a half? A thousand. What does that mean? A thousand. One half a thing. There's a human half the thickness of a human hair. And one of the vases that's incredibly impressive is there's one with a longer neck and a lip on the top and then it bowls out of the bottom. Yeah. And it's again all carved out of granite somehow. Right. And how? How did they do to do that? Well, that's the thing. I think we're excited. There's some other ones, Jamie. There's one of them that has a longer neck. See if you can find it on mine, maybe. Yeah. That seems to be stuck in a time walk where we're trying to come to terms with how the pyramids were built, which is how all these artifacts were built. What's the difference? Oh, OK. It's a nice posh cup. Can I keep this? Yes, sir. It's all yours. Cheers, mate. Thank you, Jamie. So continue? So we're lost in history. So yeah, I mean, so we have competing forces. We've got on one side you have practical engineers, practical scientists. And they want to measure everything exactly and regardless of what current theories prescribe how they were made, they want to explore other methods. However, on the other side, on the side of the engineer, I mean, engineers, archaeologists or Egyptologists, they believe that if you're examining an ancient artifact and you're a modern engineer, that you have to work under the guidance of an archaeologist or an Egyptologist. Otherwise, your work will not be recognized. That's weird. And that is happening. I mean, that's a fact. And they admit it. So that is the situation. They say, I think it's a systemic problem because it is certainly not a way to do science. Well, and also, they're not educated in those disciplines. Suppose, oh, bingo, yes. I mean, so they wouldn't be able to understand what's required to do that. Now, what the conventional explanation being some sort of copper and sand, if that's the conventional explanation, there's no evidence of any copper drills, correct? If you got to the Cairo Museum, they have a, I think there's a tube that they describe as a... But nothing, that can carve those large holes out of ground. Yeah, they're just going on the assumption that only copper existed during that period. And so that was the metal that was available to them. That was the metal that was... The tubes that they have in the museum are these tubes, authentic tubes that were used on the site for something? I would have to go back and refresh my memory on that because it was quite a while before I looked up. But the point is, they don't... They have a replica of an ancient boat. They know they're boats, they know what the boats looked like. They don't have the actual drill. So whether it's something exotic that we didn't know that they had capability to create or whether it's what they think it is, neither one of those exist. They don't exist. Okay. No, I mean, nothing exists. Everything right now is theory. Okay. And so we're stuck in a bit of a time, we'll talk them with a stuck... It's between two disciplines. So what is the reluctance of the archeologists to accept the findings of the engineers if the goal is the truth? So if the goal is to figure out, instead of just having assumptions that you're gonna cling to as dogma as to what was done. Wouldn't the goal be, let's find out what the truth is, what's capable of doing this? If they talk to enough engineers, and especially enough people that actually carve into granite, then you would get an understanding of what we know today. This is the only thing that can do this. This is how it's possible. Yeah, and then you would try and reproduce the artifacts of the ancient Egyptians that produced and then compare the results. Right. That's what you have to do. So the reluctance is they don't believe that the Egyptians had any more advanced technology than what we assumed they had, which is pulleys and ropes and copper tools and sand in the like. Yeah, one would assume that you'd have to ask an Egyptologist, and you may get a different answer, depending on who you ask. I'm sure. Yeah, sure. There's probably a lot more open-minded people coming up now. Yes, particularly in Egypt. Yeah, there's a tremendous kind of the quiet revolution going on in Egypt because you feel like you're going to be welcome. If you're not welcome somewhere, you find someone. So when I put my work out and I was talking to people in the 90s on message boards, and I could see that I wasn't getting anywhere there. And I thought, well, OK, who has the most again? And who has the most to lose? By opening this up and exposing everything. And getting it out in the open. Who has the most again? If they come down on my side and who has the most to lose. And obviously, those who have the most to lose are the Western institutions who have written the history of the world, written the history of Egypt. And so I decided, well, I have to appeal to Egyptian engineers. And so in my second book, Lost Technologies of Ancient Egypt, I put out a challenge to modern Egyptian engineers to go out and check the artifacts for themselves. And that's what they did. One man, one engineer, I don't know how many other engineers were involved. But also, I'm talking to Egypt, toology tour guides. And the message I'm getting is that the Pyramid of Tomb Theory is pretty much underway out. The young people are being energized and looking at their artifacts in a different way. So the engineer that I took up the challenge is called Amid Adley. And he followed my path. He went into the Serapeum and checked those huge granite boxes. He did a study of the statues. He presented the Giza Power Plant Theory to a physicist at Cairo University. And it's like, wow, times are changing. The Egyptian youth taken all of the rains. And they're excited about that future. Just recently, there was a, there's like a stem class. It was put on by an American University. It was held at the Grand Egyptian Museum. And there were over 200 students that took place. And the professors and teachers of these students got Amid Adley involved to design experiments, to talk about pyramids as energy sources, talk about the statues, symmetry, design projects that the kids could do. And even to the point of taking a slab of copper and trying to cut a brick using the old method, just so that they could get a hands-on feel for what it was like. It's all very well to sit at home in your armchair and come up with a theory. But if you don't go out and test it, then, are you just going to buy it, rope that? OK, OK, I respected, I respected Professor tells me that this was done with copper chisels, a couple of slabs. And it's well, if he says it, then he's got to be right because that's what he's paid for. He's paid to teach the truth. What is the oldest known iron that we are aware of? In terms of steel. Yeah, that's a little outside my wheelhouse. I don't know. I won't be able to answer that accurately. Right, but they don't think that the Egyptians had it. Well, that was metal iron found in the Great Pyramid. There was. Yeah. I think it was during Peter's time, an engineer called Perrying Discovered an Iron Plate that was lodged near one of the shafts. Wasn't there also? Didn't one of the ferros have a dagger that was made from a meteorite? Supposedly, yeah, a meteorite. OK, so how old is that? I don't know. And really, when do you talk about when you talk about the smelting of iron? I mean, I think you had that discussion on with your engraving. Did you be talking about that, General? And they're smelting being, I could have been no better. Let's find out what is the conventional date that they use today for the smelting of iron when they start doing that? I think the discussion was the appearance of lead and the in these ice cores that were drilled. Oh, that's right. Right. Industrial activity basically what they were looking for. So 1,200 BC. OK, the history of Ferros, how do you say that word? Ferros. Ferros, metallurgy began far back in prehistory, most likely with the use of iron from meteors. There you go. The smelting of iron bloomeries? Is that it? Bloomeries, are you saying? Begin of the 12th century BC in India, Anatolia, or the Caucasus. Iron used in smelting and forging for tools appeared in Sub-Saharan Africa by 1,200 BC. So it could be that these Ferros, the one that had the iron dagger made out of a meteorite. Maybe that was later. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah, too done common. OK, so for sure it was. Look at that. Meteorite iron dagger. Wow. So that's 1334 to 1325 BC. Interesting. Well, that's earlier. That's earlier than they said people were smelting. But they found it. They don't know when they made it. Yeah, but that's different. But if it's too done common, that's his time. Yeah, but that iron came from outer space. Right. So they could have hammered it into that position. Yeah. So they didn't have to smelting. So we know they were aware of it, at least, at this at 1300 BC. We know they're aware of iron. But there's just no evidence of tools. Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't say I don't know if they knew what the metallurgy of these materials that they found. But they had a material that they could shape. And they shaped it into a dagger. But we don't know if they shaped it into tools or shaped it into some other pieces of the iron plate. Right here it says it was unlikely that it was a byproduct of copper smelting operations. It was badly corroded. The outer layer of the iron have been badly corroded. Now formed by an iron oxide significant proportions of gold were found in one of the oxidized layers. And the plate may originally have been gold plated. New data coupled with the original archaeological information. It strongly suggests the iron plate is contemporary with the building of the pyramid. And that it is, therefore, one of the oldest known pieces of iron. Yeah, I think Patriot described it as having a new malight that had somehow been deposited on the surface. So at least that's some evidence of iron in great pyramid. But it's hard what iron was it smelted in this question. Did they have the capability of doing that? And when? Right. And when? Right. So it's just pure speculation as to what they use for the core. What is the conventional thought as to how they made these vases? I mean, there are demonstrations of crafting ancient vases. But I think this recent research and the discovery of the precision of them, which had always been a question mark until just recently. People would go through the Cairo Museum or in any museum in the world. And they would see these beautiful, finally crafted artifacts made out of big news rock and they would extraordinarily precise. And I've done that the same. I mean, I look at them and I was like, wow, I'd like to get one of those in my shop. And just check it out. Well, quality inspection. And so for years, that was a, for me, it was always a question. I loved to know how precise those vases are. And then in 2018, I know the owner of that original vase, Adam Young, he came on the tour. And he befriended my son Alex. And they were talking about the vases. And Alex was a quality inspector, quality engineer, to the company that I worked at. And since he worked at another company in Indianapolis, now I think he's working in the metrology lab at Rolls-Royce in Indianapolis. And so he's like, well, we should scan them. I'll do it in inspection. So Adam brought his vase down to Indianapolis and to where Alex was working. And he got permission from the managers at the shop to do an inspection of them. And he seemed like, you talk to people, shop people, right? People who are actually out there every day, making quality parts that people do people's lives depend on. If you fly on an airplane and I told one of the, there's another owner of vases, got a lot of them. And I told him, I said, you're carrying in your hand an artifact that is more precise than some of the parts that were installed in the engine that was on the plane that you flew. And he's going. And he's like, wow. OK. I mean, that's where you bring it home. And so all these guys who are making these artifacts, and they're held to exacting standards every day. They can't slip up. They can't make mistakes. There's no fudging or faking anything. Otherwise, you'd be out on your ear. Oh, people would be falling out the sky. It's right. Right. So that's for those parts. And these artifacts were more precise than that, which is just you say, not all of them. I mean, there are parts in an airplane, engine or aircraft engine that are more precise. I mean, features of the parts are more precise. And that's where, and could I, I want to explain something here because I think it's a very, very important point. And it has confused a lot of people. It really confused a lot of people. The apart, any part that you have, whether it's say something for your car, say a crankshaft or something like that. Take a crankshaft. It's got very precise features on it. And then there are features that are not so precise, because they don't need to be. It all depends on what the customer requirements are. So they don't build precision or require precision in a product where it's not needed. That just weighs the time. It just makes it more expensive. But now you have people who are looking at some of these artifacts like the boxes in the Cerapea, and they're finding imprecise areas of the boxes. The photograph of me inside one of those boxes, where they tool-makers precision square. There's nothing simpler, right? You take a square, you stick it out, and you check to see if it's square. If the surface is flat, is it square? Yeah, that's fine. And now you've got guys going around on the outside of the box and finding inaccuracies. Some areas inside boxes that have inaccuracies. And now they're calling me a liar. They say that I faked and fudged measurements. It's like the cancel culture they want to get away from. What is there the beef? You used a square and you measured things and you found it to be precise. And I said, holy shit, look at this. And what are they using? Before the whole thing. What equipment are they using that's showing that your measurements are were inaccurate? They are not. They don't go to the area and show that the area that I was checking is imprecise. They will find some other area that is less precise. Point to that and lead the viewer to believe that that defines everything. Right. So everything is not precise, but much of it is. Yes. OK. And the areas that aren't necessary to be precise like the outside of the box are not as precise as the inside. So we're saying? They don't have to be. Right. They don't have to be. So when it comes to precision, like the precision of the faces, for instance, and some of the sculptures, what is the conventional explanation for how precise they are? Because these are massive faces that were supposedly carved by hand. But the accuracy on either side of the face is so phenomenal. Yeah. Like bizarrely so. Like how accurate? Well, exactly. We don't know. But I mean, as far as the methods that I used, which is like 2D photography and then comparing features in the computer for symmetry and geometric features. Nobody had done that before. And so I come along. I say, wow, this is actually. It kind of hit me. It was in my first time I went to Egypt, and I was at Sakharan. And I was looking down the length of the statue of Ramesses at the Open Air Museum there. And I said, well, those can astrals are extraordinary symmetrical. I mean, they match. And most people's nostrils are different if you look at them. And so that's my photograph. There's the measurements on each side. They're exact. Yeah, they were exact as actors I could make. But I qualify the work that I did by saying, this is not the final answer. There needs to be more sophisticated measurements taken, more accurate measurements taken. They need to be scanned. And then they need to be analyzed where you have a precise scan where you're not trusting your eyes. You're actually trusting the tried and true development of laser scanners. But at the very least, the amount of symmetry that exists in these massive statues is spectacular. It's mind blowing. I can't even express it. It's absolutely mind blowing. You look at the one with the- How large are these that we're talking about? Well, the one that I measured was the first one was the Luxor of Music. And it's out. I would say it would probably got four feet for something. But there's very large ones too. They're just the face and the headdress. They're larger ones, yes. I think the one that was taken from the Ramas CM and is now in the British Museum was a large statue. How big was that? I think, well, they say that the statues that the Ramas CM made up to 1,000 tons. I'm not sure. But they're really big, really big. 1,000 tons. Look at that. I wouldn't want to say, yes, 1,000 tons. But I would say they were extremely heavy. Now, what is the conventional speculations to how the symmetry was achieved? I've heard different ideas where you take a mirror and then you match it when you guide your hand. And another one where you take a point, and you set a depth and then you transfer that from one side. Oh, yeah. And those are, you know, I mean, I don't know anybody who is a precision manufacturer who would accept such an explanation. And really, at the end of the day, you have to say, OK, we'll show you what we'll show you. And we'll match, you know, show me. And we'll check yours and compare it to the original, as they only way to solve the problem. And so this is just one example of one of the mind-blowing mysteries involved in this culture. That they had some kind of capability of not just doing that, and not just making the vases, but also making the pyramids themselves, which are beyond comprehension. They're huge. I mean, you know, the thing is that you have, I don't think, I want to say, not all engineers think alike, right? But I've never been with an engineer who has examined this subject from Bintu Egypt that is not absolutely blown away by what they're seeing. And I'm saying, no, no, you can't do it by hand. You can't hold those kinds of tolerances by hand. You look at the Ramsey statue, and you look at the symmetry. It's not two-dimensional symmetry. I mean, I was just measuring a two-dimensional photograph. It's not two-dimensionally three-dimensional. So that radius that you see going around the jawline is moving in three axes, right? XYZ. And you're still coming up with a radius, perfect radius. Crazy. No. And so let's go to the pyramid itself. So you have a very fascinating hypothesis as to what the pyramid or theory, as to what the pyramid actually was. And it's based on where the supposed Kings Chamber is, where those passages go through into it. And what do you think that thing was? Well, my first book pretty much describes what I thought it was in 1998, which was a power plant. The book is entitled The Giza Power Plant. My second book is evolved. And I describe it as an electron harvester. So it's kind of like you could describe it as both. But today, when you do all people, any decade, they think of a power plant. And they see these chimneys with smoke stack. Or a new plant. Or a power plant, a nasty, unclean. But an electron harvester, clean, pollution-free, not a problem. Has that been achieved conventionally? I mean, today, is there a thing called an electron harvester? I think that actually, when you look at a generator, that's an electron harvester. Because we don't create electrons. We just harvest them. They just know what we do it. And so when you say an electron harvester, you could say that, say a wind generator, we have a windmill. You have a generator inside it. And then you collect an electrons off the commutator in a generator. And that's where the electricity comes from. And that's where the electricity comes from. Or hydroelectric, do you still go the water? Yeah. You don't create, you just release them. You harvest it from a process. Yeah, I'll just put through a process. And the process that you think they use in the great pyramid involve those shafts? And it involves a lot of things. Yeah, it's not just one single thing. It's a system, not a single thing. So when you look at it. We show a photo of the pyramids and the shafts and where the King's Chamber is, where you, I know that you've described this before. Do you have a photo of... I do. I suddenly... I just kind of figure out which one you want. Okay, this perfect. This works. Yeah, that works. So these names, the King's Chamber and the Queen's Chamber, you don't think that that's actually a King's Chamber or Queen's Chamber. You think it's something else. Well, I'll have respect to the Egyptians. I caught what they call them. Yeah. Okay. But I do have a different terminology for them as they function. Now, the initial surface of the Great Pyramid is covered in smooth limestone. So it's polished and shiny and apparently it would collect insane amounts of light. The, well, the outer surface of the Great Pyramid, mostly is missing. Right. But it has been described as if it was finished and depending on the polish that it received, yeah, it could reflect a lot of light. Do you think that that had something to do with the design of this power plant? I don't think... I don't think there's any part of that pyramid that did not have, did not serve a practical function. Okay. Don't think there's any part of that pyramid that did not have did not serve a practical function. Okay, so this is the image that you have here. And what this image shows us is the Kingschamber, the various shafts, the southern shaft, the northern shaft. And these shafts have been described as portals to stars because people have looked up through there and you go through the shaft, you see stars, but what you're saying is something entirely different. What do you think these shafts were for? Well, I think they serve two different purposes. Actually four different purposes, if you will, because in the theory that I propose, which is, I don't know, it's a speculation of there as well, the whole process is kind of like a heuristic process where you're grabbing information, you're moving a, it doesn't matter what source you're getting it from. Right. Because when you are looking for answers, you look everywhere, you try and find, you know, you look everywhere. So when I was going through the process of trying to figure it out, I was collecting information from every. And one of the, you know, for the southern shaft and the northern shaft of the Queenschamber, that was a huge mystery to me. And I tried to fit it into what were they doing? I mean, if you look at the details, the facts of their design and what the ancient Egyptians were doing, why they designed them that way. You have two condors coming into a chamber, but they're not connected to the chamber. And we didn't even know they existed until 1872 or for a women Dixon. Show me that I'm just going to please. So they're coming into the chamber, but they don't enter into the chamber. So they stop their original, their original design had the, the shafts ending five inches before coming into the chamber. So you had like five inches of limestone that was left in the block. So did someone remove that limestone? Yes. Why did they do that? Wayman Dixon, because they were examining the chamber and they were poking around. And Wayman Dixon, it is reported. So the legend goes, noticed a crack in the wall. And so he took a rod and pushed it through the crack. And the rod, he didn't meet any resistors. He kept going. So he had his worker, a worker come in, built ground with a hammer and chisel, and say chisel, chisel the limestone around that people are stupid. Well, they did. Yeah, they didn't have ultrasonic thickness. No, but still, god damn, to have the arrogance to go and chip away at the pyramid because you're curious. Look at how it, you know, I don't care for revisionist historians because you know, you have to consider what people were doing, their mindset in the day. And then you, I try to look at the on the bright side, right? It's like, I don't look at it as a negative thing because if somebody hadn't opened up those shots, we wouldn't know about them. Right. And, and it's saying with the same with the chambers above the kings chamber, without how it, how it buys and his military expedition blasting his way up into the pyramid. We wouldn't, we wouldn't know about them either. You won't be at, I mean, there's a lot there, I think there's a lot there right now. And it's been investigated now. But there's things that have been revealed through scanning like moo, off of the mooography, the moo, the scam pyramid project. And they found that large void above the grand gallery. Right. And so, you know, which is larger than the kings chamber, right? It's longer than the kings chamber. And so that's not even represented here on this. It's about the size of the cabin on a Boeing 707. Wow. So if these shafts came through and then they met limestone at the end, what do you think was going on? In order to answer that question, I had to look at the rest of the pyramid. Okay. What was it doing? And how was it functioning? And so one of the key pieces of evidence that I used to propose a process that was going on is the northern shaft. And the northern shaft has dimensions and has an appearance that is similar to a waveguide that you would use for microwaves. And the dimensions of it would be approximate wavelength of hydrogen. It's playing a waveguide. How does that work? Yes. It's like a waveguide is to transmit microwaves. Electro magnetic energy, you know, in the microwave region. And it is passed more efficiently through like a tube or waveguide. And that's what they use. I mean, they're very complicated systems. And so how did this represent in your mind what a waveguide looks like? Actually, you know, the idea of a waveguide came to me from a guy. We were talking about the pyramids. And I was, I carry it. I used to carry a schematic of the great pyramid in my back pocket. And I made an engineer and I go, hey, come here. Let's start going through. So what do you think about this? Because, you know, I was like, I was looking for answers to gesture and brainstorming and anything right. And it's like, so these these shafts are right here and he looks at it and he was into electronic electronic engineering and he's like, hmm, they look like waveguides to me. And I thought, well, that's interesting. They look like waveguides. Okay. What if they are waveguides? How did they function? I mean, what were they using waveguides for in ancient Egypt? And so I started to go down that rabbit hole. And that led me to the Queen's Chamber and I said, okay, waveguides, you need a medium, you need a microwave to go through a waveguide. What frequency of microwave was it? Right. And you look at the dimensions and you come up with a matched for hydrogen. How do you do that? How do you come up with a matched for hydrogen to the dimensions? Yeah. Yeah. The wavelength of hydrogen is 8.39 inches. And the width of the northern shaft is 8.4 inches. And a waveguide generally has the wavelength and then about half of the wavelength in height. So it's a rectangular shaft. Just like all the shafts are. Yeah. And the, well, the, yeah, the Queen's Chamber shaft is a little more square than the King's Chamber shaft. So did a different function? Different function. Yeah. So these waveguides, you believe, what are they connected, collected and where are they getting it from? Good question, Joe. They had, we up on barded with microwaves every day. I mean, it's the signal from, they say, the big bang. And you know, there's a, it comes from atomic hydrogen out in the universe in outer space. So we're being barded and you believe that this passage is so collecting this. Yeah. So anyway, so then he said, okay, if we build a device and we say, and we want to energize hydrogen, we bring it to a high energy state. And just like, you know, in a laser, where you have microwave amplification through stimulated emission. So, so if we want to collect energy that is in a gaseous medium, say that is hydrogen medium. And the electrons in the hydrogen are pumped up to a higher energy state. And we want to collect the energy in that introduce a microwave signal, direct it through that gas and stimulate the emission of the energy, collect that energy and shoot it up the sudden shaft. And so that was like, okay, that might work. So what kind of gas hydrogen? And so where are you getting the hydrogen from? Queen's chamber. So there's hydrogen in the Queen's chamber and how does it get in there? The shafts. But they doesn't come in as hydrogen. That's that's a part of the theory in the gaseous power plant was it, you know, there are two chemicals that are introduced into the chamber and the chemicals mix and they boil off hydrogen. And these chemicals are just coming from the radioactive waves of space? No, no, no, the chemicals I believe are manufactured and delivered to those shafts and coming from the right. So they add some sort of chemicals to it. And what function does the limestone have at the end that keeps it from going into the King's chamber? It keeps it blocked off. Well, to answer that question, I was having a chat with a civil engineer who was putting in a septic system for me. And so with a leech field and he was doing a percolation test. This is in Indiana, Indiana is known for its final limestone. His name was Roland Dove, the city engineer and I asked him, I said, well, what do you do? How does this function if you are in an area where the top where there's not much top soil? You know, you scrape away maybe a flood of top soil and then you're on the bedrock. What do you do then? And he said, well, if your limestone is permeable and basically you follow the same steps that you would as if you were digging into earth, you know, just dirt. You dig a hole, you cut a hole in the limestone and you determine how quickly the water would disperse or would actually seep out. And I was like, wow, okay. So why don't you tell the axis of filter? Not a, well, it would have felt to yes, but definitely the water would not just stay there. It would go through it. But it would go through it in a certain rate. And I said, okay, I said, let me ask you this. How do you determine the flow rate? How would you determine the flow rate of a column of water going through limestone? And he said, well, that would depend on the head pressure. How much pressure? What weight is pushing against the limestone? Right. Right. And I would go, huh? Okay. That's interesting. So then I go back to the drawing boards. I go back to my blueprints of the Great Pyramid and I'm looking at the southern northern shaft of the Queen's Chamber. And I see that they both of the shafts go up to an area that nobody knows where it goes. At that time when I was doing research, nobody knew where they ended. So, but I was thinking, well, if they are feeding a call, a, you know, a chemical, they would need to be assured that they can maintain a particular head pressure. That would be calculated the weight of the column of fluid. And essentially, as these are on an angle, you know, you calculations may get a little more complicated. But you would figure it out or you could do it by trial and error. But not all the evidence was in to really kind of solidify that. There we are. Right? It's like, okay, I've got this much data. This is what I'm working with. There's a lot of unknowns. I don't know. So what do we do? And then in 1993, the German engineer, Rudolf Gantambring, he was invited to Egypt and he was working under the German, the German mission in Cairo. And he had permission to, oh, they wanted him to actually examine, get a row, but examine all those shafts, both the Kings Chamber and the Queens Chamber. Actually, no, mostly the Kings Chamber. They wanted to ventilate the permit. And so they wanted to make sure that the shafts were clear and that when they install their fans, that there won't be any obstruction. And so he built a robot to go through these clean, clean the shafts out and install fans in the Kings Chamber. But he'd always been a mystery in the SARS-the-Queen's Chamber shafts. Where did they end? Oh, but he knew. Nobody had explored them that way. So he proposed that they allow him to build another robot and examine the shafts in the Queens Chamber, which he did that. He had a robot they called it, Uport, which means that opening up the ways. Right. And so with his robot, he had a, you know, he had a tether behind it. And you know, a camera lights and it crawled this way. It was like a track vehicle. And there was a mechanism for the upper track that caused it to grit the ceiling. And they, it was able to climb up the shaft. And they were looking for where it ended. And they found where it ended. After, you know, a few kind of obstacles, bomb being, what he called a tank trap, which was like a depression in the floor of the shaft about a drop of about two inches, which is another story entirely. I don't think, I don't think the, the full truth of why that is there has been figured out yet, or explains, but they're working on it. And so his robot went and got so far up the shaft and they had discovered that there was a block at the end of the shaft. And through the block, two metal fittings metal metal. We don't, I don't know. So a person hasn't gone up with there and gotten a sample of it. So I don't know. There's some kind of metal fittings. They assumed that they were copper. And how far is it from the outside edge of the pyramid? Well, you do ask them all good questions. I don't have that information in front of me. But I would say that if you are wanting to reach the, the end of the, where that something shaft is, the, the shortest route that you, you can take will be through a horizontal passage that goes directly out to the outer surface of the great pyramid, just a horizontal passage going up, going down. So when you're seeing the shafts, no worries. Or helpful with that part. I want to see what it looks like on the outside. Yeah, that one. Yeah. So, so say it again. What would be the best way to access it? Yeah. I mean, if you go to the end of the shaft and just have a short, horizontal shaft going or passage going out to the, going out to the outer face, you would have a short distance. And if you went up, you know, or down. So that would be the ideal place to have access to it. But it doesn't go, this makes it look like it goes all the way to the outside edge of the pyramid. That's not the case. Well, the queen's chamber shaft. No, the king's chamber shaft does go to the outside. It goes all the way out. It goes all the way to the outside. Okay. And so the queen's chamber shaft, it stops quite a bit before the outside edge of the pyramid. Right. Right. So both of them function in a different way. And so you feel like in the king's chamber shaft that something was poured in some kind of chemicals is poured into those shaft. Queen's chamber shaft, but not the king's chamber shaft. Not the king's chamber shaft. Okay. So the queen's chamber shaft, what is the difference in why do you think that there was chemicals poured in that and not into the king's chamber? Because the the queen's chamber was the reaction chamber. So that's where the cut, the hydrogen was produced. The hydrogen filled the interior spaces of the great pyramids and also which included the king's chamber. And then through the action, different actions, whether it be the frying effect, which we can talk about, and that's the release of electrons from the lithosphere or the reaccumulation of vibration or the collection of vibration. And how it was centered or focused into the king's chamber, it created a highly energized atmosphere. So have they found access to the northern and southern shafts in the queen's chamber? To the to the shafts. Have they found access where the Egyptians would have been able to pour chemicals into those? No, not yet. Not yet. No. But they have found something that's not represented, represented on this image, another chamber, right? Which is more recent. Right. I mean, my my new book has updated images in it to describe what is what new has been discovered. And that new chamber is above the king's chambers, correct? It's actually above the grand gallery. Okay. And it kind of wraps around or is, you know, close to the northern shaft. That's an interesting place for it to be too, which prompted my research associate Eric Wilson, who is a aerospace engineer to suggest that that actually feature if it is what he thinks it is, would complete my theory because it would serve as a preamp for the microwave. So the microwave, he said that was the thing that was missing in my theory was that I didn't, there was no preamp. So is there an image that we can look at that shows where this new chamber, the newly discovered I should say chamber? Can I take a break? Yes, I need to go, Lou. Yeah, absolutely. We'll be right back. All right. So you were just discussing the chambers and how you believe fluid was in the shafts of the Queens chamber and that it somehow another created hydrogen with these chemicals. How is the microwave going through those chambers, if it's blocked off from the outside, is it penetrating through the stone? Well, it doesn't go into the Queens chamber. So that's through the Kings chamber shafts, which are open. Okay. So the Kings chamber shafts is what's collecting the microwaves. The Queens chamber shafts have the, what you believe some chemicals in there. Right. And then what is happening with those chemicals? They're mixing and bollig off hydrogen. Okay. So they're creating hydrogen. Right. And what is the function of the space in those shafts? Is that help the chemical process? Is that what it is? The space in the shafts. Were they filling them up with liquid? Oh, yes. That is the, that is predetermined to make sure that they may tend to head pressure. The, the fittings are the metal fittings I describe as switches like fluid switches. So if once when the fluid or the chemical was covering those, those metal fittings, I call them electrodes, the, they would be a closed circuit. When the, when the fluid level drops, it would open the circuit and sink and signal the lead for more chemicals to be pumped in. In order to maintain the head pressure, in order to make sure that there is an accurate supply of that chemical. And so that chemical would pool up inside of the Queens chamber? That it would probably, yes. I mean, we don't, there's a lot that is missing from the Queens chamber. You have a, a niche in the East wall. We, we don't know what that was for. I suspect that it had something to do with, they may have been an evaporation tower or something like that where the, the chemicals may extend wicked up through some materials. And you know, it may, it was maybe a dried. Can you show me the image, yeah, please. Yeah. And so, so here we have the, so there's the chemicals that are in the, the shafts. You have the Queens chamber, which is collecting the hydrogen. And then what happens into the Kings chamber? Oh, well, while that is going on, the, the Kings chamber is vibrating in sympathy with the earth. And it has, it has actually a coupled oscillator with the, how so? How does that work? Well, a couple of oscillators, a device that's attached to a larger vibrating device and, and is in sympathy with the, what is causing the Kings chamber to vibrate? The, the passage of vibration through the pyramid of the earth, of the earth, which is assisted. It's coupled by using what I call a Tesla device in the, in the subterranean chamber. Because you've got, you've got three, four, you've got several systems in there, right? So if you got the subterranean chamber, that, that serves one function. You go up to the Queens chamber, that serves another function, you go up to the Kings chamber, that serves another function. And then between, you have the grand gallery, the ascending passage, the descending passage, all of these things are there for a reason. And so the subterranean chamber, how do you think that worked? I, I would speculate that, and actually if you, if you read Tesla and some of his writings, he suggests that with a very little energy, you could, you could build a device that imparts energy or thrusts into a structure. And if it is in harmony or the exact frequency with that structure, it could bring the structure down just by an accumulation of, of energy, of vibration, the amplitude would keep, and if you kept pounding it and pounding it and pounding it eventually, it will come down. The, I mean, that was, that's why they, they instructed soldiers when they're on the march to break step, when they cross a bridge, because their footsteps might cause the bridge to oscillate and, and destroy is a very destructive force is, is this, you know, frequency though, oscillating vibration. So what would caught, what kind of device in the subterranean chamber would do that? He built a device that delivers thrusts and powers, it was electromagnetic earthquake machine, it's called, right? You could do it, electro mechanical, you could die electro hydraulic or, you know, just anything, but it had, you have to be able to time the action. And so, okay, you think of it like you've got, you've got a device, you've got a you've got a shaft coming out of it. And you've got a hammer or you've got a, you know, copper pan or whatever at the end of it. And you design it so that that shaft is going to push out at a particular frequency. So you got to like a pest boom, boom, boom, boom. And so you put it against a structure, that structure has a natural frequency, all structures do. You might hit one with a first and don't think it had, you know, it would resonate at all. But if you go, the first, the first strike may impart enough energy to move something maybe a couple of angstroms, right? And so it's like very, very mind you movement. Right? The next one will move with a little more, then you just keep pounding it, just keep pounding it. And as you pound it, the oscillations become bigger, the amplitude becomes bigger. And if you keep doing it, you can bring it, bring the, the whole thing down. So the key is to do it at a rate that is able to utilize the hydrogen. Well, you know, at this point hydrogen has nothing to do with it. I mean, this is, this is just a totally separate subsystem. It doesn't care if there's hydrogen in the pyramid, but this is the subsystem exists to vibrate the king's. Just to connect the pyramid with the, right? Okay. So it's, it's vibrating the pyramid. Yeah. And the, the hydrogen in, Pyramid. With the... Right, okay. So it's vibrating the pyramid. Yeah. And the hydrogen in the Queens chamber now makes its way into the Kings chamber. Well yes, I mean it flows up through the ground, along the horizontal passage through the Grand Gallery and up into the Kings chamber. So all this is connected? Oh, that's connected. So the hydrogen goes up, it goes in the Kings chamber, which is a phenomenal structure. Right. Carved out of granite from 500 miles away, massive stones, the biggest stones in the pyramid, correct? Right. And so what happens with the vibration of the pyramid through this thing that's connected to the earth and subterranean chamber, constantly hitting boom, boom, boom vibrating, the hydrogen flows into the Great chamber, the Kings chamber, or the Kings chamber is vibrating, and then you have these shafts that come from the outside of the Kings chamber into it. Right. So what's happening there? Okay. Well let's go back to the subterranean. Subtrainian. Right. Okay. And let's talk about not what happens in the pyramid, but what is happening in the earth. Okay. This is where we introduce Tesla technology and also the work of a NASA physicist called Freedom and Fron. Just keep that thing up there, Jim. So Freedom and Fron has done a did research on earthquake lights. And his objective was to try to determine if we could detect or if we could have an early warning system for earthquakes. And he was using NASA satellites to survey the earth and to observe for where when earthquake lights show up. And his theory, it's not really a theory, it's a scientific fact, is that in the minerals in an igneous rock, you have these positive charge carriers. But when they are stressed, they will shoot to the surface. And the positive charge carriers like the column holes, he describes it as a new physics, but it's kind of related to semiconductor physics, which is a little bit my head. But still, he's talking about releasing electrons from deep within the earth. And those electrons, when they're stimulated to move, they move very, very quickly through the pyramid through the earth. And they seek the highest point on the surface of the earth. So you have Tesla on one side and he's saying that if you could put a like an earthquake machine and just drive frequency into the planet, you might be able to release the stresses in the earth's crust and also reduce the possibility of an earthquake. I'm not saying eliminated entirely, but at least I'm... You would release some pressure. Yeah, you would release some culture. And so, you know, with that, it's... It becomes... You put in these little bits of better information together and you combine them and you say, maybe there is something here. I think, you know, the biggest discovery, which is not talked about very much, is a freedom of friends discovery of the physics behind the earthquake lights. And he actually experimented in his lab. He has a U2... There's a U2 video with him. He explains it a lot better. Do you want to pull that up and watch it? Well, we could. This is... We'll get flagged. Oh, okay, then. Use this U2 video. Oh, okay. All right. So, for those, you know, listening, you can search freedom of fraud and just fraud in FRE and E-F-R-E-U-N-D and TEDx talk in Christchurch, New Zealand. So, it's an excellent video. Okay, so... Okay, so... So, something is happening in this subterranean chamber. Yep. And this something is causing the pyramid and the earth around it to vibrate. And how is that affecting the hydrogen and how is that affecting what's happening in the King's chamber? Okay, so you have a combination of... You've got two different kinds of energy now flowing through the Great Pyramid. Okay. You've got electromagnetic energy and... From the ground. From the ground. From the ground. From the ground. From the mechanical energy of this thing that's striking. You have the passages that are filled with chemicals that's causing the accumulation of hydrogen. The hydrogen is making its way into the King's chamber. And then what is the function of these passageways that go into the King's chamber from the outside? Well, the Northern shaft carries a microwave signal. That signal passes through a amplifier and then the signal enters into the chamber and collects the energy that has been accumulating in that space. And it's like a laser or a maze of, you know? So the chambers are collecting microwave energy from space. Yep. It's going through them and it's going... Excuse me, the passageways rather. It's going into the chamber, which is vibrating and it's filled with hydrogen. So what is this reaction that happens when these two things meet? Okay, the action of that is the same as a laser where you have the introduction of a photon in a laser, right? A photon passes through an energized medium where the electrons are pumped to a higher energy state than the... That photon collects another photon and then another one and it just builds and builds and builds and builds. But it does it, it's a speed of light, obviously. And so that's why when you say you have a laser point, that process is what happens before you... Before the light appears on your slide or whatever, you press the button and it's kind of instant, right? But there's a lot going on since when you press that button to create that laser light. I see. But it just happens so fast. So this king's chamber, when it has the hydrogen in it, you have the electrons, you have the vibration of the thing, you have the microwaves coming in. What do you think this... Oh, you have microwaves coming in, but then you have power output. Power output. So the power output is the cellance shaft. And this is where there's another piece of key evidence. Jamie, could you show the slide that shows the opening of the southern shaft, please? It's crazy that this makes sense. Well, I... I'm sure I was trying to get... There's a bunch of slides in here that are really interesting, but we haven't got to them yet. Well, we've got time. We'll get to those. What it said, yo, I don't know about me. You're doing great. I made pass out. Oh, it comes coffee. Here's the northern shaft, but I don't know. Oh, that's the northern shaft. Okay, shaft. Wait a minute, go to the newer slides. I think there are better images on those. Yeah, these were created back in the day. Okay, hold on. Yeah, nothing's it selling on. See, okay, here. Just up here, okay. Okay. All right. So my first book, I didn't have a really accurate description of the northern shaft. Okay. And so since then, we got the cadroins of Rudolph Ganton bring, but when he did an examination. And he did a great, great job measuring everything, every angle, distance all the way to the outside. And so this is taken from his cadroin. And I just kind of made it a little more striking clear of people could understand the complexity of that shaft. And also to point out some of the details that are pretty mind blowing. You have four bends, one, two, three, four. Before it goes into the kings chamber. Okay. Now, where is that opening? It is at the quarter wave location. And in a resident cavity, the highest amplitude could be found as a quarter wave. So it's like, if you've got a standing wave in a resident cavity, it's the quarter wave, the quarter of the distance along the length of the cavity, that's where your amplitude, that's where your energy is high. So at least in this placement at a firm of your theory, that's where it would be. Right. But the other thing is, and this is this information, of course, is common. I mean, I've talked to people who worked on Wade guides, Eric Wilson is very familiar with them. And he did a study of a gantambrings drawings and he said, yeah, there's this. And he's pointing out different unusual features in the shaft that seem to appear in the design of modern waveguys, because you have changes in dimension. You have these steps. There is a, like a bump in an area. And it's all to kind of massage manipulate the beam as it comes into the pyramid. But then when it comes to entering into the Great, the Kings Chamber, they go through four bends. He said that's to be able to correct the beam. So that when it does enter the pyramid, it is coherent and it goes in straight. Wow. So it's literally how you would design it. The other thing, yeah. The other thing is that the, and this is mind blowing, and it will tell you a lot. There is another drawing of a plan view of that shaft, Jamie. Oh, I think, wait a minute. Yeah, no, below the one, but below that one directly. Yeah, no, you passed it. Yeah, that one. Okay. So you know the commonly held theory about why those shaft exist is to ventilate the Great Pyramid, right? Mm-hmm. And that the reason why they have those bends is for it to encircle the Grand Gallery. So there doesn't interfere with the Grand Gallery. Now, if you just don't ventilate the place, you know, you would, would you need that, that many bends? But look at the distance between the Grand Gallery wall and the North shaft. It is 13.6 feet, right? If you take where the, the level where the shaft enters the King's chamber and you take it straight past the, the Grand Gallery, you're looking at dimension E, which is 41 inches. So it would clear the Grand Gallery. It didn't have to go through all those bends unless the wall blocks of the Grand Gallery were so large that they didn't want to interfere with them. And so does that suggest that the wall block thickness because we don't know how thick they are? We don't know how thick they are. But that suggests that they are maybe just a little less than 13 feet thick. That is mind blowing. Oh, heavy little things. Yeah. So, so this, the way it's set up here, now, especially when you're looking at it from this, it really does kind of make sense that this is a passageway for gases and energy. The way I'm looking, I mean, it looks like, if you're looking at it, like this looks like like a system. There's a machine. And you were, you were pointing about, you were talking about the Southern shaft. Right. And then the Southern shaft, there's an outside image. Yeah, it's different. Yeah, good. You sure? That one. Which, uh, images it? Oh, it's coming. I think, I think you're going the wrong way, Jamie. There wasn't another picture there. I can Google it if you want me to find it, but I don't know if it was. It's in there. Uh, go down. How many images are in here? Uh, hundreds. How many of you want? The first stops is right here. Whoa. Hold it. No, just above. Right. It was right below the previous picture that we were talking about, number 47. That's, no, just below that. Yeah, there. Okay. Okay, so the bottom left photograph is the opening of the Southern shaft. I mean, yeah, the Southern shaft of the King's Chamber. Okay. I took a photograph of it in 1986. Okay. Do one on the right. I took in 1995 and that was after Rudolph Gantambrinkard installed the fan. But if you look at that opening, you see that you have like a bulbous opening almost and looks like a microwave on antenna. Right? So it's not, it's not just a straight, simple shaft. It's like a cat just mid. Okay. Yeah. Right? I mean, it's just all of these different features of this chamber that most, I mean, you would overlook them, right? But you would design it that way if you were trying to catch microwaves. And so the Southern shaft and the Northern shaft have different functions. And you believe that the Northern shaft is collecting the microwave energy. It is channeling the microwave. Yeah, I mean, they would have some system on the outside to collect them. You know, I mean, they may have a very large area, actually collecting microwaves and feeding it to a reflector that is directed down the Northern shaft. I mean, if you know that there are eight sides to the pyramid, right? Each side it dips in. So it's not, it doesn't go straight across it dips in. I'm not, I don't know where that reflector would have been positioned, but they could have been reflecting microwaves off of the surface of the Great Pyramid to a reflector. At a distance away and that reflector channeling it down the Northern shaft. That would be one way to do it. That would be one way to do it. So either way, you believe that the Northern shaft was somehow another collecting microwave energy and the Southern shaft. Do you, what would they do with that energy? This is the question like. Well, that's, yeah, that's the, your signal input. That's what enters the King's Chamber and stimulates the mission of other photons. Right. But one of this, once this energy is connected, once it's, once they haven't collected, how are they, how are they using it? How are they utilizing it? Your, your guess is as good as mine. I can, I mean, I can only imagine if they can dream up how to build this system, how they, how they machine those precision bases, how they built the boxes and the set up PM, how they created the statue. And knowing that there is so much missing from that culture. Not only that, but knowing that you have to have something that you can use to make this in the first place, like what kind of material are you using to carry these things? There's so, there's so much missing. And you know, it's kind of like, all right. So you're saying that you use the pyramid to create energy and with that energy, you do how would your power tools to build a great pyramid? That doesn't make any sense. Doesn't make any sense. Right. So there were probably some other methods that were not aware of. Yeah, obviously, I mean, you build, you build any power plant. You're going to have, you know, you're going to have generators on site. They're going to wheel them in and also does not going to be your first project. You know, you, you already have some understanding of how the stuff was making this scale. Well, I mean, our industrial development, 200 years of development, imagine if it's 500 years of development, 100,000 years from now. From now. Right. Jamie, go back to that image where it showed the cross section that he said, we'll stop at this one. No, there was one earlier, but that's fine. Either one of them. There was another one that showed like sort of a cross section. That's it. That's it. Thank you. So this gives us an understanding of what it would look like originally. There was a gold cap on the top, smooth limestone on the sides. Do you think the function of that gold cap was because gold is used in electricity? It's going in electronic components. It's a great conductor of electricity. Well, this is where you combine the Tesla's technology and also, for all, laboratory experiments. And in the laboratory, what Freud did is he got a granite slab, a couple of means of feet, a lot of feet long. And he put it in a hydraulic press in order to test his theory. Igniress Rock is put on the pressure. It releases electrons. So he wanted to test that. And he said that the granite up in his concrete press. I mean, concrete press. hydraulic press. And then he ran away through an oscilloscope. And then attached it to a copper cap on the other end of the granite. So there has to be some kind of a connection. All right. So he got electrons moving. You know, he got positive charge carriers shooting through the granite. And they're handshaking at the end with the negative electrons. And everybody does a happy dance and fires up their microwaves. Just kidding. But that is seriously. And then you combine that with Tesla and his proposal to build a system that where you can transmit electricity wirelessly without wires through the earth. And you built the walled and clipped tower, which was like a structure that would radiate that power. So that's the inspiration for this image right here. So the idea would be that this whole thing would be emitting wireless electricity. Yes. And so that they would be able to utilize that somehow. Like Tesla had theorized. Tesla actually implemented it right in tests, right? Yeah. I mean, Tesla power, Tesla Tesla cars to probably. So have you debated anyone about this as any Egyptologist or any person who doesn't agree with your theory, sat down with you and tried to pick it apart? I am not a fan of debates. Myself. I mean, I know it's good theater. And some people are really good at it. And you were able to demonstrate that the other week. But I'm not a big fan of them. I'm not sure as far as scientists go, or science, or putting work out there for examination by your peers. I'm not sure that it is helpful to set up a shouting match or a... That's interesting. But I'm just interested to see what other people have to think about your theory. Because this is really fascinating to me. I'm looking at all this and I'm like, wow, this makes so much more sense than having this thing there as just a tomb for a dead guy. Well, there's not a lot of evidence that that's the case because they've never actually found... No. No. I mean, if you asked me, what was it for help? Chris, what the hell were you thinking when you came with it? What were you thinking when you said? And that is actually a key question because, you know, if you're an examiner or if you are pleading something or somebody is challenging you, what your state of mind was when something happened and event happened, what was your state of mind at the time is important. And my state of mind at the time was the tomb theory is a dead theory. I don't accept it. The pyramid, because of its design, its features, its precision, it looked like a machine, perhaps it's a machine. And if it is a machine, how did the machine operate? So that's basically what my state of mind was. And the evidence that I was looking at was evidence of a level of sophistication and a structure that actually demonstrated the highest level of state of the art, that civilization or that culture produced. Or any culture. Any culture. It hasn't been replicated since. How is that possible? How is it possible? The whole thing is so impossible. Like if you wanted to have the best evidence that we don't know shit. You got it right there. It's like, how much do we know about what they knew if they could make that? Yeah, people ask me. Well, why haven't you built a model? And I was like, you don't understand. Because I couldn't even afford one of the blocks that goes into the king's chain, but I don't want to plant it up. And also, how much time would it take you to build that? Good Lord. And not only that, it's like, if you're going to rep, I was asked that question when I was in Egypt in 2021. I was with Hamada Amwar and Dr. Hayni Halal, who used to be the Minister of Science and Higher Education, both extremely, extremely good guys. And they are both on the scam pyramid mission team. So I had a meeting with them. And I gave my book to Dr. Halal and Hamada already had one. He had arranged a meeting. I gave my book to Hayni Halal and I described it briefly. And he asked me a question I never thought I would hear in Egypt. And he says, well, could the great pyramid be restored and functioned as you envisioned that it did? And I was like, I'd punted that question before and I thought, can't see that happening. I mean, if you're going to replicate or create another one, I would do another one. Because of the political climate. Right. Of course. There is so much focus on the great pyramid. And everybody who is focused on it is an expert. And most of them have YouTube channels. So you have a hyper focus on that area. I mean, just the simple thing like, OK, we're going to recover the third pyramid. We're going to restore it. We're going to recover it and blah, blah, blah. I mean, it was a whole shit storm that came after that. They finally killed the project. I saw, do you think that it's good they killed the project? I mean, isn't it good to leave that stuff in the state in which we found it? I think, you know, people with the best of intentions and working with the information that they have can make mistakes. And a lot of times, and I've made them myself. A lot of times it's because I am making decisions not having sufficient information. Right. So it's kind of like they were there was a new chief of the Supreme Council of Antiquity is the direct chairman of the Supreme Council of Antiquity. And so he had a gentleman who was going to help him restore the third pyramid. And so he goes out and calls a press conference and tells everybody what they're going to do. And then... So it's a pyramid. And so he goes out and calls a press conference and tells everybody what they're going to do. And then there was a firestorm of criticism that came in, just flooded in. And then finally, I think it was Zai Huas, who polled his influence to shut the project down. And then, so they backed up on it. But if he had touched all the bases, I mean, you just never know because relationships in any culture, you don't understand them. You don't know who knows who is related to who. You got all this activity. But I think people rightly so were upset at the idea of covering that thing just like they covered up the pause of this fence. Well, it wasn't my controversial, right? Not necessarily covering it, but restoring it. But you are covering it, right? Because you're doing well, you're ordering human tools. Yeah. Yeah. You're ruining what is left. But in the state that it is, it represents the erosion and the earthquakes, the looting of the rhinestone. This is what it is. So this is the cover it up with 2024 work. Seems gross. Right. I just want a lot of people to think is that it is not respecting history. Right. So if they did that with the great pyramid and covered the whole thing. Well, I mean, yeah. I mean, that would certainly be more possible than building another one. Yeah. Oh, right. Well, you would certainly, you won't have to quarry as much life though. Not even close. So if they did that, let's just imagine a world where people say, hey, we're going to do this, but we could always reverse it. Yeah. We're not going to do any permanent damage to the pyramid, but it's possible to restore it to the exact state and find out if this theory is correct. Yeah, but how do you do that? I mean, I don't think you would have to have a lot more research and evidence produced that's too international. That's too international to convince people to invest so much money. Right. Because I mean, this is a process. Okay. The Giza Power Plant and Giza the Tesla connection is a process. Right. And I'm pretty much at the end of that process. So you put it out in the universe and then other people are picking it up like I'm a dadly. You know, that's for us to be in the current university. But let's imagine we enter into a world where people say, you know what, it's better if we know and there's only one way to know and it's possible to do. So it's cover that thing the way it was done before. Let's put a gold cap on it. Let's follow the plans as if this is a power plant. Right. And you have to qualify, verify all the systems, all the subsystems, the subsystems and their functions. Right. And it's complicated. And would you qualify that? Could it be more possible today? Through a few days. You would have to, you would need a well whoever is in control of the AI who's driving. Right. But it would be, let's look at best case scenario. Let's pretend there's some objective scientists that are not ideologically driven at all and they're in control of this AI and they utilize it the exact way we would like it to be utilized. What I would love is for some PhD students to take on as a dissertation project. The acoustic modeling of the interior of the Great Pyramid get all the dimensions, scan everything, find out all the dimensions what they are and then you start to simulate the behavior of the movement of sound within that space. I mean we have, we're using human instruments to detect resonance and report on the vibrations and how they feel when they hear it. There's a lot of like magical experiences that are happening. But the magic, I mean if you've ever read the ATHSI clock is kind of like sufficiently advanced technology is first seen as magic. So if you have an alien race and they have sufficiently advanced technology, you would look at it as magic. Our cell phones, sure. If they appeared in our culture 100 years ago, magic. Magic. Yeah. People wouldn't know what to do with them. If this culture had something that's not where we are but 500 years more advanced than us, which is why they were able to create something like that. Right. I mean it looks like magic. I talk about the recent disclosure by the ODI on the UAPs in here. Really? Are they connected? As an example, as an example of what is possible physically. Because if you consider that, you know, those UAPs can descend for 80,000 feet to sea level in a few seconds, the G-forces that they would pull on a 90 degree turn would be like a thousand Gs, would destroy any of our craft and the people inside it. If it was even possible to make such a turn that which is not, we don't have anything to match it. And then you see how they function. You see what can we observe on how they are propelled. You know, in S16 they've got after burners and we see these after burners kick on and fire belching out the back. As UAPs, they just seem to have some kind of aura around it and they defeat gravity and move through space in a way that appears like magic. But sufficiently advanced technology would be magical. Right. Almost less impressive than a cell phone. Right? Because all of the joints flying around, a cell phone is sending instantaneous video to the side of the world. Well that little UAP could be doing the same. So they accept to other planets. Right. We just don't see it. Oh the mothership, which is... Or a language. We don't see it. It might be American. It's all science fiction, right? I really wonder how much of that stuff is ours. How much of that stuff is black ops projects and stuff that they've been... You know what I'm saying? You think it's from somewhere else? I mean, I can't prove where it's from. But if it is from somewhere else, I'd like to follow it home. You and me both. I'd like to see the... I'd like to observe the civilization and the culture that we've created. Go in the manufacturing plants. Hey, how are you making this? And, you know, say, okay, well you're getting your power from. I don't see any train cars carrying tons of coal and belching chimneys out in the distance. Right? Well, if there's a time machine, if there was ever a time machine, I've always said, if I could go back to one place, I'd go back to Africa when they were doing that. I'd go to Egypt. Oh, I saw what... What were you doing? I'm pretty sure. What were you doing? What were you guys doing this? What the hell is going on over here? And where did it all go? I mean, I know the burning of the library of Alexandria, they lost so much. Right. We have no idea what was in there and what knowledge they had preserved. Right. So now it's all lost. Right. And if you're correct, if they really did have some sort of a machine that makes electricity that to this day when we're... I mean, if you want renewable electricity, there you go, kids. Right. It's right there. And somehow, there's someone did it 4,500 years ago. Right. How? What did you guys do and how are we so much more advanced than all the other humans on earth? I'm so much more. I'm digging through an article right now of some audio engineers that got access to the Great Pyramid. They took in a bunch of high powered speakers and whatnot. Very first thing this guy recognized here, he says he noticed that there's a very specific precise frequency when the wind blows across some of the air shafts. And so F sharp. Yeah. And that appears in the, I think Tom Danley, who was a NASA engineer and he was on the team and did acoustic testing inside the Great Pyramid. He measured the frequencies in the Kings chamber and reported that even with all his equipment turned off, the Kings chamber was still vibrating and he, he actually... Go back to the show. Look at this right here. It says ancient Egyptian texts indicate that this F sharp was the resident harmonic center of planet earth. Yes. That's the connection. That's the, that's the seismic connection. The F sharp is also coincidentally, it says in question marks, the tuning reference for the sacred flutes of many North American shamans. Yeah, the hope is, yeah. So the F sharp is very important. It's also found in human DNA, believe, yeah. And there was a Dr. David Deamer who actually mapped the frequencies of DNA. As an engineer, I will note 16 hertz is just below the human threshold of hearing the best you can hear is 20. Interesting. So another, can dogs hear that? Carl hear that? They're known for hearing higher. I suppose they could probably hear lower to you. What is this, Chad? In the, like, around 2003, I was contacted by a very talented physicist. His name is Dustin Kerr. You could Google Dustin Kerr if you like. He got his PhD at Cornell University and his, his thesis of dissertation was actually creating a nano guitar. Well, yeah. The nano guitar, the strings are just about 100 atoms wide. Well, and you have to have a electron mic, a total electron microscope to be able to see it. And so anyway, he contacted me and I'm really impressed with this guy. How did you strum that guitar? With a laser light. Wow. Wow. Oh, it's two microns. Oh my God, that, that scale is two microns. Yeah. Wow, that's bananas. And so, it's used a laser to play this guitar. You would need, yeah, I mean, just a very, very subtle laser, which, you know, it's like micro heat, expanding, expanding the strings. And you would, you would get, they would vibrate. But you couldn't hear it, of course. Right. But it exists. Right. But it exists. So the frequency that's in the great chamber is below the threshold for humans to hear. Yeah. It's current. Emphersonic. Yeah. Right. But if this machine was running, it would probably be a different frequency, right? All those frequencies would be playing a part. Plus more, I would say. the, you know, and besides his nano guitar when we were communicating, Dr. Carr did a model, did a finite element analysis of the great pyramid. And guess what? What? 16 Hertz showed up in that. Wow. Fascinating. So, the whole thing is just so crazy. It blows your mind. What really does is there's so many questions and so many places to take it to. It's, yeah. The real question is like, how did they do it? Where did they learn all this stuff from? And did they implement this somewhere else? Is this the only power plant they ever created? The other pyramids, do they have similar function? I think the fundamentally, perhaps they, you know, the science of tapping into a harvest and electron through stimulating movement, and the lithosphere was probably known. And that knowledge was advanced and developed. Right. But if you have what this does happen, would you believe the great pyramid? How it was used as a power plant. What do you think is going on with the other two pyramids that are near it? Same plan, except they have different interior designs. They're all part of the system. So it's all connected, all three of them are connected somehow. And have you observed similar situations in those smaller pyramids where it seems like they would be utilized in a similar fashion? Is there shafts and? No, I just think, you know, if you are considering it as a project. So you design a project, you propose a project. You gather the resources to complete the project. You describe it to, you know, your investors. I mean, ultimately it's about follow the money. How much is it going to cost and what's the return on investment? And so you have, okay, I want to build a great pyramid and we're going to have all this, you know, we're going to have all this energy. And I'll build another few pyramids around it and they'll just be tourist attractions. Right. No. No. If you, if you've got the whole plateau and the lithosphere beneath it, I mean, Freud said that the, the lithosphere is actually a giant battery. It can, it can turn into a giant battery if it is stimulated. Right. Right. And so if you got that, that condition, you got all that potential energy under your your feet. All you've got to do is shake it a little bit, you know, and just go, hey, send me a few more electrons and, and you build a system on the surface. Perhaps you survey the area just like, you know, NASA satellites of the area for freedom of crime. And you build a, a pulse generator deep under the geese of plateau. And you start that system up and you survey the area and you look for the hot spots. Right. Where the, the, the maximum number of electrons are coming, are coming through from the lithosphere. And then you say, okay, we'll build a pyramid there, build one there, we'll build one there, those are your hot spots. You know, you got a hot spotting in Texas, right? Oh, really? Yeah, Mafa, Mafa, Texas. What is it? It's a town, I think you said it. Oh, no, I know, I know Mafa, but how's the hotspot? Oh, Mafa lights, have you heard of those? No. Yeah. Pull up the Mafa lights. Is that a ball lightning? No, it's kind of like a light show. Really. Yeah. And what's it's very famous? And it's from the electronics frame. Oh, famous. I still love it. Well, I know Mafa. I have a friend who has a house in Mafa. Yeah, he loves it there. I said it's like a kind of an artist community, right? Probably the energies, right? Mm-hmm. Like I said, don't. Right? Yeah, all the weirdos go. Yeah, I'm one of those weirdos. I kind of want to lick that. Oh, it's gorgeous place. So don't it's gorgeous. Gorgeous. So what is this? I just think, so there's this interview, I think, I'm imagining what they're trying to say here without listening to everything. So these lights, what's going on with these lights? What is this? It's a Marfa lights. Oh, okay. Okay. I don't know exactly what it was to show. When you see those things flying around the sky, what are they? Is that like ball lighting? Yeah, I mean, it's like drums coming from the earth and the ionizing the air. It says, according to Judith Bruesk, the Marfa lights of West Texas have been called many names over the years, such as ghost lights, weird lights, strange lights, car lights, mystery lights or key-on delights. My favorite place from which to view the lights is a widened shoulder on highway 90, about nine miles east of Marfa, the lights are almost, are most often reported at distant spots of brightness, distinguishable from branch lights and automotive headlights on 67. So primarily distinguished by their aberrant movements. So these things just sort of fly around. The first historical record of the Marfa lights was 1883 when the young cow hand, Robert Reed Ellison saw flickering light while he was driving cattle through the Pisano Pass and wanted to visit Camp Fire of the Apache. Other settlers told him the offensive lights, but when they investigated, they found no ashes or evidence of a campsite. So what is happening again with these lights? It's electrons going through the earth. If you consider a frien's theory from the frien effect, it's the release of positive charge carriers from the lithosphere, shooting up to the surface and ionizing the air. Okay, and so it creates a light that way. It creates a light that way. A lot of people have speculated that it could be like a piece of electric activity and a course bearing rock, but that's what Brian does on support, a land idea, I don't think. But it would sort of support this theory that if you could find places where that is happening naturally, like Marfa, and you established the pyramid there. You had one other thing that you just said to me when we took a break that there was some evidence that you knew about this dibble handcock debate that it comes to light. Oh, yeah, that was interesting. A fellow researcher, Manue Safeday, he wrote the book Under This Things. He had posted on Facebook a paper that have been published. I think the discussion was the existence of industrial activity during the ice age. Right. Okay. And so, you know, I talked to him and he sent me several papers where other studies have been done. And that show the same kind of markers that you see in that period of time in the paper that he presented on the podcast. So, you know, everybody should have a chance to fix their mistakes, right? But they could you pull them up, Jamie, and we could just go through and then they would be on record. Okay, so what is wrong? So what you're saying is that what he was saying is that the evidence of industrialization only occurs after a specific time in the core samples. Right. They weren't, there's no evidence of them in the ice age. And is this led? What is it in the? Right. So, I mean, this is out of my wheelhouse. Right. I'm not an expert with that. But this gentleman posted this in response. I'm saying that if there is, you know, another body of evidence or other papers that my research has been conducted that go further back into the past in the period of time, that it was paper deals with, then they should be introduced into the record. And how far in the past of these go? 150,000 years. And how far in the past did the ones that did the one should just go? They was well, between 1,000 BC, 1,000 AD, so it was just like a narrow window. A narrow window. Okay. So did you find a jamming? I don't have Glenn stuff because that was on his computer. Well, there is paper, his paper is, the paper that he referenced is in there. The one that you brought? Yeah. Okay. Well, I have what you brought. This is what you have provided. That's not the one that he presented to them. I don't know which one that would be. It was there 2,000, I think it was a 2018 paper. Just, I mean, just a poll about. Atmospheric lead and air are a guy's during the last time I actually cycle. It's like a lawn. Yeah. Is that it? That's one of them. I don't think it's the one that Dibble presented. But what are the one that you're presenting? The one that Manu sent me, let's see what she's that one. See, that one, I think it goes back, 149,000. Yes. So yeah, just in a decision. Oh, this is the one. Yeah, this is the one I think that what date is on that? 2018, maybe. 2018, I think it's 2018. Okay. Right. So, the title of this is for anybody who wants to find it is lead pollution recorded in Greenland ice indicates European emissions, track plagues, wars, and imperial expansion during antiquity. Right. Okay. Okay. So if you look up the other papers, they treat a different period of time. And when you go back to the ice age, you do find that the same kind of evidence. Is that what this paper's showing? This is, which one is it? Is this the same? This is the one we're just looking at. Oh, no, this is that short time period. So this is the 100 BC to 800. This is the one that Dibble presented that. Yeah. Okay. So what's the one that you're presenting? I'm not presenting. Okay, but what is the one that you're referencing? The ones that were sent to me. Where are those? They're in default, or Jamie. Okay. And what is that one called? Okay, go down to the next one. I believe it's this one, right? For it says highlighted. It says like the high-lacing area. Yeah, I mean, okay. I think they're all kind of similar. Yeah, well, the two, the first two, you sent me five things. The first two are the same. It's just this is highlighted. Oh, actually, okay. Okay. Let's go there and make a little bigger. I sent them to you. I get there on there. I was there with sent to me. So it says very low during the highlacing era, probably during the last interglacial and part of the last Ice Age. There were very high during the last glacial maximum and at the end of the penultimate. I love that word. Penultimate. I love that word, don't you? It's great work. Yeah. So the concentrations were high of lead during the Ice Age, it's saying. Yeah. So this does counter what he was saying? Seeps, too. Okay. But I'm not the expert. I agree. I understand what you're saying. But this goes far back, but past when he was talking about. So the possibility could be that what grandma saying might actually have some weight to it, that there was a highly advanced civilization before the Ice Age and that it went away. And then when you see lead in the future, you're just seeing sort of a re-understanding of this process. That's all way to put it. And it doesn't have to be a really highly advanced civilization like ours. It just means that there is industrial activity, whatever that shape or form that takes. Well, the real fascinating thing is if the Egyptians had figured out how to generate power without any damage to the environment, which is really wild. We haven't yet. No. But if they figured that out with that great pyramid, if that process is how they generated electricity, and that's about as green as you're ever going to get, it's pretty amazing. Yeah. There's a little factoid for you. But do you know in 2021, they quared enough coal by weight to build a pyramid 76 times bigger than the great pyramid. Wow. So we know how to extract rock. Yeah. Right? They're collectively at least. Especially in China. Oh, yeah. Which is hilarious. Very efficient now. Not just that. They're really good at making coal plants. They're good at making hundreds of new ones opening up. Yeah. Well, we're over here freaking out. Anything else before we get out of here, Jamie, you said that there was a couple other slides you thought were really interesting? Oh, I mean, I ended up getting to them. I was kind of really curious what that fan was all about, but he described way. Yeah. That was one other thing I would like to address. If you'd like to. Please. OK. So the other thing that Dr. Dibble mentioned was when you raised the question about the core drilling. Right. Right. And Dr. Dibble said that, well, that's been debunked. I'm just paraphrasing now. That's been debunked. And he referenced two sources. He referenced scientists against myth. And world of antiquity. OK. So scientists, this is where, you know, if you don't give enough information, people will fill in the gaps. Right. Of course. You leave a vacuum. Engineers are very well known for leaving all kinds of vacuum. They don't explain everything completely. because they assume everybody knows it, because they know it. Right. And so it's the simplest thing. And basically, scientists against myth, they sent me their paper on the methods that they used, which contradicted my methods. And what they did is they got these photographs, two dimensional photographs of the petri core. And they rejected the method that I used, which was just a simple string, cotton thread, with magnification, and with the artifact in my hand. So you've got best evidence in your hand, and against evidence second hand, we take them with photographs. So what's wrong? What is the problem with that? And when I saw what method they used, I didn't take it seriously. Perhaps I should. And then we won't be here talking about it. But I didn't take it seriously. And it's like, it kind of failed on its face. Just after the first two pages. Plus, it was very insulting and mocking. Not very professional. And but basically, what they did is they took a 2D photograph of a 3D cone. OK. I want to show you two things. This is a flat blank. And this is a cone. So aerospace manufacturing engineers know all about how cones are made. And they know how to measure them. And they know how to transmit. know all about how cones are made and they know how to measure them and they know how to transmit geometric data to the customer. Our customers would never accept a 2D photograph of a 3D object as evidence of geometric accuracy or precision. I mean a 3D camera would you know like a scanner or something like that but just a simple 2D measure. 2D limited. 2 limited. 2 limited. But what happens to the evidence when you take a 2D photograph? I'll show you. You have a corruption of the evidence right away. What happens with a 2D photograph taking a 3D object? You can go through these series of cones that are made. This is a cone that has horizontal lines around it. You can see that there are horizontal. You can assume, okay, I took a 2D photograph of this. 2D photograph of that. And then I brought it into my computer but there are some things that happen to the arc length. On the original, if you take a 2D photograph, you are using the cord length as they are. You got all that on camera, Jimmy? Is it on both cameras or another one? Okay, but there's another problem with it and it's not just geometri. Well, it's ultimately a geometri but it's more involved with how the eye works and how the camera functions and not the lens. And basically what you're doing is you're capturing an image and what a cone. And if you focus your camera here, the lines here, because of that way, the lines down here go this way. Okay, right? So you take those and you lay them out flat. You've got corrupted evidence. You project those images onto a cone in the computer and this is what happens. You've got a bunch of wavy lines. Did you get that? Which indicates that it's a spiral. No, this is not to prove that it's a spiral. This is to prove that the evidence that they have produced is not the best evidence. Right, because it's only too dimensional. Because they have to refute your evidence. They should look at the thing and measure it accurately scan it. But it also describes the state of mind of the investigators who are working on this. And that is they are driving to a conclusion that is directly opposite to mine. So they're not acting in good faith. If you read a scientific paper or if you are working on a scientific project, if you're in school or if you're anywhere. And so you prepare your report, you publish your report, you describe the methods that you use and the tools that you use, how you did it, and then you publish your results. I did that. And then somebody comes along behind you and they say, well, I want to see that for myself. That's what you call falsification process, where a science has any theory, it has to be falsifiable. So somebody says, if they can find anything wrong with what you did, then they have to follow the same steps you did. Right. To the latter. Right. But they didn't do that clearly. They didn't do that clearly. And also they didn't have access to the actual physical object. It doesn't indicate that they did. Which is the only way you could really test. They were just drawing down photographs from the internet. So they were just trying to debunk it. Exactly. And they were doing it and what they were doing is silly. Then you have a college professor who scoops up all that research and they become cited sources in their work. Well, he probably was just respecting their work and thinking that your work is one of those alternative guys that's not a part of the system, not a part of the academic system. Yeah. And so he just, yeah. And he obviously he works with seeds and things along those lines. And that's his area of archaeology. So he'd trust the other things. Yeah. You know, I'm not saying that I'm not saying that what he's had is his own, you know. Right. He just said that the sources of information. I'm just saying that he was certainly well school and he had the answers to some of these mysteries. Right. And he had been given information and pretty much he reeled it out when the question was raised. The other thing that I thought of after the fact and we are actually kind of covered it, but I never connected the dots was that one of the things that we were talking about when we were talking about go back to the tepi. The go back to the tepi was created by these people that didn't need agriculture because the place they lived was so bountiful. Yeah. But what if they just didn't, what if agriculture to them wasn't plants? What if agriculture was animal agriculture and they fed their animals with wild plants? If the wild plants were in such abundance, they could just go out and chop down the wild plants and use them to feed their animals. That's still agriculture, but it's not plant agriculture. Yeah. So that's the difference. I forgot that while it was happening and then after it was like, oh, why don't I connect those dots? Because go back to tepi, no one is disputing the time period of it. It's 11,000 years ago. Right. That's when it was covered intentionally 11,000 years ago. So no one's disputing that, but that puts it into the term of pre agriculture. And so what he was saying was that maybe where they lived was so bountiful with food that they didn't need agriculture at the time. Right. But possible. But also are we only thinking of agriculture as plant agriculture and do we have to grow plants in an agricultural setting to feed animals? Well, doesn't that entirely depend on how we're raising these animals? Because if these animals are free ranging and you have an enormous area, then no. All right. Then you could harvest them out free ranging. You could have agriculture in terms of animals. And you could have these animals that you're farming. You're just farming them with wild plants. And if you could do that for go back to tepi, which is what they're saying. At least they're saying that either they just hunted all the animals that were around there. There were so many animals around them. They could hunt them very easily to feed everybody. They didn't have resources to build this thing. Or maybe they had some kind of agriculture in terms of animal agriculture, but just hadn't planted things. Or hadn't had the need to plant things if they're living in such abundance. Yeah. I don't know. It's a good question though. It is a good question. Yeah. All of it is good questions. All these good questions. Yeah. Just sit us in, just coming forward and asking the reason I hadn't been saying, oh wait a minute, what about this? What about this? And that's what you've done. And listen, I think you've done an amazing job of it. And the way you explain it today, I really appreciate it. It's great for a person like myself to be able to ask a person like you questions and get to this, the heart of how this whole thing would work. And I think you laid it out amazingly. It's such a fascinating subject. And so many mysteries and so many questions. And I just want to thank you for putting in so much time and having so much energy of your life dedicated to trying to get to the figure this thing out. Yeah. All right. Can I go take a nap? No. Yes, you can go take a nap. You're good, great. Tell everybody about your books though. So we'll get them. So anyway. Yeah. The first one was the Gaze-a-Power plan. Okay. Technology is a very ancient age of today. And then the newest one who is from. Is what does it say on that one? Gaze-a the Tesla can they see it from there? Yeah. Okay, cool. Gaze-a the Tesla connection. Yeah. And those are available now. Okay. Acoustical science and harvesting of clean energy. All right. Well, thank you, sir. I really appreciate you coming here. I really enjoyed it. All right. And it's, you're doing a good service. You should give those to Elon Musk. Why, he needs them? Yeah. Well, if he's going to build electric cars, he's going to need electricity for him. All right, well, I'm not. All right. Thank you. All right. Thank you. All right.