So, okay, Bobby Kennedy, your longtime friend, looks like he's going to be the HHS secretary assess. Did you think that was going to happen in your lifetime? None of my lifetime. No, Tucker. We're in this historic moment. Where America is waking up to the fact that it's been the frog and boiling water, slowly getting sicker and sicker and sicker, bankrupting our country with almost $5 trillion in healthcare costs, $1, $5 of our economy, 80% of it are more preventable, 99% of Medicare dollars are spent on preventable chronic disease. And never this conversation has happened in the political discourse until now. Which is a little crazy because you hear people talking about health care all the time. Well, they tell you a health care is a way of like limiting and title cancer, Medicare for all. Exactly. Everybody's upset about health care on some level, some reason, but I haven't heard anybody until recently in the public sphere address like why it's so expensive. So the question, I know I'm a functional medicine doctor. Yes. My focus is on why. What's the cause? What's the root cause of the cause, the cause of the cause, the cause. Shouldn't that be every doctor? Well, yeah, ideally, yes. But I'm not sitting my office years ago and I had a diabetic patient come in. I realize, you know, I can't cure diabetes in my office. It's cured on the farm and the food we grow. It's cured in the food manufacturing process. It's cured by what people buy in the grocery store. It's cured in the kitchen. And so we really have to look at the root causes of our food system as a why are my patients eating this food? Well, it's because the food system. Well, why do we have the food system we have and the way in which it's operating that drives this chronic disease epidemic, which now is the biggest killer on the planet and is caused by food. Food has outpaced smoking as the number one killer in the world because 11 million people here. I'm telling you, it's the biggest killing United States. Why that happen is because our policies are driven in large part by industry, by the food industry, the agan street, the chemical and seed companies. And those are the companies that are profiting. This is the biggest, biggest industry in the world. It's over $16 trillion when you aggregate all the food companies, the fast food companies, the agricultural chemical and seed companies. And this is enormous force that's driving our political process. And so a lot of the policies we have, either by just kind of miss a alignment of our expectations and incentives or what happened or because of deliberate actions in the food companies have actually driven a food system that's making a sick. And we have an illness industrial complex. We have a system that's driving disease and everybody's profiting from it. And no one's addressed that before. And this is why we have the system. So we're supporting commodity crops, wheat, corn and soy that get turned into ultra-process food, which is basically chemical science projects that our bodies are not used to. They're not technically defined as food. Food is something that helps nourish human being towards life and growth. These things don't. They do the opposite. They cause disease. And so we sort of slowly get into the system where enormous rise in chronic diseases over the last few years. Tucker, when I graduated medical school, the cost for healthcare in America was half a trillion dollars. Now it's almost 10 times that in my lifetime. When I graduated medical school, there was not a single state with an obesity rate over 15 percent. Now there's not one under 30 and almost all over 40, 42 percent of American soror obese. We've seen them in all 50 states. And all of you say, see how we see? And you know what? The highest diabetes mortality rates are in red states. 14 out of the 15 states with the highest diabetes mortality are red states. So this is affecting everybody in America. It doesn't matter whether you're red or blue or purple. Biology is bipartisan. Heart disease, cancer, dementia, diabetes. They don't know who you voted for. What radicalized me, so when I grew up, I'm a little younger than you, but roughly the same generation, there were no fat people who were growing up not zero. And half full in area, but still, no fat people. And I always thought that it was like a failure of will. It was a kind of pain. Yes. 100 percent. And then I came just from my own experience to realize that if you just go about your your life as the way Americans do, just what's presented to you. And you don't make any effort to fight it. If you just sort of all things being equal, you're going to be like 70 pounds over weight. 100 percent. That happened to me. Wow. I'm going to be super fat. And if I don't really struggle all the time, that's weird. Well, we make the hard choices, the healthy choices, and the easy choices, the unhealthy choices. It made me think that actually people who are obese are not the perpetrators, but the victims of this is really important. Tucker, you just hit on something that is so critical, which is that we have blamed the victim for this problem. I have. It's your fault, your fat, your glutton, your lazy. Yes. And it's your fault. So just stop beating that crap and get healthy and you'll save America. That's bullshit. Okay. So I kind of that's bullshit. Here's, you feel better to hear that, but here's, I think that's true. And it's absolutely true. The NIH is an incredible study where they took a group of people and they fed them for two weeks, a whole food diet match for protein fat, carbs, fiber. And they fed them an ultra processed diet. And they saw what happened to their biology. The ultra processed food, which is what 60% of our diet is, 67% of kids diet, it's 73% of the food on our grocery store shelves. When you eat that food, it disregulates your appetite. You eat 500 calories more a day in a week. That's 3500 calories. 3500 calories equals a pound of weight gain in a year. That's 52 pounds. So if Americans are eating this food, which is everywhere, which is ubiquitous, which were marketed to death on, I mean, kids get targeted $14 billion. The food industry spans on marketing junk food to kids. They see an average of 30,000 ads a year. You could talk to your kid breakfast, lunch, and dinner and snacks about healthy food and you're not going to be marketing. And this to me is criminal. Most countries have banned this. Most countries don't allow this. And for example, Chile has gotten all the food marketing to kids off between six in the morning and 10 at night. They have no more Tony the tiger on frosted flakes, no more to can on the fruit losing frosted flakes or a highly processed food. Of course they are. I mean, I'm a serial killer. The tell the truth. I am a serial killer. I think serial is the worst thing ever. The food tree, man, it's basically 75% sugar. Sugar for breakfast. It's the zer for breakfast. That's not what we should be eating. And so what's happened is there are ways in which we are making it so easy for people to make the wrong choice. And when you're exposed to these foods, you're going to gain weight. You're going to be dysregulated. You're going to destroy your microbiome. You're going to create inflammation. You're going to drive heart disease, cancer, diabetes, dementia, autoimmune diseases. All these things are coming at explosive rates. And I've looked at the data. And even though we're spending more and more, we'll be fine if we're spending $5 trillion in the Merck was getting healthy. It would be five. We're spending $485 billion on drugs if they are working. But for Tucker, the drugs that we're using for the disease that we have are not the right treatment. The right treatment is changing over eating. And if you look at heart disease, it's up 50%. Cancer is up 30%. 60% higher in those under 50. So we're seeing cancer rates rising in the young. It rates we've never seen before. Even though young people don't smoke cigarettes. No, it's the food. Colin Cancer is the biggest thing. But it's just a little crazy. Again, this is the benefit of being in your 50s because you sort of remember what the previous lives were. But like if we get rid of smoking, not endorsing smoking, then cancer is just going to like cease to exist. Well, certain cancers like lung cancer and other cancers have gone down. But when you see cancer rates increasing in children, like by 30%, you see autoimmune diseases up 100%. You see mental health issues up 80%. You see autism up 1,000%. 80% to up 200%. Diabetes up 400%. Alzheimer's up 150%. So we are screwing up here a big time by not dealing with the root cause. And we're spending on all those conditions 2 to 300% more on drugs. So we're almost like, you know, we're increasing by one or two full of these diseases. And the drug use has gone up two or threefold. And we're losing. So if it was working great, but if it ain't working. And what's happening is that now most people don't realize it. But then one of every dollars of your taxpayer dollars goes to fund our healthcare costs in America of that $4.9 trillion, which was half a trillion when I graduated medical school. That's paid for by the taxpayer and it's mostly preventable. We're probably adding two trillion to our federal deficit every year because of this. And also the amount of money we're spending is 40% of all healthcare bills. So if you look at the total healthcare bill and you add in everything the government, not just Medicare, but any health service, the military, all federal employees, all the programs that are the government is funding around healthcare. It's 40% of the total healthcare bill in America is paid for by the US government. And we have enormous power to change how those dollars are spent and how chronic these address this country. And for the first time take this on and not just try to find a pill for every ill, but to get to the root cause. And it's really from changing our food system from field to fork. And it's addressing the conflicts of interesting government. It's addressing NIH funding. It's addressing what we pay for with food stamps. So many areas that we have policy letters. Before we get in that, let's just define a couple of terms. So when you say ultra process foods can be precise. Yeah, for sure. So there's a nova classification and there's many different classifications for different kinds of food processing and there's pros and cons with each one. So there's no perfect system. But nova classification was developed by scientists in Brazil. It's now their standard of care for their food programs and dietary guidelines. So, you know, non-process food is a tomato, an egg, an apple, you know, an almond, you know what that is, right? But if you make almond butter, well, that's a little bit of minimally processed food. If you make a can of tomatoes, that's minimally processed. There's another level of, you know, processing that you use in cooking. It's a little more sort of processing of things. But it's not made from anything other than real food ingredients. The fourth classification is ultra process. And this is essentially where they take commodity crops, which are funded with our federal dollars, supporting farmers who are losing the game. That's corn, soybeans, horns, soybean, and by the way, the farmers are suffering so bad, you know, Tucker, there's a 350% higher rate of suicide in farmers than there are in the rest of the population. There's $435 billion of farmer debt that they carry to support us. And those, and they're stuck between the crop insurance that the government's playing, the banks which are providing them, you know, the loans and the aggregate chemical and seed companies that are providing the fertilizer the seeds and the chemicals that they're spraying on the farm. And they can't get out of that toxic loop. And they're struggling, those real communities are struggling so bad. And that can be fixed. And so when you look at, shit, I lost my train. So process is any of that's been changed in its context. So what happens is they run these commodity crops that the government's basically supporting them funding a wheat corn and soy, but you're not eating wheat berries or whole grain. You're not eating true whole soybeans. You're not eating just corn on the cob. These are deconstructed in fact in factories and science, basically science labs into their molecular components are torn apart and rebuild into these chemically extruded food-like substances of all color size and shapes that are not by definition food. If you look up the Webster's definition, they're a definition of food. It's not actually technically food. And so what most Americans are eating is stuff that actually is harmful. It's causing disease and killing people. It's literally think about it. The equivalent of two hollocoss a year are caused by the food or eating according to the food or disease that you see it. You said 70% of our grocery store offerings or ultra process. The labeling food labeling is a big issue and it's one of our key initiatives. I think if we move forward in this administration, it has to be addressed. People need informed consent. They mean being in power with or by information. They need to know what they're eating, whether it's good or bad for them. And now you need to be a PhD scientist to read a nutrition label or read ingredients and know what it means. Right. So I avoid the null away first. That's I guess if you look at the if you look at the ingredient list, it should be stuff you know, which is a tomatoes or salt or so that's the measurement. If you see stuff, if you get mutilated, hydroxyl, tall, you mean probably not something you want to be eating. And many of these chemicals that we use in America are outlawed in other countries in Europe and Singapore and in many other countries, these compounds that have been validated to show that how harmful they are human beings have been removed from the marketplace. And we should follow those standards here. So labeling is really key and we're going to work on that. But right now if you're if you're just trying to figure it out, yeah, look at the ingredient list. If there's stuff there that you wouldn't have on your kitchen counter or you wouldn't have in your pantry, don't eat it. If it says multi-diction, where's your multi-diction jar in your spice jar? Where's your mutilated, hydroxyl, tall, you mean you sprinkle that on your salad? No, you don't understand it. Don't eat it. Yeah. I mean, things can have a long list of ingredients. If you eat Indian foods, they have lots of spices. That's fine. But if it's something that is in Latin that you don't understand, can't pronounce, or it has a health claim on the label, it's probably not good for you. I mean, like, lays potato chips. Now it says they're gluten-free. I mean, that's ridiculous. Right. Oh, it's gluten-free. It's healthy. No, it's not. No, it's gluten-free. Because there's no weed in that. But it's Coca-Cola's gluten-free. So like, my role is it has a health claim on the label. Don't eat it. If there's a health claim on it. Yeah, if it's low fat, high fiber, low cholesterol, you know, if it's no sugar, if it's gluten-free, it's hiding something. If they're hiding something, right? It's just food. I mean, tomatoes and say gluten-free on it. It's just a tomato. So that, I mean, that limits your options. Well, you know what? You're going to lose weight just from... No, it's embarrassing to get that. You know what? It's amazing. I had this view that it was people's fault they were fat. And I went down. It was part of this movie called Fed Up that I did with Katie Couric and Laurie David about 10 years ago. We went to South Carolina. And I went to easily South Carolina. One of the poorest areas in America. One of the worst food deserts in America. There's something called the retail environment food index. How many fast food in junk food and go-degas are compared to grocery stores? They're like 10 to one. And this family in five lived in a trailer. They were on disability and food stamps. And they wanted to get healthy. And I asked them, why do you want to get healthy? Because I'm like, why do you want to be in this movie? This is what my dad's 42. He has type 2 diabetes. From the foodie eight. He has kidney failure. He's on dialysis. He's going to die unless he loses 40 pounds. And we can't get into lose 40 pounds. We don't know what to do. The mother was well over 150 pounds of her weight. The son was 16 years old, almost diabetic. 50% body fat. It should be 10 to 20%. I went, I said, rather than giving a lecture about what to do and what to eat. I said, let's go to your house. Let's go shopping and get some simple foods that are inexpensive, that are whole foods that are healthy to eat. So we made turkey chilis. This was from good food and a tight budget, a guy from the environmental working group. I said, here's turkey chili. Here's how to roast some sweet potatoes. Here's how to try fried speragus. Here's how to make a salad from not just ice per gletis, but some real lettuce. Here's all of them being a good rice. Bursi is not real lettuce. No, no. It's pretty, pretty much nutritionally vapid food. No, not really. Yeah. I mean, it's fine if you want to eat it. But it's not fully dense with phytochemicals and nutrients. And so we easily showed them. I went through their coverants, everything in their coverants. They had low fat diss and cool what they thought was healthy because they said no trans fats. But the FDA with an inclusion with the food industry allowed a food to save, no trans fats that have less than half a gram per serving. So basically they're just do being the American public. And we need clear transparency and information. So they didn't know what they were eating and everything was frozen or packaged or canned or boxed. They never cooked anything. They didn't have cutting boards. They never cooked anything in their kitchen. Because they made turkey chili. We made this whole meal. We sat down and ate it and was so delicious and the sun goes Dr. Hyman. Do you like this for your family? Every night I'm thinking, yeah, I do. And it wasn't hard. It wasn't difficult. I didn't take much time. And I still listen. You know, I don't know if you can do this. But here's this guy to how to eat well for less. Here's my cookbook on how to actually eat healthy and try it. And I on the plane, I sent them cutting boards and knives because they didn't have anything that we're cutting like with a butter knife, trying to cut sweet potatoes. It was really good. It's hard to treat with this. They didn't know you had tonsils in there. Nothing. Not for cooking, right? And so the first week the mother texting back to the mark, we lost 18 pounds. I'm like, amazing. And a year they lost over 200 pounds of family. The father lost 45. Got a new kidney. The mother lost 100 plus pounds. The sun lost 50. But he went to work at Bojangles. He came in it back. He said it was like putting an alcoholic to work in a bar. And then he gained all the way back. And then he called me if he was like, Mark, can you help me? I'm like, yeah, we could Dr. Hyman. But you know, yeah. I said, yeah. And so I coached him and got him in the last 132 pounds. And he's the first kid in his family to go to college. He wrote me a letter. He said, Mark, can you write me a letter recommendation for medical school? And now he's a doctor. So and he lost all that weight. So what that taught me was that it's really about education, about information, about skills. You know, I don't know if you know this story, but in the way. Wait, hold on. Hold on. Yes. But you can know the right path and not take it. There's a compulsion. Attached to certain kinds of food. 100% and this is well documented, Tucker. It is well documented. And this studies are published. There was a large study published reviewing all the literature on food addiction. And there's something called the Yale Food Addiction Scale, which is questions you can look at online and you just ask to answer the questions. And it tells you if you're a food addict, just so that you can do a question or tell if you're not go hauling. It's 14% of the adult population or alcoholics. 14% of people are food addicted and 12% of children are food addicted by this scientific definition of food addiction. Not just, oh, yeah, this is addictive, but actually biologically addictive, measuring the things you need to measure to determine addiction. And so if that's true, you know, you're saying compulsion, but it's really a hijack of our biochemistry. So the food industry is designed foods to hijack their biology. There's a book written by Michael Moss called Salt, Sugar and Fat, where he interviewed 300 food industry executives and whistleblowers and scientists. And basically they said, look, we have haste institutes where we hire craving experts. These are their own terms to create the bliss point of food, which is the maximum lighting up of your brain. And then we go for targeting marketing to heavy users. So they're not going to get me to drink a can of coke. But they're going to get someone who's already having coke to try to drink a two-liter bottle. And they know how to do that. And so the effects of these foods are so harmful on us. And they know what they're doing and they actually designed them to be this way. I mean, the tobacco companies bought a lot of the food companies back in the 70s, RGR and Nabisco, Filmor's Craft. And they built this whole industry of ultra-process food. There's not 600,000 ultra-process food products, 80% of them are full of sugar. And they're the things that are driving most of the things that are wrong with America. If you look at food, it's the nexus for everything. One, I would see chronic disease, all the things we mentioned, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, Alzheimer's, autoimmune diseases. I mean, just digestives these, all the things depression, mental health, now is linked to ultra-process food. There's really well-documented signs on this that these foods cause depression, anxiety. So we have all these foods that are being causing disease. Then we have the economic burden which we've talked about, almost $5 trillion. We have the effect on national security because 77% of military recruits are rejected because they're unfit to fight. So we have a national security crisis. And 72% more evacuations or for obesity, more injuries from Iraq and Afghanistan. Think about that. In a war, more soldiers were evacuated because of obesity than because of more injuries. Academic performance, we're 30th something in the world in math and reading. We are, kids are suffering, our kids are on ADD medications. So it makes you dumber, certain kinds of 100%, makes you cognitively impaired behavioral issues. I mean, there was one study in Tucker where they, where they took kids and juvenile detention centers. And they gave them healthy food, swapped it out for the junk food. 97% reduction in behavioral issues and violence, 75% reduction in restraints and 100% reduction in suicides, which is a third leading cause of death in teenage boys. This is, this is documented science. This is not something I'm making up. And it's, I wrote it in my book, Food Fix, which is really how to save our health, our economy, our communities, and our planet one by the time. It talks about the nexus of all these issues. And then we, and then we have the effect on, on our, on our soil. We've lost so much soil carbon, soil has to be healthy to grow a healthy plant. And healthy plant is what creates healthy humans. And the nutrients and plants have gone down by 50%, so even if you're eating your broccoli, it's less nutritious than it was 50 years ago. She got to eat twice as much. She got me. Yeah. There you go. You do that. I'm going to tell. The best Christmas presents are the ones that you would give yourself. Well, this Christmas we were recommending a gift that we do give ourselves. Meet from Mary Weather Farms in Wyoming. So about six months ago, we'd interviewed a bunch of different health specialists, doctors and nutritionists about food in the United States. And the consensus is it's not very good, particularly the meat. So we decided let's search across the country and find a source of good clean, tasty meat, not all of it tastes very good, the clean stuff, by the way. So after trial and error, we settled on our all time favorite, Mary Weather Farms. And we really settled on it. So every time we have done it with a guest before the show, which is often we serve the exact same thing, stakes from Mary Weather Farms. And every single time they've been excellent, every guest has loved them, we eat them at home and at work. So we can recommend this with total heartfelt sincerity. And this year, Mary Weather Farms makes it very easy for you to send their meat as a gift. They got all kinds of gift boxes, their famous stakes, including wagubif, roast burgers, hot dogs, beef stick snacks, everything you could possibly want. You can send to your loved ones from Mary Weather Farms. The address, Maryweather Farms dot com slash Tucker use the promo code Tucker Christmas for a discount this year. We need it. We recommend it Maryweather. It's M E R I W E T H E R arms dot com slash Tucker promo code Tucker Christmas at checkout highly sincerely recommended. And then, you know, we have also the effect on biodiversity because of all the chemicals are used. We have 75% less pollinators, no pollinators, you know, it's hard to hard to have agriculture. We have 50% loss in bird species from William or growing food. We have the structure of our waterways because we use fertilizer that runs off into the rivers and lakes and streams and causes beautification, which basically grows algae because of the extra fertilizer and that sucks all the oxygen out of the water and all the fish die. There's dead zones as high as New Jersey in the Gulf of Mexico. There's 400 around the planet that feed half a billion people. So this is often the first license which one uses actually 2% of the world's global energy to make fertilizer. But you don't need to do that if you use regenerator agriculture, which is what actually one of the things that I think the student may see should focus on, which is how do you fix the farming because you got to start at the field to fix food. And, you know, I think go in. No, Barry said it beautifully. He's a poet and a farmer. Amazing man. Amazing man. He said, we have a health system that plays no attention to food and a food system that pays no attention to health. We need to fix that. So you've referred a couple of times to the connection between what we eat and cancer rates. Can you be a lot more? Absolutely. Absolutely. So the data is really clear. You want to scare people into eating better cancer is a good way to do it. Cancer is on the rice. And we've got to kick it over that. I thought we were going to defeat it with our one cancer. Yeah, well, that was Nixon. He wanted to. But the problem is we're barking up the wrong tree. If you look, there's a real clear data on two drivers of cancer. One is food and particularly sugar and starch. And two is environmental toxins. It's carcinogens, which are ubiquitous. We're exposed to toxins everywhere. And we can reduce those. But the food part is really interesting because when you look at the growth of cancer cells, they feed on sugar. There's a whole metabolic theory of cancer where if you use a ketogenic diet and this is working down to Columbia and by said Mukherjee and others, ketogenic diets as a treatment for cancer to actually shut down the cancer cells because they can only feed on sugar. We are like a hybrid engine. We can go electric or we can go gas. We can go carbs. We can go fat. Cancer only goes sugar. So you start the sugar and you kill the cancer. So the amount of sugar and flour eating is about 152 pounds of sugar per person per year and 133 pounds of flour. That's a lot. That's the most three quarters of a day of sugar and flour for every American. And what that does is it fuels the cancer cells. And so pancreatic cancer, colon cancer, breast cancer, uterine cancer, prostate cancer, even some lung cancers. And the data is documented. Go up with insulin resistance. Go up with obesity and go up with diabetes and metabolic dysfunction. 93% of American stucco are metabolically broken. This is extraordinary from the American Journal of Cardiology. What this means is that we're somewhere on the degree what I call diabetes city. Diabetes city is pre-diabetes to type of diabetes. And we cut off at pre-diabetes, but that's one in two Americans has pre-diabetes or type of diabetes. That's bad enough. 38% of teenage boys. When I graduated medical school, there was no type two diabetes. There was no type one diabetes. It was juvenile diabetes, which was an autoimmune disease or health on diabetes, which is a food parent disease. And so now we've changed the name of the protective and the guilty. And so now we see kids. Really? Yeah. Three. The names were changed. I mean, the tasks, the cause of type 10. I mean, yeah, I mean, because kids are getting us. So how do we call juvenile diabetes if kids are getting type two diabetes as young as two or three years old? It's not their fault. They're being fed soda. And I once was working in an urgent care in California in an underserved community. And this woman comes in with back pain. She got a baby and her baby care. And he's drinking this brown liquid. And I'm like, what is this seven months old? And what is that? It's just Coca-Cola. I'm like, why do you pay Coca-Cola? So he likes it. I mean, this is what's happening. And so we're turning our whole society into this metabolic-y broken society. And this is the driver of all the disease we're seeing. Cancer, heart disease, diabetes, dementia, their congeal Alzheimer's type three diabetes because of how it's connected to sugar and insulin resistance. You know, I co-founded a company called Function Health, which allows people to get insights into their own biology. And what we're finding, Tucker, is that 96% of the people we're testing have metabolic dysfunction. So how do you get insight into your own biology? So basically, you know, healthcare system is broken. And I believe that I could work for the 50 years. And maybe I'm wrong. Maybe with this new administration, we'll lead pro-gen things, we'll change. Because I'm very helpful for, but I created a company with a number of other co-founders called Function Health that allows you easy access to your own blood test. It is simple, five minutes to sign up. 50 minutes to go into a quest lab to get your labs to try on. You get over 110 biomarkers or lab tests that gives you insight into everything that's going on in your body that you're not being checked for your regular doctor's office. It's get five times more diagnostic. You look at your hormones, your metabolic health, your cardiovascular health, your nutritional health. I mean, your immune health, we've seen 46% of Americans have some degree of autoimmune immunity, which is crazy. It's one of the biggest cost drivers, whether it's thyroid, auto-immunity, or other autoimmune or pre-autommunity, we're seeing 67% of nutritional deficiencies. And these are the lab reference ranges that are quest. These are not what I would think are optimal. So vitamin D, for example, should be over 50, 45, 50. The reference range is 30. But still, we've got a huge amount of people deficient at that level. And when you're under 30, your risk of getting sick and dying COVID is 70% higher. If your vitamin D is over 50, your risk of death is zero. Looking at these risks. We could just get a dumb question. No dumb question. So a basic question. So you get blood, your company does this. Maybe others do it, but you get a blood test. Yeah. You get all these markers, all these measurements of what's in your blood. How do you know what they mean? Well, that's a great question. So we really use the technology to help us build a database of the most up-to-date scientific information informed by all the scientific literatures. And you have a clear description of what every biomarker means. So if you're insulin or blood sugar or your cholesterol particles or abnormal or you have positive autoimmune antibodies, we tell you what it means. Why it happens? What the root causes are, not necessarily just what traditional medicine thinks, but what the new science thinks around root causes. We give you all the self-care I think you can do yourself to optimize your health. So you can upgrade your biology with insights from scientific literature, from knowledge experts. We've brought in the top scientists and doctors to help inform the content. So it's like having a thousand doctors in your pocket. Remember the iPod was a thousand songs in your pocket. This is a thousand doctors in your pocket. And it gives you the ability to do self-care. And like I said, diabetes isn't turning the doctor's office. It's carrying the kitchen. And that's really what most chronic diseases can be fixed. And I see this over and over after doing it for 30 years. I've written almost 20 books. And what I see is when people follow the guidance without having to go to the health care system, they can correct these things and they can fix these things. Really? Yes. It's quite amazing, Tucker. And by these things, diabetes, paper, reversible, heart disease reversible Alzheimer's, now Richard Isaacson has done amazing work showing how we can reverse Alzheimer's using aggressive lifestyle interventions. But what? Yes. This is incredible data. Well, I just want to speak up as a non-doctor. We know for a fact that Alzheimer's is incurable. Nothing can make it better. Well, that's actually not true. I know, but I've been told that a lot. Yes, of course. Well, they just want to speak up as a non-doctor. We know for a fact that Alzheimer's is incurable. Nothing can make it better. Well, that's actually not true. I know, but I've been told that a lot. Of course, of course, because we've spent, this is a great example. We've spent about $2 billion in over 400 studies trying to find drugs for Alzheimer's and nothing has worked. The drugs that are approved are extremely expensive, have marginal benefit, a lot of side effects and cost a huge amount of money and made the layer entry into nursing home by two or three months. That's a win. It's not very good. Now, there's a couple of trials that have been done. The finger trial out in Europe and in the pointer trial, which is emerging, they showed aggressive lifestyle intervention, diet, exercise, managing stress, sleep, optimizing all your risk factors was able to not just slow the progression of Alzheimer's and dementia, but to reverse it. This is published data. This is not my opinion. Richard Isaacson also has published this data. It's so by now using biomarkers. And we can actually test with function soon will be adding biomarkers for Alzheimer's. Another blood test for Alzheimer's. You don't have to wait until you forget your keys. And also for cancer, you're asking about cancer. We do a multi-cancer. We do a multi-cancer. What age is Alzheimer's detection? Well, that's a great question. On imaging, which is very expensive and difficult and not- Brain imaging. Yeah, brain imaging, you can see the changes up to 30 years before you get Alzheimer's as a symptom. With blood tests, it's not as far as that. We're still figuring out what those times are, but you can see start these proteins, start to develop in the blood that indicate there's something happening. And you can then intervene early. And the thing about Alzheimer's is that if you intervene early, you can have an incredible benefit to help slow the progression and delay it and actually reverse it. And I've seen this in my patients. I wrote a book about this the Ultra-Mide Solution 15 years ago. You know, Brettis has written a book called The El Valence and the Alzheimer's and documenting that we have to get through the causes. And NIH on this? No, they're not on it. And this is what drives me. I don't understand. So I'm saying we spend so much money. We've gotten really no results. Because I don't think you're a crackpot. But if, I mean, here you are sitting on camera saying, no, Alzheimer's is reversible. Yeah. Talk about a headline. Why isn't that in the New York Times? Good. Frickin' question. No, I'm serious though. So either you're crazy or they're dishonest. Yeah. I think it's a medical paradigm shift. You know, I think most doctors are in a world is flat world. They don't understand that the world is around. They've shifted a paradigm scientifically from a disease-based diagnostic system to understanding the body as an integrated ecosystem. And so the work of people like Lee Roy Hood from the Institute for Systems Biology, his phenome project, is mapping out how our understanding of disease is completely wrong. It's based on labeling people according to symptoms and where it is in their body rather than on mechanisms and causes. So I wrote a book called Young Forever, which is about longevity. We talked about it last time I was on your show. And in the book, I talked about the scientists who come up with a model of what are the root causes of aging? Because we think aging is just going to happen in an edible. We're going to get sick. We're going to get older. We're going to get frail. And they've identified the underlying biology behind that. So if we cured heart disease and cancer from the face of planet, we might extend life five to seven years. You can get the same thing with meaning and purpose or plain tennis. But if you actually drill with a hallmarks of aging, the things that really go wrong. At a time, you'll enjoy our nutrition. You can act and your microbiome, all the things that underlie disease, you can extend life by 30 or 40 years, which means living to 120, which is a crazy notion. So we now understand biology in a very different way than we did before. And it hasn't translated into the clinic. And so why I co-founded function health with my co-founders was to help accelerate this gap to leapfrog over this ossified system. But we need to change. It's kind of crazy. If you take three steps back, I mean, it's like the whole point of medicine I presumed was to extend and improve life. Yes. Right. Yeah, Dr. Schick Healthier, you happier. And so if there is science that shows that that's possible and everyone's ignoring it, then I'm trying not to use profanity, but what is that? Yeah. Well, it's a good question because we have a illness, medical, industrial food, bag complex, the profits off of people being sick. But so you write a book saying or someone else, several doctors write books saying, I can show that Alzheimer's is reversible. And what is every other doctor in America is they just don't read the book. They haven't heard of it. Yeah. It's like, that's kind of a provocative thesis. Yeah. Because I think of Alzheimer's as like AIDS in 1986, like it's the worst thing that there's nothing you can do about it. No, it's, if you remember that with age. 100% it's scary as hell. And the scariest. Yeah. And I can tell you that it is, this is not my opinion. I'm, you know, as a Cleveland Clinic, I work with Marlon Subba when he was there. He was the head of the dementia research center. He understood this. He understood these mechanisms, these biology, the sciences there. But there's no funding for it because what are we talking about, Tucker? We're talking about providing lifestyle interventions that they're intensive that people need support. They need to change their diet. They need to exercise. They need to optimize their sleep. They need to manage stress. They need to take the right nutritional supplements. They need to modify their risk factors aggressively. This requires a very different reimbursement system. We don't have evidence-based medicine, Tucker. We have reimbursement-based medicine. Doctors do what they get paid to do. Now what the right thing is, the right treatment for diabetes is not or drugs or a zempect. The right treatment is diet. You know, so it sounds like doctors aren't really in control. I mean, they're doing the best they can. You know, they're responding to forces bigger than themselves. Yeah. You know, the, we, medical education is a great example. Doctors' graduating, you know, in the 50s or 40s, we're dealing with infectious disease in acute care medicine. And we have the best acute care medicine system in the world. Barnon. If you have an acute infection, if you have sepsis, if you need ICU, you're in a car crash. Here, car crash. Damn right. I'm going on hospital. But that system doesn't work for chronic illness. And that's what we're facing now. And so the 80% of the conditions that doctors are seeing are chronic diseases for which drugs are not the right therapy most of the time. They can be helpful as adjuncts. But the fundamental drivers of our chronic disease epidemic is the food we're eating. And, and also environmental toxins that are adding to that. And when you add those two things together, it explains most of the chronic disease epidemic. It's just, I mean, a lot of smart people you included, you're definitely one of the earliest, but are saying varieties of what you're saying now. So I mean, it was, you know, 30 years ago or so that the Congress hauled the heads of the tobacco companies, rentals and Phil Morris and Laura Larden, who humiliated them on camera. And like, you knew you were hurting people you did it anyway. That's right. Is that going to happen with the Bisco anytime soon? I mean, there are, there are class action lawsuits that are being now raised around these companies to look at called them accountable for what they're doing. And they know. And there's been FOIA requests and information requests that I actually wrote about in my book that show their nefarious behavior. For example, targeting minorities and targeting poor income, lowering income people to focus on by more junk food. Well, the food stamp program is perfect example of that. Yeah. I mean, it's kind of crazy to talk. When you think about it, you know, when the American taxpayers paying through the nose for everything all the way along, the companies are privatizing profits and we're socializing the costs. So, so we basically fund the growth of commodity crops with $20 billion of subsidies in crop insurance for corn, wheat, and soy, the farmers, which puts them in a really tight bond because they can't change their system without support to changing to a more regenerative system that they're going to make more money. They're going to grow better food. They're going to have better resuscitation of their real economies. And not hopefully, it's suicide at the rate they're doing. We pay for that. And then we pay for those foods for our SNAP programs. We have about 125 billion in SNAP, which is our food stamp program. It's supplemental nutrition assistance, but there's no end in there. There's just food security, which means calories. So they pray when you get your EBT benefits in the beginning of the month, these food companies know to advertise in the bodega. So they'll get your two liter bottle of Coke with your EBT and they put these giant ads in there and they know exactly when they're getting their cart. So we, we basically fund, you can buy Coca-Cola. 75% of the food bought on SNAP is junk food. 10% is soda. So you think about $12 billion on soda, the American bank. Why would soda be federal? Why would if we're giving out nutritional assistance to the poor, why would we pay for soda? What an obvious question, Tucker. Yeah. Well, that's just crazy. It's crazy. It's crazy. And we know why don't you hurt the poor. You do that. I mean, we know beyond a doubt. And, you know, we can talk about ultra process food. There's arguments in that way in this way. But the food industry will say, oh, it's we're going to take away people's choice. We're going to take away convenience. We're going to take away affordability. We're going to make food less safe if we don't ultra process food. These are their talking points. It's not all it's all about calories. It's not moderation. So you can have, you know, soda as part of your diet, as long as you don't exceed your calories it's basically your fault that you're fat. So you fix it. That's the messaging. Right. It's the messaging from every food industry sort of message from every professional association message from the medical sort of. But that doesn't mean that we have to pay for it. Well, that's it. So we pay for probably 30 billion or more servings of soda for the poor every year. And then we pay for taxpayers or sending all this money to Coca-Cola. The biggest profit center in America for Coca-Cola is 20% of their profits is SNAP food stamps. Walmart gets I don't know something like you know 40 billion of that food stamp bill. I mean, it's crazy. And we pay, we pay on those numbers real. Yeah, I can get you the, I can get you the Walmart numbers. But yeah, it's it's it's really high. And then we, and then we have that's shocking to pay for Medicare and Medicaid. I mean, back end, when people get sick from those foods. And then we pay all the other people. The Coca-Cola and the asmpit. Yeah. I mean, listen, the price we paid the checkup charts and the insulin. I mean, that's right. The pot, the check the price you paid the check out can counter is not the true cost of food. The true cost of food, the Rockefeller Foundation report is for every dollar you spend on food, there's three of dollars in collateral damage to health pay for the crack and the rehab. Yeah, exactly. It's totally nice for the hookers. And we can fix this. We can fix this. And Andy Harris, who's a, who's a, a congressman wanted to do a simple pilot study. Just a pilot study to see what would happen if we eliminated soda from food stamp benefits and a couple of locations, just to just to monitor the impact on the health of those people. And he couldn't get it through as a, as a pilot not to change the entire USC policy. Just as a pilot study. So imagine how anti science this is. Is this this is truly anti science? I really believe in naming and shaming. It works. Yeah. Just call people out. Yeah. You know, bring some sunlight in and let them defend it. Exactly. So I'd love to know who's behind that. And by the way, I'm not saying you shouldn't be allowed to buy Coca-Cola. I'm saying I don't want to pay for it. Right. Yeah. That's fair, isn't it? 100%. I mean, the government of the United States should not be funding the, the crown of these epidemic, which it currently are. They are, they are either by policies that were put in, you know, that were innocent or by money. But it's so perfect. It's like when I learned that we were funding ISIS in Syria, I was like, that's kind of perfect actually like both sides are taking American money. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of crazy. But we have the opportunity to change that. For example, WIC, which is women infants and children's food program is based on only allowing people to buy food that's going to be healthy for the mother and child. Why not apply that to WIC? You know, why not school standards being changed so that actually kids can have healthy food? Well, I know that I think WIC is like the center of profit for the formula makers. Is it an? Yeah. Well, they do. That's another problem. But yeah, for example, chilling the out lot formula marketing for kids, the out lot that advertising the kids, they got rid of all the junk food in school. They put it in front and pack. Why would the federal taxpayers be included? You included be paying for baby formula? Why would we be encouraging formula over breast milk? Well, it's a huge industry. I mean, it's all, it's, it's, it's, it's, you know, there's a group from the WHO who's put together some initial papers and it's coming out of their poor next year about the commercial determinants of health, which is how multinational and transnational corporations in food and ag and alcohol tobacco are essentially driving across the epidemic and they're privatizing the profits of burning public health and socializing the costs and the governments are the ones who are struggling with this. And so, so there are many other countries governments are paying for. Their governments are paying for it. And you look at the healthiest countries. They're the ones like Japan and Singapore and Spain, Italy. They actually have policies that are protecting their citizens that are educating them about food that are not allowing the same. But just don't pay for it. I mean, let's, we can start there. So Christmas is coming and winter is coming and that's the perfect combination for cozy earth. Cozy earth is a company that makes exactly what it sounds like. Products that are close to the earth and that are white. Cozy and you should consider them this Christmas. They have the best sheets available. They're made out of bamboo, believe it or not. And I started to believe how great they are until you try them. We have and they are great. They're a great fit for everybody in their shopping list. What sets them apart? Well, their fabrics are temperature regulated. That means they keep you cool and cozy or warm and cozy depending on the temperature. And they have a 10 year warranty. So if anything goes wrong with your sheets, you get free ones. to cozyearth.com slash Tucker user promo code Tucker for up to 40% off. If they ask tell you tell them the Tucker Carlson show sent you everyone here uses those sheets and loves them. And it does raise like some pretty interesting questions. The smartest thing I've heard this year, I think it's a common phrase now is that the point of the system is it's outcome. So if you're wondering about motive, look at what the system produces and that describes the motive. Yeah, right. We don't have to guess. So if governments are making their citizens more unhealthy, I think we can assume that they want that outcome. No, they don't. They don't. This has been the frog and boiling water slowly that's hit them so fast. Because yeah, bring all these fast food companies, bring all these American companies into help us with our food nutrition. Let's get fast food everywhere. It's kind of the kind of the Americanization of the world, right? We basically created the worst diet in the planet and exported to every country in the world. And we see now even in the developing world, they call the double burden of disease, chronic disease and infectious disease. So they're dying of diabetes and tuberculosis, so dang of diabetes in malaria. I hate to say it, but I've traveled a lot of countries this year and the best food I had in any country was in a country under such severe US sanctions that know US companies. There you go. Not going to name the country, but I'm saying, yeah, there will be two controversial. Yeah. And it makes me sad. You controversial Tucker? You always call her in the life of myself as a truly a loyal American. I'm only an American, I'm never leaving. But to go to a country whose food is the best I've ever had in my whole life. And it also happens that country is no American food of any kind because it's not allowed. Maybe there's a connection? Maybe there's a connection. Yeah, exactly. And so these countries have been unknowingly participating in what they thought was growth in economic development, but what it's done is sick in their populations. And so now that a lot of these countries are standing up like the UK just band advertising of junk food, France has clear labeling on their front of package to make it really clear what you're eating. You know, Chile and South America, you go there and there's big just warning signs on the front of labels. They've done all these policies that have actually been studying and worked. So we have covering the United States. Why should we be allowing things in the United States? So we don't, these other countries have determined our own state. What are you paying for? Let's just stop paying for it. You know, people are into some weird self-destructive behavior. Not interested in rooting at out or showing up at your house making sure you're not feeling it. No, no, no, no. People should be at full. No, we should. We should be informed and we should be not having to pay for it. Yes. And you know, government procurement, $166 billion, the government spends on food for military, for correctional facility, for schools, for everything. When you look at the fat belt, you know how much that could change the food system. We said based on these set of nutritional principles, which are, I think, well accepted in the nutritional science community of being what is food. If we just follow that and didn't pay for all the junk food and the ultra process food, we just took that out. They would change the food system. Yeah, because all the industry would change. If you take $166 billion out of the food economy and say, we're only buying healthy food from farmers or produce healthy food, it's going to change everything from field of fork. The simple things that the government can do, that's easy. I mean, because they control it. So people, I know, I've known a lot of people go to prison more now than ever. And they get fat in prison a lot of them. Oh, yeah. Is that I assume that's because of the food. Of course. I mean, in prisons, they did another study. I mentioned about the juvenile detention centers. They swapped out prisoners food for healthy food. And they found there was a 56% reduction in violent crime in the prisons and an 80% reduction if they added a multivitamin. So, oh, there's so much nutritional efficiencies. In countries like Japan, they put people on a super healthy diet in prison and all their violent behavior goes down. It's pretty amazing. Really? Yeah. It's really interesting. It's got to die. It's only there. It's got to like a macrobiotic, like very kind of like healthy diet that gets them completely reset. And we know, we know the mental health crisis. Also. Why don't we do that since it's a captive population? We should. We can. I mean, the problem is the, this is a very, I don't want to sound conspiratorial, but I'm telling you, there is a very loose organization of industries that are working together to keep the system status quo. They don't want changes in our agricultural subsidies. They don't want changes in farming practices. They don't want changes in how we fund SNAP. They don't want changes in how we reimburse health care. They don't want changes in our food labeling. They don't want changes in ingredients that are in our food. You know, this is this is stuff that's so entrenched. It's essential for their for their profits and their success. But I mean, prisons, if you think about it have been used as because it is captive, the population of a prison, they've been used as, you know, testing populations for civil and vaccines and LSD and all kinds of horrible shit. And you feel so sorry for the man who I do endure them. Why not use prison? I'm not sure the LSD was bad for them. But a whitey bulger was at Alcatraz, where the bulger, the, you know, the head of the winter hill gang in Boston, a mass murder. And he got dosed really hard with LSD at Alcatraz in the early 60s and wound up effectively a serial killer. And his brother didn't wound up the most powerful politician of Massachusetts. That's incredible. So I'm just saying, maybe, maybe flip them. But anyway, here's the point. Why not use prisons as a kind of federal prisons as a national test for the outcome of the diet? Yes, you could do that. I mean, I mean, there were studies that were done in mental institutions years ago. But there's ethics. And so the informed real sense. Yeah, not feeding people Oreos is unethical. Like, yeah, yeah. Well, I think you're right, Tucker. I mean, the, the, the, the considerations are really around informed consent medicine. We gave them syphilis. You can't get some cancer. Okay. And then, you know, now there's rules about this. No, I'm just saying like, but we could, we could, we could again, informed consent. We could have 15 cents an hour to work. I mean, they're prisoners. They can't vote. They can't own firearms. They can't. See, they're wives like everything about it is horrible. Why, why wouldn't you use the opportunity to improve their health? I 100% agree. I think we need to every, every sector was a society where the government has a hand. School lunches, the military, all our federal food programs. These are easy interventions. But, but the food industry blocks it by huge lobbying efforts in Washington. You know, in my nonprofit food, food, food, food, food, and pain, which is really about educating and advocating for policy change to really improve the health Americans. We've been with 150 centers in Congress, been both sides of the aisle. And everybody seems to get this issue. And they're not hearing about it. And they're starting to hear about it because people like me are talking about it. But I'm just one guy of a little nonprofit. I'm not funded by industry. I don't have any like conflicts of interest. And I'm just trying to, you know, what are the big lobbies? Everyone says the big food lobby. What companies do you have? I mean, you've got the American Beverage Association. You've got, you know, all the, you know, the pharmaceutical lobby groups. You've got all the ag lobby groups. I mean, collectively, they're the biggest group of lobbyists in Washington. Exceeding all the other lobby. And they're very powerful. And they control a lot of what happens in the Washington. I detail a lot of this in my book, Food Fix, where students out of Congress, been, you are funded by Coca-Cola or these become the other fun both sides. They fund everybody. Of course they do. And so they've got a lot of it locked up and they're miseducating. It's the misinformation and miseducation of our policymakers and government officials because they're only hearing one side of the story. They come in with their briefing books, with their scientific papers, with their justification, with their regulations written, with the legislation. And they live in, literally give it to them. I've been in Congress and the Center's off saying, this is amazing, Mark. Could you write the legislation for me? I'm like, what? I don't know how to do that. I mean, if I have people on my team, if you do that. But it was sort of, it was sort of a startling kind of revelation that the people in Congress need help and they need guidance and need direction and they're overwhelmed. And they're overwhelmed and they're good people and they want to the right thing and they're not hearing the other side of the story. And so when you lay it out for them, they're like, that was what Senator Boosman from Arkansas, he's a great guy. And he's like, yeah, I'm seeing the changes in my real community. I'm seeing what's happening on the forums. I'm seeing the degradation of these, and I'm seeing the process through that. I've seen what affects my population. And he gets it and he wouldn't let me, I was off for 45 minutes to usually get like a Senator Popsian High, five minutes ran out. But it was incredible conversation. I've seen this with Randy Fenster, who's really just in regenerative agriculture. I've seen this on the Democratic side of the people like Cory Booker and Richard Neil and James McGovern, who are trying to advocate for food policies. So I brought your Marshall and Cassidy, both doctors, fully in on this stuff. So there's so many allies in Congress on both sides of the aisle that are sort of sick and tired of how this thing is going and realize we can't continue to do what we're doing. And I think Tucker, we have a historic opportunity with Trump and Bobby Kennedy, and Dr. Oz now has to have the CMS and other people I think. This is a public case. He means it'll be a surgery general. I hope we can. I hope we can have a shift in the thinking and educate America. Just like we did with smoking and we can win. It's just so funny that I mean, whatever life is irony, everything is irony. But the Big Mac president is assuring in. It's just crazy. Oh no, I'm sick. I'm a lot of people. But it makes sense, right? It's incredible. Johnson was one of the biggest bigots. He signed the Civil Rights Act. Reagan was the most staunch anti-communist. He's the one who ended the Cold War. So there's a historical fact. No, that's very deep. What you're saying is deep. No, that is the way life is actually. It's the opposite of what you expect. And I've talked to Trump about it and he means it. I would say Bobby Kennedy is one of the nominees he's proud of stuff. He hasn't backed down at all. I think Bobby's going to get confirmed. I want to ask you about the thing for which Bobby is most famous. But I don't want to say the word because YouTube won't monetize it. You're not even allowed, even now, YouTube's biggest company, most powerful company in the world, Google, has an AI program that will literally knock out your video if you use the V-word. Yeah. So let's call it the shot. If you don't have the V-word. If you weren't. Not the good V-word, the bad V-word. So Bobby Kennedy became infamous 15 or 20 years ago when he wrote a piece in Rolling Stone suggesting that. I mean, he just got exiled from America basically. First, suggesting that the shot might cause really bad outcomes. Yeah, that comes from children. I never hear anybody bring that up anymore. Have we accepted that there may be truth in that? Well, listen, I think, we get to a religion around certain topics. Yes. I don't understand this. You know, medicine is supposed to be about science. Yes. That's what I thought asking questions. And to say a subject is settled and we need no more science doesn't make any sense. Like Aspen's a great example. We thought Aspen was a great thing on the planet Earth and everybody should get an Aspen to prevent a heart attack. But as we started to look at the data, very carefully, we saw the gene. No, actually, it increases the risk of certain problems like brain hemorrhage and gas from Tesla bleeding and death. And 30,000 people die every year from taking an Aspen for prevention of heart attacks. What? Yeah. I didn't even know that. So let's take a baby Aspen every day. Well, that's right. But it causes bleeding. It thins your blood. That's why it's good for spreading heart attacks. But also it can make you have a brain hemorrhage or a gut blade. And so now the guidelines have been revised and it's not recommended for everybody. Only certain high-risk populations. And yet we change our mind based on the data. We look at the science. We update our data. The V-word is, listen, I'm just going to say it. I think vaccines are one of the greatest advances in medicine history. They have eradicated many serious diseases, polio, smallpox. You know, I mean, I was in Haiti during the earthquake and I was working at the General Hospital there. And there was a guy with tetanus. I'd never seen a full-blown case of tetanus before. It was one of the worst things I'd ever seen. What is it? I don't know. Tetanus is when we step on a rusty nail. Right. Lock jaw. Lock jaw. But you're like basically going to total paralysis. Like your body's in a cunt. It's like one being giant spasm. And you can't get out of it. And you're like, basically have to give them IVs and oxygen and hope they survive. And there's tetanus in the toxin. But it was the worst thing I ever seen. So vaccines have a role. And the problem is that... A tetanus shot is a vaccine. Yeah, tetanus shot is a vaccine. I didn't know that. Polio is a vaccine. Of course, well, famously. Yeah. But a tetanus shot is a vaccine. Yeah, it's a vaccine. Yeah, you're supposed to get rid of 10 years. Yeah. And, you know, diphtheria, there's some really good things we've done in medicine to reduce a lot of the childhood illnesses and deaths. Yes. Measles, this is... Vaccines aren't a problem. Problem is that we need to study long-term safety and efficacy of these strokes. Like any other drug. You know, one of the problems with medicine is that... And I think this was a huge failure during COVID. And I think Bobby was right about this. You know, we did not actually give the American public benefit doubt that they were smart enough to understand the nuances around this treatment. So they said vaccines are safe. They're effective. Well, not really. Like any drug, it's sort of safe and it can be effective. Right? Aspirin is effective for certain things, but it also has side effects. And so vaccines work to prevent the mortality rates and reduce death rates and reduce the severity infection. But it didn't prevent infection. And that was very clearly early on. And it's a concept called sterile immunity versus disease immunity. So, sterile immunity is you get a meso shot when you're a kid, you never need it again. You're sterile, you're never going to get measles. The flu vaccine, you have to get every year because you basically don't get permanent immunity. You get sort of a reduction in the risk of disease. That's what the COVID vaccine was. So it reduced the risk, but it didn't prevent you getting it. It didn't prevent transmission. And it also has side effects. And we were pushing on young kids. And now the data is really clear. It caused increased malcar, diet is, heart inflammation. So what we need is just good science. And I think that's all Bobby's asking for. He's not anti vaccine. He's been vaccinated. I've been vaccinated. We've vaccine our kids. I think it's propaganda that say these in anti-vaxxer. That's really just a way of dismissing him. But I think we have to understand that we just need to do good science. And that's all he's asking for. He recently come out and said he's not taking the vaccine. He's pro-vaccines. We need you to want good science. And I think that's what we need. I read everything. I mean, and it's whether it's Alzheimer's or whether it's diabetes or whatever it is, we're studying the wrong things. Now we've told you before about a staff favorite here at TCN, the eight sleep pod. What is it? It's a high-tech mattress that's what we talk about over lunch here, our mattresses, because this one is excellence, high-tech. It's a cover. It goes right over your existing bed. Well, this Christmas, you can get it for the best price of the year up to 600 bucks off. The eight sleep pod works by adjusting the temperature warmer or cooler depending on your preference. And it maintains an ideal sleeping network all night long. You might not know this, but through different phases of sleep, every night your bodies needs change. Sometimes you want to warmer, sometimes colder. That's why you throw the sheets off. That's why you pull them around your other parts of the night. You don't have to do that anymore with eight sleep because it automatically keeps things exactly where you want them throughout your entire night's sleep. What's called the sleep cycle. And it's been studied. It's clinically proven to increase quality sleep time every night that improves your recovery time from physical exertion, makes you a little sharper, makes your health better. It learns and adapts to your sleep patterns over time and it automatically adjusts temperatures throughout the night through each phase of your sleep. And it does this independently for up to two people in a bed. So each person can have a tailor-made sleep. It really helps. People here absolutely love it. Eight sleep. Go to 8sleep.com slash chuckles the promo code Tucker to get up to 600 bucks off the pod for ultra. You can try with no obligation for 30 days if you don't like it. Just send it back. That's 8sleep.com slash talker. Better sleep truly. Why do you think it became for Bowdoin to ask any questions about this one category of medicine? That's a very good question. I don't know the answer to that. Was a religious fervor that scared me? I didn't understand. I have exactly the same view that you just articulated on a subject. I don't. I'm not a zell in either way. But the zealotry was 100% on the other side and it was really scary. It ended friendships that divided families. Yes. I've never seen anything like it. What was that? I think as a public health effort, I understand the public health mission which is to sort of work on the health of the entire population. And so you will. think you know is a public health effort you know you know i understand the public health mission which is to sort of work on the health of the entire population and so you will need to kind of simplify things and put up messaging that may not be completely scientific in order to get people to do stuff right which is what happened during you lie to manipulate people well bad yeah you can't do that no but i think i think i think you know the period we need to inform consent we mean you listen when you give prescribed drug as a doctor you're supposed to say if i give you this drug here's the benefits and here's the risk you know it's it's really clear we're supposed to do that in medicine it's called the report why you do that yeah and we should have informed consent so people understand here's the benefit here's the risk and you can decide for yourself but why would i mean of course everything became in the political political charge year of 2020 election year became super partisan okay so there's that yeah but it was deeper than that because trump was out there he was pro vaccine yeah and then the Biden people of course are pro vaccine but the media take became like i've never seen that level of intolerance like anybody who asked any question was not just wrong or misinformed but even no it's everything is death no as it's doctored with is that the view of doctors like anyone who questions this yeah i i i what is that why does stounding tucker it's one of those areas in medicine where it's become a religion and you can't question it but why was that the case when you were medical school not really like i just i don't understand what happened i think there was there was a sense that that you know we're being not given this whole story in the whole truth and i think this is true and i think most people don't know whatever they attack you for asking questions then you can be certain you're not getting the whole stuff so and you and people have attacked me there's there's a group called the american counts on science and health which is gone after me and they're they're basically funded by monsanto and pesticide companies and and uh... pharma and the tobacco companies and the fast food companies and so they they you know like i'm pretty much like a fun group yeah and they and they sound great and this is one of their strategies so so the the way in which the food you ask how this is happened it's it's not by accident so the food industry and the energy have deliberately set up a series of actions and strategies across this all sectors of society to take over the narrative one they fund most of the research so there's there's twelve times much research quote on nutrition from food industry in other words the american beverage association does a study on artificial sweeteners they find they're fine and they don't you've got they do a study on soda they find it doesn't cause obesity right that's kind of garbage science and there's eight to fifty times more likely to show a benefit for their product if they're funding it so they take over the research infrastructure they they take over the professional associations the american heart association which is a hundred ninety two million dollars a year from pharma and food american diabetes association and cami nutrition dietetics all the major professional associations which we think are independent giving us independent advice are fun and and co-opted bodies and i i mean it's if that's yeah i wouldn't have the autism groups um because i was wondering there's been this massive increase in autism i don't know what's causing it it's not genetic no it's not true it's not because we brought in the classification of autism that's not better detection it's a thousand percent i mean i i okay right so and it's a it's a life ending crisis like yeah i went from one in twenty five hundred to one in twenty six kids twenty thirty nine course we all know people who have autistic children and that's it's really is a tragedy so they're always autism groups and they're all they're incredibly pompous and self-righteous yeah but all of them have sort of shot down the idea that like we should ask any questions about where this comes from well not all then they're some are asking the big ones have yeah of course i know so new work to one i was like what's causing the shut up that's right it's like you work at an autism group or where are you interested exactly i mean this is who's funding them do you know we should take a couple i don't i don't know but but but there's autism groups and then they fund not only um professional associations definitely they fund nutrition research but they obviously also quit these these front groups like the american council and science and health and crop life and all these nice sounding things american council and science and health sounds very legitimate it sounds legitimate and you look at these guys have these guys were in jail are you not getting science and health what no but what these guys was like a jail for medicare fraud for eight million dollars you look at these guys your criminals he knows a lot of that side so now yeah exactly it's so and then they and then they fund social groups so this get this tucker they fund like the nwcp and Hispanic Federation oh i'm aware of that and i i was i was i was where i was where i was where i was sharp and it's where he got his suits taking it's right i was i was with uh i'm birties king at the uh in in washing in uh Atlanta and this woman yeah we were going to show the movie fed up which was about childhood obesity and how our sugar industry was causing this that food it was causing this and i'm she said non-violence is just not non-violence to others but it's non-violence to yourself and i think this is important and i want to show this film in the king center so i said great and so few days later she come back to mark and do it i said why cochola funds a king center uh i know we see is not a problem in the black community you know if you look at the african-americans in the 60s they were healthier than white americans if you look at that movie amazing grace with the wreath of franklin oh i know it's a great movie she was thin and every black person in that congregation in ochlean in 1970 what's then and now 85% of african-american women are overweight this was it was LA i think non-ocland really was it LA okay was she record the gospel album it was yeah this is the amazing grace i don't remember it was a great document oh it's the most incredible so album too so they fund social groups to uh help oppose things that they don't like soda taxes or they fund like the trillans hospital um Philadelphia which is one of the premier trillans hot chocolate what chop was going to actually uh come out in favor of a soda tax but cochola gave them ten million dollars and they they pull back this is the kind of stuff they do they have made they they they fund science they co-op the professional associations they uh fund uh you know the social groups they create front groups and they're huge lobbyists and so they very deliberate in how they do the same fact it was it was illegal they got a huge lawsuit against the from secretary of the attorney general of washing state because they colluded a lot of the food industry groups colluded to fight against jima labeling which they wanted to do in uh Washington now american syria are the only countries that don't allow jima we're not a pretty good company serious bigger problems china and russia you know are transparent about this and they're not known for their children not allowed in russia right yeah and so so basically they funded this campaign for a ballot initiative to defeat the jima labeling and they they won but they did it illegally and they said huge amounts of money doing it and they were then fine and had the biggest uh fine ever which was trivial for them was like an 18 million dollars or something that they had to pay but it was trivial but they they got a big stop on the risk for doing this but they were but they won same being california when jerry brown was was governor and he's governor moonbeam and he says left as you can get you know and and they were soda taxes being passed all around california and the soda industry got together american beverage association they said we're gonna create a ballot measure it's gonna require two third majority for every vote in any state or local government for anything would basically paralyze the government of california if they pass this ballot measure and they were funding it with millions of dollars had nothing to do with food they said look jerry we're gonna pull this ballot measure but you've got to put in a permanent ban on soda tax in calivornia and he did that's what's going on behind the scenes that's how this permanent ban on soda taxes in california there's no permanent ban on any other kind of taxes so that's that's also it bothers me is i do think there should be one for everyone in every category as we're all american citizens right nobody should be exempt from taxes no very much including college and diamonds and nobody should be exempt from lawsuits unless all of us are and so i don't understand like one of the reasons orthopedic surgeons don't do knee replacements drunk is they can be sued for it well they yeah but drug makers for certain category of drug have blanket immunity where do i get but you're blanket immunity grants up like which i don't i wish that would be nice how do we get that so i don't okay i don't understand i mean i think i'm a million dollars i'll donate maybe i can get that right but like this is actually yes it is how does i mean one category of product have blanket immunity from lost stature totally blanket immunity and no and they're like well we provide a vital survival service will everybody who works things he provides a vital service right who doesn't think he's brought you think you're providing a vital service i do i mean you you want to i don't get it you wanted to incentivize innovation you want to incentivize science you want to you know accelerate things that may be really necessary in ways that you know are are probably not possible within the normal course how we developed drugs no let's do tort reform right but how we all benefit from this vaccines you know some of them were not that profitable and and some are very profitable but what's happened is that in 1980 i think it was 86 the u.s. government indemnified vaccine makers oh i know so that meant that they can make vaccines and ever be sued and they created a vaccine court deal with vaccine injury and this paid over five billion dollars in vaccine injuries so the drug companies paid for over five billion no no the u.s. taxpayer space way way way way wait so you're saying that the drug companies can never be sued but if they are sued taxpayers have to write a damn it that's right federal federal vaccine court yeah and and so that's the biggest scam i think i've ever heard of ever i mean in a way i understood the thinking behind it because you know you want to incentivize rapid development of drugs that aren't going to be that profitable right so but it turns out that many of these are profitable like rotavirus which is a new vaccine and we know when we were kids they were like eight back eight shots nothing like 72 shots you get and and many countries for example don't allow for example i have to that is b at birth is a vaccine we're recommending in America and it's what you get from iv drugs or sex now i don't need newborns that are doing iv drugs or sex and you know if you learn a lot probably a lot but in many countries don't actually have it on the vaccine schedule you know we do and so with with rotavirus example they profit a hundred billion dollars a hundred billion dollar profit for them that's nuts right do you have any idea why the trial bar which has always been one of the most powerful obvious in washington and definitely the most powerful democratic party i haven't said anything about this i don't know so their argument has always been look if you want safer goods and services you have to apply penalty to people who are negligent yeah i mean that's what that's their argument is not a crazy argument by the way and um coca cola by the way for all its faults can be sued if they poison you with the can of die coke that's right so they don't right so why wouldn't that and by the way if you're saying well i can't make enough money selling my product why you convince people to buy it then just convince people that it's a good product and yeah probably pay for it yeah no i understand that i mean it's it's it wasn't a completely stupid idea but it's ended up being a bit of a disaster and i think i think all we need is better science good science and i know if you have a government that's like you must use this product you have you got no choice will punish if you don't use the product and then you get injured by the product yeah most people got injured like had no idea they could be injured because nobody told them that you get injured yeah you're told to shut up and just suffer a dying silence and then you've got no recourse and the and then the people who sold you the product at gunpoint become billionaires that seems like a very flawed system it's a bit it's a bit messed up i mean it's a bit messed up either kind of a perfect set i mean for the drug buddy but it just sort of underscores of the bigger problem in our society which is that we we really have multinational and transnational corporations profiting from creating more sickness you know the food companies create illness the pharma companies pay for the illness drug treatments and the whole thing just works for them but we have to change this and we we can't as a federal government change the policies because other countries have done this they've been successful they they're winning the war on this problem and and we need a folks effort and i think there's so many things that could be done in this administration okay so tell us about Bobby Kennedy who you for viewers who haven't followed this for a long you know for a long time you were to book with them he's not just like some guy you met at cocktail party no no no well yeah just you told me didn't understand you were just staying with him yeah um do you want to say where you're staying because i thought it was hilarious how we were staying in doctor Oz's house Mark i'm in Bobby Kennedy where the means is there too uh Cali was there yeah Cali means to doctor Oz all staying together so yeah yeah it was sort of it's a conspiracy of light i would say um but anyway but you know Bobby really well yeah personally and professionally what do you think his strengths are going into this job i think he's he's he's has the right focus of perspective which is that we have a crisis which is our chronicles the epidemic it's been neglected by scientific community predominantly it's been neglected by the federal government it's bankrupting us it's causing destruction of our environment of our social structures of more academic competitive global competitiveness of our military and he understands that these needs to be addressed and so i think that's a huge strength i think he wants to focus on on rooting out corruption rooting out complex of interest in the in agencies i think he wants to impan policies that are going to transform the health of america and and you know we're working on a whole series of different ideas but i think the NIH needs to be reformed they should basically fund fund nutrition research around chronic disease which they don't very small amount of money goes to that they still don't 5% but but it's 80% of the diseases we're seeing they they should have a mandate for example that all medical schools and academic institutions that receive federal funding from any source should have a nutrition curriculum and that issue you may be in it and there's there's there's a reason for that because doctors graduate today my daughter's in medical school she's in poor thermatical school not a single thing on nutrition like what did you learn well i would have been in me and washes and fatty acids i mean what do you tell your patient have for lunch you know like and and so their education that could be changed over that true and you were in medical school of course yeah i learned about you know quash yours corn rasmus and rickets and syrup found me all these rare diseases from vitamin deficiencies in africa and protein malnary berry yeah berry berry and palaagrom like i never seen any that you know like i i didn't see it so i think i i did see some malnutrition when i was in Haiti but but it was you know really really rare and and what what we're not doing this the NIH could do a lot and then the the HHS could fund with medicare nutrition services in medicine which it doesn't pay for now so if you've diabetes or heart disease or auto diet causes diseases very hard to get nutrition services and we we at kleiman clinic created a lifestyle change program where we got people to you know to work together to change the behavior and change lifestyle is based on this sort of work i did with brick war and it's out of back church where we got 15,000 people to lose according to my impounds in a year by by actually getting healthy together so really it's about behavior change and also what to do so they change it was in the refineries they got rid of the pancake breakfast ice cream socials they got they got everybody jogging for jesus it was and then they lost a lot of weight rick loss time away they got healthy and we showed how people doing this in groups actually works and this could be funded by the federal government well schools used to do that yeah they i don't think they do anymore no and so so we know we know actually how to change behavior we know how to change these chronic diseases with food and that needs to be funded so like i said we don't have evidence based medicine we have reimbursement based medicine there's a company called verta that reverses type to diabetes the 60% of their patients using a ketogenic diet they do it with a continuous care online model they reverse all the biomarkers for heart disease they get those better they have about 12% weight loss which in a separate issue they reverse 60% of diagnosis type two yeah advanced really advanced type two like insulin dependent 100% they get they get 100% off the medication the main medication for diabetes they get 90 plus percent when is part of a safe six thousand dollars per diabetic patient and if you apply that to the Medicare diabetes population just doing that alone would save a hundred billion dollars here and not even coming all the amputated limbs and well that's what it was all the stuff right that goes wrong with it yeah so roughly when is the average type two diabetic diagnosed as such depends I mean if you're a pure up into and it could be three years old yeah you know 80% of type two diapima Indians by the time they're 30 have tectured diabetes 80 80% 80% it's very convenient it's rampant in African Americans it's it's much higher than it's it's Hispanic is much higher than white so you know the age can vary but the pre-diabetes starts early so we're measuring with function our my company function health insulin resistance and we're measuring insulin and most doctors never measure insulin I asked quest how many doctors are measuring insulin probably less than one percent of the lab the question is the testing the question top yeah like less than one percent get measurements for insulin which is the single biggest thing we have a problem with in America which is our insulin levels are spiking because of sugar insulin is high causes you to store belly fat it makes you hungry it locks the fat in your fat cells and it slows your metabolism so you're screwed and you get stuck in this vicious cycle where you have hungry fat that makes you eat more that makes you want to exercise less and you get this cycle of weight gain nobody wakes up to any pretty they go I want to be diabetic I want to be overweight I want to gain nobody says that they're they're they're being people do wake up craving sugar cereal and exactly exactly because their metabolism and biochemistry has been hijacked by the food industry I want to stay to get out of that cycle very quick very quick how quick well I I would say you're on a typical American diet and you're waking up with frosted flakes yeah getting some kind of big sandwich and then having pasta for dinner you doing that for ten years how long is it taking to get out of the cycle I I actually done this with my patients for decades and I created a program called the 10 day detox diet and essentially it's 10 days of treating food addiction and I wrote a book about it called the 10 day detox diet I have an online program starting actually in January if you don't go 10 day detox.com and essentially guys people through how to reset your biochemistry your hormones your gut microbiome metabolism very quickly through food so one of these patients I had including she lost she started the program when three days she was off her insulin so the cravings go away in two or three days you feel shady for two or three three days and then you start reducing symptoms and what happens is when you take out the bad stuff and putting the good stuff you see changes across your whole system because you know when I talk about food as a root cause it's root cause for so many of the things people are suffering from so depression and autoimmune diseases and gut issues anger anger I mean yeah it's it's amazing and we know sugar causes anger yes actually the data is that pretty interesting so the amygdala is the reptile brain fight or flight it's your yeah it's your reptile lizard brain you will have one yeah and we have a frontal lobe which is the grown-up in the room yeah so you got the the reptile kind of and you've got the the grown-up the communication there is important so when you when you're walking down the street and you see if a beautiful woman you say gee I'd like to kiss that woman you don't do it because you know it's not a good idea for your marriage right yeah right you have the frontal lobe one that's probably not a good idea or gee I like that car over there I want to just take that car and my car was stolen from my driveway two days ago it's crazy but that's another story but but you know people don't have control over their behavior because the amygdala and the frontal lobe communication is interrupted by inflammation inflammation in the brain is the root cause of so many of brain issues so depression's inflammation autism is inflammation ADD is inflammation Alzheimer's is inflammation of the brain and Chris Palmer is a Harvard psychiatrist who wrote a book called brain energy talking about this and how he curious gets to free me using a ketogenic diet beating getting people off a sugar during schizophrenia yes yes so so we have a we I'm saying these things it sound like crazy here radical we can where Alzheimer's reverse diabetes well there they are heretical yeah they're definition there heretical doesn't mean they're crazy though no I mean the science is there it's like if you look if you actually look online there's a national library medicine database called PubMed anybody can search it and you can look at these things and you can look them up they're online their study's done there's plenty of studies but they're don't you know it's so it sounds like you said so far the ketogenic diet can cure that baby is Alzheimer's cancer yeah and now skits of frontion is a free yeah so what I so we described the ketogenic diet just to be yeah sure so so basically this is something was developed for epilepsy a years ago because when a no drugs work for epilepsy neurologists realized that if they put people on a diet where their brain was just running on ketones which is the fuel instead of sugar that the body can run on maybe I said we're high bread AC DC the gasoline is carbs and the hybrid electric clean burning fuel is ketones so when you switch to ketones it activates the brain repair systems it improves mitochondria function it reduces inflammation it helps cognitive function at every level so I've seen a work from autism to Alzheimer's to schizophrenia to depression this is just an all protein diet it's not all protein it's fat it's actually 75% fat olive oil of a cottos nuts and seeds some animal fats dairy fats and it basically should be a healthy version of it because you can you know eat bacon and that's not a good idea but you you can do healthy ketogenic diets that actually improve health and reverse disease and work across all these things so sugar is really driving this big problem sugar and starch and by the way flour bagel I mean I had a had a little a lecture the day and the woman said you know I had a bagel for breakfast I noticed my head a glucose model my sugar spike 70 points you know she's got a metabolic problem and and you can start to see when you eat these foods your your body gets dysregulated and when you use you use a diet that actually shuts off this cravings that repairs the metabolic dysfunction that improves insulin sensitivity it doesn't take long so so it's shocking in five or ten days you get we get a 70% reduction from all symptoms and all diseases by people just changing your diet and most people Tucker don't connect how they feel with what they're eating they don't make the connection and so they they think they're suffering from all these problems that are related to what they're how why is it so hard for people to maintain ketogenic diet well it's a very extreme diet I don't think you need to be so extreme like a 10d detox is not keto but it does like probably 80 or 90% of the benefit so you get to eat more start to you well let's just say you just I'm going on a keto diet from now until I die yeah well probably probably you know what you want to do is use it to fix the problem and then come off it we were always doing this historically because we were hunting and gathering and sometimes we didn't hunt and gather very well we couldn't find anything so we would switch into burning fat because we probably have 2500 calories of sugar stored in our muscles that doesn't last for you long at the last of day but we probably have 30 50 60 100,000 calories fat in our body because we just naturally have fat in our body and that's a great source of fuel so what happens is the body starts to break down the fat and uses that and that's what happens when we overnight fast or we do you know ketogenic diet you flip into this alternative metabolic pathway and that pathway is incredibly helpful for longevity it's a kind of a reversing chronic diseases and across all these diseases we're seeing the same thing happen so really at the bottom line here is that sugar and starch is the problem in America and it's in every processed food it's in what people are eating every day and people have no idea how much you're consuming and so if you take out all the sugar and all the starch is that the same as keto not necessarily I mean for example you can if you can take out all your processed food and you can stock your liquid sugar calories if you can eat more good fats eat good quality protein lots of fruits and vegetables most of our problems will go away this is not is not complicated science and so you don't have to be super extreme but if you are in extreme situation and you have an extreme disease on your far end at the end spectrum of type 2 diabetes yeah you might need to do that for a while till you fix your metabolism so once you fix your metabolism it's a metabolism return to balance 100%. I mean yeah I mean you've got like I showed you the picture last night of that woman she had type diabetes she had heart failure she had hypertension she had kidney's feeling she had fatty liver she changed her diet in three months she was off all her medications off all her insulin reverse her diabetes reverse her heart failure reverse her kidney failure reverse her liver feeling she was on her way to heart and kidney transplant this is not a patient who's like just slightly broken she's she's 66 on her way out and then a year she lost 116 pounds enough all her medication and it wasn't through rocket science or or through some great new advance in medicine it was just to applying the basic principle of nutrition and how this is pretty much so like any insulin dependent patient in his 50s can he be cured type 1 no type 1 is in autoimmune disease I understand not but type 2 if you're uninsung you know you you can probably get 60 to 70% of those people off of insulin or dramatically lower on insulin and you can reverse completely diabetes in about 60 to 70% of those patients and this is well documented science I'm not you know pulling us out of thin air so why wouldn't that be a goal well that's one of the once one of the things I think the new administration needs to do is I mean we spend over a billion dollars a day on diabetes and this is a completely avoidable problem and it's the biggest driver again in all these problems via diabetes you're four times likely to get Alzheimer's more likely to get cancer more likely to get heart attacks all the things are caused by this fundamental problem of sugar and starch in your diet and so I think that the federal government should initiate a diabetes reversal campaign across HHS and alvany of the services and fund these trials and demonstration projects show this works and the scale it up because this is a solvable problem you know I can't I can't fix Middle East crisis I can't you know in the war I can't you know prevent your heart yeah or but this is a solvable problem the answers are clear and the solutions are clear we did an interview with a woman called Casey Means she's a Stanford educated surgeon and really one of the most remarkable people I have ever met in the interviews she explained how the food that we eat produced by huge food companies big food in conjunction with pharma is destroying our health making this a week and sick country the levels of chronic disease are beyond belief well Casey means we've not stopped thinking about ever since is the co-founder of a health care technology company called levels and we are proud to announce today that we are partnering with levels and by proud I mean sincerely proud levels is a really interesting company and a great product it gives you insight into what's going on inside your body your metabolic health it helps you understand how the food that you're eating the things that you're doing every single day or affecting your body in real time and you don't think about it you have no idea what you're putting in your mouth and you have no idea what it's doing to your body but over time you feel weak and tired and spicy and over even longer period time you can get really sick so it's worth knowing what the food you eat is doing to you the levels app works with something called a continuous glucose monitor a CGM you can get one as part of the plan you can bring your own it doesn't matter but the bottom line is big tech big pharma and big food combine together to form an incredibly malevolent force pumping you full of garbage on healthy food with artificial sugars and hurting you and hurting the entire country so with levels you'll be able to see immediately what all this is doing to you you get access to real time personalized data and it's a critical step to changing your behavior those of us who like Oreos can tell you firsthand this isn't talking your doctor an annual physical looking backwards about things you did in the past this is up to the second information on how your body is responding to different foods and activities the things that give you stress your sleep etc etc it's easy to use it gives you powerful personalized health data and you can make much better choices about how you feel and over time it will have a huge effect right now you can get an additional two free months when you go to levels dot link slash tucker that's levels dot link slash tucker this is the beginning of what we hope will be a long and happy partnership with levels and doctor Casey means so I buy everything you're saying I think it's demonstrably true you can feel it in yourself yeah um and you know one anomaly does not disprove a general truth yeah but Donald Trump is that one anomaly yeah yeah I don't know if you remember you be Blake he was a musician and he smoked and drank and did all he's in an eight crap he says if I would know when I was gonna live so long I would have taken better care myself and I think you know there are people I'm a father like that I mean there are people who just like Madame Clama she lived to a hundred and twenty two years old she smoked she drank she had tons of chocolate she was never married maybe that was her secret she was the oldest living human ever yes and you know some some people just have genes that make them go no matter what and so I would like to see what his blood work says I would like to know what's going on into the hood I mean that would be amazing and certainly we'll let to help anybody be healthy I take care of everybody you know one day my office I had a Muslim I had a chief rabbi I had a top Democrat a top Republican I had a Christian pastor I was like you know it's so funny but yeah I'm a doctor I take her humans and you know biology is bipartisan we all are human we all suffer from the same things there are genetic anomalies yeah there are yeah I just had an ice cream sunday with with Trump like three days ago yeah I'm off the ice cream some days for a while thank you hunger I got to get off him but he's 25 years older than I am yeah and I'm not just saying this I'm not sucking up I I wouldn't say anything if this weren't true but the guys sure yeah actually sure yeah really precise recall fast funny yeah and you know yeah pretty good shape 79 chaps like what that that's just a pretty good nature thing I think it is you know I think it is I mean I think you know what I love him to get healthy and everybody get healthy yes that's my job I'm a doctor but he's managing and doing great I feel what can I say but but for most of us that's not yeah no I can feel it's not gonna work no no it's not most of us are more in the human realm he's in the normal that's why sorry just had to say that yeah yeah yeah yeah No, it's not gonna work. No, it's not. It wasn't supposed to are more in the human realm. He's in the normal way. That's what. Sorry, I just had to say that. Yeah, I was like, yeah, yeah, yeah, you're right. I don't know if anybody's really had a chance to do that. I'm talking about his health and health risks and how we could do better. But you know, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how you do how we do that job at 78 years old, but he's crushing it. It looks like. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So he's not like, and by the way, most I've known a lot of people removed and present. and none of them are kind of normal. Yeah. It's an unusual job. It takes a lot to get there. It's a certain kind of person. Yeah. There, I don't know. The last time we had a president die in office, it's been quite some time, but it seems to kind of suspend maybe it's the intensity. Ward your world said how to stroke, but that's it. Yeah, no, but he made it. He made it. Not about his wife was present. Yeah, we're right. Oh, we have that now actually, but, um, but they still keep going. Yeah. No. So you think that after all the the powerful forces you've described to rate against him, but Kennedy can can still do. I do. I think what's going on now in America isn't awakening. I think there's an awareness that the trust in our medical system and science system has been broken and needs to be repaired and needs integrity. It needs someone. Yes. Calling out the complex of interest and he's sought good science being produced. And I think, you know, with, with the understanding that now we're in this chronic disease crisis that he's so well articulated and people like Casey and Callie on your podcast have done, that I've done for decades that somehow it's getting through that this was never an issue. That's was never an issue in any I've been crying from rooftops for 30 years. I feel like I'm in a voice crying in the wilderness. And now it's unbelievable to me to see must be pretty cool for you to see them. Unbelievable. And I see that there's an awakening in America that people are sick and tired of being sick and tired. They they're seeing everybody in their family sick. They're seeing the rise of all the diseases. They know something's broken. They know the drugs and the current system is not fixing it the way it is. It needs to be fixed. And then we need somebody to lead this. And I think, you know, Bobby has his issues in his controversies and his questions. But at the very heart, I think he's he's focused on the right thing, which is focusing on the root causes of our chronic epidemic, focusing on the problem with our food system with our ag system. And that is the right thing to be doing. And I think the federal government has enormous power to actually change this through whole series of different actions across different agencies that all can work together to make a difference. And I'm I'm thinking this is now going to happen. I think we can provide for these things across all the agencies. And they're not like hard things, right? We can we can improve snap. We can improve school lunches. We can improve our dietary guidelines and fund those. And we have dietary guidelines for Americans. There's no funding for them. The Congress mandates that they're produced every five years. I met with the guidelines people in HHS. And we have to go around with a tin cup to the other departments, the beg for nickels to actually fund our work because we don't get any federal funding to create the dietary guidelines. Nord is nascent in the National Academy of Science, Medicine and Engineering, which is supposed to review the literature and be an independent scientific body looking at the nutritional research. Doesn't have the funding to do basic literature reviews and science reviews to actually inform the dietary guidelines. So there's no money in the process. And there's no money to implement the guidelines to actually create awareness and implementation across America for what we should be eating. So the whole system is sort of broken. And we need to sort of read jigger that we can find I don't know how many billions of dollars you spent on forever wars. I mean, we're talking about a few million dollars. Like a few millions of dollars could make a profound difference in actually getting the right things done. So we have the ability to change what's happening in the DOD as well. You know, with the military readiness and performance and parts of Hammond's enhancement. And I've been working with Special Ops forces on some of this stuff. And you know, the the military is starting to understand that this is an issue and shift some of their policies. Now the NIH needs to fund again, research and research. We should probably have a national institution like many other countries have. We shouldn't allow funding for medical schools that don't actually provide nutrition curriculum. So we should, you know, have our agricultural systems supporting farmers to transition to regenerative agriculture. I'm just healthier food and revitalize these communities and stop their their extreme decline into sort of financial ruin and suicide. I mean, why? Why is there 350 percent higher risk of suicide in farmers? You know, that's ridiculous. And that's because of our policies and what we're doing and how they're squeezed. So we have across all the agencies such tremendous power to make simple changes that can really transform America. Front of package labeling, we can do front of package labeling and form people about what's in their food like they have in other countries. You know, get out the stuff. And the European Union has really clear clearly identified the most harmful chemicals in our food. Get them out of our food. I mean, you go to Europe or you go to Canada. You don't see the same product with the same ingredients like fruit loops. You know, there's a big 400,000 person petition against fruit loops because their, their US product was full all kinds of dyes and colors. Whereas in Canada, they use, you know, there's carrot, diet or you just, you know, blueberry, diet or other things to make it colorful, not harmful dyes that are banned in other countries. So these companies already do it. Why shouldn't they do it in America? If you get crap back when you're in cheese in America, it's got dyes in it that they don't allow in Europe. So they do the same companies are making the product. They just don't do it here. So this is cheaper. Yeah. So we need to just enforce these standards. And we should adopt the precautionary principle. You know, we shouldn't allow things in our food that we don't know are healthy or are that we don't know are are good for you. If they're harmful, we should know about it. So the study should be done to prove that they're safe and effective rather than just approving them and then waiting and seeing if they're harmful and then taking them off the market, which is kind of what we do is it's different than the precautionary principle, which is, you know, you're guilty until proven is that here you're innocent to prove in guilty, which is fine in the court of law for a human being, but not for a food added ever chemical that could harm human health. What do you do about doctors? I haven't been in the doctor in a long time because so distressed because I've seen so many doctors recklessly prescribed drugs that have destroyed people's lives. Yeah. Um, at a raw and so as a PM's or as to a surprise. Yeah. It seems all stuff. It's like, it seems like an incredibly reckless group of people they've no moral authority left from my perspective, but we need doctors more or more. Who practice science? Like, how do you change that? Listen, I would say Tucker, the most doctors went into medicine to do good. I think that's right. And there's a it didn't go because it's easy. I mean, the well meaning or often it'll doing and they're caught up in a system that is kind of co-opted them. And it took me a while to get the program. I was programmed by medical school. I was taught that, you know, this is this this is this bastion of science that everything is pure and clean. There's no conflict that everything you read in the scientific papers true that that, you know, the pharmaceuticals are the solution to our problems. I mean, this is what we were taught and and and we were taught pharmaceuticals are the solutions to our problems. Yeah. I mean, what did the doctors toolkit? It's a knife and a prescription pad. That's it. Yeah. And if you have cancer, it's radiation, right? So basically, we don't have a hell of a lot of tools. And if you take away doctors' prescription pad, how do they practice medicine? But I almost never pull out my prescription pad. I don't need to because lifestyle and food are the best drugs on the planet. They're not like drugs. They work better than any other drugs like exercise, diet, sleep. These are profoundly foundational to our health. And we have a disease system, not a health system. We have a we don't have a medical system, the space and the signs of creating health. We have a system, the space and the science of a diagnosing and treating diseases rather than looking at their causes. So part of the problem is in the education. And I think doctors want to do the right thing and they're frustrated. And I can tell you, bang, bang, bang on the inside because, you know, I'm cleaning for 10 years, people come out of the world work. Like, this is great. We want to change. We need to understand how to do things differently. Toby Cosgrove, who is the visionary CEO in medicine, he was asked by the Biden administration, the Trump administration, everybody to work for him. Like everybody wants him. And he brought Clinton clinic to be in the number two center health care in the world, Mayo Clinic. You know, at him, they're in competition. He said, Mayo was what you put on your sandwich. It was very funny. But I met him at the World Economic Forum and I said, Toby, what if I could empty out half your hospitals and cut your Andrew Placie's and bypassed in half? And then the number one hard hospital in the world, he said, that would be a great idea. I said, why you're going to cut your revenue in half. What you can do about that is it will figure it out. It's the right thing to do. So he invited me to come and I would, I mean, like, I didn't want to go to Cleveland and he had a good life. And like, he says, I want you to come and maybe whatever you want. But let's do this. We need to dress product is definitely the way we're doing it as wrong when you think differently. And he gave me carplanche and we built a center. We had done tons of research and we showed that the model works and it really gets, you know, gets into the root of the problem. And so there is a shift in medicine. There are doctors who are flocking to this. There are people who are understanding this is broken. But it's a tough sell for some people because they're so brainwashed. It's like, if they're this flat, you can miss your this flat and you can't get miss people otherwise. And you know, we're still arguing over things like evolution, you know, 150 years later. I mean, we're flogging over the worth of there's people who are fat earthers, you know, like it's like, so this is the problem in medicine. There's a scientific paradigm change that needs to happen. And doctors are starting to get that this is true. And I think it's it's not that they're trying to do something harmful or bad. They're just stuck in the system and they need to get liberated. And I remember with Catherine Sibilias when I was going around trying to get these policies in Obamacare around lifestyle change, this is a great idea. You know, if we upgrade these lifestyle change programs for Medicare, people are going to get better. They're healthier. We're going to just health care costs and people health care outcomes. She said, but who's going to know how to do it? I said, don't worry about that because if you pay for it, people will figure it out. If you pay for an angioplasty, doctors are going to learn how to do angioplasty. Right? You don't have to worry about that. If you pay for a lifestyle intensive change program that works better, then I mean, this woman I was telling you about, she had $20,000 a copay. I don't know what her other medications cause for the insurance or health care system plus she was in and out of hospital all the time. We probably saved the health care system a million bucks. I got paid $200. We don't get the benefit as doctors for doing the right thing. We get benefit for doing the wrong thing. We get benefit for paying more. I mean, for doing more, not doing the right thing. So it's a reimbursement based on fever service and throughput, not based on outcomes. Imagine if you were making cars and you're in a car company that cars didn't work or you drove off the lot and they just fell apart after a few years. So they had to come back constantly to get fixed every month. You wouldn't have a car company. But that's what we do. That's what we do in medicine. We have a system that doesn't really fix the problem. And people are not actually getting the solutions that the science says work, like the things we've been talking about in the show. So I think we have a historic opportunity now. I mean, it's fraught. There's going to be a trillion of dollars that take your tucker, trillions of dollars, in the food industry, in the ag industry, the fast food companies, all these companies are going to be frightened about this. And they are already circling the wagons. They're already coming around Washington working on discrediting everybody in this administration. They're pushing back hard because they know they have reckoning is coming. And I think it's time. I mean, the American people should not be the victims of this system. Like I said, 93% of us are somewhere in that spectrum of pre diabetes to type your diabetes. That's frightening to me as a doctor. I mean, that's just like when I was when I was in medical school, this wasn't a problem. There was no juvenile diabetes that were kids had type your diabetes. This doesn't exist. And I'm not that old. I mean, oh, I'm not that old. I'm still walking. Look at the pictures of Woodstock from August of 16. Yeah. Yeah. You know, exactly 150,000 shirtless. You were there in the math. You're honest, born. And you can see the ribs all over. Yeah, exactly. You know, so this is not a genetic problem. You've got, you know, scientists from Harvard saying this obesity is genetic. It's not. I mean, they're a genetic predisposition. What is that? Yeah. And what is the celebration of unhealth that you've seen for the last four years and attacking people who try to stay fit is right wing. That's some it's a political category to be healthy. Yeah. What is that? I mean, the body positive movement or you mean, yeah, it's the most negative thing I've ever seen. Of course, it's mislabeled like everything. Yeah. How is it positive to encourage people to be unhealthy? I mean, you know, you know, do you know, there's a number I think it was in the acoustic, I was watching post or whilst we travel. They had a whole sort of series of articles on how the food industry is sort of hijacked thing, uh, the media. So they talked about how 40% of the nutritionists who are on social media are paid by the food industry to promote false concepts, like don't worry about how many college you're eating, eat whatever you want and indulge yourself. It's really quite striking how how deliberate their actions are. And so I think I think the sad thing is that people are actually been manipulated by the food system in a way that they can't 40% of the nutritionists on social media or paid. Yeah. Yeah. Five of the companies. Yeah, this was an expose that I think was in the Washington Post. And it was like, and you see it. And so they're they're they're not. Sarah Lee is paying nutritionists. I don't necessarily or who's it's, you know, I mean, 40% of the budget of the American Academy nutrition dietetics is paid for by the food industry. And they have panels where you've got people from McDonald's and Coca Cola on the table. So you're saying that most physicians want to do good doing a world and help you want to do good. But if you're I'm sorry, if you're a nutritionist taking money from, you know, the baked goods in industry. Yeah, not good. I mean, I mean, you must know that you're corrupt because that's corrupt. That's so obviously corrupt. It I guess I'm not taking money from George Soros. No. And if I were, I would know that I was corrupt. Right. Exactly. So it's it's it's it's how the system's rigged and in unfortunate that people participating in that system were also global. Sorry. I think so. I mean, I think, you know, there there I think for sure those nutritious. I think doctors are stuck because they wanted the right thing. They don't have the education of what to do. They don't know how to do it. And they're only told one thing, which is these drugs work for these problems and give these prescriptions. And like I said at the beginning, we've seen dramatic rises and all kinds of deals. And even more dramatic rise in the use of prescription medications for those diseases, which we're not getting better. We're 48th life expectancy. We spend more than double any other nation on Joe Rogan. I gave us a slide to a friend of mine, Callie. And he gave it to Trump. Oh, gave it to somebody else to give it to Trump that he used on Joe Rogan, which showed, you know, the life expectancy in America and the cost of our health care expenditures were complete kind of off the chart. So life expectancy is going down. Other countries are high. We're spending twice as much as anybody else. It must be nice to live long enough to be vindicated. Yeah, Van Gogh never got that. But you have. Yeah, I mean, I I said I'm optimistic, Tucker. I think we're in a moment where where the country is ready for change where the country understands we have this health crisis where they're willing to sort of make changes. And I think if the politicians in Congress understand these issues, I think they'll make the right to choices. I think if they have the support of the American people, which I think they do, they can make choices that are difficult. And often against the people who are funding their campaigns are funny for funding their superbacks. And you know, we have to realize we have a bond paid for a system. And it's unfortunate. But I think that the problems got big enough. We have to face an idea with that. Dr. Mark Eiman, thank you very much. Appreciate your pleasure. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google would be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear. But it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. Not in charge or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think, is to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. And you'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.