First of all, I just gotta say the CCP deserves a round of applause for this amazing American influence campaign. That's right. You're doing incredible. Yeah So how does it feel make sure you sweep this place after games? Well, how does it feel to have a turning spy on your podcast for the first time? I think you might be the second I think Wow, Lee might have been the first Chinese spy. Okay. I think you might be the second Yeah, but I'm better than she is when you're doing an incredible job. Yeah, you're a superstar. Yeah, yeah Yeah, that's what I want to say. You know, no, I'm on this after the CCP. So I'm doing this national tour I'm going around the United States on this secret mission to undermine American democracy by teaching Americans facts and logic and how to think for themselves That's my secret mission and it might be impossible Yeah, I mean it's the first time I've ever seen anything like it. Yeah, yeah, very impressive. Thank you Yeah, so how did you get into all this stuff with creating this first of all? How does a guy like you get away with talking about the things you talk about in China? Yeah so I work at a part school in Beijing and It's very gray zone because it's not public Meaning we don't train our students to take the national interest examination To get into Chinese college and these are students who are wealthy enough to apply to US colleges so we we teach them English we teach them philosophy and I was brought on to teach philosophy and geopolitics and I start to record my lectures on YouTube and I'm a maverick in education I don't like how schools are run and I try to provoke students into deep thought so one thing that I did was Make predictions in my history class and my argument was that you can look at historical analogies and History repeats itself. So as long as you're able to apply current events to The past then you should be able to make pretty accurate predictions about what's gonna happen in an future So I struck through my class around pre-predictions and this was made 2024 My first prediction was that Trump would win a second term. He would get a second term My second prediction was that he would start a war against Iran and my third prediction Is that the United States would lose this war and does we set the global order? And so two of my three predictions have turned out and that's what Maybe viral online How long have you been teaching in China? so I went to Yale and After I got from Yale so you were born in China. No. Yeah, so I went back on this I was born in China. Okay, and a small village. We were very poor and then when I was six years old We went to Toronto and that's why grew up and went to school And then I got a scholarship to go to Yale College and I studied English literature there and then after Yale I want to return to China And I've been there ever since so I've been there for about 26 years now and I've been working in education In different capacities since then And you said that the the school that Hired you it's a it's like a private school that's not it's not traditional school in China. That's right. That's right. So The vast majority of schools train students to get into a Chinese college and it's a system of rope memorization So you just have to memorize books and books of knowledge. Yeah, you take a multiple choice test If you pass it then you go into a good college And these are students whose parents don't want their kids to go through that path because it's very stressful You know 8% of Beijing high school students have been diagnosed as depressed or 80% 80% 80% 80% of Beijing high school students have been diagnosed as having some sort of mental problem and it could be Stress it could be burn out It could be depression But it's a huge issue in China And so these are students who have opted out of that traditional path and they want to go to the United States And so you need to provide them in education that focus on English as well as teaching them like reading and running skills Now is this specific to Beijing or is this throughout China? This is for China throughout China? So Right now there are about 200,000 300,000 train students studying In an American college like a four year undergraduate program. Mm-hmm. Yeah, I heard something about I read in this book one I can't remember what book it was, but it was explaining how the reason that Chinese are so much better at Math is something to do with the language like the Chinese language Yeah, so I think you're referring to Malcolm Gladwell. Yes. That's a lot. We'll go to book all outliers Yes, I explained why Chinese are so good at math. He has a very funny theory that is not Scholarly or academic in any way, but this argument is that Though human brain can only absorb so many syllables at once and Because in English a lot of these numbers have multiple syllables like 11, right? But in in Chinese they're just one syllable so it's easier for Chinese to remember long strings of of digits and that's its theory You know, I'm you know, I agree with it. I don't agree with Malcolm Gladwell So what makes the the Chinese so much better at math than it than us? It's a system that Prioritizes math above everything else so our math students are like football stars in high school Yeah, that's why that's it's wild and so what happens is you know You show an aptitude for mathematics and you are given very special treatment by the teachers Right, so if you do well math test you consider a genius and therefore you don't have to follow the rules You can curse out the teacher you can both of your classmates Same as like football stars in the United States exactly the same system What kind of jobs are these math wizards in China getting like what what's the ultimate goal for these guys? Is there is there any sort of is it is it sort of any similarities with the sort of the individualistic view of the United States where people want to climb the ladder gain wealth You know drive a nice car get a hot girl How is it compared to that like it was exactly the same? Really because you know these football stars they're aiming for the NFL right? These math stars are aiming for ai Art of intelligence because you work for meta right that's like half a million starting salary That's the NFL all of ai Wow, it's the same system and they can do that from China that to move to the US So they go for the Chinese system and then they come to the United States for graduates study So they go Stanford or is that a? Common thing for these people in the Chinese education system to strive to want to go to the United States That's exactly right. Yeah, because The dream is this the dream is to work your ass off coming United States to do a graduate program in Data science or artificial intelligence Then get a professorship for about 10 years and you go back to China and then you are now like a superstar You have unlimited funding and you get hot girls. Yeah, and yeah Are there is there anyone else like you that is? educating people in China on the things that you're talking about like these whoa, you know I mean to the common to the uninitiated the stuff sounds wacky Yeah, you're talking about secret societies and talking about all kind the Rothschilds and you're talking about a geo-politics and like the The devil's chess board type stuff so How many Chinese students in China are aware of this kind of stuff? Well, I mean when you watch my video and I'm teaching There's in the back exactly what's different Watching me So I'm just one it maybe there's sometimes when I'm lucky there's two You know if I'm having a good day. I get two students Wow, yeah, but One runs the camera No, no what it's a silliest operation because what I do is I get a tripod And I put the camera on a tripod. I turn on then I teach And I turn it off and upload it to YouTube. That's the extent of my production values I really love your whiteboard because I thought I was I was tri was fooled I thought I was a chalkboard and then you started changing the colors on it. I was super impressed. That's really cool I think Patrick bet David loves it a lot Yeah, he does he tried to take a page out of that. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. No I'm gonna complain because I left the school and they're like you need to go back to the school and get get that blackboard Workboard back and go back to your old teaching did that that whiteboard companies to reach out to you They need to you need to do a deal with them. I'm sure they would they're getting a lot of promo they are they are getting a lot of promo Yeah, so you started doing these videos about the history of the United States States and you have a couple students in your class in China and You said it was what's it was there a specific video that sort of like Exploded on YouTube and you were just like holy shit was happening. Yeah so the video that started to gain traction online is Last June I made a video on the fond decline of Meghan Empire and Towards the end of the video. I predicted that Israel would attack Iran and a couple days later. That's exactly what happened and That got me about so last May I was at 200 subscribers on YouTube and My goal was to reach 5,000 and maybe a year my my dream was a 5,000 YouTube YouTube subscribers Mm-hmm, and I thought that I would have made it if that if I did that So after that video and after 12 day war last June I went in a month to about 400,000 subscribers and then This March the United States attacks Iran and now I'm close to 2.8 million subscribers that's bonkers any year. Yeah, it's crazy It's crazy And I was kind of asking you thank you CCP. Yeah, thank you for for they're doing a great job Yeah, thank you for yes investing in me. Yes By the way, is there like different rules in China for YouTube than there is in the United States? Yeah, it's not allowed No, YouTube's not a yeah, how do you do it then? It's illegal to watch YouTube and it's illegal to post on YouTube Then how so why aren't you in jail? Oh, yeah, CCP. I forgot that. Yeah That's right. That's right. That's right. That's right. No. Um, so I'm a foreigner and I'm basically posting to a foreign Audience the best way to see the best way to understand this is like just pretend I'm a Martian Making videos for peel back at Mars. Right? Does it really affect people on earth? Not really Do the governments of earth care not really right? They're like so. How do you go on to YouTube then if you're in China? Oh VPN Everyone has a VP. Oh really? Yeah, so the Chinese haven't figured out how to stop the VPNs They have thought they have some like crazy firewall. Yeah, so I think there are secret agreements between VPN companies and the Chinese state Because and I think this because there are Chinese VPNs What block certain sensitive news articles about China Right, so what this train state recognizes is you can't block off the internet because how will Scholars how our professors do research Right the reality is that most information is on is in English and it's across the firewall so you just block China off then Your professors your researchers Your academics will fall way behind So I think they make this compromise where okay, well, there's this great area where we allow certain people To access the internet because remember The thing about the internet is that it's in English and nine nine percent of people in China do not speak English So it's not really a problem for China. Yeah, if you were speaking in Chinese to a Chinese audience Well, first of all, they would catch you because you can't people will try and try and try and can't watch YouTube They have a specific platform. That's right. Right. That's right. And what is it called? So this there's one giant social media platform that everyone talks on and communicates on is that true? That's called we chat so we chat is all there is There are other social media, but we chat is The most common and we chat is crazy because you just open up we chat and you can order a youber A taxi on we chat go to the restaurant and then on your we chat you can order a meal and then pay for it and and then leave and We chat as all your data like for the more you get up to the moment you go to bed We chat is monitoring everything you do It has all your communication with all your friends And it's able to track you Do they make do they have like wearable devices you have to wear to like track your heart rate and all that stuff? It's coming right. I'm like ordering to sit a partnership with Palantir That's right. They're getting I don't know what they're doing, but they have access to the data. Yeah. Yeah Something like that. I would imagine. Yeah, so I will say this I will say that the surveillance in United States it is much more sophisticated than in China really because for example I can turn off my Geo locator on my phone in China But when my Apple iPhone United States. I don't know how to do that My phone in United States. It's tracking a lot more information about me than my phone back back in China How so? It's just because you're saying with the way the the iPhones are set up you can turn it you can basically turn the iPhone completely off and it's still listens and tracks locations and stuff like that right so on my Chinese phone I usually turn off my GPS But like on my you know on my iPhone here in United States. I'm not sure how I turn off my GPS my geo tracker. Yeah, right. I see what you're saying Do you guys have TikTok in China still? It's not called TikTok. It's called Doying, but it's the Chinese version. Yes, and is it true? I've heard so many People talk about how there's a curfew for that app for kids when it's only like educational content. Yeah, do you think yeah, yeah, you You guys should do it look look. I mean I talk trash by trying out all the time But I think the fact that they limit Social media exposure to kids. It's a wonderful thing. Yeah, because you look at how depressed teenagers are especially girls Because of their exposure to social media. I mean it's it's a mental health crisis in the United States Most people don't notice how much their hair affects their confidence and tell it starts to disappear and then suddenly you notice yourself Analyzing your hairline every time you look in the mirror the problem is there's so much conflicting evidence and advice on what works What doesn't what takes you farther and that's where hymns makes everything simple hymns offers convening access to a range of prescription Hair loss treatments including shoes oral medications Serums and sprays all through 100% online process prescription strength ingredients like finasteride and Oxidil can help prevent further hair loss and regrow hair in as little as three to six months you can get a personalized treatment plan flexible subscription options once a day treatment options and access to 24 7 provider support all designed to make getting care straight forward and convenient For simple online access to personalized and affordable care for hair loss ed weight loss and more visit hymns.com That's hymns.com Slash Danny for your free online visit hms.com slash Danny feature products include compounded drug products which the FDA does not approve or verify for safety effectiveness or quality Prescription required individual results may vary see what's like for full details restrictions and important safety info Is there anything else nice you can say about China? I'm curious. I'm curious about misconceptions Right like misconceptions that normal people have like like even that I have about China like what's it? How bad is it like we what I think about China? I think of this crazy You know can't cameras everywhere monitoring everywhere you go You know like you talked about with the weed chat monitoring all that stuff and you know everyone is The same they're treated like robots. We have a great health care system So I don't have a health insurance, but you know if I were to break my arm I would go to a hospital and I would pay maybe a hundred dollars for a limb to do an x-ray and for them to subscribe Subscribe some medication and for them to put me in a cast it'd be nothing Whereas United States it would literally cost you an arm and a leg Speaking some more optimal nation state China United States I mean if I had a choose where to live I would definitely choose to live United States if you did choose which country you want you you got to run oh Well China is a lot easier to run a nation about guns. I think that I think the American leaders are very envious of China I think so but but not just the leaders. I think they lead in general, right? The oligarchy They're very envious of the Chinese system because of how obedient right Chinese are and I think that they're just I think we're frustrated not we but those people the elite of the United States are frustrated that they have to continue this lie of Democracy because that's not what they are or what they want to be yeah No, you look at you look at the opposition towards data centers United States, right? I mean people are angry about data centers when you China no one ever complains about data centers People just don't believe they have a right to protest Hmm, and then talks to me about that we were talking a little bit about this last night The one child policy sure in China so You were explained to me that people don't don't want to have girls. Yes because the girls may have to learn family and it's and like They're the lineage of a family is very very important to The culture of China to the families that yes are living in China. Yes So and and the health care system doesn't extend past the first child. Yes. Okay. So for most of its history I'm saying I'm talking about like the people's Republic of China which was found in 1949 For most of its history, it was a socialist nation and we call this the iron rice bowl system in that the state guarantees you a job health care and a pension and during this time The first major leader was Chairman Mao Zedong and he had some ideas about how to run a Country and he believed in population growth He believed that nations that Encourage childbearing would be more successful than other nations and so During this time and this this for my 1950s until the 19 late 1970s Parents were encouraged to have as many children as possible and You have this population explosion in China and then The next leader the next per month leader named Deng Xiaoping he comes in a power in the late 70s early 80s He's very concerned about population growth because he understands that the more people you have the greater the strain on resources so to reverse a lot of Muslims policies the institutional and called the one child policy and as a family you're only permitted one child and If you had more than one child These children would be removed from the social system They would not be guaranteed jobs. They will lose access to schooling and do health care plus Parents would be given a huge fine so This was pretty easily implemented in the cities in the urban areas if you're going to official You got promoted based on your adherence to the one child policy if you Had more than one child then you lost your job as a criminal official This will this was a lot harder implement in the countryside Because the countryside is obviously much more traditional and they believe in the importance of having sons for a variety of reasons the main reason is The socialist system didn't really extend to the countryside So there was no welfare. There was no pension so you need it you need it labor. You need it boys You had girls you could spend 20 years Feeding and raising this girl, but then when she was 20 you could run off and marry someone else and you would lose that labor Also lineage is very important so you want to continue your family clan. You know a source of pride is Is to have a family that they extended like back thousands of years and their families that do extend back thousands of years So a son is really important so this this was a huge problem in the countryside so much so That infinicide became a huge problem right infinicide is where they kill the girl at Maybe one month or one week after she she's born in order to have a son and their families who might kill three or four girls before they have a son and Now there's a 50 million Gender and balance in China. They're 50 million more boys than their girls in China That's insane. It is insane and is that Strictly with strictly within a specific age group or is that like is it like that with the older population as well as the younger population? Yeah so The one-time policy was implemented in 1980s, so we're talking about People for you basically yeah, yeah, wow not that like I am an advocate of killing Any baby whether it's born or unborn, but why do they wait until after it's born because they don't know if it's a girl boy Unto after it's born. Oh, yeah, so they don't do the it is illegal It's illegal for a doctor to tell you the gender of your child So they have to wait until the why is that illegal because if they if they told the parents then Every parent would abort The girl Right because they want the boy so if you at age at one month If the fetus is one month and you know, it's it's a girl then you avoid it right away Oh, I see right so they make it illegal Wow that's insane. Yeah, I've three kids. They're up one in China and You know we really want a girl and um We didn't know it was a boy girl until you know He came out of the womb and saw the penis. Oh Yeah, yeah, the doctor the doctor If you want to edge your seat, but the doctor knows the doctor knows yes, right because you guys still have the technology That's right. That's early. I'm sorry. We'll not tell you Yeah, so none of your children are born in the US. That's right. They're all born in China Wow Man, and do you think that do you think so you think you want to raise your kids in the US or Somewhere outside of China Yeah, so this is an issue we're struggling with because we don't like the Chinese system because you know how In the United States Kids start doing sports at like through or for right. Yeah, well in China. They start doing math at three or four You know like they literally go to cram schools and they start doing algebra at age three or four And we're like that's insane Because the kids are not mentally equipped to do abstract thinking at that age. I know because I worked I've worked in education all my life and You're really studying the mental growth of majority of of kids the problem is a Chinese system is a winner-take-all system So it's almost like this it's really the same as the football system here where you know what a thousand kids try football One will make it and everyone else will have an injury or yeah, yeah well, I don't understand like I mean I See what you're saying. There's no emphasis on abstract thinking because it's all very mathematical and You know if you look at the economy of China, it's You know the majority it's not creative. That's right for most part right. That's right but you know the schools in the US Aren't really promoting Abstract or creative thinking either. That's also very rigidized like cookie cutter system. Yes. Yes. Also What I don't like about the United States is how Kids are prescribed medication out of early age severe boy And you're you know you jump around and ask questions at a raw. Yeah, they think they think you have ADHD Just for being a boy. Yeah, and I think that is just inhumane. I mean boys. I have two boys You you have two boys as well. They went around. Yeah, they have a lot of energy They're gonna challenge authority. They're gonna ask questions to curious and this is something that you be encouraged but when they go to school they consider a problem they're considered up ADHD they prescribe outer row and I think it really screws them up for the rest of the lives So I'm not I would not be happy Sitting like children to a formal school anywhere right well at least you have you know the ability to stay informed with that stuff here Right we have with access to things like the internet and you can get a variety of different opinions on what's going on And you know listen to people like you talk about this stuff and you know the problem the problem is like the uneducated Lower class of people who don't have the time to pay attention into that stuff and they're just sort of like in the system Right they're they're in the health care system Paying their deductible and they don't have time to pay attention to any of that other stuff So they're just kind of like do whatever they're told to do and they know that this is what this is what you're supposed to do put your kid in the school and You know do the teat whatever the teacher or the doctor recommends is what you should probably do if your team is an answer customer calls on the first try Chances are that customer is gonna move on I've done it myself recently had to call a locksmith the first three didn't answer The fourth one did and then when the first two called me back I'd already solved my problem and they weren't getting my business That's why today's episode is brought to you by Quo spelled Q you oh the business phone system that was built So you never have to miss a call Quo keeps your calls text and voicemails all in one place So anyone on your team can see the full conversation and respond quickly You can keep your existing number add teammates as you grow and even to set up everything in minutes without an IT department They're built in AI agent can even handle after hours calls answer questions and book appointments While your team is offline Quo also integrates with tools like HubSpot Zapier and Claude so you spend less time chasing information between systems Quo is the number one rated business phone system on g2 and Trusted by over 90,000 businesses money is on the line So always say hello with Quo try Quo for free plus get 20% off your first six months when you go to quo.com slash Danny again, that's q you oh dot com slash Danny the other thing I'll say about the US system That's bad for kids. It's the food Yeah, I mean we've been here For about two weeks My my son and I my eldest son who you met last night and like the food it's in here for about two weeks. My son and I, my eldest son, who you met last night. And like the food, it's poison, right? Because it's so much salt, fat, and sugar. And obesity is a huge problem here. It's a growing problem actually in China as well. Really? There's fat people in China? Yeah, because there's rich people in China now. Wow. Yeah. So I haven't seen any China fatties before. I've never been. Yeah. Well, I mean, I've been talking about here. Yeah. You know, most Chinese, most Chinese are very fit that I've seen. Well, they're thin. I wouldn't say they're fit. But if you go to Beijing, it's a growing problem because because the Western lifestyle, it's penetrating China. So it's a high carb, high fat diet. And. Yeah. So China has a food problem, right? What do you mean by food problem? I believe that Lai when she was here, she was explaining to us that there's a China relies on importing all of its food. That's correct. Yes. So China imports about a quarter of its food, which is crazy because China is primarily an agricultural nation. So what happened was that during the 1980s, they transferred farmers into factories, right? They encouraged people to leave the countryside and move the cities to work in factories. And believe you do that, you industrialized, then you are no longer food self sufficient. And so they started to import a lot of food from overseas. Before China was importing most of its oil beans actually from the United States. But after the trade war started, you know, the trade war started in 2018. China started to import more soybeans from Brazil. But China does import most of its oil and most of its food from overseas. Does Apple, I think Apple diversified a bunch of its manufacturing hubs out of China? Not really. Not really. So what happened was this. So it's almost impossible to compete with China in terms of low-class manufacturing. Just because the Chinese system, there's so many people and they have basic skills and they're pretty obedient. Also, China has an amazing logistics network. So what happened was to get around sanctions, a lot of these factories that used to be based in China, move to Vietnam and other parts of Southeast Asia, even Mexico. So you're still working with these Chinese sub-cock chakters. But to get around trade, Chinese companies put warehouses in other countries. Factories in Malaysia. Factories in Vietnam. Yes, they move the fact to this. So it's still China is still supplying most of the world's manufacturing. Is the suicide net thing real? You know how they have the stories of the suicide nets around the factories? Like the Apple factories? That's right. So the factor you're referring to is called Foxconn. Foxconn is the main sub-contractor to Apple. So Apple is mainly designed and marketing. It's Foxconn that actually may factor the iPhones. And these are cities. These are huge dystopian cities of like hundreds of thousands of workers. And they're treated like cattle. They literally are human cattle. And as you can imagine, yeah, this is exactly what it was. It's like something out of a frickin- It's like a Curtis documentary. Yeah, it's like a Soviet. Yeah. And they're huge. They're like, they're literally cities. Show me some more pictures. Yeah. Oh, wow. There's the nets. That's right. Oh, wow. And they're designed like prison systems. Right? So you live in a place and when you get up, you go to the assembly line and you do this thing for like eight, 10 hours. And as you can imagine, it has tremendous impact on the mental health of these people. Right? So some people become suicidal and then they, you know, in a moment of anxiety and stress, they just jump and kill themselves. And that's why they have these suicide nets. But this is a huge problem in China. And Terry was very bad PR for Apple. Yeah, I'm sure it's pretty bad PR and they deserve it. And they do anything about it. I don't think they did. Yeah. Because people like their iPhones. And honestly, I think that if you were to make a factory iPhone in the United States, it'd be like five times the cost at least. Right. Right. Right. So like, do you want your cheap iPhone? Do you want human rights in China? That's your option. That's crazy. Yeah. Absolutely crazy. Not only that, they're using slave labor to get all the lithium. Right. They had the lift, they're the mines that they're mining all the, uh, not lithium. Most dealer, the rare earth medicals that they need to create like the batteries. And so yeah, it's, it's so, I mean, people don't appreciate that China has a rare earth monopoly because China is willing to sacrifice its people and its environment in order to extract the rare earths. Right. The state has plenty of rare earths, but you guys want clean water and clean air and trees and grass. Right. Right. Right. So yeah, we don't want to pollute all that stuff. That's right. And like, and honestly, like rare earth extraction is probably the most environmentally costly activity on the planet. What do you know about or how much have you looked into Chinese involvement with the Mexican cartels? Oh, yeah, it's huge. Yeah, it's huge. Yeah, I know there, I've heard stories from cartel reporters that I've talked to where, um, you know, they've explained, you know, the cartels basically everywhere. It's ubiquitous in Mexico. They do everything from security. They'll run security for like, you know, uh, the Ford Motor Company, you know, when they're you know, patrolling like the perimeter of their factories and things like that. Also, companies that are running lithium mines in Mexico, they also need heavy security. So the cartel kind of is there kind of like fixers everywhere there. And I know that China is very deeply involved. Yeah. So, um, you know, the reality is that if you go to Mexico, the cartels are probably the most, um, efficient part of the country. Yeah. Right. So in the Chinese have don't care who they work with, um, as long as the job gets done. But the main point of cooperation between, between the cartels and China is actually in money laundering. So the cartels have a lot of cash. Yeah. Right. There are cash rich business. The problem is how do they legitimate legitimize this cash, right? That's the cartel problem. Mm hmm. The China China has a different problem because there are lots of rich Chinese and they need to move the money out of the country and preferably into the United States. Because there's lots of, um, financial restrictions against moving your money out of the United States. So a Chinese citizen is only allowed to move 50,000 US out of China into the United States every year, every year. So if you're millionaire, that sucks. That's slow process. Right. So, so the way to around this is through trade. Okay. So so what I do is this, okay. And I'm talking hypothetically as well for simplicity sake. All right. So the Mexican cartel has both loads of US cash, right? So you borrow from the cartel, like maybe maybe two million dollars and they buy you a house in flushing Queens, New York. Okay. Um, now you owe the cartels two million dollars. And so how do you, uh, compensate them for that? Well, you do it for trade. Right. So our cartels set up a factory and you buy goods from its factory at an inflated price. Wow. And then the cartels now are able to launder their, um, you know, drug money and the Chinese are able to launder their money in the United States to buy real estate. Wow. And that's a main point of story. Chinese rich people in China are using the Mexican cartels sort of as like, uh, like mortgage mortgage lenders on real estate in the United States. Thanks. Basically. Thanks. Right. That's crazy. And this is all to get around like the sanctions or like international laws, like trade laws. It's to get around, uh, the financial repression in China. Right. Because because of the, this is not the United States. That's not the United States. Right. So you are not allowed to convert. So the US dollar and the renby are not convertible. Right. So, so you, because the reality is, if you are a Chinese person and you're allowed, and you're allowed to convert, you would just convert all you'll be into your stalker. Right. Right. Right. Right. So, and this would cause a collapse of the renby of the Chinese economy. So there are tremendous restrictions on that. And so, um, the way you get around that is by working with the Mexican cartels. If you're a millionaire, a billionaire, right? Obviously, you're an owner person. You don't really care. Right. But you have a lot of money to burn. You need to invest it and you need to move this capital overseas. Right. Then you work for the cartels. And right now, there's all of anxiety in China because, um, over these past 10 years, there's been going repression in China, especially against financial elite. So the classic case is Jack Ma, who's he, uh, Jack Ma used to be China's, uh, wealthiest person. And he, he runs a company called Alibaba. Jack Ma. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And he's pretty famous here. Here. Oh, this guy. Yep. Jack Ma. Right. And he's the poster boy for Chinese entrepreneurship. He was a rock star in China for the longest time. And he really thought he was untouchable because, um, he represented, um, Chinese entrepreneurship. And at this time, and this like, you know, but I, I fed the year, but maybe 2016, 2017, um, the Chinese economy was considered what legitimized the Communist Party. So the the Communist Party had to ensure entrepreneurs were happy. And he was the poster boy of entrepreneurship. So he started to, um, be arrogant and then they shut him down. He's like the Jeff Bezos of China. That's right. That's right. And you can't touch Jeff Bezos in the United States. Right. Right. Donald Trump cannot call Jeff Bezos in the White House and says, Hey, Jeff, you've been, uh, um, you're, you've been naughty recently. And we're gonna have to teach you a lesson. Not a naughty, you've been naughty, right? You can't do that. No. Jeff's gonna hop on the yacht and he'll be out of town in no time. Exactly. Right. So, so they did, they did not do Jack Ma, the section him. And ever since, uh, Chinese entrepreneurship has been very afraid. They sanctioned him. Yes. Yes. So he doesn't have, he didn't have a, uh, I mean, if I'm him and I'm the richest dude in China, I would be doing everything I can to diversify my wealth out of China. Right. Yes. But to where if China sanctioned my money, my Chinese bank accounts, I'm fine. That's right. And so a lot of entrepreneurs are doing that. The problem is that, uh, within each Chinese company is a foreign party cell that monitors the activities of this company. Right. Yeah. So one ended up happening to Jack Ma, John Ma moved to Japan and he's basically tired. Yeah. He's still rich, but he's not as powerful as he used to be. So what is the current, um, state of affairs with Xi Jinping? Where do you think, he is going to end up in the near to mid future as far as like, um, how much support does he have? From the people from the people around him, the powerful people around him in the government, um, is there any sort of like opposition against him right now? Or, and then also what is his whole view? I'm, this is getting too complicated, but what is his whole view on like everything else that's happening with the US and all this stuff? Right. Okay. Uh, that's a good question. Uh, it's a very complicated question. Yeah. Okay. So I need to explain to you how this Chinese system works first. Okay. So the years 1949 and the Khan's party comes into power. Mouse alone is the leader and there's tremendous jubilation, um, and joy that the current party has come into power because they promise a socialist paradise. They promise work, work, work, or rights. Um, they want to modernize and industrialize the economy. Okay. So there are millions of overseas Chinese, um, who we try to try to help build China. Um, and but over time, there is a split between Mao Zedong, the Supreme Leader and a Chinese current party elite. Right. Um, Mao Zedong wants a new China that is focused on equality, on, um, worker rights, but the revolutionary elite, uh, his comrades, they want a more bureaucratic China. And Mao Zedong believed that, uh, if you had a bureaucratic China, you know, a nation run by bureaucrats, China would end up being corrupt because China has been a bureaucratic state for the past 5,000 years. And throughout this time, it was very corrupt, meaning you had an elite that exploited the people. And, um, the phrase that I would use to describe China is a plantation economy. It's a slave society, right? Where, um, you have landlords and everyone else is a peasant and they're working their ass off in order, um, so that the landlord can play Ma Zhang every day and, and, and over time, um, this leads to famine and, uh, peasant rebellions. Okay. So Mao wanted to create a new China, and, and so he launched a court of revolution. And the main purpose of the court of revolution was destroy the bureaucratic elite to go after the, uh, revolutionary elite, the, the people he came down to power with. Right. He died before the revolution was completed. And so these, the old guard came together and says, screw this. We're never going through, uh, this again. We will not allow another man like Mao Zedong to come to power. And we will never allow for the people to rise up again again, up against us. Okay. So they created collective leadership under Deng Xiaoping and they created essentially the fundamentals of a plantation economy where the majority stakeholders would be these red nobility. These families that came to power because of revolution. Over time, this is really important. Many members of the red, no, red nobility move to United States for education and for work. Okay. So the people who run China are not actually in China. They're actually in the United States. And they are inconspicuous. You don't know who they are. The state of the department knows who they are. The state department gives a very close track of these people. And there's like tens of thousands of them scattered throughout the world, um, primarily in the United States. And China is essentially their plantation. It's no different from like these British aristocrats, quite circumplantations back in the Caribbean. Okay. It's the same concept. Wow. Yeah. Okay. Wow. So that's a very structured off the Chinese system. Now, um, after Deng Xiaoping died, you had a new set of leaders who came to power. And these were 10 of crafts people like Tiananmen, Zhuong Ji, Hu Jintao, Wen Zhaba. And they ran China for a year we're talking. So, D' And that's what we understand that technocracy is building a middle class. Right. So you got this revolution elite that are the stakeholders of China. They have the real power because they can control the military. Okay. These are military families. They control the guns. Okay. And then the compromise is let's create a middle class to interface with the global economy. Right. These multinationals are going in and you need, um, economists, you need, uh, professionals, you need managers. And, um, they help the Chinese economy to boom. And, um, and this was good. But at the same time, it was causing a lot of conflict and contradiction in China because it was leading to a lot of inequality. It was leading to a lot, a lot of corruption. It was, it's going to lie dead. Okay. And the problem with working with United States is Wall Street wanted China to liberalize its financial system. And what that means, it's very simple is Chinese household, um, households save more money than anyone else in the world. They save 40% of their income. Wall Street wanted access to its capital to invest to speculate. Okay. They wanted, um, access to the Chinese financial system. They wanted people to invest in US companies and US stocks in US stocks. That's right. Yeah. They want to liberalize the Chinese financial system. And, um, the Chinese didn't want to do that because you, as you can imagine, if the Chinese had an option of investing in US companies, all the money in China would flow out of China in the United States. Right. And China would go bankrupt. So President Xi Jinping was brought into power to, um, basically get rid of the cooperation between Wall Street and the middle class to nationalize China again. Right. To also there at one point was this cooperation. Yeah, between Wall Street and so people at one point were allowed to invest in Wall Street stocks and companies. So, um, it didn't get to that point. Okay. But the fact, the, but a lot of the, um, ingredients were already in place for this to happen, meaning, um, Wall Street had a huge presence in China, Washington had joint ventures with Chinese financial companies. A lot of Chinese middle class people were moving to United States and getting education. Now, is there any argument to be made that that would be a good thing for China? Sorry, that's very sensitive question. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. All right. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry. You shook me there. Right. I don't know how to go tell back my superiors. I'm Beijing. Um, but no, um, um, the argument is that the middle class is what drives democracy and what drives innovation in China. They are what, um, it's called a creative class. And in a global economy, whichever nation state has the most creative class will win out because in a global economy, say that one more time in a global economy, in a globalized economy, the nation state that has the most creative class, uh-huh, will win out. Why? Because, um, what drives the global economy is human knowledge. Right. So, um, before maybe resources drove the economy, but now it's really about, uh, nation states capacity to produce knowledge, soft power, basically. So if they're able to create really good AI, that would, that would control the world economy. Right. But to have really good AI, artificial intelligence, you need, um, a very vibrant middle class. Right. So nation states are competing for human capital. Got it. Okay. So if you want human capital, you need democracy. You need, um, talking about like, is it, is it similar to what you're saying, uh, would this be equivalent to like innovation that would be a good word to use? Exactly. If you want to drive innovation, you need a middle class. Got it. Okay. But this middle class also has to be custom polity and liberal and forward looking. So, um, there's a book, there's a book by Richard Florida called, um, the rise of the creative class, the rise of the creative class. Yeah. By Richard Florida. And in it, he argues that the most creative people are drawn to cities that are the most open-minded. And he causes the gay index. Okay. So cities with the highest proportion of gay people tend to be the most creative. He refers to places like San Francisco, Austin, Texas. Um, and what he argues is it's these cities that will ultimately drive the global economy. So the argument is if China really wants to overtake the United States, it needs a creative class. And therefore it needs to liberalize not only it's it's economy, but it's society and the red nobility and presidency, they said, we don't want that. Right. It's a plantation economy. Right. Right. We just want to be able to extract value from the people. We don't want the people to be creative because they're creative. That means they will want to overthrow the government. Right. Okay. So, so there was this contradiction. Uh, did you want innovation or did you want control? And they said, no, we prefer control. Right. But then see what's brought in power in order to exert control over the economy. Got it. Yeah. And the classic example is COVID because I would actually in China when COVID happened. Oh, really? Yeah. So in 2003, I was in China during SARS and I was in Beijing and SARS was the best time of my life because like for two weeks, everyone just stayed in their apartment. And I could just go out and drink beer. And like the entire city was mine. It was like paradise. You weren't scared. I was scared because everyone was at home. Yeah. Right. So like, like it's an infectious disease. Are you better off in a apartment with like thousand other people? Right. Yeah. Parments. Right. Right. Innovation is bad. Or are you better off outside drinking beer? You probably better off outside drinking beer, right? So I thought I thought it was a great time. And then COVID happens. Um, and this year, 2021. And I thought same thing that, but it was like a bit opposite. And what I believe because because you know, by 2021, I I wasn't trying to for a long, long time. And I believe the main paradigm was economic growth at all costs. We didn't cure what we have to do. What kind of growth. I'm a growth at all costs. Right. We're going to grow the economy no matter what it takes. Right. Because that's the source of our legitimacy. But during COVID, they completely upended that. It was a paradigm shift. And I didn't think that was possible. But during COVID, entrepreneurs were no, were no longer able to go to the factories. Factories closed now. The real estate market tanked during COVID. They kind of was basically destroyed. And it's ever really recovered. And I'm like, why would they do that? Why would they intentionally implode the Chinese economy? Right. And the answer is they wanted to control not innovation. It's a plantation economy. They wanted to exert control over the economy. Even if it meant the entire economy collapses. Yes. Yes. Because they did not like the direction the economy was going. We've talked about red light therapy many times on this show. And I've already used Iris stores elite device. So when they came out with their new sculpt LED belt, I was curious. Body sculpting and recovery treatments usually mean appointments, a lot of money. And another thing you have to schedule. This is something you can just use at home. Wrap it around your waist, hips, thighs, back shoulders, knees, and let it run while you're working, watching TV or just winding down. It uses triple wave LED technology and 1260 medical grade LEDs to support body contouring, firmer and smoother looking skin circulation, muscle relaxation, and post workout recovery. I've been using on my shoulder and on my hamstrings after workouts because it's really good for circulation and recovery. My wife's been stealing it from me recently. And she's telling me that her stomach skin is starting to look smoother. She's very happy with it. Take advantage of Iris stores Labor Day savings with huge discounts on their new sculpt LED belt. Bring body focus light therapy into your routine, support a more sculpted look, and feel more confident in your skin all from the comfort of your own home. Head to irisdoor.com and use the code DJP. That's djp at irisdoor.com. It's spelled the letter I-R-E-S-T-O-R-E dot com. Please support our show and let them know we sent you. Do you know like the stats on what like the mortality rates were in China during that whole year? That's a state secret, man. That would give me kill. None of that stuff is public. I mean, I'm sure they made some sort of claims, right? Even though if it's true or not, there's got to be some sort of statements on it now. I think it was a lot higher than its public knowledge. Right. I would assume that. But that is a state secret. COVID is probably the most sense of topic right now in China. Still to this day. Yeah. How it started. Government policies. How many people died? Why they ultimately decided to live restrictions. It's all state secret. It's really interesting because if you're going to China, one thing that you'll discover in what China is that it has no memory. It's a really interesting place. But if you've talked to people over the 1980s, then we've memory anything from 1980s. It's really strange. And the reason why is, now authoritarian nation state, memory has to be curated. Right. Right. Right. Right. History class. It has to be very exact. Right. So you're not allowed. You have your own memory. Your money allowed. So now we hear so many people now killed. Okay. You don't want to tell them that, right? Yeah. Or is it like that? Do they tell them like the truth about Mal? No. This is what I've found. Oh, okay. Yeah. It's probably not true anyways. Yeah. Okay. What the back into that question I was asking you is, um, how much support does, does, uh, G have right now in China? And, and, and what do you think, do you think, uh, what do you think G's view of the geopolitical landscape is? Okay. So, um, all right. So let's continue this narrative. Okay. Okay. So I've already established that China's a plantation economy and the majority stakeholders actually overseas. And what they're interested in is that innovation because innovation innovation doesn't help them. They're only interested in stability and control. Right. Because these are the people who control the hospitals, the power plants, the infrastructure, the telecommunications network. Mm hmm. So as long as the nation state is stable, they're able to extract value. But with innovation, a lot of innovation, uh, the, um, profits of innovation would go to the middle class to people like Jack Ma and then they could present a threat to the control of the current party. Right. Okay. So they don't want innovation. They want control. That's part one. Part two is within China, even within, within a red nobility, there are many different political factions. And these political factions are fighting over control of the country. And, you know, we can argue about how many factions there are. But there's quite a few. And so what is your new greed is there has to be a strong man at the top to get the appearance of authoritarianism. And then these factions fight amongst themselves for the spoils. And what they agree on is, um, right now, presidency is the only possible strong man for China. There can be an alternative to him. There's no successor to him. There's no succession plan in place. Right. So he is really the front man, the strong man for the system. But the problem with this is he has actually very little control over China. He's an emperor of no close. It's a faction. There's an ability that have control. Interesting. Yeah. Uh, and what is his view of or what? What do you think his view and or strategy is right now on the. And what is his view of or what do you think his view and or strategy is right now on the world stage? He has absolutely no strategy. No strategy. So I think maybe seven, eight years ago, many American journalists were kicked out of China, New York Times, Washington Post, Washington Journal, they were kicked out of China. So ever since then, China has essentially become a black box. There's very little reporting about China. And if you think about it, that doesn't really impact the world. I mean, Russia matters in the world. Iran matters. Israel matters a lot, but China doesn't really matter. And the reason why China doesn't really matter is it doesn't seem to have a concrete foreign policy. It doesn't seem to have a grand vision for the world. For China, what matters is peace and trade. Right? Let's just trade peacefully with everyone. And China is not actually trying to expand its borders. It's not actually trying to influence other nations. And the example is, do you create war and they ran war? Do you create, and then you create war, it was expected that China would support Russia because President Xi and President Putin are good friends. But if you actually... Well, the theory was that would push them even closer, right? But that's how it happened. In fact, if you look at Chinese companies, for the most part, they've respected US sanctions against Russia for the most part. And China doesn't really talk about the war in Ukraine. Like when I was in China during all this time, no one talked about the war in Ukraine. In fact, if people were to talk about it, they would say that Russia is the aggressor and Putin is around. Yes. There was no propaganda push by the Chinese state to promote the war in Ukraine. Hmm. China was very neutral. What is the sentiment of normal, everyday Chinese people about the United States? Most people like the United States a lot. And the reason why is American soft power is really powerful. These are people who grew up watching Hollywood movies, right? They watch friends. They watch Seinfeld. They love America. Even today, if you were to go to China, lots of Chinese would come up to you and ask you, are you American? And ask people asking you questions. They would want to become your friend. But as you can appreciate, if you're American, you go to other places. You wouldn't get that reaction. No. It's really strange in that there's a trade war going on between the United States and China, but out of people to people level, the Chinese people are extremely, have really strong impressions of Americans. They're like Americans a lot. There's strong affinity between Chinese and Americans. That's wild. Yeah. It seems to me like China is being very rational in playing out this long game of this tug of war between all these nation states right now. It's trying to be quiet, keep its head down, play the long game. It's learned from all the mistakes of the United States and other countries that it's not the greatest idea to go run around the world waving your gun around and overthrowing governments and all this stuff. It seems like they are being practical for lack of a better word and playing the long game throughout all this. And you don't think that's that's by intent. You know, think that's by design. I think that's not by design. I think the Chinese system has become extremely bureaucratic, very ossified. And there's really no one in control. It lacks the capacity to make critical decisions. Right. So president C is not president Putin. President Putin can by himself declare war against Ukraine. And Trump can by himself declare war against Iran. President C cannot declare war against anyone. This is a moment won't allow it. Hmm. Well, one of the things that's interesting is there's been reporting on this conflict or this threat for them to take Taiwan, right? And I've had people, your friend Andrew Bustamante, Bustamante, you're a friend. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We'll just go together. We'll let the commenters try to figure that one out. He's been on here speculating that I think he tried to be predicted on this show one time that that China would take Ukraine by force. Are you talking? Taiwan. I'm sorry. Taiwan, right? Because Ukraine is kind of far away. Yeah. He predicted that China would take Taiwan by force. I think sometime before 2025. Obviously, to come true, what it seems like now is there's more of a diplomatic thing going on where one of the parties in Taiwan is seems to be visiting China. And it's like they're working together now. Yeah. That's right. Okay. So some background. Okay. So in Taiwan, there are two main political parties. There's a democratic progressive party, which is now currently in power. And then there's the opposition party, the KMT, right, the going down. and the new leader of the going down is this very charismatic woman named Tung Lee Wen. And she's very forceful. She's very tall. I'm sure you've seen pictures of her, but she's very tall. What's your name? Tung Lee Wen. But you just go to go to Taiwan, KMT leader. Okay. Taiwan, KMT leader. And she recently went to China and she was met by President Xi Jinping. And they had a very good conversation. And she's very much in favor of strong relations between China. Yeah. That's who she is between China and Taiwan. Get us a full body shot, Steve. Yeah. And like you can see how tall she is. She's just tall as President Xi Jinping. Wow. Look at that. Yeah. So she's a very forceful personality. All right. And she was at the United States so she knows the US system very well. Okay. So she will probably be the future leader of Taiwan. But her argument is very, very simple. Look, if you look at China and Taiwan, there's no reason for any animosity between these two places. There's about like, you know, half a million Taiwanese in Soojo just in one city, Soojo, doing business there. You got millions. Soojo is a city in China. That's right. It's where besides Shanghai. Okay. Millions of Taiwanese going to China to business every single year. Taiwan is only a population of 20 million people. The trade between Taiwan and China is going rapidly. Right now, as the global economy sings, then Taiwan will probably become even more dependent on China. If you're a Taiwanese person, all you want is a good set of living. You're not interested in independence because what does independence get you? Right? What's going to happen is Taiwan and China will just reunify peacefully over time. I'm talking about like the next 10, 20 years. Right? And so what China can do is use economic carrots to lure Taiwan back in. And again, like, you know, if I'm offering Taiwanese security as well as double their current income, I think the majority would take this deal. Right? So that I think is China and Taiwan. And also, I will also point out that if I'm Donald Trump, I would encourage Taiwan and China to reunify. Do you know why? Because my main problem is Taiwan controls the semiconductor industry. Right? They may factor most of the world semiconductors. If Taiwan and China were to reunify, I guarantee you the entire semiconductor industry in Taiwan would move over to the United States. Why? Because as a semiconductor manufacturer, I need to integrate with the global economy. Right? So if I'm in the United States, it's a lot like like I can be secure in the knowledge that I'm still part of the global supply chain. But interesting. But I'm part of China now, they can basically use me as a point of leverage like China is using rare herbs. Right? So it's basically reunification with force. This Taiwanese semiconductor conductor in companies to move to United States. In fact, it's already happening. So TSMC has opened up plant in Arizona. I think it's like $20 billion. Really? When was this? I think this was like a year ago. Can you Google this? TSMC? TSMC? TSMC? It was the only plant. Is that a semiconductor plant? Yeah. So TSMC is the largest. And it's owned by the Taiwanese. The Taiwanese. It's a private company, but it's based in Taiwan. And they're trying to move operations to Arizona. And they want to manufacture there. That's funny. So we're manufacturing everything in China and China's manufacturing shit in the United States. Right. Okay. TSMC, Arizona started high volume production in this first fabrication plant. Fab 21 in Phoenix. And the company recently expanded its total plant investment in the region to 265 billion. Yeah. So yeah, that's 20 billion. It's totally yeah. Wow. But you can see it's already happening. All right. So if I'm talking like, go ahead. We unified, get okay. But here's the kicker. Communication is impossible. And the reason why is Japan okay. Mm. All right. So China. China invading Taiwan. Right. The issue is not the United States blocking the reunification. It's Japan will not allow reunification to happen. What could Japan do to stop it? Okay. So let me explain why Japan would not go for this. So the new Prime Minister Takayachi has said that Taiwan is core to Japan's national security interests. And there's a really good reason why. Okay. I'm going to draw your map. All right. Steve can pull it up here if you want. Okay. Because you have a map of Taiwan and Southeast Asia and Japan. We should have brought a whiteboard like that. The CEO. There we go. Yeah. Okay. That was a wrong button. Where's the map? Yeah. It's a full of maps. Maps. Okay. If you see a map. Okay. Can you just draw it out? Can you just zoom out for me? Okay. All right. Get rid of that sidebar. Click a little arrow in the middle. Yeah. Right there. It's kind of the top, right? Where's Japan? Japan's right there. That's right there. I got it. Okay. So Japan is resource poor. And traditionally, Southeast Asia is what supplies Japan with most of its resources. Okay. Oil, food, all that. Okay. So Japan has very little resources. Historically it's engaged in piracy. Recently it's engaged in resource extraction from Southeast Asia. Okay. So Japan needs Southeast Asia. Just between Japan and Southeast Asia, the East China Sea, what's in the East China Sea? Uh, Taiwan. I know. It's right in the middle. That's right. Right. So what would happen is if Taiwan and China were to unify, China could use Taiwan to embark on Japan from Southeast Asia. And China could now go to colonize Southeast Asia. Do you see? Right. It would be completely and utterly screwed for all four. It would cease to exist as a nation state. Wow. Right? You see that? Oh yeah. I can see it now. Yeah. So Japan needs access to Southeast Asia for its resources. Taiwan would come up in the next case. Can you just show me on this like what do you consider Southeast Asia here? All right. So it's hard to see the borders of the boundaries. Cambodia, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia. Yeah. That whole area is Southeast Asia. Right. And you can see how Taiwan blocks access. So if China now owns Taiwan, you're saying that China will be able to like charge a tax to everything that goes to Japan. No. No. What would happen is China would then go into Southeast Asia to colonize it. And that would have happened. Japan. But why would they be able to colonize all of Southeast Asia just quickly had that Taiwan? So if Taiwan were not part of the picture, Japan and China were to compete for influence in Southeast Asia. Okay. Does that make sense? Yes. Okay. The problem is Japan has a far greater influence over Southeast Asia than China because Japan has soft power. That's NMA. It has like Southeast Asians. If you look at polling, Southeast Asians have a very high, they like Japan. They like Japan all Japan. Japan does better. Yeah. Exactly. They got a better PRT. Right. So if you're like, you know, do I want to work with China more or do I want to work with Japan more? Obviously, Japan, this China is big dragon. Right. Right. Okay. So if China were to take over Taiwan, then Taiwan could embargo Japan and then China can just like very easily move into Southeast Asia. That makes sense. Yeah. How could Japan possibly stop that from happening? Well, what's happening right now is Japan is building an alliance. It's called a quad. Okay. And the quad has four foreign nations. Do you have Japan? You have the Philippines? Australia and you have India. This is called a quad. Japan, the Philippines, Australia and Indonesia. Right. Okay. And the gold scoop down a little bit. You just do that a little bit. Yeah. Right. So that's more on figure right there. Perfect. Got it. So what's quite doing a quad is in bar-gwing China from the open sea lanes. Right. Do you see that? The Philippines. Yes. The Philippines, Japan, India, and Australia together can embargo China from oceanic trade. Okay. They could if they wanted to. They could if they wanted it exactly. Right. Do you see that? Yep. Okay. So that's that's the game plan. So if China tried to take out Taiwan, you believe that Indonesia, the Philippines and Australia would all gain out of Japan. India. India. India. The Philippines, Australia and Japan are the quad. These are the foreign nations. India. Okay. So they would all group up and they would push back against this. That's right. That's right. And already what's happening is the Philippines are challenging Chinese control over the South China Sea. So there's been a lot of conflicts between the Filipino coast guard and the Chinese coast guard. Wow. Yeah. So you kind of explain this in this general idea of how I forget which one of your videos, but you did a great video of one of your presentations explains how I think it was how evil triumphs you explained how this this arms race of teaming up with other nations. That's right. Right. Can you give it like a high level view of like, I mean that that's similar to what you're explaining here, right? To where like two nations team up to gain more power and influence and that incentivizes three other nations to do the same thing to get more power over there off, you know, more power compared to the other two. And it's just a never ending thing where people are constantly in this tug of war for power and control and see who has the most friends. Yeah. So China is a lot of pro China is actually in a lot of danger and trouble. The reason why is everyone in Southeast Asia sees China as a main threat. So they're more likely to team together against China than China trying to ally, ally other nations. Right. So like if you look at, if we go to the map, okay, and this is really important, China has exactly one friend in Southeast Asia in North Korea. Right. That's it. Right. So the reason why is every nation is hard for me to see because I don't like the, I don't like the borders. I don't really see the border. Right. Right. But like, you know, if you zoom into East Asia, China is exactly one ally and that's North Korea, South Korea, Japan, Southeast Asia, India, Australia, they all see China as a major threat that they have the team up against, especially now that the United States is choosing to leave the Asia Pacific. Right. This is part of Trump's grand strategy where the United States leaves Asia Pacific and arms Japan in challenging China. Really? That's part of the grand strategy. And North Korea, are they, they're also allies with Russia, right? That's right. Yeah. Yeah. Um, quick pause. I got to use the restroom. Okay. Yes, sure. We'll be right back. But you were telling me last night that this basically all ties back everything that's happening on the entire landscape of American foreign policy all ties back to this Chabad, Luba fish stuff. That's right. Yeah. It's crazy. Yeah. I almost seems too simple of an explanation. That's right. That's right. But what I want to do is maybe just show you some videos from YouTube videos. And then we're just going to focus on facts. Okay. What is verifiable? What we can Google what we can have what we can show on YouTube. And so the first thing I want to talk about is the clean, quick memo. Okay, 1996. Okay. And the clean, quick memo, um, we should have put a camera that looks down on his notepad Steve. Yeah. No, I mean, I mean, like it's just easier for him from the keep track of what we'll say. No, it's very convoluted. Right. Right. Right. This is where I'm telling you. Right. Composed of certain individuals in the two most prominent are Richard Pearl, and Douglas five. Okay. And they write a memo for the incoming Prime Minister of Israel, Benjira Nadin Yahoo. He's just one election. And what they argue is that, um, now Yahoo has to break away from traditional, it's really a political thinking. Okay. assets to this political thinking. The first is that Israel needs to be a socialist state. So the main political point at this time are the labor Zionist. And the Kimbell-Brem memo says, no, you have to embrace neoliberalism. You have to embrace economic reform. You have to embrace innovation. The second thing that's much more important is for the longest time, there's really believe that the only way to guarantee the long-term security of Israel is to come to peace with the Arab nations around them. And to do that, you need to be solved the past in an issue. You need to get the past Indians as their own state, the two-state solution. And it's like we're being who was previously the Prime Minister before we got assassinated. He worked with both Clinton to implement the Oslo peace process. And Arafat was involved as well. But this was just how people understood. If there is to be peace in the Middle East, there has to be compromise. The past Indians, the Arab nations, they have to be respected. But the clean, big memo is like, no, that's not how these things work in Middle East. These people only respect power. So you have to show them strength. You have to bully them before they can respect you. And once Israel shows that it's strong, then the past Indians will power. They will obey the Israelis. And this will bring peace to Middle East. And they also argue what ultimately brings peace is balance of power. So we need to alter the landscape of the Middle East so that Israel is a dominant nation. And Israel is able to balance out other nations. So this memo calls for regime change in Iraq as well as Syria. In fact, what's really interesting is in 1996, Israel says that what will happen is we will divide Syria up with Turkey. Turkey will split up Syria with Israel. Turkey will talk from the north and we'll talk from the south. That's exactly what happened last year if you remember ISIS, the proxy for Turkey comes in from the north and then they overflow Syria. So it's really interesting how this memo, right? And I think that in 1996, it's able to foretell all these events because you have regime change in Iraq and also regime change in Syria. You're great, balance of power. Now, what's important that this memo was written by Richard Pearl and that is five, disease two individuals will then go on the Bush administration and they'll become the chief architects of the Iraq war. Where did Richard Pearl and Douglas five come from? Richard Pearl and Douglas five all used to work for Senator called Henry scoop Jackson, Henry scoop Jackson, right? And all the new cons wolf wits five and Pearl all used to work for this guy. Henry Jackson was a senator from Washington State and he advocated for the Soviet Union to allow Jews to immigrate to Israel. In fact, he said that any precondition, this is the 1970s, right, at the height of the Cold War, any precondition for peace between the United States and the Soviet Union had to be the Soviet Union agreed to let Jews immigrate to Israel. Why this guy is an American? He's a Christian and he's an American. Why would he do that? Why would he care? Yeah. So there are two things. The first thing is, Harry Jackson made this his main foreign policy achievement. This is what he cared about. any pussman called the Jackson Bennett amendment. Jackson Bennett, Bennett, V-A-N-I-K. Okay. It's called the Jackson Bennett amendment. Okay. We'll let that together. Okay. Again, like this is all going to sound crazy. So I'm making sure we are fully, you know, I hear it so fast. The Jackson Bennett amendment to the trade act of 1974 is the 1974 provision in the United States federal law intended to affect US trade relations with countries with not market economies, originally countries of Soviet block, of the Soviet block that restricted freedom of immigration and other human rights. The amendment is contained in the trade act of 1974, which passed both houses of the United States Congress unanimously and was signed by President Gerald Ford into law. Over time, a number of countries were granted conditional normal trade relations subject to annual review and a number of countries were liberated from the amendment. 2012 Obama signed the Magnesky Act, formally titled the Russia, Moldova, Jackson Bennett, a appeal and Sergey, Magnesky rule of law accountability act of 2012, Jesus Christ, that repealed the application of the Janet Jackson, Bennett amendment to Russia and gave normal US trade relations to Russia and Moldova instead punishing individuals violating human rights. Okay. I don't know what I just read. No, okay. So immigration policy, okay. Okay. That's what's important. What part? The Soviet immigration policy. Okay. Got it. Got it. Got it. Okay. So immigration from the Soviet Union was restricted. Mmm. Okay. So what the Jackson Bennett? Amendment called for is for the Soviet Union to relax its immigration policy, specifically with regard to Jews who want to immigrate to Israel. Okay. Right. That's what it did. Okay. Got it. So the question for us is why would it says it right there after Soviet Union allowed a number of Soviet Jews to immigrate in the years after 1967, June war in the Middle East, elections of freer immigration to buttress Jewish settlers to Israel were raised, but they were soon shattered as the 1972 Soviet immigration head tax made immigration very difficult. Okay. So this is really important. Okay. This guy who is a Christian and who is a senator from Washington state, he's American. He wanted the Soviet Union to allow Jews to immigrate to Israel so that Israel could expand his population. Yeah. Why would he care? Yeah. That's interesting. About a year ago, I got a random text about an unpaid toll and I just paid it without even thinking about it and it ended up being a scam. And ever since I've been paying a lot more attention to how I spend and move my money around. And that's one of the main reasons I like using cash out. If you weren't up to speed already, cash out is way more than just a safe way to spend and receive money. With the cash out card, you can unlock tons of perks without all the hidden fees. Enjoy benefits like exclusive early access to nationwide concert presales like Kendrick Lamar, Sabrina Carpenter to name a few plus discounts on everyday purchases and popular brands. You're probably already spending money on. Add your card to your digital wallet to make your money move easier. Cash app also adds security to your money by declining suspicious car transactions and sending you notifications to make sure the payment is really you. And if your card is ever lost or stolen, you can lock it by hitting one simple button inside the app. Spend with confidence with the cash out card today. Download cash out today and make your money work for you. Visit our link in the show notes below. Cash app is a financial services platform not a bank banking services provided by cash apps bank partners prepaid debit cards issued by Sutton bank member FDIC cash out Visa debit flex cards issued by Sutton bank member FDIC and the bank in a pursuit to a license from Visa USA Inc. See terms and conditions for the Sutton prepaid card Sutton debit flex card and bank corporate debit flex card cash out green features savings direct deposit roundup overdraft coverage and discounts provided by cash out a block Inc brand. Visit cash dot app slash legal slash podcast for full disclosures. There are two things about Henry Jackson. The first is he was friends, a man named, Rebbe Snirson. Pull up the scoop Jackson guy on here. Let's just get a basic Wikipedia on him. Yeah. Okay. He was friends with Rabbi Snirson. Rebbe. Rebbe. Rebbe. Oh, he wasn't a rabbi. No. So, Rebbe is the rabbi of rabbis. Oh, really? Yes. He's like the final boss. Yeah, the guy father. Okay. The Pope. Okay. So rabbis are under him. Okay. So how many of these types of rabbis are there, by the way? They get new ones. Like the Pope, there's a new Pope is a new rabbi. Right. So, um, the Jewish favorite is different from the Catholic favorite. The Catholic favorite is very centralized. Right. There's one guy, the Pope at the top. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But the Jewish faith, it's very decentralized. And so there are different dynasties and these are family dynasties. And so Rebbe Snirson was head of something called the How about Loubovich movement. Okay. Okay. And look, as with Pope is Wicky Bro. Okay. Sorry, continue. Yeah. And so the How about Loubovich, it's a family dynasty. And I was founded in, you know, the mid 19th century in Russia. And for about, you know, most of its history was persecuted by the Russian. in the mid-19th century in Russia. And for about most of its history, it was persecuted by the Russians. First by the Russian SARS, but then later by the Soviet Union. And then the turning point was they were imported to the United States. They moved from the Soviet Union to the United States at the outbreak of World War II to escape Nazi and Soviet persecution. And now it's a turning point because they let it in Brooklyn and then they start to invest in Brooklyn real estate and today they basically control most of Brooklyn real estate. Can you pull up a photo of the Schneerson fellow? Yeah, right, right, right, right. Right, right, right. There it is. He's called the Red Bay, okay. Give some images, hit images. The Red Bay. Yes. Okay, and the Red Bay just means the rabbi of rabbis. Whoa. What is that thing he's wearing on his head on the very left? The cube of Saturn. Yeah. The cube of Saturn. Yeah. It's like a miniature hat. This is who he is. What the hell is the cube of Saturn, bro? Okay, so the cube of Saturn will be found throughout most of Coronavirus. So blackstone, black rock, it's all cube of Saturn. Okay. And the idea of Steve, you spazzing out over there? Oh, it's not relevant. I didn't want to distract you. No, it's cool looking stuff. It was like fucking, looked like some death metal album covers. So black rock is the cube of Saturn, black rock, black stone. And is this official? Like are you speculating this? I speculate. Okay. But you asked yourself why is it called black rock, black stone? Yeah, yeah. You look at it. It's very similar to what Reverend Snare's name is wearing. Okay, right. Yeah. So what people believe is that Saturn is the main God that the Jews used to worship. And so the idea of Saturday, right? Saturday. Hmm, it's Saturn. Isn't Saturn also synonymous with the devil? Like isn't Saturn connected with the devil in like certain like ancient Christian writings? Right. So if you look at quick mythology, Greek Saturn was Cronus, the father of the Titans. And what Cronus did was to ensure forever power, to ensure that he would be God forever. He ate his children. So whenever his wife gave birth. Yes, yes, yes, yes. He would eat that person. Right. And then the children under Zeus, we belt against him and kill him. This is that painting, that famous painting. Right. Right. Exactly. Right. So Saturn, if you think about it, represents total control and domination. Yes. And so I honestly, I don't know why, but the Jews seem to worship him. Okay. So Saturday is named after Saturn. And Saturday is when the Jews rest, right? That's a bath. Yeah. And there, and there. There are a lot of shows me these Jewish elevators either. I saw them Twitter, I think. There's Jewish elevators in certain office buildings for the Sabbath, where they don't have, they stop at every floor, so they don't have to touch any buttons. That's right. That's right. That's hilarious. That's right. And there's a man named Sepay Zevi, who is very important to this story, but Sepay Zevi is named after Saturn. And he's sort of, I mean, he used to be the Messiah. Okay. So Sneerson is wearing this black cube of Saturn on his head. Yeah. Okay. So that's like his Pope hat. Or he uses, he uses to meditate and to pray. Yeah. Got it. I don't want to derail you too much on the Saturn stuff. Right. Okay. Yeah. So I'm not familiar with what we're, we're seven nearly, they call it Saturn, nearly. Right. Okay. But so, very snareston is good friends with Henry Jackson. All right. Let me tell you some background about very snareston. Okay. Very snareston was born in Marner, Ukraine into the Habad-Luvitch movement. Okay. So he married his cousin and his foreign law, very snareston, it's the same family name to their cousins. But he's only a snareston can inherit the title of Rebek. Okay. So it's a family dynasty. Mm hmm. This is a persecuted movement. And as a result, they become misianic. Right. Because if you become persecuted, your followers are under intense pressure to convert or to give guilt, guilt the religion. And the only way to convince them to stay is if you convince them that you're suffering for reason. You're suffering because God is testing you. And you will usher in the end times and bring about the mazaya and the salvation of the world. And so it's a very small movement, but they come to belief in it and they come very misianic. Okay. Their turning point is war or two. And Rebek snareston and his family, they're brought to America by name, by man named Louis Brandeis. Okay. I was born for you. Brandeis. Okay. Why is he important? Because at this time in history, the late 1930s, you go to school, do you go to school, Steve? Brandeis. There you go. He is the most powerful Jew in America. Why? Because he's the, he's the Supreme Court justice. And also at this time in history, and it's very important for us, he has the most ardent Zionist in the United States. Wow. Yes. Died in 41. Yes. He has the most ardent Zionist in the United States. And so people don't appreciate this, but there's a huge debate among Zionists at this point. Okay. So there are many Zionists who are afraid of the Jews going to Israel. Why? Because this racism problem of dual loyalty, right? Because Jews at this time in history are heavily integrated into our society in Germany, in the United States. And if a lot of them were to return to Israel, this might cause a spread of anti-Semitism, right? Because because a lot of people would say, well, you know, if Jews have a homeland called Israel, why not just go to Israel, get out of their country, right? You know, are you Jewish or are you American? Right? So a lot of Zionists is like, you know, let's not do this guys. Let's not advocate for the creation of a state of Israel because this would create plums for most Jews around the world. Right. Okay. And do we want, so this is assuming that Jews and Israelis are already like in the same bucket or are all translated. Well, Israel is not created at this point. Israel is in 1948, right? And this is like the 30s and the 20s, right? Yeah. Louis Brandeis, throughout this time we're saying, no, we need to create this state of Israel. Okay. And there's this guy who brought the stairs and family into America. And let me tell the story of how he did so. Okay. All right. So he needed a war war II has just broken out and Warsaw was being invaded by both the Soviet Union and by Germany. Okay. And the very snare sent like basically this represents father-in-law was at Warsaw at this time. So what Louis Brandeis did was he called a friend in Germany. This guy was the head of German military intelligence. Okay. This guy was the head of German military intelligence in the, in Nazi Germany got it. Okay. And then what he did was he assembled an elite force of half Jew Nazis. There were Nazis who were half Jewish, but because of their value, value in World War I, Hitler, granted, granted them fall German-airian status. Okay. So these were half Jews. And they were tasked with going to Warsaw and finding this family and bringing them to United States. So they went to Warsaw and then they took this family and like look, they're clearly Jews. Okay. So you got these Nazis protecting these Jews. And then they shipped them to Brooklyn. And this is where they built their, about Louvich movement. The Nazis rendered this, this lube of each group, this little secret society as a favor to Louis Brandeis as a favor to Louis Brandeis and saved them and brought them to the United States so that they wouldn't be killed in the war. That's right. Okay. Okay. That's insane. Okay. So, so that's a background into the red, okay? Okay. And what will happen over time is the, how about Louvich? There will have three basic principles. Okay. The first principle is we will pull our resources because they're poor, right? But what this means is everyone in the movement will just surrender the money to the leadership and the leadership will invest in Brooklyn real estate. And this is again in 1940s. And now today they control most of Brooklyn real estate. So they're pulling the resources, okay? The other thing they will do is they will spread across the United States. They're now leaving Brooklyn building communities in Wyoming in other places. And when they do so, they become very insulated. So they refuse to acknowledge their neighbors. In fact, they teach a children not to play with other kids. You're only allowed to play amongst your community. It's basically the cult, okay? Yeah, yeah. And the third thing that they do, which the most important is, they have lots and lots of children. The men are encouraged to study the Torah, the biblical law, the women are encouraged to work in half lots of children. And so you can imagine, this in 1940s, you can imagine how fast they grow throughout the United States, okay? And so this is Rubri Snaresson. And let's go into a psychology. Because most of us are not live, he's been persecuted by the authorities. And his brother dies in the war, not just killed his brother. He experienced the Holocaust. He comes to America and he becomes an art designer because of his association with Louis Brandeis. And how about Louvre and she's going really rapidly. So I think that if you're the Rebbe, what you believe is your on a mission from God. Okay. Because how else can you explain why you're being persecuted and why you found some of the sudden success in the United States? It's the will of God. The persecution is to test you to make you a true believer and this success is to let you can have the power and authority to implement God's vision for the world. God's plan for the world. Mm-hmm. Does that make sense? Of course. I mean, you can see the parallels with all kinds of other cults. I mean, that's right. Heaven's gate, Scientology. It's very, yeah. My question though, is it, does he actually believe this? Or is he actually just using this as a stunt to get more power and more controller his group? I think he believes this. Okay. So what I want to show you now is how he goes and implements his vision, okay? So he went into the Jackson Vennick Amendment, which allowed Jews to immigrate to Israel, right? Why is this important? These Jews, these Russian Jews, now make up 15% of the, it's really population. Wow. And who do they think for being allowed to go to Israel? This guy, right? Because it's this guy who promotes the Jackson Vennick Amendment. So they're thankful to him. And they believe he's actually the Messiah. They believe he's Christ or not Christ or not. I mean, these are Jews. Right. They're not fans of Christ. Right. Right. So this is the Messiah, the Messiah, been David. Okay. So now what I want to show you is how he goes and builds a network in order to implement his, as a, as a, as a, as a, technology, his, I'm not saying the vision, okay? The first, first video I'm going to show you is of him meeting nine, nine, yeah, who? Okay. So nine, yeah, who in 1980s, he is, his, his, who was ambassador to the United Nations. So he's in New York, where he's near, he's also in New York. And so they come friends. And where he's near, he encourages his political career, okay? So, so Steve, can you jump to the video where the first, the first YouTube video I sent you where Naya, who is talking to, yeah, it should be this one. Yeah. There's another one. The first one. So I'll show you two, okay? So this is him and this is at your 1990 when Naya, who, Naya, first wins a seat in the Knesset, which is basically his, was parliament. Okay. So I, so I want to show you this video. Is there audio that we should hear? Yeah. Yeah. There's audio. I don't need the audio piece. These are speaking Hebrew. Oh, okay. We don't need the audio. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. But we'll look, look, look, let's sometimes see other, okay? Okay. So they're good friends. Okay. I've seen a long time. Blessing succeed. 16, 16, 16. And this is New York City. A double portion of benediction. I came to ask your blessing and help in everything. In all areas, both personal and political. This is BB talking. Yes. Rabbi says, since we last met many things have progressed, many things have progressed. What hasn't changed, however, is that Moschiah still hasn't, the Messiah still hasn't come. So do something and hasten the coming. We're doing, we're doing says BB. Apparently it's not enough says the rabbi. Since many hours have already passed today, and he's still not here. But there are still a few hours left in the day. So try still for today. Yes. Good tidings. With join happiness. Okay. So this, the year is 1990. Okay. And now, now, now who is like, I need your help. I need your blessing to do on is really politics. And the rabbi is like, the Messiah hasn't come. The Messiah is going to hurry up, man. Okay. All right. So, so clearly this guy has a plan. And clearly he expects, now, yeah, I have to help him implement this plan. Okay. So, so now the next video I want to show you is Miriam and Shonen Elison going to the rabbi to ask for his blessing. Okay. So can we drop, drop that video? Shonen and Miriam Elison asking the rabbi for... And what year did this happen? A year later. Is this an also subtitled? Yes. Okay. All right. So this year, 1991, what are they doing? Counting money? No, no, it's it's blessing. Like I even want the bill as a blessing. I keep you going to bills as a, um, no blessing. Also, I'm sorry. So we, we, we probably need, need, need audio for this. We need audio. Okay. Cause now it goes for any English. Okay. All right. Let it steep up. We both do it as a separate club. Thank you. Do you know what's happening? It says, oh, okay. But it is different from the end of the day. For me, we are all right. Thank you. Okay. Good job. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Yes, thank you. Thank you. Yes, thank you. Are you on the day to show you that? Lyce Hynear dollar bills. Oh, it's just the blessing, like the dollar represents the blessing. $2 bills is a double blessing. That's so weird. Yeah. But I want to show you this because the year of 1991, so this year after Nanyu comes and asks for Rebbe's blessing. And now on the eve of the wedding, Miriam and Shona Ellison asked the Rebbe for his blessing. Why is this important? Because who finances Nanyu, Nanyu, who's political career in Israel? It's Shona Ellison. Okay? Shona, Ace Ellison is gonna spend millions of dollars to buy up Israeli media in order to support Nanyu, who. And what is, and so Nanyu and Shona Ellison both ask for Rebbe's search and blessing. It's on YouTube guys. You can just look at it yourself. Is this all coincidence? Now, also remember Shona Ellison is the one who finance Trump's political career. 2016, 2020, Shona Ellison is a biggest financial backer. And they're showing on the Brooklyn Nets, right? Or what was the NBA team that he owned? I think it was the Nets. Well, I'm not sure what team he owns, but he basically controls the Las Vegas. Right, but he also owned an NBA team. I want to, I think I was mirroring that correctly. Just type in Sheldon Adelson, NBA, NBA team. This is probably not relevant, but this is just for, oh, the Mavericks, he on the Dallas Mavericks. Okay. So is there any kind of with Sheldon and Sheldon was not Israeli, right? His wife is a, his wife lives, he's not, right? He was not. Yeah, it's kind of strange, right? So it is very strange. Yeah. So this is mainly a push by his wife. Murdoch recently married, we seem to be married to an Israeli woman that he really, I think so. Yeah, can we fact check that Steve? New wife type in Rupert Murdoch new wife. Yeah. I think she's Israeli. Rupert Murdoch's current wife is Elena Zukova, a retired molecular biologist. They married in June, 2024 at his Marigua Vineyard, estate in Bel Air, California. This marks Murdoch's fifth marriage. She's Jewish, I know that. Happen as she's in her. Yeah, she's Jewish for sure. But yeah, she's from East real. Well, no, let's go, go, go, go, go down, go down. This is the, she Russian. There's a thing right there. Is Elena Zukova Russian, click that. Yeah, she's Russian. Born in Moscow, Soviet Union now Russia retired molecular biologist of Russian Jewish heritage moved the United States in 1991. So this is a Russian Jew. Yeah, okay. Right. Have I looked, which was also very big in Russia, by the way. Anyway, anyway, so, well, so, shall I let it listen, finances the political career of both Donald Trump and Nani Yahoo. And these are the two people responsible for the war in Iraq. Mm-hmm. Okay. Now, I want to show you another point of convergence. Okay, and it's like Mugg Zuckerberg. Have you ever asked yourself how Mugg Zuckerberg made his money? Yeah, I watched the Facebook movie. Okay. Right. Okay. So, I want to show you- Get insanely lucky. Right, that's what we all believe, right? He's insane and lucky. He met these two dudes who were kind of stupid. Right, right. That's a great idea. So he just stole the idea from that's it. Right, okay. That's what the movie says. All right. So, I went to Yale in 1995. The moment you step on campus, they give some call of Facebook. And the Facebook it's this big picture book of all the freshmen at Yale. And we obsessed over it for whole year because that Facebook had every picture of every freshmen with their personal details, with his or her personal details. You can- Sorry, I find out the hot girls, right? Exactly. Right. So we spent a whole year obsessing over this. In fact, in the seniors obsessed over this, because they wanted to know who the hot girls were. So they could like go pick on them, right? Go, go, go, go, go, go, go, date them, right? So imagine how profitable it would be. If you could digitize this, because if you were able to digitize this Facebook, you could now interact with people seamlessly, right? Now, everyone wanted to do this, but the university would not allow this to happen because of privacy laws, right? Because once you digitize it, then these people could be harassed all the time. Okay, that's number one. But number two is if it was digitized, then every person in the United States would want access to this data as well because hot girls are Harvard and Yale, right? Right. Okay? So the university, of course, would be very protective of students' privacy. That would be the thing that we most protective of. So the question is, why would Harvard University not only allow Muck Zuckerberg to prioritize student data, but also to allow people from other universities to access this data? Because basically, he's leveraging Harvard brand, right? And also like the people who invested in Facebook, they're something really weird. The people invested in Facebook, Peter Thiel and others, basically gave Muck Zuckerberg total control of the company. He was given class B shares, which had 10 times the voting power of class A shares. So the public others were allowed to buy class A shares, but Muck Zuckerberg and his friends were allowed to have control over class B shares. So even today, Muck Zuckerberg has completely control over Facebook. And even to whatever he wants, including startups, to Ben, and a price call of a metaverse. Is he out of all of the big tech platforms that are out there like Facebook? Is he the only CEO or founder that has complete and total control over their company? There's only two more. Okay. Sergey Bern and their page at Google, Sergey Bern and Larry Page. Yes. Only they also have complete control over the companies. But Muck Zuckerberg is the only person who has complete control over. And Sergey is the person who's not even in Google anymore, right? I'm not sure about that, but I do know that they have to complete control over Google, but Muck Zuckerberg has completely control over Facebook. Okay. All right. So the story is, of course, that he just stole this idea from the Vancouver lost twins. Yeah. Okay. But if you look at what he did at Harvard, as a freshman, he participated in a society called the Harvard How Bad Society. It was an off branch. It comes off branch of how about Lubarich. Okay. The seniors at that time were part of Harvard How Bad, who were very active were Jared Kushner and Natalie Portman. Look up the Harvard How Bad. Yeah. What's it called? The Harvard How Bad Me Group community. You're in a school Harvard How Bad. Okay. C-H-A-B-A-D, okay? No, no, no. Harvard How Bad. That's a Yale. We're looking at Harvard. Harvard C-H-A-B-A-D. And you just do a pop day of members. Not, yeah. Yeah, that's your website. The soul of Jewish life on campus, the Harvard Habad. And again, alumni. Click on alumni. Yeah. And this is basically their, okay, let's just go back. Maybe we can find something. Find the wiki. Find the wiki, PDF. Or you just Google Harvard How Bad alumni, right? Members like notable members of Harvard How Bad. Yeah, that's good. Okay. Rabbi, here she's Archery. Zarchee. I don't know anything. That's beautiful. Yeah, that's beautiful. Good questioner. Ben Landau. Joe Katzmann. Alan Dershowitz. Okay, so Alan Dershowitz was the faculty advisor. And the patient was Lewis Summers. Okay, and then type in Mark Zuckerberg. What's Mark Zuckerberg? Can no, no, no, don't ask anything. He says Mark, ask anything. Type in Mark Zuckerberg. No, no, you don't have to type that. Just type in Mark Zuckerberg. Yeah. Mark Zuckerberg did attend some events during his undergraduate days, but he's not considered a primary leader. Okay. So he was, he attended some of us. Okay. So, okay. So there's another connection that Mark Zuckerberg has to talk to, to how bad, which is more important. In an interview, Mark Zuckerberg said this. He said that his parents had three daughters before they had him and they really wanted a son. So they went to Rabbi Snirson, Margaret Friend, Robert Snirson, and says, soccerberg's parents. Yes. Could you please bless us with a son? And Rabbi Snirson says, yes, I will bless you with a son. And then they had Mark Zuckerberg. Okay. Now, this sounds like a pretty inaccurate story to us. But if you know the Bible, and these people do know their Bible very well, there's tremendous significance to the story because some major profits, some major little figures were born of parents who begged for a child from God. Okay. So the most famous is Abraham and Sarah couldn't conceive. So they begged God for a child and they had Isaac. And then God asked Abraham to sacrifice Isaac and Abraham did before God stopped him. Okay. That's Isaac. The Samuel, Samuel's parents couldn't conceive. They went to the chief priest of Jerusalem and begged for a child and said that if he was a child, then we will have this child become servant of God. And then they had a, have this child named Samuel and Samuel was a prophet when no one is David to be the leader of Israel. And then you have John, that this as well. Okay. So I would interpret Mark's up, we're telling everyone that, you know, like my parents as for blessing from Rabbi Snirson, as saying that Mark Zuckerberg or Mark Zuckerberg was conceived to be a servant of God who was born to be a servant of God. Do you know what interview he said that in? Well, I, I sent Steve that the link. Okay. Can you drop the link? There's an actual link to the interview on YouTube where he talks. So when he now I, I shared a link to the interview. Okay. Surprisingly connection between Zuckerberg and love, love, the richer, Rabbi, Rabbi Snirson. All right. Okay. Let's play it. Can you play it? Hit not now. Scroll down. Oh my God, ads. Scroll down. Is there a video or is this all okay? It's historical. Yes, yes, an article. Yeah. In a recent interview with what is this website? In a recent interview with Jewish magazine in the US, Facebook, CEO, as Mark Zuckerberg shared a special connection, he has to the Lubavature, Rabbi, a bond that began before he was even born before it, quote, before I was born, my parents had three daughters and my father wanted a son. They visited several doctors, but weren't successful. They were nearly at a total loss until a close family friend who was affiliated with the Chabad movement advised my father to seek the Rebbe's blessing. In 1982, Zuckerberg's father found himself in New York. The seat of the Rebbe. He waited in a long line and when his turn came, he requested the Rebbe's blessing of a son to his surprise before granting the blessing. The Rebbe warmly asked whether he was observant of the Torah or the Mitzvah. Keep going down. When the father admitted he wasn't observant, the Rebbe explained to him that the philosophy of the Chabad and asked him to commit to giving. Keep going down. When the father admitted he wasn't observant, the Rebek explained to him that the philosophy of the Shabbat and asked him to commit to giving the future son a Jewish education. Quote, my father promised he would and I was born less than 18 months after the Rebek's blessing. Zuckerberg said with a smile, but the story doesn't in there. Quote, when my bar ritz became, my father gave me that dollar bill he received from the Rebek and passed along the message that came with it. I held on to that dollar without giving it much thought. During my college years, the idea for Facebook began to form. And suddenly I recalled what my father told me. I felt there was a connection between the Rebek's message and my social media network. When it came time to officially establish the Facebook as an active company, I felt it was time to use the dollar and deposit it in the bank on the day the company was founded. Though I'm not religious, I can vouch for this man's extraordinary intuition referring to Rabbi Louvich or Rauchneerson. And I regret not having met him. Interesting. This is a weird website though. I can't believe there's no other. So you find any other like mentions of this. This could be a bullshit website. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I asked Chachi BT and Chachi BT does come from the story. Oh, really? Oh, wow. But I actually believe Chachi BT. So I look for source and this is like a news website. Oh, wow. So it's like an in group messaging. Yeah. Right. And so he's saying like Facebook was founded with the blessing of Rebek's nursing. Wow. Now, Sam Joffsen, last night too, Sam Tripoli told me this crazy thing about DARPA being the member when Sam Tripoli was telling us about the connection with DARPA and Facebook. And it was a it was a program inside DARPA that basically I got turned into Facebook. That's right. Right. Because you want access to people's personal data. But like if DARPA came out and says like, you know, give it to us, everyone be like, screw you, you're the government, you're the Pentagon. Right. But if you have this nerd, Microsoft or. Right. So, you know, that's so interesting too because DARPA was fundamental in creating and incubating the Google. That's right. The Google search engine. That's right. So it all ties back. Also, Google Oracle as well. So a lot of these tech companies come from the Pentagon. But you know, like this is very famous exchange where Mark Zuckerberg is talking to someone says, you know, like, hey, I have access to all of Harvard students personal data. And the person replies and says, how we how are you able to get this data? And then Mark Zuckerberg's like, well, they trust me. It was dumb. Fox. This is a real email exchange between that. Yeah. Mark Zuckerberg and the friend. Wow. Yeah. And he's right. It's like people will are willing to trust a nerd with their personal data. No way, thinking that the nerd want to abuse it, they wouldn't give it to the government. Right. So the government needs a front. So this is also early days before people were really aware of like what data even meant. That's right. And what the value of it was and then that's the that's right. So so the idea that Mark Zuckerberg just got lucky doesn't hold water. You know, he has this very close connection to the how about lubricant movement. And he how about lubricant was very prominent on the Harvard campus. The page of Harvard Cloud bat was very summer. If I could advise it was Alan Derswitz and two pilot members at that time were Jerry Kushner and now the department. Okay. What this is important is the year 2016. It's a Cambridge analytical scandal. Do you remember this? When Cambridge analytical was able to access 50 million Facebook users and then allow the Trump campaign to create micro targeting to sway their political opinion. I know. The abandoned was a part of this. That's right. So at that time, the two heads of Facebook were Mark Zuckerberg and Sheryl Sandberg. Sheryl Sandberg is a policy of lyrics. Summers and today she's an arts line is running the Trump campaign. It's the band but also Jerry Kushner. So it could all be coincidence. Okay. It could all be coincidence. But there are dots connected, right? The first thought sorry, the first thought is, Robert Neerston has a feminine connection to Mark Zuckerberg. And Mark Zuckerberg was born with Robert Neerston's blessing, which meant that now he must serve God. Okay. That's that's what the Jewish tradition believes. When Mark Zuckerberg was at Harvard, he was able to use the Harvard brand and so, so in that Harvard's prophecy lost great Facebook. The person at that time was lyrics, Summers and the faculty advisor to Harvard, how bad was Alan DeRshwitz. Okay. And then 2016, Mark Zuckerberg and Jer Kushner are both involved in the Cambridge analytical scandal. Hmm. Again, it could be entirely coincidence. Yeah. Okay. But it's kind of strange how these things line up. Yeah. Another thing that I will point out is, and you can Google this just again from okay, did you look at Chachi BT with us with that Zuckerberg Chabad blessing? Yeah. It couldn't give me any other. It seems like that's like the own outlet. That was the only source. It is an official. It, why I already got rid of it. I think I did. Did I? It is an official Jewish. Just pull it out. Yeah. So just you can do it again. Just show me on on Chachi BT. Jewish Journal, additional verified facts of Mark Zuckerberg's family, his Jewish journey. While meta is official investor relations, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. That's not that. Do this, Steve, paste the link to that article that was in the process of doing that we were looking into the AI and say, can you corroborate this story with any other sources? But like you know that your question is the families of our prominent family in the Habbat, Louvre movement, right? A vaguely aware. Right. So the Kushner family is very prominent in the Habbat, Louvre movement and Naya who and Charles Kushner who is Jerkush's father. Yeah. You're very close. So close in fact that whenever Naya who visited the United States, he stayed with the Kushner family. Yeah. So he slept in Jerkush's bedroom. Mm hmm. Okay. So it all aligns. That's crazy. It's crazy. Okay. So again, it's going to all be coincidence. It's really strange how you have the smoke of people and they're always associating. And they're all like now in the high spaces of power in the world. Are you familiar with the story of Jared Kushner's dad on how he blackmailed like his brother in law or something like that? Yeah. Like putting a prostitute in his hotel room. That's right. persecuted. No, so I hear it's prosecuted by by Christie for that. Chris Christie. That's right. And that's why Chris Christie and Jerkush have a bad blood because they were both involved in 2016. Uh, campaign for Trump. Yeah. And then Jerkush and got rid of Chris Christie. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So there's a lot about that. That's an insane story. Yeah. But, um, but the story gets more insane because in 2016, 2020 on the, on the, on the eve of the election, the president election, Jerkush and then back to Trump both visits the grave of rubber, nursing, rubber, nursing, nursing, dying in 1984, by the way. Yeah. And as for his blessing, rubber, nursing is grave in Queens, New York is the most visited Jewish holy site outside of Israel. 2024, Donald Trump with Ben Shapiro visit the grave of rubber, nursing, nursing, dress for his blessing before his president of presidential election against Kamala Harris. Mm hmm. Why would they do that? Like who is this guy? Well, I mean, if he's getting all of his money from people like the Adel sins and all of these other, uh, Zionist billionaires, you know, I would imagine that there could be some influence there. Like, Hey, we want to do this. This PR, this would be great for the voting base, you know, the, the Zionist and the Jewish voting base, so you'll get a lot of voters from them. And this will be a good PR thing to do. All right. Okay. Okay. Okay. So about Zuckenberg, let me see your question. Can you go? And it said, uh, the interview the story describes in an article. Okay. Okay. The interview and the story described in the article are entirely fabricated. While the article frames these quotes as direct testimony from Zuckenberg to a Jewish magazine, no such interview or statement ever took place, the story is a well-known piece of internet folklore, often referred to in Jewish media circles as a Chabad urban legend, uh, and has been thoroughly debunked. Um, why the story is false. The story claims on Herbert's father visited the rabbi in 1982 because he had, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, because he had the issues with, uh, having a kid. Um, and then it says, okay, he has an older sister, Randy and two younger sisters, Donna and Ariel in 1982. His parents did not have three daughters. I thought I said that had two in the article. No record of the interview. There is absolutely no record in any reputable mainstream or Jewish publications of Mark Zuckerberg ever making these statements, nor did he deposit a Chabad dollar into the bank that found Facebook. Well, how would this say I know that? I don't know. Fabricable go up, go go go. Fabricated quotes. The quotes attributed to Zuckerberg discussing his father's medical struggles, the rabbis philosophy and the mystery link to the creation of Facebook were completely invented for the viral internet story. Um, I asked if a Zuckerberg himself has never commented on it. So it's like, who knows? So go it is very interesting, uh, how defensive AI is being. Yeah. It's, it's, it's weird. It's debunking it, right? But it's not being, uh, like very neutral about it. It's, it seems to be being a very aggressive, debugging the story. It's funny because I asked, I asked it simply if that information, if that did happen and it says, yes, his father did go to Rabbi Shneerson. Whoa. So it's, uh, so you asked it previously and it said yes. Yes. But then it cites that one article from hit on hit about sites that one article, which is a Jewish to this interview. It's a Jewish outlet. And then when you asked it again down below, it said this is an entirely fabricated article in a separate chat. I asked it in a separate one. This is a different tab. So you can find the author of it. I don't know. That's interesting. But, um, and why would how about Lou, Lou just make this up out of thin here? Why would who make it up? How about Lou Bovich? Why would they just make this up? Why would this, this article? Yeah, just be, we made up. If there's no, if there's no validity to it, why would you just make it up? Uh, I mean, people make shit up all the time. People make up, you know, they will do smear campaigns on people all the time to try to tie them to them. But this is a smear campaign that this is like to praise Mark Zuckerberg, right? This is a Jewish magazine. It's read by Jewish people. When was that published? That's, that's an entire, that's what we should have paid down to 2015. That was published in 2015. All right. And this is a Jewish magazine. Well, it's, it's just weird because it's the only article on the entire internet that references it, you know, it's the only source for it. So it's like, I don't know. I feel like we got to, we got to scrutinize it a little bit harder just because of that. There is no, ah, oh, wait, wait, there is an author. Sheera, debush. You know, how many stories online that we reference or, you know, use in context of coming up with a bigger theory on something, only have one, one article posted. Yeah. Usually there's, you know, lots of corroborating stories or different takes on it, at least acknowledging that this event actually happened. Right. You have to be right. So, yeah. But, you know, it doesn't really, um, yeah, I mean, like this is just a theory. And I'm not saying this is what happens. I'm saying like there are certain thoughts and, um, you know, the connection between the cushion of family and the river, Stearston and river station are definitely true. Right. This is heavily acknowledged in knowledge. Something else that I want to bring up is, um, how we got into this, how the United States got into this war in Iraq. Okay. So, so, river station, he's casting a pretty wide net. Right. So, he's got the connections to Henry Jackson. He's got connections to, so yeah, we started talking about scoop Jackson. Yeah. And we started talking about how they brought near sin in his family back to the US. That's right. And, uh, the connection to Wolfowitz and Pearl. Yeah. And how they came up with this plan. Yeah. Right. The Wolfowitz doctrine. Uh, no, that's, no, the clean brick memo. The clean brick memo. Yeah. Yeah. So, so something that's really important for us to keep in mind is, where are we? And once the Messiah to come. Okay. And so, um, I'm going to go into how he thinks and, and then we're, we'll tie to current events. Okay. All right. So, um, the question is, how much influence does Rebaits near sin have? And, um, what I want to do now is go into how he perceives the world. And he perceives the world for something called Kabbalah. Okay. So, uh, is just the Jewish mystical tradition. So you have the Bible, right? Then a Bible or, or collection of stories. So you have Adam and Eve. Yeah. The story of the patriarchs, Moses. And then you have the story of King David. Right. Right. And the idea of the Kabbalah is trying to interpret the stories in a mystical lens. So I still understand the soul of the universe, the mind of God. Right. The understanding of the Kabbalah is, um, the world that we see around us, there's a mature world. It's a fake reality. It's a simulation. The universe itself is pure consciousness. And the totality of this consciousness is God. Okay. So universe itself is the totality of the universe's pure consciousness. Yeah. Okay. So, so think of energy, okay. Energy that vibrates. And that's consciousness. And then at a lower level, this vibration becomes much more concrete, much more visible to the human eye. Okay. And that's a world that we live in. All right. And you're saying that this is the view of the Kabbalah. The Kabbalah. Okay. And this is generally accepted, understood. Okay. So the idea is rather than seeing that consciousness emerges from matter, it's really conscious that creates matter. Right. Okay. So mind before matter. Mm hmm. In school, we're taught that matter leads to mind. Okay. The brain is what creates a mind. Well, at least Kabbalah's belief, it's the mind that creates the brain as well as the body. Right. Okay. So now what they're going to do is they're going to take this major idea, consciousness is universe, and apply it to the Bible, the stories of the Bible. And resolve some mysteries as to what happened in the Bible. So the first mystery in the Bible is why did Adam and Eve disobey God? Right. Because God just basically said, this is paradise, the God of Eden, you will live forever here and you can eat as much food as you want. You'll never have to labor. But there's only one rule. The rule is do not eat from the food of the tree of knowledge. Right. That's going to do. And I'm adding an Adam and Eve just managed to break that one rule, which can dab humanity to the war that we live in today. Right. We were cast aside from paradise. Right. Okay. So I'm just trying to figure out why this happened and what does this mean for us in a universe? Right. And so the explanation is this, the explanation is in the beginning, this only God, God's totality. And God is the will to bestow. He is pure love. And love means giving. The problem is there's nothing to give to. So God creates a new being called Adam Kenmog, which is the will to receive. God can know itself. God can complete itself by giving to someone else. Okay. The problem is that Adam Kenmog, it's a immature being. It is the will to receive. Therefore, it is pure eagle. And therefore, it doesn't understand why God gives because it only receives. And so Adam Kenmog receives this gift of the vine light. But at some point, he hesitates he doubts and he rejects the light and he breaks and this is the shadowing of the world. And the shadowing of the world descends into our world and these divine sparks become embodied by us by bodies. So humans are this divine light that come from Adam Kenmog that now become embodied in us in bodies. And because we have bodies, we become blind toward divine origins and we engage in all sorts of sin. Sin, right? Okay. And that's why Adam and Eve disobeyed God. And that's why when we go into the world, we commit all sorts of sin in evil. And this explains how the Bible progressed, right? That was the original sin. That was the original sin. And so the purpose of the universe is for the Jews to repair the world because they do start to show some people. They will repair the world and then bring all these sorts of like back together again. And this will allow God to have a union with humanity. And this will repair the world and this will be the end of days. Okay. So that is the general idea. Okay. But there's a logic to all this process and that God is all knowing. So God knew that we that we reject His light, but that was part of the plan because it's only for our sin that we will have knowledge that we can repent. And therefore we can welcome God. And the classic example is a story of King David who is the most beloved by God. Right. I'm not sure how familiar you are with the Bible. I'm fairly familiar. Okay. The story of King David is he comes King of Israel and he starts on a fair with Pashiba. The promise Pashiba is already married to a man named Yurila Hite. What happens to be David's greatest warrior? So David in order to marry your Pashiba kills Yurila Hite. Okay. And then Nathan, the prophet of God comes to David and says, you've committed great sin. Do you feel sorry for what's happened? And David's like, not really. So God kills Pashiba's son with David. And this forces David into tremendous mourning and now he repents. Now he recognizes all the sin that he's caused. And what's really odd about this is this creates an intimate relationship between God and David. Once David repents, once David recognizes that he is pure sin, he opens his heart to God and they become the best of friends. Now there's a reunion between God and David. And that is the point of our existence to commit so much evil in the world that we ultimately have to repent and the moment we repent, then God forgives us and now we can be one with God with God. Right. Okay. And this is what the extreme faction of the compalas believe. The problem is this extreme faction also includes where they sneer sin and the Habalubar movement. And that's why he is telling Nanya who to hurry up the coming of the Messiah. Why? Because if you interpret the universe through this lens and you apply to current affairs, then you want to create conditions for the eventual redemption of humanity. Okay. So three things have to happen in order for the juicer we paint and for humanity to be redeemed. Right. So what happens is the creation of the greater Israel project. Okay. Why? Because the greater Israel project was God's original covenant with the Jews. Okay. The greater Israel project. Number two is the return of the Jewish diaspora to Israel and the repentance. Okay. And what would cause their repentance? What would cause the return to Israel? And the answer is anti-Semitism. Right. Right. So the cabalists interpret the Holocaust very differently from the way you and I interpret the Holocaust. What you and I were taught was, okay, the Holocaust happened because Hitler was an anti-Semite. Right. He had this hatred for the Jews. But the cabalists believe something different. Okay. And these are an extreme faction of cabalists. Okay. Okay. They believe it was the Jews who forced the Holocaust. The Jews are at fault for the Holocaust. Because if you read the Bible, every time that thing's happened to the Jews, it's because the Jews disobey God. And nothing else. Right. So Moses is leading the Jews out of slavery in Egypt to the Promised Land. And what do the Jews do? They build a calf to worship. But God already told them, do not worship false idols, do not engage in idolatry. Right. So then God's like, I've to punish you and so you will spend 40 years in the desert, one in the desert. Right. The greatest trauma for the Jews in a Bible is a destruction of the temple, because the temple is the house of God. It was a Babylonians who came to destroy the temple. But the Prophet Jeremiah said to the Jews, it's the Babylonians are just the tool of God. Okay. It's not the Babylonians who are doing this. It is God who is doing this. Why? Because God told you not to worship false idols. And you continue to worship other gods when we told you not to do so. So why the hawkaw has happened? It's because God dispersed the Jews around the world to teach them a lesson, to force them to repent. What did the Jews do instead? They assimilated into our society. They engaged and reformed Judaism. They became secular. They became intellectuals. They want to stay in Germany and the United States. When they should have returned to Israel to build the temple of God and to repent. So God had to teach them a lesson, the lesson was the Holy cost. Okay. So the same thing is happening today where most Jews are secular. There's 40% of Jews in Israel, including Netanyahu, right? Yeah. 40% of Jews in Israel are secular. One third of American Jews are secular. God cannot have this. God wants Jews to repent and to worship him so they can be together. So given all that's happening, the only thing that can force repentance among the Jews is a major tragedy for the Jews, verse similar to the Holocaust. Okay. That's number two. Now that Jews return to Israel and to repent. And number three is the building of the third temple, which means the destruction of the Al-Aqsaq Mosque in Jerusalem. So like God can come to earth and be with the Jews again. Okay. This is what Rabbi Snorston given his publicity, um, leanings, the leaf must happen. Now why am I saying this? It's because you look at all three things. They track with current events. Yeah, they do. This is one of the crazier things when I when I initially heard you say this, I thought it was completely bad shit crazy. And then the more I thought about it and the more I saw happening and the more I saw these public events playing out with Netanyahu on camera. It was a very smart guy like nay, and Yahoo is not dumb by any stretch of the imagination. I thought, okay, maybe this guy is starting to lose his fastball, right? He's saying shit in front of camera is like, listen, class, we have to buy TikTok, looking like a mobster and other things and that are just unbelievably terrible for PR for Israel. Right. And it's like either this guy just lost his mind or he's doing this on purpose. He's doing it for me. It's just it's really hard for me to cope with that that's actually. And again, like he's not a religious guy. So like and also like I thought about this, I can't imagine I have a lot of Jewish for I always have a bunch of Jewish friends friends. And if I asked them in today's day, I mean anti semi anti semitism like yeah, it's ramping up online. You have there was a crazy thing that happened in Tampa there. They were some guy like went to a synagogue and like with a gun or something got arrested. Like there's a lot of lots of these types of things happening more more more recently. Like a lot more of them popping up. And obviously there's lots of anti semitism online. But I mean, I could call up any of my Jewish friends right now and ask them like, hey, if anti semitism, you know, continued on this trajectory where it is now and got a little bit worse over the next few years, would it ever convince you to move back to Israel? I think they would say fuck no. I don't think they would ever want to go back to Israel. You know, I think maybe a certain types of Jewish folks who are more religious might do that. But I don't think the secular ones can ever be convinced to go back. Well, do you think that they could? Well, I mean, if we were talking the year in 1910, 1920 and like, you know, like, so they want to build this nation called Israel. It's in the middle of a desert. It's literally a desert. And it's it's already purely already living there. And like they want to convince Jews to go back to Israel. And we were like, there's no way they could succeed. The Jews are really established in the United States and throughout Europe. Right. And both of these societies are very tolerant, very welcoming of Jews. They're very accessible where they are. Why the hell would any Jews we go to Israel? Right. But they did. But they did. Mm hmm. Right. So what's holding them back from from rebuilding this temple and doing this whole thing, right? Doing it bringing back the anti-Christ or whatever they want to do. Right. So right now, um, there, the foundation stone for the third temple is also where the Alex mask is. Yes. The Alex mask is the third holiest site in the Islamic tradition in the Islamic world. Right. So it's Mecca Medina. And there is the Alex mask where they believe is where Muhammad ascended to heaven. So if they were to destroy the Isaac mass in order to build the third temple, this would ignite, um, sectarian violence throughout the world. Mm hmm. And this is also part of the eschatology because this is really the war of God and Magog. Um, this is all part of the plan as well. Now, um, certain things about the Isaac mass is, um, to build the third temple, you need certain preconditions. A major precondition is you would need a perfect red heifer to sacrifice on the grounds of the moss in order to concentrate the grounds to build the, um, third temple and then they have the perfect red heifer. So this guy in Texas, he bioengineered perfect red heifers. That's just well, really? Yes. The red heifers in Texas and like Steve can, can Google this right now. And they were transported to history about two years ago. So now Israel has, uh, genetically engineered red heifer. That's right. That is perfect. And for, um, I'm not joking here, guys. Texas man ships red heifer to Israel and he's wearing a yonka for ceremony. The fort worth star. Tell me. Yeah. This is this is very well known. Okay. Well, look at this. Look at this YouTube video. Texas red heifers arrival stirs prophetic excitement in Israel in September of 2022. Okay. So that's number one. Jesus. Yeah, they're serious about this man. They're going to send millions of dollars in years and years just through bioengineered perfect red heifer. Okay. They're very serious about this. Okay. That's number one. The perfect red heifers are in place. Number two is there's the, the organization that wants to build a third temple. It's something called a temple institute. The temple institute and they've already built. is there's the organization that wants to build a third time, it's something called a temple institute, the temple institute. And they've already built the third temple, like brick by brick. And so like all that they do is move this third temple to the site. Okay, it's called a temple institute. They are pre-fabbed it and they just go like, drop it and please. Exactly. They pre-fabbed it. Okay, that's number two. Number three is for the past two years, there have been archaeological surveys underneath the ocean mass. And people suspect that what they're really trying to do is undermine foundations of the Arctic mass because if that would have been and there's this work on between Israel and Iran, right? If Iran would allow the missile over to Muslim, they could implode the Arctic mass and blame it on the Iranians. Yeah. And in fact, there's a video of this Jewish rabbi in Israel saying how this is the perfect plan to cause war between the Persians and the Arabs, right? Because the Iranians are Persians and Saudi Arabia, they're Arabs and just have them kill each other, right? But that'd be perfect. Do you want to watch the video? Sure. Yeah. Okay. So you're in the Google, Steve. Okay. It's basically Israel rabbi. I think mass missile while you look for a loxa mask, you know, these are us. All right, cool. We'll pause real quick. Hey, Steve. We don't know. Maybe one of the missiles will hit the mask and clear the place for the third bit of me. I could also be a miracle. If it was up to me, the last time when they shot hundreds of missiles, I would pretend that one missile came from Iran and shoot it down. You know, then all the Arabs will go against Iran and will be the end of the problems. You make them fight with each other of these bunch of lone attacks. Never to lay it deal with a bunch of cowards. These are really, they just want to pass the week. They don't survive this week. They don't think long term. Some of the shit that comes out of the mouths of these people, they're honest about it. They're direct about it. They are. Yeah. And they aren't concerned about what people are going to think, you know, but they're not concerned about long term ramifications of this. Well, first of all, which tracks with them wanting the end time. Yeah, first of all, I think they think we're too stupid to know what's going on. Also, like as part of their check Twitter, as part of their grand as technology, they want us to know what's going on. Right. And third of all, I think like they believe it's all part of God's plan. So there's nothing anyone can do to stop it. Okay. Yeah. But I'll answer another video. And this is Peter Hecht's death. Who is now obviously the war secretary. Yeah, I watched this last night. Yeah. But he's also talking about depending on the third time on how it's God's plan will be able to travel. So it's still kicking. We showed that club of Haggzath. It's towards the end of it. I want to say it's about nine minutes in nine and a half minutes in. Okay. Where he's talking in front of that at the podium or whatever. And yeah, right there. Yeah. The Western Wall. A little bit further. So much of the old right there. People of the scripture of this land and the understanding that for years, if not this year in Jerusalem, then next year in Jerusalem. But we are here in Jerusalem. And today Jennifer and I had a chance to go see the Western Wall of the Temple Mount, the Western Wall tunnels. So much of the old city. And as you stand there, you can't help but behold, the miracle before you. And it got me thinking about another miracle that I hope all of you don't see too far away because 1917 was a miracle. 1948 was a miracle. 1967 was a miracle. 2017, the Declaration of Jerusalem that the Capitol was a miracle. And there's no reason why the miracle of the reestablishment of the temple on the temple mount is not possible. He said that people were in the gasping in the background. It's part of God's plan. Right? Because how all of you explain how history has developed. Right? He's saying how 1917, the buffer declaration is a miracle. Yeah. 1948, the founding of the state of Israel is a miracle. I think the war against Arabs is a miracle. Moving of the Capitol to Jerusalem. It's all a miracle, right? And what is important is, in July, Donald Trump was in a carat, Turkey, for an anal conference. And this past month in July, in early July, this past July, you're not out. That's right. And intelligence that is really told him, look, there's a bomb on your plane here, first one. So Donald Trump sneaks out of Air Force One on a catering truck. And this is this is reporter. Okay? This is, I saw this. Right? Yeah. And like the news reporters are still on the plane. They told me to stay on the plane. They were on a plane. Most of his sick of his cabinet are still on the plane. Karen LeVat is still on the plane. Okay? He brings to be with him. There are Peter Hacks Deaf, his war secretary, the guy who was calling for the third temple and also now he harp. Okay? So there's a lot of scrutiny around now. We're not, who is not, not really harp? Now, having harp is someone who is very close of Trump and basically she writes off Trump social media posts. Okay? And remember a few months ago how Trump released a social, to social of him being Jesus? Yes. That's not going to harp. This woman who's, you know, like 35, 36, she literally believes Trump is Jesus. So this is a new story of how she was not allowed on the more, more arcade with Trump. So she forced herself on the back of an SUV, the trunk of it SUV just so she could ride with Trump in the more, in the more, more, okay. Did just a signal locker room? He said, uh, and there's another story of Trump was that bad mister, yeah. Of club. And there's no room for her. So it's like, fine, I'll just sleep in the locker room. So that's not who not, not in harp is. And now he harp is probably the person closest to Trump. She Jewish. She's not Jewish. Okay. But there are people around Trump who are very close with him who are not Jewish, but they are Christian Zionists. This includes Peter Hex. Yeah. And then it includes Sean Hannity. And also includes Niley Harb. Right. And I think that why they're so influential around Trump is after during 6 2020, Trump was isolated. There were a lot of people who were closer to him, even his own daughter who abandoned him because of the controversy around during six, but she was an individual who did not abandon him. They include Niley Harb, Sean Hannity, Mayor Madison. Okay. And that's why they are so influential around that in harp literally believe Trump is Jesus. She said this or you're saying this because of her post. Just the way she behaves. Yeah. I mean, I mean, I mean, everyone's like, she's crazy, but isn't it just easier to believe that he she literally believes Trump is Jesus and he's doing God's work. And Trump has him with, Trump has her with him all the time. Right. So that tells us that Trump probably believes his beliefs in himself. Yeah. So what is the whole God and Magog thing? Okay. So in this as a technology, yeah, okay. The world ends when the juice repent and the juice call for God, but the juice will only call for God at the moment of their worse suffering at the moment when their very existence is most threatened. That's when they know the Messiah is coming because when all is lost, God will save them. Okay. So the moment of the greatest despair for Israel will be the God, war of God and Magog. And in this in this as a technology, they believe that it will be an alliance of Russia and Persia that will attack Israel. An alliance between the the Orthodox Church and the Islamic world that will try to destroy Israel. And at this moment, all Jews around the world will call to God. They will repent because the very existence of the juice is being threatened. And then at this time, God will come and save the world. Christians believe this will force the return of Jesus, Jews believe this will force the coming of Messiah. And is there something to do? Like is there a connection between all of the wars in the Middle East, including the Iran war and maybe even the Russia Ukraine war that connects to this? Like there's not to be like worldwide chaos. Yeah. Yeah. That's right. So if you look at how about Louvich, right, they are throughout the world. Okay. And they are most dominant in a few places. They are dominant in the United States. They are dominant in Israel, of course. Right. And how about Luke, Louvich has influence over Trump. And they also have influence over Naya who but what people don't appreciate is how about Louvich is also influential in Russia. And they have very strong alliance with Putin. In fact, when a Putin as officials came out and said that about Louvich, it is a supremacist cult. It's a cult and Putin fired him. Okay. How about Louvich is also very prominent in Ukraine because that's where they're from. Right. And what's really interesting is that this was all engineered by Rabbi Snursson because go back to 1970s. Okay, 1970s, Rabbi Snursson was supporting Henry's Jackson in and Henry Jackson wanted the Soviet Union to allow Jews to immigrate to Israel. Yeah. Now, if you watch YouTube, okay, there are lots of people who worship Rabbi Snursson. And it's too long a video. Okay. But one of the videos was which was about an hour long, a rabbi who was a translator for Rabbi Snursson. Tell the story of how Rabbi Snursson communicated with the how about Louvich in the Soviet Union back in 1970s because at this time, how about Louvich was being persecuted by the Soviet authorities. So what happened was that the how about Louvich Louvich movement was on the last screen and they want to know if they should immigrate or should they stay in the Soviet Union. So they sent a message to Rabbi Snursson in Brooklyn and Brooklyn and in Rabbi Snursson then asked one of his rabbis to go to the Soviet Union and give two two Bibles to two powerful rabbis of the how about Louvich movement. Okay. And he didn't even know what his mission was. But he was told to give a Bible to this to his two individuals. So he goes, he does this in the first person opens the Bible and there's a page that is marked. He opens it. He reaches stories like, Oh, I understand now, very seriously. And it wants me to immigrate to Israel. But right now, the Soviet authorities won't let us immigrate. So what should I do? Why should trust the rabbi? Because he's a prophet and we know we will be allowed to immigrate and I will provide my flock to move to Israel with the time is ready. Okay. And the person, the immersery then goes to a second person. The second person opens the Bible and says to another page and he's like, Oh, the rabbi has told me to stay in the Soviet Union. So that's what I'll do. I will promote my flock to weather storm and stay in the Soviet Union forever. Okay. So in 1970s, Rabbi Snorze has this all mapped out. He knew exactly who should be where which which rabbi should be in Ukraine or in Russia or in Israel. He had all mapped out in his head. Laura Lumer recently visited Ukraine and he met with two people. He met with Zelensky and she met with the head of the Habad Lüberge movement in Ukraine. And we can fact check this. Laura Lumer. Have crazy face ladies? Yes. I don't know what's going on. Why is how bad Lüberge is all over the news? But but but just Google did Laura Lumer meet with Habad Lüberge in Ukraine? Are you talking about Lindsey Graham? No, Laura Lumer. That's that's crazy. I believe you. We can fact check it right now. I can't believe it when I saw it as well. Like why are they everywhere? Yeah, well, she's also like a psycho. Look at this. Laura Lumer met with Rabbi Moshe, whatever, the Shabbat affiliated rabbi who holds the title of chief rabbi in Ukraine during her trip to Kiev in July of 2026. Wow. A Guardian. Yeah, that's good. Yeah. Like what's going on here? Why are they everywhere? And what's everyone meeting with them? Right? So Laura Lumer met with her. She is like a nobody. She just gets a lot of attention online because everybody hates her. She has a lot of influence on White House though. Does she really? So I was in Los Angeles and I met with Mark Max, when my phone, you do own Max. Yeah, I'm familiar with Max. Well, yeah. Well, you know, he wasn't a fan for the um, for the Ayatollahs funeral. He comes back to Max was yes, he comes back to United States and his devices were confiscated. And before and now Max is suing the Department of Homeland Security because he wants to know who did this. And his suspicion is it was Laura Lumer because Laura Lumer was posting how, wow, how Max was a traitor or, you know, this guy should be prosecuted for doing this. So Laura Lumer has a lot of pull in the White House. I don't know why. But apparently she's able to have people fired in the White House as well. Yeah. Well, it seems like anyone who kisses Trump's ass hard enough. We'll get some sway, you know, like he'll bring them in as long as they like talk nice about him, build them up, kisses ass. You know, it's like I had a hard time believing that Trump could do this whole war in Iran just because Netanyahu shmused him said, Oh, you're going to be looked at like, you know, one of the greatest presidents in American history, everyone's going to love you. It's going to be the best thing America has ever accomplished when you take down Iran. It's going to be super easy. You know, just with words like that and compliments and, and buttering him up, I found it very hard to believe that that would be possible. But the more I think about it is like maybe because it seems to be that way with everyone else, you know, all you really need to do is just, you know, talk nice about him and public. And the people who are the most influenced over Donald Trump right now happen to believe in this eschatology tonight, but also like Sean Hannity, they're talking about phone every day. Fox news. He watches three hours of Fox news every single day. Um, not only harp Peter hexaf. The people who most believe in this have no sway over Trump right now. Well, do you think that the, um, the Epstein stuff had anything to do with him invading Iran? Because there's that great. There's not great, but it's a fucking crazy email that was in the Epstein files. I believe it was in 2017 or 2018, uh, year before he died where he said in an email to fucking can't remember who the email was to. But Epstein wrote in an email saying that if Trump feels cornered like a rat, he will invade Iran. That could be true, but it's, but you know, I, I put, I predicted he would do so two years ago, right? And how's I, how's able to do so? Yeah. Just, just pattern recognition, right? I'm just, I'm just conducting the thoughts. Trump comes in all office, right? And what does he do? He gets out of the JCPOA. Yeah. The Iran nuclear deal. Right? He's like, screw that. We're not doing that. That's number one. Right. He moves the capital to Jerusalem, he moves the embassy to Jerusalem, which is, which is a no goal for, for past present. It's like, this is a worse thing could possibly do for the Middle East. But Trump said screw that. We're moving the, the embassy from Tel Aviv to, uh, Jerusalem, that's the two. The three is he recognized Israel's control of the golden heights. Yeah. That's number three. Number four is he orders this assassination of Iranian general, Qasam Sallamani. Yeah. Right. You just kind of the thoughts and you're like, well, then the next logical step is he attacks Iran. Right. Right. So yeah. So I mean, there's a, there's a pattern of behavior. Mm hmm. Right. And again, like the only explanation I have is this is for all eschatological because just when they peer to a political perspective, this makes no sense. None of this makes any sense. Why are you just trying to go away? Con me. Right. I mean, like the Iranians, everyone knew the first one Iranians will do is close out the sugar, who moves and attack the energy infrastructure of the Gulf States. So the Gulf States, why won't they do so that they have to save themselves? Right. You forced their head. Right. And Trump's like, no, I didn't know I didn't know that. Right. Yeah. It's insane that they didn't gain this out. Right. That's crazy to me. Even today we don't know why this war is happening. Trump has yet to articulate a good reason because we can't let them have a nuclear weapon according to Higgs FM that appearance that he made in front of Congress and July. Right. But remember, before the Americans assassinated, um, via a tolla, he had a fat whip. Yes, he did saying no nuclear weapons for any reason. Yep. So as long as he was in charge, not only no nuclear, no development of nuclear weapons, but not to ever use a nuclear weapon, let alone develop one. I actually had a former Mossad guy on here telling me that. And that's true. Right. So, so, so you don't kill the guy. Iran cannot have to go weapons. Right. Because it's a theocracy. They think they really just lost seriously. Yeah. John, John Kerry hockey was on the show. He was telling me he's a former CIA officer who worked in the Middle East. Uh, he was one of the guys. He captured Abu's beta, um, during the, the warney rock. And Afghanistan. And he, um, he was telling me that there was two of these, um, national intelligence assessments. And this is when all whatever 17 or 18 of the US intelligence agencies, they all get together. And individually, they all go into their corners and doing assessment on does Iran have a nuclear weapon program. And independently, all 18 intelligence agencies went into their assessment. And the head of each agency came together in a roundtable and unanimously decided that they all agree that Iran does not have a nuclear. That's right. This happened twice. Yes. Yes. There's also something called a million challenge where like 20 years ago, they, they wore game a war with Iran. And the conclusion was the United States could not possibly defeat Iran in a war. When was this? This is, this is called a million challenge. I believe it's 2002. Okay. So, so maybe Steve, you, you, you, men, you, men, it was the Millennium Challenge. Millennium Challenge. I believe it's 2002. Okay. I could be wrong, but I believe it's 2002. Okay. And the war game, the conclusion was the nights that Iran would use, uh, asymmetrical warfare. I do. $50 military, you, uh, war game. Wow. The largest and most expensive war game in US history held from July 24 to August 15, 2002 to test, uh, network centric warfare concepts. Keep going down. What does it say about Iran? Keep going. Right. So they, war game, a war against Iran and they kept on losing because Iran could just use asymmetrical warfare, just drones against their aircraft carriers. There's absolutely no way for the aircraft characters to protect against a drone swarm, which is exactly what's happened right now. Right. So they knew exactly what's going to happen in 2002. Right. And we spend like billions of dollars on a single aircraft carrier and the type of equipment that we build and we've developed is, um, yeah, it's shiny and it's new, but it's not suitable for warfare against a country that does war like that. He's like, another issue is sailors live on the aircraft carrier. And there's only so much time that human beings can live in a confined space. Right. Well, they're already trying to commit suicide off the aircraft carrier. Yeah. Please, they've been deployed for nine months. Yeah. And like the maximum you're supposed to be out, deployed is six months. So they're all going crazy. Right. And rather than admit the problem, Peter Hexf is, is trying to bury the problem. Right. Yeah. The story just came out a couple days ago, where there's a, at least one or two sailors on one of the aircraft carriers, the Lincoln, Abraham Lincoln, maybe who jumped overboard trying to kill themselves. The one guy was in the water for like an hour. And they didn't tell his wife or his family. They like, one of his friends had to reach out to his wife and tell him about that. Um, so again, it's very hard to understand what's going on, unless you look at it from an eschatological lands. Yeah. Right. They literally believe this is the end of the world. And they're, they're preparing for the coming of God. So how do you predict that this, this Iran war is going to play out how much longer it's going to last and what are going to be the downstream effects of it? This war is almost unstoppable at this point because what's happened is, um, both sides have become eschatological. So, um, the United States has become more extreme. So Trump is running himself with people who are going to reinforce his religious zeal, people like Naveh Harp and Peter Hexf. Okay. Um, and this really has gone all in in this eschatology as well. But the Iranians have changed as well. So at the, at the onset of this war, um, the Iranians were led by a very pragmatic leadership. Yes. But the Americans have come to have killed them all. And they can't sell them any and they literally did nothing. Yeah. There's no reaction. That's right. So a lot of the pragmatic leadership, the wise moderates have been eliminated. And who's rising in the ranks in the RGC, the, um, Iranian revolution, guard court, court are these radicals who are eschatological, they're young, they're angry. And they want vengeance for what they're, what the United States is doing to, um, to Iran. And they are eschatological because they believe that this is, this is the end of the world. This is, um, the war to end all wars. And when this happens, then their, uh, Messiah called it 12, um, Iman, the Magdi will come to lead them. Okay. So this has become a religious war on both sides. And it's almost intentional because remember, um, the United States had an MOU with Iran. Yes. And the United States kept on reneging on the MOU, which embarrassed the pump, the, um, the moderates in Iran. Yeah. Right. It basically deligimized them. And now the, um, zealots are in control. So what Iran has said is we now refuse and negotiate with Americans. And also from now on, we will go on offensive. We will no longer retaliate against, um, bombing. We will now initiate a top. So as of today, what was the day today? August 19th, there's no negotiating. There's no, they're not trying to negotiate. It's done. It's done. The Iranians no longer want to negotiate. And there's even discussion that the Iranians will attack as far as Europe because they believe that a lot of weaponry is coming from Europe. So if this would have happened, what would, what's going to happen is do you crane war and the Iran war would merge together to engulf the entire world? How the hell would they merge together? So, um, Iran is being embargoed by the United States right now. And there are two countries that support Iran. Right. You have China. You have Russia. Yes. You try to support Iran through the, um, through railways for such an Asia. Russia supports Iran for the cast. It's been seen. Right. Can we jump on maps? It's really point we see the map. Okay. So so we're, we'll just see a map of central Asia in the Middle East. And I'll show you how that the wars will link up is the lens key going to try to supply the United States with drones and shit. No, no, it's much worse than that. Okay. So, so, so you see, um, Ukraine, right? You see Ukraine. You see Iran. Okay. Uh, yeah. So you're, you're trying to see Iran. Okay. Punch it a little bit Steve. Just a little bit. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. All right. So right now they're two, they're two wars. The one, the one Ukraine, the Ukraine and the war in Iran. Right. Now Russia supplies, uh, Iran for the cast. It's here. Right. You, you see that big lake in the middle. Yeah. Yep. Yep. What happened a couple weeks ago was the Ukrainians launched a drone strike against a Iranian cargo ship killing one person in the cast. We can see, you see how far Ukraine is from the cast. We can see, right? Yes. Zensky, um, omitted it was the Ukrainians who did this and he said, though, and he said it was justified because the Iranians are supplying the Russians in the war. Okay. But people suspect that it's because Zensky is trying to get American financing and some one for the one Ukraine. And that's why he's trying to merge these two wars. Right. So so as this war continues, what's going to happen is the United States will try to cut off Russia's supplies to Tehran and that means war war in the caspian, which could involve Georgia, our main in Azerbaijan. And if these three involved, then all, then then then like basically you have the merging of these two, two fronts, the Ukraine and the Iranian, uh, fronts. Also, what's been happening is Iran's proxies happened brought into the war. Okay. So at the odds, the war, it was issued United States versus Iran. Now, there are more, there have been more fronts open up. Okay. So you have Hezbollah in Lebanon, Israel is attacking, uh, Hezbollah in Lebanon. Right. Right. There's talk of Syria attacking Hezbollah from the north. Okay. That's one front. Another front is if you go down, uh, to Yemen, okay, this is something called, uh, the Bab El-Mandad Strait. Okay. Uh, you, you see, you see this, right? Okay. This is where the Houthis are, right. Houthis are also a proxy of their Iranians and they have been brought into the war. And what, and what this important is the Houthis live in mountains, right. It is impossible to attack mountains. They try during Operation Prosperated Garden. It did not work. Okay. The Houthis are in certain range of the entire Southern Arabian, uh, energy infrastructure and they've been attacking, uh, Aramical oil fields with their drones. Because at the end of the day, the entire Middle East is this one giant oil field that you can blow up with ballistic missiles or drone strikes. Okay. So you can see how this war is expanding very rapidly throughout the world. Mm-hmm. Okay. Something else that, um, um, is happening is on the economic front, Japan is under a lot of pressure. And the reason why is Japan, uh, provides a lot of liquidity to the world. It's been called the Japanese Yang Kuri trade. Okay. And, and this, this is where it comes out. But I'll try my best to explain to the reversible terms. Basically, the idea is this, for the past 30 years, Japan has been suffering from deflation. So the government... concept, but I'll try my best to explain to you in the reversible terms. Basically, the idea is this, for the past 30 years, Japan has been suffering from deflation. So the government is like, was this lend money at zero interest to Japanese banks and corporations in order to refinance the Japanese economy? Right. But if you're getting money at 0%, you're like, why don't we just take this money and then buy your stressories, which gives you 5% a year. Right. It's called a Yangtari trade. So it's like free money. Right. So what's happening is Japan is literally financing the entire world with a Yangtari trade. But with this war in the Middle East, Japan is losing most of its all supply, which is putting strain on the Japanese yen. So that's why these past few months, Japanese yen has been sinking, because investors believe the Japanese economy is heading towards collapse. In order to shop the yen, where do they buy their oil from? From the Middle East, from specifically where though, sorry, Arabia, so far away. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Yeah. Like maybe 80% of Japanese oil comes from the Middle East. Okay. Right. And Japan still has strategic petroleum reserves, but it's going to run out in like six months. Wow. Wow. Japan doesn't have any oil. Okay. So investors are putting strain on the Japanese yen, which means that eventually what's going to happen is Japan is going to have to, and the Yangtari trade. And so Japan can no longer finance the world. And then what is important is Japan right now is the world's biggest buyer of US treasuries. Japan has like over a $1 in US treasuries. And it depends stops buying US treasuries. Then this is going to put this can put strain on the US economy. And it's possible that this will burst to bubbles, the AI bubble and the private credit bubble in the United States. And this would cause tremendous contagion throughout the United States. Basically, it would cause a white color pop glimpse. Now, how do you know 80s and 90s? A lot of book call jobs were shipped off to China, right? Mm hmm. And so workers suffered. Well, if they're coming with a collapse, then a lot of white color people would lose their livelihoods. Right? The middle class would cease to exist in the United States. Right. Yeah. Japan's largest owner of foreign holder of US treasuries approximately 1.16 trillion. So in the beginning of this Iran thing, like one of the craziest things, like I was, there was a documentary that Vice did where Shane Smith went to Iran. I was talking to one of the spokespeople for Iran. And they were showing how I forget which president it was. But I think it was in the 70s. One of the presidents gifted Iran within its first nuclear reactor. And it was called Adams for Peace to help them with nuclear energy. Yeah. And, you know, the question was asked, like if it seems like nukes are the biggest question or the biggest excuse that everyone's using to go after you, like they can't have a nuclear program, then they can't have a nuclear program. Eisenhower did the Adams for Peace thing where they gave them their first five megawatt nuclear reactor. And it's still sitting there in Tehran. And it's just funny that now like that's the that's the excuse they're using to invade. But so he was asking like, this is, you know, a hot bet or this is like one of the primary locations on earth for oil reserves. Like he was surrounded by oil. Why not just use oil? Like, why do you need nuclear energy? It seems like that would be a huge answer to all of your biggest problems. Yeah. And the guy gave kind of a bullshit answer. He kind of was like his answer was like, oh, climate change. Yeah. But if I was a leader of Iran and like they were accusing me of having a nuclear program and doing that and I was like, no, I need to have this much nuclear energy. We need to refine this much to have nuclear power. I would just fucking go off nuclear and I would just do all oil. Yeah. Fossil fuels. Yeah. Yeah. You know, like, don't you think that seems like would seem like a reasonable thing for them to do? Yeah. Look, I think if you just look at the Middle East, not a lot of things make sense. Okay. So when the big mysteries is, why do the United States invade Iraq in 2003? Right? Because if you just look at some, if you just look at some who say not this point, his advice is when terms says, look, I think the Americans are trying to invade us. Some of a sudden it's like, there, there's no way they would invade us. Yeah. The reason why is it makes no sense. If they came in destroyed Iraq, Iran would become the regional superpower. Right. Why would they do that? Right. One is, when let's have Iraq in Iran, kill each other like like like like what happened in 1980s Iraq, Iran war, right? Yeah. That's the power. That's how empires behave. Right. There's no way they would come destroy us. So we just, no, it's not going to happen. Mm hmm. It makes no sense. Even to it, it makes no sense. Unless you have some crazy religious zealots that have the answer to everything. Yeah. So, so let's look at another video. Okay. This is Wesley Clark talking to Amy Goodman. And this is after 9.11. And Wesley Clark is saying how the United States has his plan to invade seven countries. Oh, yeah. Right. And like a certain amount of years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. In five years. Right. And how long is this video? Seven minutes. You know which part of the video he says this? Go ahead. Hit play. About 10 days after. I went through the Pentagon and of my very rumsfeld and Debbie Secretary of the way. So I went downstairs just to sell over some of the people on the joint staff who used to work for me. And one of the generals called me and he said, Sir, you got to come in. You got to come in and talk to me a second. I said, we're too busy. He said, no, no, he says, we've made the decision we're going to war with Iraq. This was on or about the 20th September. I said, we're going to war with Iraq. Why? He said, I don't know. He said, I guess they don't know what else to do. So I said, well, did they find some information collecting Saddam, Al Qaeda? He said, no, no, no, there's nothing new that way. They just made the decision to go to war with Iraq. He said, I guess it's like we don't know what to do about terrorists, but we've got a good military and we can take down governments. And he said, I guess if the only two, he had as a hammer, every problem has to look like a nail. So I came back to see him a few weeks later. And by that time we were bombing in Afghanistan, I said, we're still going to war with Iraq and he said, oh, it's worse than that. He said, he reached over on his desk. He picked up a piece of paper. And he said, I just got this down from upstairs. He said, defense office today. And he said, this is a memo that describes how we're going to take out seven countries in five years, starting with Iraq and in Syria, Lebanon, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, and finishing off Iran. I said, there's a class of fight. He said, yes, sir. I said, I said, well, don't show it to me. And I saw him a year or so ago. And I said, you remember that? He said, sorry, I didn't show you that memo. I didn't show it to you. I'm sorry. What did you say his name was? I'm not going to give you his name. So go through the countries again. Well, starting with Iraq and Syrian Lebanon, then Libya, then Somalia, and Sudan, and then back to Iran. So when Iran, he says that it's not exactly replay, but here's the truth that Iran from the beginning has seen at the presence of the United States of Iraq was a threat, a blessing because we took out Saddam Hussein and the Balthists. They couldn't handle them. We could be careful. But also a threat because they knew that they were next on the hit list. And so, of course, they got engaged. They lost a million people during the war with Iraq. And they got a long and unprotectable, unsecurable border. So it was in their vital interest to be deeply involved inside Iraq. They tolerated our attacks on the Balthists. They were happy we captured Saddam Hussein, but they're building up their own network of influence. And to cement it, they occasionally give some military assistance and training and advice either directly or indirectly to both the insurgents and the militias. And in that sense, it's not exactly parallel. So there are three things I want to point out about this video, okay? Number one is they've already achieved six of the seven countries, okay? Right? They've destroyed Libya, Syria, Iraq, Somalia, Sudan. Yeah. And the last country is Iraq, okay? So if we think that this war was simply accidental, how do we explain this video? Right. Okay. That's the first point I will make. Second point I will make is this aligns with the clean brick memo of 1996, right? So he's like, you know, where this compound? We don't know. What comes from the clean brick memo? So this is something that goes back for a long time. Okay. That's number two. Number three is people don't appreciate this, but he should not be allowed to say these things. This is confidential information. This is a state secret. The guy went to a Pentagon and he's like a US general. So they will tell them the truth, but now he's to say it in public. So why would they want us to know this? Also, he's talking this to Amy Goodman. Did you know what Amy Goodman is? I don't know. I mean, I'm familiar with who she is, but I don't know her background. She is one of one of the most prominent left wing voices in American media. She is extremely anti-war and anti-empire. So why would he pick this? Why would it pick Amy Goodman to be the person who received this news and not people like Sean Hannity or Fox News, who would be more sympathetic towards war against Iraq? Okay. So it seems kind of planned to me. It's again, here's a US general who has received confidential information from a source within the Pentagon. And it would be considered, you know, I mean, so you think he's letting out this secret plan to invade all these countries. To the public intentionally to to to so distrust in the United States and American empire or to prepare the public for what's about to happen to prepare the public. Yeah, it's it's called pretty the programming. You know, like, if you tell people what's about to happen, they are less likely to be angry about it. So for example, you know, Donald Trump has been joking about 2028, right? He's got this baseball caps and you know, like, you know, 20, Trump 2028 everywhere and then during the White House correspondence dinner, he's like, Hey, I've got a scoop for you guys. I'm going to run for a third term. It's meant as a joke, but was it so Kurt Metzger told me you had a theory on the Venezuelan operation. That's right. And how this all ties into Trump getting another term. He's going to can you explain that you're saying that when Maduro goes into his trial, Trump's going to get him to testify that they stole the election, something like that. Yeah. So what Trump is obsessed about? Okay. And what anything else in the world is a 2028 election. And how is stolen from him, right? Okay. He talks about this all the time. The Butler assassination tab. He never talks about it. Okay. That's also very weird. It's so much fun to kill you. Yeah. He survived. Do you like talk about every single day? He never talks about it. Do you have a theory on that? Well, we can come back to it. Yeah, we're going to come back to our character. Okay. But like not only does he not talk about like, no one talks about it. No one in his administration talks about how they tried to kill him, right? But he talks about the 2020 election all the time. How is stolen from him? He's obsessed about it. He has his entire administration working overtime to uncover how they stole it. Remember, it was a gabber before she left the DNI. Her job was basically to figure out how they stole the elections, right? And the theory is the smart, smart, manic machines. Yes. Right. That the polling machines. Yeah. That's the smart, manic machines. Okay. So I think that Maduro is a CIA asset because otherwise it's for her to explain how this operation went so smoothly and how after Maduro left, the Venezuelan government has been so cooperative. Did you know that Maduro is still the president of Venezuela? I did not know that he's still a president of Venezuela. There's been no change in leadership. It's really weird. It's really weird. He's still technically the president of Venezuela. Even though he is in prison in New York. So I think there's a secret deal between Maduro and Trump. And Maduro is going to testify that the smart, smart, manic machines are rigged. And the Democrats basically were able to use the smart machines to steal the 2020 election. And he's going to use that and it's going to excuse to get another term. He's been in the case. Yeah. Right. Because honestly, if you are the American public, you have to believe something weird happened during the 2020 election. Right. Because Trump won on election night. And then two weeks later, you have all these million ballots come into mailbar and come in and it overturned the election. Now, I want to show you a video. Okay. Okay. So can you find Bernie Sanders, Jimmy Kimmel, the blue tide, blue tide? Yes. And this happened before the election in November 2020. Jimmy Kimmel, blue tide. No, Jimmy. It's gonna be a short, maybe. Yeah. It's a short video. But basically what is blue, blue tide. So the blue tide. So what is the context of it? What is said? So what Bernie Sanders told Jimmy Kimmel? What's he suspended on this? Oh, black tide. Blue tide. Okay. The blue tide black tide is a metal band. Okay. Okay. Explain what happened. Okay. So what happened was this? Okay. Before the election, Bernie Sanders appeared on Jimmy Campbell and said, listen, I'm gonna tell you what's going to happen on election night. On election night, it was seen as though Trump had win. Had won. Do not worry. Okay. Because what's going to happen is there are all these millions of these mail-in ballots that are going to come in on next two weeks in Wisconsin, Pennsylvania and Michigan. And they are the blue tide. And they will overturn election and let Biden win. So guys on election night, do not freak out. Do not riot. Do not worry. We've got this. This is before number 2020 election. This is Bernie Sanders appearing on Jimmy Kimmel saying this. Wow. And like you're like, how would he know this was going to happen? That's exactly what happened. This is exactly what happened. Can you find that him talking about mail-in ballots? Bernie saw Sanders talking about mail-in ballots on before 2020 election on Jimmy Kimmel? I believe it was Jimmy Kimmel, but it might be Jimmy Fallon. I think it was Jimmy Kimmel. Okay. It's on YouTube. Yeah. Why would he come out and admit that on a huge. This is before the election talk show like that. Right. This is before the election. Right. How did he know? Did you know that six billion dollars were spent on election? Six billion dollars between both parties? No. No. Just by the Democrats by the Democrats against Trump. Six billion dollars were spent to defeat Trump on that election. That's insane. That's totally crazy. So it's weird. I'm not saying that the Democrats cheated, but like I don't understand how Bernie Sanders was able to come out a few weeks before the general election and make that comment. And that's exactly what happened. The blue tide. Do you think that those there was anything to those smart matic voting machines? Do you think there is any legitimacy to that? Those things were actually used for voter fraud, maybe in other countries and other South American countries or anything like that. So Glenn Greenwald mentioned this, but he lives in Brazil. And he's saying that every time there's a national presidential presidential election, they were able to and Brazil is a population of 200 million people. Right. But they're able to tablet results in a day. They're able to like literally tell you that night. Right. What does it take a month in the United States to figure out who won? Right. Right. The United States is the most turned out to not allowed to advance country in the world. What does it take a month to figure out who won? Yeah. It's really strange that way. Okay. So what I think is if you just look at the two-party system, there's a lot of shenanigans in elections. And they do sort of protect the two party duopoly. Yeah. And that's why it takes so long to count the votes to enable cheating. So I think like everyone cheats, I think every election, there's a lot cheating. Yeah. And then in 2020, the Democrats cheated better than the Republicans. Yeah. I think that makes sense. Yeah. I think that makes a lot of sense. So what do you think happened with the Butler assassination? What do you think that was all about? So there's so many weird things about that whole thing. Okay. So I think when they do these things, it's a ritual. Yeah. It's a ceremony of some sort. Okay. Because what happened was that the bullet grazed Trump's right here. And it bled. Yes. And then when he fell to the ground and the civil service was trying to remove him from the podium, he said, no, no, no, no, like my shoe on my left foot, um, there's no, I need to get my shoe and they let him get a shoe. That's really weird, man. Right. Like if someone's shooting at you, get the hell out of there. Like no, no, I, I, I, no, I need my shoe is my lucky shoe. That's retarded. Right. And they let him do that. Okay. So, so, so this is an anomaly. Um, the right ear is bleeding and the left foot is about a shoe. Mm hmm. Okay. So if you go to the Bible, Leviticus, yeah, um, whenever someone is, is anointed for special purpose by God, they have a ceremony. The ceremony is you first make a sacrifice to God and you take the blood of that sacrifice and you dap it on your right ear as well as your left foot. Right. And that annoys you as the special agent of God, like the, um, tolls in one, basically, right. Um, so I think that's what happened at Butler. I think it was a staged event in order to annoy 12 for the special mission ahead of him. And, um, he's doing it. So you think this could have been a plot by one of these extremist religious groups to perform it, unbeknownst to Trump, and then later convince him that he was anointed by God. Okay. Or do you think he was a part of it? So, um, the bullet graced his ear, right? Right. If you talked to any places like that, if you talked to any places like that, they were like, that's impossible. Right. But some guy didn't get shot in the head. You're right. I'm saying like, how's it possible for that bullet just graces the ear and then magically the air is fine a week later. Right. Right. And you talked to any blis six expert and like, that's impossible. Mm-hmm. That can't possibly happen. I mean, like, the ears can get blown off. Right. Regardless of how, you know, of like, how, how he graces it. Okay. Yes. So what people will leave is that Trump had a razor in his hand and then he slightly cut his ears so that it bled. Okay. I can hold wrestling trick. Well, he used to be part of that world, right? He did used to be a part of that world. Yeah. Right. He had this, he had this death notch with his, his, his man. Yep. Yeah. Yep. That's so bonkers. Yeah. If you talked to a lot of people, I hope that's true. I will be admits it. I think if he admitted it, his followers would accept it. But he never talks about it. Right. No, no. He goes against his, his character. Mm-hmm. Right. He's not a shy guy. He's not humble or, you know, he, you know, I mean, if it really happened, he would have said God saved me that day. He would say it every single day. He would make everyone say it around him. God saved me that day for a special purpose. Mm-hmm. And I mean, God damn it. Unfortunately, it does track with all of this other crazy stuff that's happening right now with these religious wars and with the, you know, the, the reporting that came out where the, the leaders of all of those military commands and different groups, the factions of the US military came out and said that Trump was anointed by Jesus. Yes. This is a religious war. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And right now, there's this purge in a Pentagon, right? So if you don't agree with the war, you being purged. Yeah. Right. Like Joe Kent. Yeah. Well, he resigned, right? Nobody allowed generals to the war or being urged. Yeah. Dan Cain is still a part of it though, right? Because Dan came with one of the guys that originally pushed back on the war. That's right. But now he's got the, now they, he's supporting it. That's right. If you enjoy watching our show on Spotify or YouTube and you want to be more involved, I encourage you to please come check out our Patreon community. Not only does our Patreon community get every episode you see on YouTube early fully uncensored and ad-free, but we're also doing patriotic exclusive episodes as well as live Q&As and you can get your personal questions answered by our guests every single week. For me, being able to collaborate and communicate back and forth with our Patreon community every week has been huge. And this is my way of saying thank you for the cost of a cup of coffee a month. Now back to the show. What is your take on? So, okay, we have this sort of Chabod Lubevic group, these essentially cultists that are influencing all of these billionaires, Zionists like the Adel sins or whatever that are funding world leaders like Netanyahu and like Trump and everyone else. Right. And Putin as well. And Putin as well. Yeah. And it's Alaska. So, and these crazy. Have it, Malay of the Argentina, these super powerful billionaires believe have these religious beliefs and for some reason they put so much faith in this cult. I'm just going to call it cult because it sounds like a cult that they're willing to do whatever it takes to put these people in power using their money, using their unlimited wealth essentially. But so in this sort of like puzzle, where do the groups like the Rothschilds fit into all this? And like the crazy, the huge families of international wealth, global wealth, how do they fit into all this? And like people even, I mean, even tangentially like people like Epstein. I could go into 12 hours on this topic alone. Yeah. Because this goes way back. Okay. It's, I mean, like it makes no sense that this suddenly comes out of nowhere, right? This has been going on for like a long, long time. And it started with a man named Septite Zevi. Okay. So I'll give you a quick version. Okay. Vision. Okay. Version. Okay. But something like Zevi. And he, so they're 1666. Okay. And this is like Anatolia, which is like Monday, Tokyo. Okay. Zevi. Okay. And in the year 1666, he proclaims himself as the Messiah, promised to the Jews in the Bible. And a third of the Jewish diaspora at this time in history, believe he is the Messiah. Okay. So the question then is, who is this guy? Would he come from and why are Jews following the sky around? Okay. So let's go back in time, 1492, 1492, the Spanish expel the Jews from Spain. Basically, the Spanish give the Jews a choice either you convert to, to the Catholic religion or you are forced out of Spain. And a lot converted and a lot moved elsewhere primarily Turkey on the Ottoman Empire because the Muslims welcomed Jews because the Muslim song, the Jews as God's people. All right. And this criticism within the Jewish religion because again, the greatest sin you commit as a, as a Jew is to convert to worship false idols. And in their religion, they believe that if you do so, you will be condemned to burn in health or all of eternity. Okay. That's what they believe. But today is, it's a religion of blood. So you're born into the religion. Right. Right. So in other words, a lot of Jews are being forced to believe that their brothers, their uncles, their mothers are burning in hell because they convert it. Okay. And this causes a major quest of faith within the Jewish religion. Okay. That's point number one. Point number two is that during this time, all wars are bringing out throughout Europe. So Jews are being persecuted and they're dying in numbers. And at this time, remember, in their religion at a time of the greatest darkness, God will appear. The Messiah will come. So there's this mesaemic fever throughout the Jewish eyes were at this time because there's so much suffering. So in Zabhli Zebi, we'll cleanse himself the Messiah. Jews are convinced. Okay. And so he becomes the first Messiah in the Jewish religion. Okay. And there's only one one Messiah. Okay. And there's some strange happens. The Ottoman Sultan, no, here's about this and thinks that some of Zebi is trying to format a revolution against him. Right. Because based on the Messiah, it's supposed to bring the Jews back to Israel, proclaim himself the King of the world and build the third temple. And so the Sultan ceases as a revolution. So he says to Zabhli Zebi, you either, so either the turban or your head, either you convert to Islam or I will kill you. I'll behead you. And Zabhli Zebi surprises everyone by converting. Okay. And this shocks the Jewish world. But there's a core group of people around him who understand that is his mesa mission. Okay. So remember Jesus, what was Jesus wrote? Jesus wrote was come to earth and save us. We deem us from the original sin. Right. Okay. And how did he do? He killed himself. Right. Well, what's the original sin of the Jews? The original sin of the Jews is conversion. So by converting, Zabhli Zebi is redeeming the Jews from the original sin. Because in the Messiah convert, that's telling all Jews that conversion does not matter. So what Zabhli Zebi believes is what the close you wear, the religion you practice does not matter. What matters is your heart. So as long as you practice Kabbalah at home, you're still Jewish. Because you are Jewish by blood. And if you are a Catholic or a Muslim, it doesn't matter. Okay. And so this starts something called sabbatism. And the sabbatians believe that, first thing, it doesn't matter what you believe. The faith you practice in public, one not just is what you believe in private. Okay. That's number one. But number two is they also believe in something called redemption by sin. And redemption by sin is the idea that we've been discussing, which is the idea of accelerationism. Okay. So yes, we will eventually all be unified with God at the end of time. But if we have two faith, we would accelerate the process. And how do you we accept the process by committing as much sin as possible? Because if we lead humanity to darkness, God must come and save us. So you force God's hand. It, right. Does it make sense? It makes sense? Okay. All right. So. Yes, God must come and save us. So you force God's hand. Right. Does it make sense? It makes sense. Okay. All right. So why this happens is somebody's levy will then be reincarnate in Jacob Frank. Jacob Frank is also a protest along the lines of Rabbi Snorison. Jacob Frank. Jacob Frank. Okay. And the moment it's called Sabatian fragrances. Okay. So if you just bring this up, Sabatian fragrances. And now what's really important about something fragrances is they encourage conversion and the infiltration of different religious groups. And in the 18th century, fragrances becomes dominant among the European elite. There are a lot of European nobility who become a Frank kiss. Okay. Including the Raffshoff family. Raffshoff family. So thank you for the Frank kiss. Yes. The Frank Feggism is extremely popular among elite European Jewish nobility. Okay. And remember how um, Jeffrey Epstein in an email wrote to um, Iran, the Raffshoff. And he said that there were three elite Beggian families in Europe. They are the Raffshoffes, the Epstein's and the Guttmans. Yes. There were all Sabatian Frank kiss. Interesting. Okay. And who was the American Frank kiss? I'm sorry. Who was the American? Sabatian Frank kiss. His name was Louis Brandeis. Louis Brandeis was a Sabatian Frank kiss. You can Google this. Louis Brandeis Frank kiss them. Okay. He was the most prominent believer in Sabatian Frank kiss in America. He was also the most ardent Zionist in America. He was also the man who sponsored about louvich coming to America. So you see how all this fits in together. Now in their religion, and again, this is not Judaism by the way. Okay. This is a theoretical cult. Yes. Within Judaism, that actually looks down upon all Jews. Okay. They think that Jews are just morons and idiots. Okay. So this is a radical set. Now the thing about them is they believe in reincarnation. So the Mazai can ever die. The Mazai can just reincarnate. So sometimes they have when he died, he reincarnated as Jacob Frank. When he got Frank, when he died, who in the world could he reincarnate us? Rabbi Snareson. He will believe this. Unfortunately, people will do believe this. That Jacob Frank reincarnated as Rabbi Snareson. That's a great secret of how about louvich. Yes. No one about allowed to talk about it. But I make this assumption based on game theory. Because remember, Jacob Frank, he died a very wealthy man. He died with a love European nobility being his followers. Yeah. Yeah. Um, do you know what? What's really interesting that um, kind of Owens talked about? What she talked about with the that on her podcast or with that debate on her podcast. Okay. Fraggism gave birth to um, Simon Freud. Simon Freud is an agent of sappeting fraggism. Okay. So so let me tell you the story. Something that the something that is practiced is ritual incest. Okay. It means ritual incest is a form of bonding. Okay. Because in their religion to sin is to show faith in God. These to sin is to break the loss of man in papique because you have two faith in God. Right? To break the laws of man because you have true faith in God. Right. Okay. So, um, for example, you're not allowed to steal. Well, why you're not allowed to steal? You're not, you're not allowed to master it in public. Why you're not allowed to master it in public. Mm hmm. Does God care if you masturbate in public? No, God doesn't care if you masturbate in public, but your neighbors do. Right. Right. So if you master in public, what you're doing is you're defying the loss of man to show your truth in God because you know your heart that God loves you and God gives you free will and God's empowered you. Right. So say to a friend has a very famous saying, he has the power to, um, live something that 10,000 men cannot lift. And if he teaches you that power, uh, you, you were able to live this, this thing like a feather. Okay. So what is it that 10,000 men cannot lift, but you can lift and answer is taboo. Hmm. Right. Social talk, boo something that most men cannot break, but you can, you have two faith in God. Is this something he said specifically about taboo? Yes. Yes. He says that all sin, all religion is made up by men. It's not the true word of God. Only you know the true word of God and the true word of God is, um, you want you to enjoy life. Do you think this is something that Jeffrey Epstein subscribed to? Jeffrey Epstein was an Epstein, right? He wrote, he wrote that email to it. They're in the rough side. There are three families in Europe that control finance, the rough child, the Epstein's and the gut mince. Right. Why was Jeffrey Epstein giving so much power? Where did this guy come from? Right. Right. There's a make sense. It doesn't make sense. He was okay. So Jeffrey Epstein, okay, there are, there are, there are so many strange things about Jeffrey Epstein, but the strangest is in the United in 91, let's say wexner, a billionaire, fine, I'm Victoria's secrets. He signed over power, Tony. Right. To Jeffrey Epstein in 91, who would you sign power over turning over to in your life? Who, you my wife, that's all. That's all. I mean, there's no one else I would do it. Right. Do you love and trust, right? Exactly. Because that person has literally the power of life and death over you. Yes. So let's say wexner signed over power of attorney to a guy. Right. He doesn't really know. Right. He's a Jeffrey Epstein. Right. Good question. Right. Right. And why would he be chosen to go to the trilateral commission or what? At age 30, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And anyway, we'll Steve Bannon, where Jeffrey Epstein said to Jeffrey, Jeffrey Epstein said to Steve Bannon, and he's 30. I was selected to be on the trilateral commission by David Rockefeller. Jeffrey Rockefeller himself, appointment says, you're a financial genius. I need you to be on a trilateral commission. All right. So if you look at his life, okay? So his first job was at adult in school. He was hired by Donna Barr, who was one bar's father. Then after the adult in school, he goes work for beer stones. After beer stones, he works for that is the least who is one of the major arm track for trafficker in the world. And then so people were like, well, he just fell from job to job. Right. But you can look at it as he's being mentored, but on his powerful people in the world, the dollar in school is old money. It's where the most powerful families send their kids. Right. So you're learning how to interact with powerful nobility. Then you go to beer stones to learn how the financial world works. Then you go do arms traffic, king to learn how the criminal underworld works. Right. So he's being mentored. He's being trained to be almost a special agent. Right. Yeah. It does it seems like also one of the things it's just kind of like, I can't ignore is what you were saying about Rabbi Schneerson wearing that Saturn, the cube of Saturn on his head and Saturn being the god that eight, it's children. And all of the Epstein stuff with him allegedly eating human flesh and like disappearing children and all that taboo stuff. Yeah. That's very, a lot of this ties back to the serpentine Frankenstein. Yeah. Yeah. Because they practice with winning connections. They practice with which to insist. Like they practice like redemption through sin. Like how do you show your truth in God by sinning? Okay. But you can't sin by yourself. It is too hard. So you sin as a group. Right. So Jacob Frank and his followers, they convert to the Catholic religion. And on the data convert, what happens is he organizes a group orgy. Okay. And again, this is online. This is something that is well known about the Septine Frank is. And so it's a group orgy. And it's inside of mansion. And the group orgy is almost a blood off, meaning like, even though we convert and even though we will go to different parts of the world, we are now found by this blood off through this group sex, this group orgy, but knowing that, but our, but our descendants will also engage in this of activity to, um, um, you know, to basically renew this blood off. Did you ever watch, um, I'd write shot? Yeah. It's been a while. Yeah. Yeah. What would they organize these parties? Right. To get blackmail on people and to build the lines of people. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I do not think it's blackmail. I think it is social bonding. Yeah. I think it's just the lead, um, having a frat party, right? Right. Like, like, like, like, like that's what I think absolutely not anyone else. It's a, there's a big frat party. Yeah. It certainly seems like something really weird was going on. And, um, you know, I'm always like racking my brain over why the government lets out things that it does. You know, not only this interview you just showed this general explaining the seven countries it wants to invade in five years, uh, to a group of people who would be very against that. I want to expose something like that. But also, you know, the government releasing these Epstein files with all this crazy shit in it and doing absolutely nothing about it and giving no, giving no analysis of what it is and sort of just leaving it to the internet to battle out, have a battle of ideas. So there's one connection that people, people don't, don't really talk about it. Okay. And it's a connection between Robert Maxwell and Javi Epstein. Okay. So Robert Maxwell was a very known, yeah, uh, to a agent he was working for MI6, the KGB and Mossad on this pretty well documented. Yeah. Okay. And he was basically Epstein before Epstein, uh, because he was trying to create as much influence as possible for his publishing company. Yeah. So he was publishing textbooks, um, as well as academic journals, right? Because remember Epstein invited the scientists to his island like Stephen Pinker, Marlinski, no, I'm sorry. Um, and also Epstein was don't, don't, don't know a lot of money to sign with research and to universities as well. Yeah. Um, so the connection is that after Robert Maxwell died, Glenn Maxwell, the daughter, the favorite daughter of Robert Maxwell, she starts to date Javi Epstein, right? Also there's about $600 million in a pension fund associated with one of Robert Maxwell's companies that goes missing. Yeah. And people speculate that that money went to finance and start, yeah, um, Epstein's influence career. Right. Okay. So another way of saying this is, um, Epstein is a new Robert Maxwell. And he is this transnational agent of Zionist influence. Yeah, that tracks. Yeah. There was that famous, you know, that very well documented case of the Butler or housekeeper at his house in Manhattan, um, where he was interviewed, I think, by Terre Palmieri during her podcast on the Epstein stuff. And he said like in the 80s, Epstein was always very rich, millions of dollars. Yeah. And then in like the early 90s, he just became, he went from millions to billions. Yeah. Something crazy happened. And that tracks right when Robert Maxwell, that's right. The moment that Robert Maxwell died, you know, 1991, Glenn Maxwell starts to date. Javi Epstein and Javi Epstein starts to come up nowhere to, um, yeah, you want to other crazy things to me is how Epstein was super into. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. 1991 is also the year that Leslie Wexner signs over power attorney to Jeff Epstein the same year. The same year. Yeah. You want to go with this? No, I believe you. I've heard this before. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The Leslie Wexner connection is very weird. And it's also like the interviews to like the depth, the, the, um, the depositions that were done. Oh, yeah. interviewed Wexner. Yeah. And they also interviewed Hillary Clinton and Bill Clinton, right? About the Epstein stuff. And neither of the interviewers asked them about the Rothschilds. Yeah. But they volunteered the Rothschilds during the questioning. That's weird. But, but but also like remember doing the deposition when these comments went flew into Leslie, West Virginia mentioned. Yes. Let's watch on how loyal beside him. And the lawyer whispered like loudly into West, West, West, West, West, you know what I'm saying? It's like, if you answer this, I will kill, I will kill you. Mm hmm. It's like, wait a minute here. Like, who's working for who, man? Right. There's just too much weirdness around it. Yeah. And it's like, like I was getting at earlier. It's, it's almost like it's deliberately, they're deliberately letting out putting on this performative show with the media and, and dripping out all of this crazy with no conclusion, like almost provoking the public to come up with all these insane theories and argue about it online. Yeah. It's called comic responsibility. Have you heard the term? What? What? What was also the comic responsibility? The comic responsibility. I have not heard that now. Okay. Uh, maybe Steve, you can Google the term, comic responsibility. Okay. So this is a theory. Okay. And the idea is the elite karmic responsibility, the spiritual principle that you are accountable for your own thoughts, intentions and actions that the energy you bring into the end for the energy you bring into the world. Okay. Okay. So the idea is the elite are superstitious. That's why they do this stuff. Yeah. Right. And so, um, they believe in karma. And the way to reduce your comic responsibility is by telling the truth to everyone. Right. Because like, let's just pretend we're all dead because they blew up the world with nuclear weapons. We're on heaven. And God's like, hey, man, why are you all here? And we're like, well, we don't know. Right. Then God will put all the other response, response on the elite for causing nuclear war. But they lead told us, but we just don't connect the dots. Then it's our response, but right now, right? They look like what we told you, man. Like look at the evidence before you like, look at the videos, man. Yeah. Right. Like how much evidence do you guys need to connect the dots? Right. And what did you make in the Epstein files of that? The fact that all of the stuff was redacted between 1999 and 2002, 911 and that it was like that. If you look at it, there's a great chart. I think that Ian Carroll, least on X, where it shows all the emails and the dates of the emails. And there's just a blank slate between like a year and a half when 911 happened. Yeah. Yeah. So, um, how about lunik and um, do you have Epstein word neighbors? I mean, it hadn't, right? Yep. And I think Jeffy Epstein lived in number 11 and then 9. Like, like that's kind of weird. That's insane. Yeah. Like all these coincidences, right? And Howard, Luke, um, didn't report to work that day. Yeah. I dropped his kid off a school that day. Yeah. And first time ever. Yeah. And kind of Fitzgerald suffered the most casualties that they like, like, like it was that floor. His brother died. Yeah, his brother died. Um, there was 17 Dingle work either. Like the only day he misworked in its entire life. Um, yeah, there were a lot of weird things. Yeah. Yeah. Again, just leaving us to speculate about the craziest shit, you know, it's almost like if I'm the government, what's going to happen if I leave out all the emails from between those years? We know people on the line are going to come up with all kinds of crazy theories. Yeah. And maybe this is just some sort of, you know, flood the zone tactic just to divert attention away from what this hand is doing over here. Oh, let's, by the way, let's drop all this UFO stuff. Yeah. Which, you know, it's just, it's just too much. It becomes overwhelming for people to track. But I also think that if they want to make it obvious to people, because if you just look at the JFK assassination, I love it, the Shirley Kirk, it's also obvious. Yeah. You just look at it in open mind. But so many of us are, you know, caught in dissonance. We actually refuse to believe there are people like this in the world doing this sort of thing. Yeah. So we just block it out. Yeah. It is interesting. Like why yeah, there's, it's almost like a, like a group thing, right? Where it's like you're in, you're in this one group who automatically assumes that conspiracies are for dumb people. Yeah. And this level of, of secret societies or intelligence people, spooky people that do illegal things for the US government. That's not real. It's just crazy people making, connecting dots. And then you have like this other group of people who think everything is a conspiracy and every dot connects to everything. Everything is, you know, everything is the Jews or whatever. And it's like the truth is actually very much in the middle of all of this stuff. But it doesn't matter because you've created this diversion because you've created these two groups, isolated groups that are constantly fighting against each other and just creating all this noise and the signal gets lost in all the noise. Exactly. And that's my frustration with all of it. And I don't know. I don't know what the answer is. I'm very concerned about the future in of freedom of speech online with, especially like YouTube and podcast. Like the fact that you can come on this podcast right now and say all of this shit is kind of bonkers. Yeah. Considering where we were. I don't know if you didn't proceed in 2020, but here internet was extremely exactly. Yeah. Because of COVID. And you know, it doesn't matter. If you, if you gave it talked about any sort of medical stories or advice or whatever that was, that deviated from the government what the government was saying, you would most likely get your accounts taken away. People would lose their livelihoods and think that it was terrifying. Yeah. And it seems like that pendulum has swung all the way to the other side right now. It's almost like the wild wild west. You can get away with anything right now. Um, you know, YouTube has these new rules, right? Starting next week, the, uh, they will, um, count any click as a view. Yes. Like you know what this right? Yeah, that's how it used to be where if you click on a video, click play that count as a view, then it changed to where like they had to watch maybe like the first 30 seconds of it. And that account is a view. Yeah. Now they're doing it going back to where every click counts as a view. Well, I mean, the difference is now you have bots in AI. Right. Yeah. So like now, if you do this, like these bot accounts could just dominate YouTube, they would have much more influence over a public opinion because like before, how can you determine whether a video was worth watching or not? Just just the view counts, right? Yes. But Google is a new tube are very good at tracking that kind of stuff. But you, if you, if you flood fake bot accounts to a YouTube video, YouTube can figure that out very quickly. Okay. And they automatically will take you out of the algorithm. Okay. Okay. Well, I just think like now there's just going to inflate the statistics. So now it's going to be very hard for people to filter what's, yeah, but here's the thing though, like YouTube didn't like, they can, here's the crazy thing about companies like YouTube is they can change stuff behind the scenes and they don't have to announce it publicly. Yeah. That's right. They can make little changes. Yeah. And like they tell you generally how the algorithm works. Like people have to watch it for this long. It'll show up as long as they're subscribed or whatever. Yeah. But they have the ability to turn you up or turn you down. That's right. Without ever telling you, that's right. This happens to people all the time. Yeah. So, you know, why would they make this a public statement? Maybe they, maybe they explained it in their in their press release about this. But yeah, it's very, it's very strange because they, they can manipulate the amount of reach anybody gets and they never have to let you know. That's right. You know, it's a, and like I was saying, I'm very concerned about how this pendulum isn't going to swing back to something that we're not prepared for. You know, is this, is this some sort of like, is this some sort of like test to see how people act during these years, during all this stuff to see what people are saying with the crazy emergence of AI being implemented into all these platforms and being able to track what did Jang say? Yeah. I think so throughout the last five years, I think so. Now that AI is taking over, we're going to be able to figure out put people in boxes and control things even more. But right now, we want to make it the wild wild west to see what who people really are. Yeah. And this is a very, you know, this is a pattern that repeats itself throughout history. So during 1950s, in 1957, Chimeo also don't like, lots of me called like, let the 100, let 100 flowers bloom campaign. And basically he was running courage people to speak up against the government against society. Yes. And then after a few months, these people were tracked down and they were arrested and labeled as anti government, revolutionary, right? Right. Right. Right. So it's very, I think it's very possible that this will happen soon because nowadays with the algorithm, it's very easy to track people and late to categorize people. That's what Palantare does, right? So I think it's very possible. I think they're letting us speak because they want to know how much traction these views get and who is actually commenting, liking this video. Right. Right. And one of the wild and one of the one platform that took all the breaks off was X. X is like, yeah, you can completely wild wild west right now on X. Anyone can get away with anything. And Elon's controlling with Grog people are, you know, the accounts that I'm following, like the shit that I see. And the crazy, like, powerful people that there's the accounts that like showed these quotes like that this guy, this leader of this country said this horrific thing, Grog, can you confirm it? And Grog's like, yeah, he said this, like, you know, it's just insane to me with with Elon and the power that he has and that he's not spoken out at all about any of this stuff that Trump's come back on with the war. You didn't say anything about the Gaza stuff. Well, he did. And then he had to go visit the the wall, right? And off switch. Right. Yeah, he did do that. Yeah. But it's like, he just constantly talks about like the border immigration and all this stuff. Ice, but he won't say anything. He won't even touch this topic, which is very odd to me. Yeah. Anything else we missed that we should cover? We cover a lot, man. We did cover a lot. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. We're like four hours in right now. Okay. Right. You getting tired? Yeah. Yeah. It's, yeah. It's, it's probably my longest podcast so far. while I guess one. Yeah. Yeah. But we covered a lot. That how about Louderidge material was pretty tiring actually just thinking like these people are in charge and they, you know, yeah, it really blows my mind how it all comes back how how the way you described how the the hobbod thing connected to all the wars. Yeah. And it all kind of is coming back to that whole end times eschatology. Yeah. It's pretty scary. It is perfect. So so how do you think this plays out in like the short term? Like next five years, what do you predict happens? What do you think happens with like the US economy, the global economy? Yeah. I think we're in a rough, we're in for a rough 10 years. I think the global economy collapses. I think the US economy collapses. I think the midterms will not turn out the way people expect. There are a lot of Democrats who think the midterms will mark a turning point and maybe, you know, when the Democrats come in a power in the house, they will start to limit, um, chose war powers and they will impeach him. I don't think that seems like they want the war just as much as he does. Exactly. Because they're not really doing anything to stop him, right? Um, and so the theory is they want this war, but they don't want to be on the public record supporting this war because that's what happened to 2003, right? And a lot of punish for supporting the war. Right. 2003. So they don't want to vote. You know, they want, they don't do that. They do not want to force a vote and have a public record saying who support this war and who was against this war. And so they're probably happy to advocate the responsibility and this let Trump continue this war. Yeah. Because I didn't think about Louvich is able to control all levels of Washington D.C. Right. Yeah. The, the, the floor, I don't know if you saw, but the, there was these elections in Florida last night. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And Dan Bilzerian was actually running and he was, who was he tied with? Was it Randy fine? Well, he was running against me. Yeah. Running against Randy fine. And it looks like they were close to tie to being tied in like last minute. Randy fine got like all of these extra votes. Yeah. From somewhere. And people are speculating that they was stolen or something. Um, yeah. Yeah. I mean, it tracks. It's crazy. Just how much influence Israeli influences in the United States, you know, especially with decantis and, you know, all the crazy laws that they've been implementing. I was thinking Trump will run in 2028 and they'll be a lot cheating in 2028. So I think they're just going to test out a lot of systems during the midterms. So I think if Trump gets a third term, uh, this will be a crossing the cross on the Rubicon. I mean, this will be a breaking point in the United States. And really, yeah. Because, um, if Trump worked in a third term, I think you would have a lot of violence in the United States. I think you would have like these Democratic part, uh, Democratic cities in New York City, uh, California, uh, Boston Chicago, who might be an open rebellion against Trump. Well, I don't think it would just be Democrats. I think everyone will rebel against him. I don't think most of the Republican bases is stoked on Trump either. Yeah. He's lost some of his biggest supporters. Yeah. I mean, like, I was talking to some friends and they were like the apathy in America right now, it is overwhelming. You know, there's just war going on in the Middle East that no one voted for and which could potentially collapse the global and the American economies. And no one seems to like know what's going on. Yeah. People just locked it all out. Yeah. So I'm not sure, um, it's like the hyper normalization. Yeah. Yeah. People are just stuck in their little bubbles and they put their head in the sand. Yeah. And I'm not sure how, how people react to a Trump third term. I think most people would be like, we don't care. Uh, and, uh, but I think that the Democratic Party, um, might be an open rebellion against Trump. And this could lead to a lot of street violence. Very similar to like George Floyd protests. Mm hmm. Yeah. I hope you're wrong. I hope I'm wrong too. I hope I'm a, I'm completely wrong about everything we said today. I hope that everything is a can be coincidence and I'm just making this crap up. And I just have like, I'm just like an, I'm active imagination. Yes. Yeah. Because, you know, both both of you and I have children. Yes. And we do not want our children grow up in this world. No. Yeah. No, not at all. Yeah. But at the same time, I also think it's important that people will be open to the possibility that this is true because, yeah. You know, we, we owe it to ourselves to keep ourselves informed. Yeah. It's really important to notice these patterns and you do an incredible job of exposing that stuff and making it easy to understand it. I just so, uh, thank you for all your work. Thank you for your time. So much for giving the time to like make my case. Of course, man. Yeah. Of course, my pleasure is great to have you here. Yeah. And, and, and I think I did a great job of undermining the United States. You did. By splitting the truth. And, and, and you know, my collaborator. So, yes. Exactly. So if the panel is not, I'm not recrutable. I'm not required. All right. Just, just tell, tell G that, uh, And you're not my collaborator. So yes, exactly. So if the fan is coming up, I'm not recruitable. I'm not required. All right. Just tell G that I better come up with a good extraction plan and better save me from the CIA when they come knocking. OK. All right, man. Thanks again, man. This was super fun. We'll just help people to find your YouTube channel. We'll link it below. Is there anything else that we should tell people? Yeah, my sub stack. Sub stack. Yeah. OK. And I'll save my sub stack. Perfect. Perfect. Thank you, all below. All right, man. Thanks again. Thanks, Dave. Good night, folks.