Hello world, Randall Carlson is a master builder architectural designer teacher geometrician geomithologist Geological Explorer and renegade scholar He has over four decades of study Research and exploration into the interface between ancient mysteries and modern science Randall investigates and documents the catastrophic history of the world and the evidence for advanced knowledge in earlier cultures On this episode we get into the younger dryest period climate change asteroid impacts the city of Atlantis UFOs and all sorts of terrifying shit prepare yourselves folks This episode will make you question everything. Please welcome the great Randall Carlson Mr. Carlson, thank you so much for for blessing us with your presence today Thanks for having me Danny. It's a pleasure. It's great great little vacation Working vacation. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Too far. Yeah. We're having fun. It was an eight hour drive Not too bad 500 miles could be worse. Better than an eight hour flight. Yes Yes, because I could stop and get out whenever I wanted and get right Freshman and I didn't have to wear a mask the whole time and yeah, so it's not quite like Atlanta, Georgia down here in Florida No, Florida Florida. We're doing actually we're winning as far as the cases I know that's I'm always come on Florida. Yeah. Yeah, we're not too far behind. Yeah. No. No. You guys aren't too far behind No, we're all doing a lot better than California. Oh my god. Yes, and you know where where I live is Really pretty intense blue zone Everybody wears their do-to-fully wears their masks, but as soon as you get out into the outer area is the rural areas No, everybody's been going on just like normal pretty much Right, I spent a lot of time up in Dave County, which is the northwest corner and exploring up there and I don't have ever seen anybody wearing masks up there for the whole this entire thing And last time I was up there, which was in in October I didn't see any corpses piled up on the streets anywhere. It's so strange like I was Tony I was just in Nashville North Carolina, and it's the first time I've seen I've been to a public place where everybody was wearing masks Well, it was strange to see you just it was it was kind of shocking. Yeah. Well, that's Indicated where I live is pretty much the same way right and if you go around without your mask on people look at you like here The devil incarnate will you just you actually just had COVID right? Yeah, we were out in Washington state Doing a tour of the great flood lands up there, and we may talk about that a little bit here in our interview tonight It's possible. Yeah, and um, yeah, we had a there was 30 attendees and Six or seven or eight facilitators about say 36 to 38 people altogether and on day two one of the attendees Started feeling symptoms and he went into town got tested came back said I tested positive So he and his wife left and the rest of us went on with our tour for the next was a five-day tour and the end of five days, which is about the incubation period several people started feeling Some symptoms and then we all Parted company when our separate ways and then we're doing a kind of a telegram chat amongst all of the Tour attendees So it turned out about I think somewhere around 22 people came down with it, but nobody was too seriously affected But here's what's interesting to follow that brought it into the group patient zero had been double-vaxed The other thing was is that Over half the people that came down with it had also been double-vaxed So that my own personal experience along with a number of others Experiences and experiences of people that I know firsthand suggests that maybe those vaccines aren't working like they were Touted to be Yeah, it's uh, there's tons of stories like that. Oh, yeah people you know, it's it's Known that if you're vaccinated you can spread it almost just as easily as if you're not vaccinated Yeah, but they say you know, there's been claims that I know I don't know I don't have any personal experience with it. I don't think I've had COVID, but um You know they say that it's opposed to Relieve some of the symptoms when you are vaccinated, but obviously you can speak to that better than I could because you have firsthand experience well And I don't have first name experience with being Back well with getting COVID, but yeah, so I mean it was I'd My temperature topped out for two days at a hundred degrees Which isn't you know, I was uncomfortable. I was a key for four days five days Didn't sleep well But then I got the eye medicine that you're not supposed to horse dewormer the horse dewormer and you know what? As soon as I started taking that I turned the corner My wife my son had it. There was no big deal with them My brother started coming down with it about four or five days after I got home from the The tour by that time I'd all I said I didn't get the the the horse dewormer until like four days after I got it back home So I'd had four maybe five days of incubation so my brother Started feeling the symptoms, but we already had this stuff and he started doing this suggested dose and literally the next day The next day he was feeling pretty normal and by two days later he felt perfectly fine and it completely Sideline the whole phenomenon of having the COVID How much how much what was the dose of I've ever met in the 12 milligrams? Yeah, so did you do anything else like monoclonal antibodies or no didn't do that, but you know did the megabitamins? I did the quercetin and vitamin D vitamin C zinc all of the stuff that also Mitigates the severity of the symptoms You know so when somebody says to me well the the vaccines presumably Mitigate the symptoms. Maybe they do. Maybe they don't. I don't know. We've been told a lot of things But you know there are studies that show that the quercetin the zinc You know Make a doses of C and D things like that also do that right so But yeah, you know since I got over it Feeling great feeling really good. Awesome and I you know typically every year I right around Thanksgiving I Get something it makes puts me down for three four five days just Not like a mild flu or something, you know, I feel achy I get head achy You know typical stuff maybe some tender glands and I started getting that a couple of weeks ago and I Thought oh gosh, I'm getting this again by yearly Bout with stuff and then it just didn't happen For two days I felt like I was getting it three days and then I didn't and I'm Wondering I'm that if I can attribute that to my immune system Being Overactive now right you know in response to the to the code right you probably have you have obviously had the antibodies now That you had covid yeah, it has a positive right so now that's you know Where's the term for that? You know when you get covid that's that's that's better than actually having the vaccine is You know have the natural immunity natural immune that's that's typical when you have Anything like that right you get a natural and now the corona virus is overall which are cold viruses still There's no cure you just have to get it and get through it The scary thing about it is you can have a fucking conversation about it on the internet. That's the problem right there You can't have a have a conversation and it's it's like you've got stories. I mean I've known now five people Four personally one that my wife worked with so I don't know him but she knew him worked with him for many years now that have had severe Severe reactions to the vaccines. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I got we have a client I was Interviewing her in August about a potential project. We might be doing next year and Her and her we'd done a previous project for her 14 years ago I know that because she was pregnant at the time and we were expanding Giving a more room and creating a nursery and things like that so now I'm back there her 14 year old son then came out to say hello, you know and so she told me that another zogist and She had been Baxed in April. She said she still could not sleep on her right side because the pain in her arm and her 14 year old son who loved sports was having a trouble you know with throwing balls and stuff because Something you know he was having trouble with his right arm. So I figured April to August her right arm is still hurting So, you know, that was one another one A good friend of my wife took the first dose and got so sick. She thought she was not even to survive and Another one the guy got sick with it. This is one of my works with my wife and He was away from work for a firm full month When he came back, you know, she talked to him and he'd been in the hospital for a week With the COVID But he'd been double-vaxed So There you go Yeah, it's such a polarizing topic to talk about there's so there's so there's so there's so much nuance to it You know, I mean like depending on who you are how old you are what you're you know preexisting medical conditions are how you how different It's affected you like I don't personally know anybody who's had a battery action to it But I've talked to a lot of people who do know people who have had bad reactions to it And I also know a lot of people who have had including my wife who's in her early 20s who's had Really bad reaction to COVID when she got it. She wasn't vaccinated So it's just you know the problem is you know trying to suppress certain sides of the narrative just it gets It gets crazy especially when you're on a website like we're on YouTube And talk about this YouTube will do everything they can to de incentivize you to talk about anything that goes against vaccines Right, it's almost like humanity needs something to distract us something like a big asteroid Big asteroids brings us to a Another topic. Yes that I've been wanting to talk to you about So for people who if there are anybody if there is anyone out there who doesn't know who Randall Carlson is Why don't you let give those people a brief introduction to your background in your studies. Oh well geez You know, I'm As far as relative relevant to what we're going to be talking about here. I've been very interested in Oh science since I was literally since I was a kid And I majored in geology in college. I didn't graduate because With a degree because at the time if you had a geology degree You could get a job in industry typically in the You know in the energy sector and the mineral sector or you could get a job with the government And I wasn't really interested in it. I was interested in learning about the earth everything I could learn about the earth and how it functioned and what its history was as a as a planet and so I You know took a few years I've also studied a lot of astronomy I studied Mathematics in order to be able to handle some of the equations and things studied history Did not I would just drop out so okay, and I but I've run my own business for Going on 40 years now as a contractor which gives me the flexibility So I do all kinds of things but primarily our our business that I work On partners with my younger brother. We're third generation Basically house builders. I came up by the time we're you know 18 years old. I pretty much New the ins and outs of building a house But you know I've been doing I got a you know secondary income now coming from the podcast that I do Online sales and and doing tours. We're doing a lot of tours to take people out um Basically what I what the objective of the tour is The tours that we do is I'm trying to teach people the To read the language of the earth because the premise that I'm working from is basically this is that inscribed into the surface of the earth into the crust of the earth is this epic story this epic tale and It's on such a large and grand scale that we don't really see it. It's invisible because it's too big but and would have been impossible um A generation or two ago But I employ you know we what we do is leading up to a tour We do a series of briefings. We'll do we'll do zoom meetings three four zoom meetings And I will basically instruct people and teaching them You know exactly what what is a coolie and why is it different than a canyon? What is a drumland? What are you know what is Maureen? What is glacial till? um Teaching them a few things about paleo hydrology and what happens when great volumes of water are moving across the landscape How do they shape the landscape? What are the features that they produce? What is a point bar? What is a cut bank? You know what is a boulder bar? What is a you know? I teach them a little bit about stratigraphy and a little bit about sedimentology then when we're out in the field uh They've already got some conceptual awareness. They've got some vocabulary. We can visit sites and then um I'll explain and what we do is we'll travel around when we did that the tour that you know that uh That we got the COVID on that we were just talking about you know that was a week Five-day a five-day tour up in the eastern the floodlands of eastern Washington and we can look at some of that here Tonight and that was the setting for some of the greatest floods ever documented to have occurred in the history of this planet And we're talking about water flows that would be measured in hundreds of millions of cubic feet per second Which is kind of really almost inconceivable One of the standards I used to help people wrap their heads around what we're talking about is that We look at some of the largest historical floods say in in America Mississippi River flooded 1923 and again 1993 And the 1993 flood of the Mississippi River is considered to be one of the most economically Expensive disasters in American history the total volume of or total worth value of The damage done by that flood Typically, I think the Mississippi River runs at about 150 000 cubic feet per second something like that maybe 200 000 But during these two floods it topped out over a million cubic feet per second All right, okay now Some of the floods and some of the things that we've been looking at in Eastern Washington where I took people I took them to places where the water flow going through there was been Seven to eight hundred million cubic feet per second How do you even understand or visualize you can't? You can't wrap your mind around it, but we can talk about it all day We can look at photographs. We can look at video and now I'm collecting a lot of drone footage Which is which is a new perspective on this stuff When I started exploring these these landscapes in the 90s You know, there was no drones, you know, mostly we were just using You know still images and I would hire pilots to take me up Um, you know, so I got a lot of aerial footage that I took back in the 90s early 2000s and things of some of these because you can't From the ground you just you can't get the perspective So now what I do is you know, we have we use of course there's all the you know There's you know NASA photography. There's aerial photography now. There's LIDAR Which has opened up a whole new vist of understanding the landscape under our feet um And you know, there's now always somebody who comes under tour somebody who's you know an experience Drone pilot and so we get we're getting accumulating a whole lot of drone footage and this is starting to go up on my website now That it's devoted to this um But see once you begin to understand these floods now the eastern northwestern floods of Washington are Some of the most spectacular and they're spectacular because They're their journey from their source to their ultimate Where they're ultimately heading which is the Pacific Ocean is a relatively short span The gradient is steeper now you had gigantic floods coming down to Mississippi River and these floods and I'm talking about Are all coming from melting glacier ice? Because if we go back 13,000 years ago to say 25,000 years ago More than half of the North American continent was buried under a mantle of ice bigger than the one that is now covering the south pole Right now how do you again? How do you? How do you? How do you get that? I wear you know well we don't have an explanation. There's no explanation how you can get from the present day North American environment to an environment that's closest modern analog is the south pole Of the world of the planet, right, but it was um And what we can look at some slides here in a minute that kind of conveys graphically What the earth would have looked like say 15 to 20,000 years ago one of the most fascinating things to me is how Through studies that you've done as well as people like Graham Hancock is that these ancient biblical myths and stories are now Scientific studies. They're becoming real science. We've got a new branch of geology called geometology Which basically looks at archaic accounts traditional accounts have come down to us by whatever Then you know biblical like you just mentioned is of course a very rich source, but all kinds of myths have Hundreds right oh yeah hundreds if we were talking about floods We've got at least several hundred that have accounts. John or Sir James Fraser was one of the first I think in his His work early 20th century where he just collected a lot of the flood myths from around the world and it's it's amazing the parallels usually you know There've been there've been ways that that academics have been able to sidestep the implications of that By concocting a lot of very weird Usually it comes down to oh well. It was a it was a local or regional flood It was that was bad, but it was nothing you know on a scale that would have been planetary And then through the telling and retelling through generations it just got blown out of proportion and exaggerated That would be the primary explanation The people though that are concocting those kinds of explanations Don't know anything about geology. They don't know anything about glaciology or paleo hydrology or the kinds of subjects that would Allow you to go into the field and actually observe firsthand These landscapes that are by the byproduct. That's the thing about this right is that there's so many different there's so many different studies like geology and Glaceology and so many things is it's almost impossible for one person to have a comprehensive understanding of all those subjects Yes, that's very rare. Yeah. It's a unicorn. Well, it's it's definitely You know an interdisciplinary study and I you know, I basically call it catastrophism catastrophist studies and to really to be You know very knowledgeable in catastrophist studies. You have to know geology. You have to know some astronomy You have to know some paleontology. You have to know some sedimentology some stratigraphy All of that you have to know about impact geology. There's a lot of things And so you know people have different things that they're obsessed with and like you know That's my thing I when I use all my spare time to study study. I research study and then I'll look at studies that come out or you know whether they're they're brand new or even older studies and Then I use those as guidelines and I design field trips and things around that to to go and end up like when I first started in Visiting these flood lands of the Pacific Northwest, which is going to be mostly Washington, but also Oregon Idaho and Montana I was using early papers over written in 1920s and 1930s by one of the pioneers of Flood geology, which was Jay Harlan-Breath so I had Reprints of all of his papers and I use those as kind of guidelines and followed in his footsteps as much as possible um And he was of course very much ostracized by the geological community back in the 20s and 30s who were strictly Grounded in very gradualist models uniformitarian and uniformitarianism was what the the dominant Model of geological change was called and it was the idea that And it's a powerful idea The present is the key to the past and you basically in order to try to understand what happened in the past You look at processes that are happening today that we can witness on a day-to-day or a year-to-year basis and then we extrapolate backwards So the problem with that though is that it became entrenched dogma and what that meant was that only Processes that we're seeing today in terms of scales and rates of change and magnitudes and things Anything beyond that was considered to be pseudoscience or science fiction-y and so you couldn't talk about you know giant floods, but You know part of that goes back to the origins of geology when you had You know in the late 16 early 17 through the 1700s the 18th century you had this conflict between science and religion and You know the the the Litter lists say the biblical literalists have a lot of political power before the Scientific enlightenment and so you know what the bishops ruled and what what Rome ruled about You know what was accessible You know then it was you had the break away with the Protestants, but they were pretty much the same way very fundamentalist about taking the Bible literally right and so You know and in that model the earth is only six or seven thousand years old and that was a one of the big conflicts in the early days of geology has it become Obvious to anybody who really started studying the strat of the earth that it could not possibly be only seven thousand years old and You know Grand Canyon is the is the you know ideal exemplification of that idea because you've got you know when you you know Geologists now can look and you can say okay. You've got sandstone sandstones form Obviously from sand but that sand can be either sand on the beach or sand in the desert if it's sand on the beach it's being shaped by Waves and water right if it's in the desert it's being shaped by wind and we can go and we can look at sand in the desert today And sand on the beach today and we can look at the forms that are being that it's being shaped into by the forces at work on it See they're very distinct and different one and you can go and look at sandstone rocks and you'll see the same Types of formations and things and go okay. Well that looks just like what we might see in a modern desert if we took a cross section of a dune And looked at it and there it is okay. So now you got sandstone now you got limestone limestone is going to be formed in a Usually in a shallow marine environment. Okay, you might have a peep that forms shales Okay, so shells come from like muddy material originally you have mudstone that can become Metamorphicized Ultimately into shale and then if that's further metamorphicized it becomes slate Right metamorphic means it's been subject to heat and pressure Well, you can look at all these different kind of rocks and you might have an igneous rock You might have a A granite which is a type of igneous rock that forms below the surface You might have basalt which is an igneous rock that forms outside of the surface now Right go up there in eastern Washington It's called the Columbia basalt plateau and around 17 million years ago. There was a major wound in the surface of the earth. It's right now where Yellowstone Yellowstone hot spot is the the mantle plume that comes up under Yellowstone Cased tremendous outflowing of basaltic lavas that created this Columbia basalt plateau now there There was 10 million years of these This was 17 million years between 17 million and Maybe seven or eight million years ago. Okay. It can't finally pretty much stopped The early flows were the the the most voluminous and then it sort of declined in Involium over over the time But you'll get a layer of basalt and then if there's a stretch of time of a few thousand to tens of thousands of years What happens is soil will form on there? Vegetation will grow You'll have trees and and all of this and then another layer of lava comes in and drowns that Well sandwiched in between those layers of basalt you can find the evidence that there was this hiatus You know you can find the remnants of seeds and and branches and Vegetation and stuff actually sandwiched between so that will tell you that okay, so There was a hiatus and then that say a forest was there was drowned by lava And then that lava cooled New soil formed another forest grew etc And then you can go below it and you find ancient granites Right now you can go and when you begin looking at this stratigraphy you can see okay If you've got let's say you've got a beach Right and now the ocean rises. That's called a transgression the ocean rises And now that drowns the beach And now you've got an ocean a say a marine environment over it So now you see all of the creatures and things that live in that marine environment The little creatures that form their shells out of Calcium carbonate they they die and they drift to the bottom and eventually they form Thick layers of what is my limestone rock and you can tell it's got fossils in it You can tell that it was the calcium carbonate because if you put acid on it it'll bubble right So now you if you have a beach Okay, the ocean rises now you have layers of limestone Right so now if the beach recedes as it's receding Maybe the the swamps or the forest there will follow it And then eventually you'll get a layer of shale And then you see that that that succession repeats itself Sandstone limestone shale and then there might be more sandstones that you can tell that it was a beach So it goes through this whole cycle and then it does that over and over again You see and you go okay, this could not possibly you couldn't get a layer of limestone 200 feet thick Over a layer of sandstone that's just as thick Right in 7,000 years You just you can't do it. Right. So this was the conflict there that in the early days of geology So coming back to Jay Harlan Breths and his studies on the Great Floodlands of the Pacific Northwest The attitude was was hey, you're trying to bring back take us back to biblical fundamentalism with your flood theories We don't want to go there So it took like 30 years before mainstream geology finally accepted that yeah, Breths's gigantic floods were real And they really did happen and they were on the scale that he was describing now Obviously you can look at this and you're going to see Phenomena that a hydraulic event that includes western Montana northern Idaho Half of Washington state and northern Oregon, right, but that's not the whole planet So you know it's one thing to say you've got a flood that's 300 400 500 million cubic feet per second Right, which is beyond anything. Well, here's here's another another way to think about it if you took every single River on earth think about all the continents from North America South America We'd be talking about the Mississippi the Columbia the Missouri You know the Ohio all of those up in Canada. Do you'd have the Yukon and the Mackenzie in South America's South America we'd be talking about the Mississippi, the Columbia, the Missouri, you know, the Ohio, all of those up in Canada. You'd have the Yukon and the Mackenzie in South America. You'd have the Oranaco and the Amazon in Europe. You could have, you know, the Poe and the Tims and you go all of those rivers. You go to the Yellow River in China and all of the rivers there, all the rivers, the Nile River, the Congo River. Add all these rivers you're still only looking at about one twentieth, the volume of one of these flows that swept over Eastern Washington. So how do you even explain something like that? How do you see, and this is where, instantaneously, like out of nowhere? Well, it's out of somewhere. There is an explanation. There's a naturalistic explanation. How you do that. Now, here's the other thing that you got to understand is that while that is happening there, there are other gigantic floods happening in other places around the planet. Something really extraordinary happened around 12,800 to 13,000 years ago at the end of the last ice age. Now, I say ice age because the volume of ice on earth was more than double what it is now, but half of that ice is gone. And in terms of geological time scales, it was like that. It was something melted all that ice in a very short period of time. You got it. What could it have been? And to me, it only comes down to two things, possibly asteroid impacts or impacts on say, bowlight impacts because the term bowlight can be anything that it can be a rock, it can be a piece of a comet. It's something that comes out of the sky and say encounters, it hits the earth, right? Or the sun or the sun or a combination of the two. I don't know what else there would be. I've looked at things on a galactic level. I don't think that it would be on that level. I think the most likely explanation is if you had an impact. Right. However, there are new studies out that have been coming out in the last 20 years ever since we've started with, once we've deployed solar observing satellites, we've seen something very interesting that there seems to be a connection between hyperactivity on the sun and the in fall of what's called the Kreutz sun grazers, which is a family of comets that nobody knew about until we deployed solar observing satellites or at least I think maybe they were suspected, but we hadn't really observed them. Now we're seeing that constantly there's commentary masses falling into the sun. And they're generally small. However, as we may talk about here when we get into the younger driest in a moment, there's evidence now that somewhere between 20 and say 25, 26,000 years ago, a really big comet came into the inner solar system, kind of got caught up in this ping pong game between the sun and Jupiter. Right. And that comic began to undergo a hierarchical fragmentation littering the inner solar system with the byproducts of its destruction and that the earth may have encountered that material on more than one occasion. A lot of it could have been swept into the sun and what those Kreutz sun grazers are telling us is that these hypervelocity impacts into the sun may be tri-b triggering solar storms, coronal mass ejections and things. So giant fireball shot at the earth. Maybe something like that. And interestingly, so what it might mean then is that you almost have this perfect storm if you have the injection into the inner solar system of a very large mass of cosmic debris if you want to call it that. Some of it's going to hit the earth. Some of it's going to hit the moon. Some of it's going to probably hit Mars. Most of it will end up probably being swept up by the sun, which is the biggest mass. Typically, when a comet, let's say, comes in and it's making this this jovian circuit, Jupiterian circuit. It's going out to the orbit of Jupiter. It comes back in and circles around the sun. When it comes in and makes that close passage to the sun, that's called the perihelion. Next, next to the sun, right? Typically, because the sun is such a strong gravitational force, often what happens is commentary masses disintegrate when they're perihelion point or short shortly thereafter. So we saw something very similar we were talking about at the other night over dinner, the Sumaker Levy 9 event of 1994. You had a single commentary mass that passed by Jupiter in March of 1993. It passed so close to Jupiter that Jupiter's ultra strong gravity force of its gravity field literally ripped one cometary nucleus into 21, if you want to call them sub-nuclei. And then those 21 objects then formed a what was called the string of pearls as they moved away from Jupiter, they began to spread out in a long line. They made a passage by the sun and as they circled back out towards Jupiter, they arrived at Jupiter's orbit. The same week that Jupiter was at that same position. So you had 21 impacts over one week of July 1994, 21 impacts into Jupiter. And any one of those impacts, I think that from what I recall those objects, individual objects were some of more a kilometer and more in diameter. Now if we had something a kilometer and diameter or more strike the earth, it would pretty much throw our whole civilization into a serious tail spin. It would have economic consequences that would take probably decades to work out. In the immediate area of the impact, nothing would remain. It would be completely annihilated. And then the secondary consequences of an impact like that would have major repercussions on the rest of the world, in terms of climate and things. Would it be on the scale of like roughly dozens of hydrogen bombs? Oh yes. Oh yes. In fact, we can actually look at some of that for comparison. There was an object, one of the main things that I really can end up studying and talking about is that famous 1908 event over Siberia, the Tunguska. And that was an object, probably a byproduct of this very same comet that we're talking about here that has produced what is now known as the Taurid Meteor Streams, which is a family of these meteor streams that is still out there. There's several known comets within that stream, or several known asteroids. Earth crosses that stream twice each year. It's called the Taurid stream, Taurid Meteor Stream. Earth crosses in Lake June, early July, and in late October, early November. And interestingly, that particular stream, it peaks right around Halloween. So it's been called the Halloween meteors. Anyways, so the object that didn't actually strike the ground, most people would think, you know, an object coming in is going to strike the ground. And then it not all depends on the density of the object, really. If it's a, and think about the family of extraterrestrial creatures that might, the Earth might encounter. You have a scale, density scale. It starts at about the density of water, which is one grand per cubic centimeter. And that would be primarily a commetary mass that's mostly ice. On the other end, you'd have an iron asteroid. And an iron asteroid would have roughly the density of a piece of cast iron. So imagine that you've got, in one hand, a chunk of cast iron, and the other hand, you've got a snowball. That's the two endpoints of the continuum. And then the whole range of things in between. So you've got stony asteroids that are about right in the middle. Right. Now, if you think about it, even the layperson, it makes sense that say an object as hard as a piece of cast iron is going to be able to penetrate through the atmosphere a lot more effectively and actually strike the ground than something that has the composition of a snowball or the density of a snowball. Now, the Tungusgobjek was on the lower end of the spectrum, right? So it was not able to penetrate the full depth of the atmosphere. And it exploded about five miles up. Now, what you have to picture is that that thing I have miles, five miles. So you have to picture as that thing is entering the atmosphere. What it's doing, it's moving so fast that the atmosphere doesn't have time really to move out of the way. And it compresses the atmosphere. And literally, the atmosphere becomes almost like a brick wall at some point. Very much like, you know, the atmosphere is a fluid. Now, you ever done a belly flop? Well, okay, right? Now, if you if you do a belly flop, you know that even though it's water, it can still provide a tremendous amount of forceful resistance. Right? That's what the atmosphere does. Right? So the object comes in early morning, June 30th 1908. Now, interesting, remember, I just said that the peak one of the what is called the summertime tardes, because late June early July. So in terms of the window of when the earth is encountering debris from the tard meteor stream, the Tungusg object was right in perfect timing, right? June 30th came in early in the morning. Now, and it ends in around October around Halloween, you said? No, no, that's it's almost like this. Imagine that you've got a racetrack, it's a cylindrical racetrack, and all of this stuff is moving around the racetrack. And then here comes the earth crosses one side and then it's out, free of it. And then goes through again, goes through again. Got it. Right? So in the summer, earth is crossing the stream when that material is coming from behind the sun. And see, one of the one of the consequences of that is that you don't really see the meteors the tored meteors in the summertime, because you're looking in the direction of the sun, right? Right? If you want to see tored meters, you have to watch in the fall, because that's when they're coming from the direction of space, most generally the direction of the back of it by the sun or their lid by the sun, they're front lit by the sun. You got it, right? You got it. And so you're not looking at the sun, you're looking away from the sun. Right. Right. So that's the Halloween meteors if you want to call them. Okay, that makes sense. Yeah. It does. And I got a graphic when you pull up and look at it here in the minute. Yeah. For for people who are only listening to this podcast, it is definitely one of the ones you want to pull up on YouTube and watch it because Randall's brought a deep library of slides that we're going to be going through to illustrate a lot of the things he's talking about. Yeah, so much of this is, you know, you really don't get it until you've seen the graphic, the images and stuff. And then I think it's so it's so crazy how the well, the tongue, tongue, goose, uh, asteroid, which was in 1908, or eight, was it 1908, 1908 and it exploded five miles in the air. Yes. And it still caused so much devastation to the surface of the earth, about 820 miles of old girls, Taiga forest was decimate completely. He's blown over. These are trees two and three feet thick. I forget what it was at 80 million trees instantly snapped off like their twigs. The force of that, that explosion was about equivalent to a 15 megaton, maybe 20 megaton in that range, hydrogen bomb. Now, in the peak of the cold war, the largest bomb, the largest warhead deployed by the US was roughly 15 megatons. And that was, you know, that was part of the whole mutual assured destruction that, you know, if the Soviet Union launched the first strike in us, we would have enough retaliatory capacity to still completely wipe them out. And so 115 megaton hydrogen bomb is enough to wipe out any metropolitan urban area on the earth. I mean, think about this. Let's see, if I go 15 megatons, that's 15 million tons of TNT. Now, to give you a comparison, that would be the equivalent of 1,500 atomic bombs that destroyed Hiroshima. That's unfathomable. Yeah, that's one hydrogen bomb warhead, right? 15 megatons. Actually, no, it's more not because the bomb that took out Hiroshima is only about 10,000 kilotons. So, you know, it'd be even more than that. But it gives you an idea. I think that the Nagasaki, Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs, they detonated those in the air as well. That's right. Why did they do it in the air? Because the radius of destruction is greater in the atmosphere. Because if it strikes the ground, a lot of that energy is absorbed by the ground. Right? So, if you want to knock over the maximum number of buildings and kill the maximum number of people, you detonate it in the atmosphere. Now, that's exactly what happened with the Tungu Scobjekt. Now, as it turns out, there's no known direct deaths from that because it was so remote. In fact, it was so remote that it took Leon and Koolak. I think 19 years later, he finally was able to get to the site. And, you know, it was very disorienting to him as he ascended this ridge and then looked out for the first time and saw the remnants of this destruction. Now, if you look at any modern urban area, and in fact, I think I have him here a map of say Atlanta. It's got a 285 is the surrounding perimeter freeway. Washington DC has roughly the same size of perimeter freeway. The area within that freeway, which is the entire metropolitan area of Atlanta plus the outlying suburbs is about the roughly the area of devastation of the Tungu Scobjekt blast. So, again, a Tungu, one object. And see, here's the thing. The topic was object. It was about to say, here's the thing. It's about 50 meters in diameter, which means roughly 160 feet. So, that's a baby. That's a cosmic spec that we're talking about there. I mean, the Chelyabinsk had happened in was a 2013, also over little town of Siberia. That was like only a 10th of the size, if even that of the Tungu Scobjekt. It detonated, like, what was it, 15 miles up? But it still caused 1,500 injuries. Nobody was killed, but it caused 1,500 injuries. Some of them serious. And it also damaged 7,000 buildings. And I don't know if you've ever seen some of the video clips of that. But, you know, when the I think I have, yeah, the sound wave, the shock wave when that thing hit is pretty mind. Where did it hit? It's a little town called Chelyabinsk, also in Siberia. So, yeah, so it was not anywhere close to the magnitude of the Tungu Scobjekt. But there's a possibility that it also was part of the same Taur and Meteor Stream. There's a paper that just came out on new studies of the Taur and Meteor Stream that think that it might, they've actually referred to as the smoking gun for the younger dryest event. So, what are the theorized locations for some sort of an impact during the younger dryest? Like, I'm sure, you know, this is the big question. But, well, just like with the Cretaceous tertiary impact that wiped out the dinosaurs 66 million years ago, for 10 years the Cretaceous said, well, we're not buying this scenario because you can't produce a crater. You know, if there was a huge impact 66 million years ago that wiped out all of the dinosaurs on Earth, where's the crater? Right? So, it took 10 years, but then the crater was found and it's buried under like a half a mile of limestone under northern New Catan Peninsula. And subsequent studies have confirmed over and over again. Yes, it's a buried crater, which is called an astro-blim, which literally translates as star wound, a star wound. What was the name of the the rock that hit that killed the dinosaurs? Well, it doesn't really have a name, but the crater is called the Chichilube. Chichilube. Chichilube. And that's the name of a little Mayan village that sits on the northern coast of the Yucatan. Now, here's some of this stuff where it kind of gets bizarre and tastes this back to some of these ideas like geometology and astromithology. Like, there's no way they could have possibly known about it, right? But, and again, I can pull up here and we'll look at the ground penetrating radar surveys of the giant 120, 130 mile wide scar in your surface, astro-blim, star wound, right? Now, typically, that's how big it is. It's insane. Yeah, yeah, I know. Yeah. So, and you know, that was probably not the only impact at that time. Right. Anyways, if you look at the structure of these large impact events, there's several things that characterize them. They have multi-multiple rings because you've all seen, you throw a rock in a pond rings, emanate out. Right. And right where the, where the, if you throw a rock in the pond, it's going to be a splash that comes up, right? And immediately falls back down. Well, in an impact like that, a hyperbolicity impact, it basically liquifies the crust. And it sends multiple rings moving out. But they're rapidly cooling as they move out. And then at some point, they, they cool enough that they crystallize and they sort of get locked into the landscape. So, you can see the multiple rings and then into center, there will be a central uplift that usually forms a peak, right? And that peak is where the ground, this molten ground is rebounding. And then it'll come up. And then it'll literally like freeze, freeze and crystallize and create this upward peak. This is called the central peak. So, the Cretaceous tertiary impact, the Chichalube impact has a central peak. And it's directly in the center and sitting on the ground surface above where that central peak is, is the little town of Chichalube, which is a my intern. Interestingly, in a court, just only be a coincidence, right? The translation of Chichalube literally means the horn of the devil. Oh my God. So, I've always thought that was rather interesting. Chichalube. Chichalube. That's it. Yeah. Chichalube. And that town is right, basically in the center over that crater. Yeah. Well, it's not a crater because it's buried. Right. It's an astroblee. So, you'd have to strip away like half a mile of limestone to get to the thing. So, it's buried. You can't, the only indication that it's there is the ring of cenotes that that sit just inside the rim of the great buried crater. And these are essentially like solution almost like potholes, claps caverns that form in the limestone. And that ring of cenotes forms delineates the rim of the giant underground crater. And which is interesting because these cenotes, many of them are considered sacred to the Mayans for various reasons. You know, the northern new cotan peninsula is composed of porous limestone. And so, there's an overground rivers. All the rivers flow north there and they flow under. They flow under the surface of the ground. But they're linked into this gigantic unfathomably huge labyrinth of these underground caves and tunnels that are the result of water percolating through this fractured limestone created by the impact. We don't have it booted up now, but in the show, you know, when I did research down in the eucatan, I visited cenotes, went diving and some of them had no bottoms. Scared, yeah. I didn't do the perfect, I basically just did the, I didn't do the serious diving like some. I didn't have the equipment. But I was there with people who had been exploring these cenotes for years and had never found bottoms to them because they just, they go in, in there's hundreds of them, probably thousands of them. But the Mayans would build their, their towns and their villages around the cenotes because that was the source of water. And like at Chichen Itte, there's two cenotes there. And one of them is called the well of sacrifice. And it's become, it's become filled with stuff. So it doesn't seem to link directly in. But if you dug all the sediment out, it's accumulated and it may connect, but they held ceremonies there, you know, in pre-Columbian times. And the ceremonies were interesting because they would, they would carve pipes, typically wooden pipes that were hollow from both ends and they would carve them to look like a serpent. And the mouth of the serpent would be open. The pipes would be hollow, right? And then they would take a ball of copal resin and put in the mouth of the serpent, light it on fire. And then the burning copal would create smoke that went through the, the hollow pipe of the serpent and come out its tail. And they would hold ceremonies, typically they assume that they were probably doing sacrifices there at well at the time. And they would throw these pipes of burning copal down into the well of sacrifice to represent cosmic shit falling to earth and destroying the earth. Well, in that bizarre, I mean, at least, yeah. And dozens of these, these serpent effigies have been excavated from the well of sacrifice. Most of them are in the Carnegie Museum right now. But yeah, I mean, in the future thing, I've got slides. You can see the whole thing. I'm showing you. I've got the slides of the, the cenotes. I've got the slides of some of the artifacts pulled out. So yeah, these guys were hip to something. So the younger dryest impact was most likely over what happened. It's colored by an ocean right now. No, that's the Cretaceous tertiary. Okay. So 66 million years ago, but the younger dryest not, there's not colored by the ocean right now. But where the impact happened? Well, see, just as I was saying before, if it wasn't impact, okay, let's back up for a second, because I remember what I was saying is that, you know, one of the primary objections of the critics, the skeptics saying, oh, no, you know, that was not an impact. It was a long protracted extermination of the dinosaurs, etc, etc. And if you can't produce a crater, you know, you got for us to start buying into this theory, you have to produce the smoking gun, which is the crater, right? Well, then the crater got produced. They found the crater. And in fact, several other craters, smaller ones that seem to be date right to the same age. In fact, Indian geologists have found what they think is the Shiva crater, which is the same age off the coast of India. And in the Indian ocean, right? So I haven't seen the latest studies to see if that's been verified or not. But the studies I've seen suggest that the Indian geologists really do believe there's just a giant KT boundary crater on the bottom of the Indian ocean, which means it might have been a double whammy. Now it might have not happened at the same time, but over a short period of interval, short interval. And one of the scenarios that's kind of emerging now from studies of the cosmic environment is that there may be periods that you might think of as a bell-barredment epoch, where you have longer periods where bombardments are relatively isolated and few and then there'll be a clustering. See, so a lot of the critics of the dinosaur extermination said, well, they didn't all go extinct at once. So therefore, it couldn't have been an impact. Well, what they're doing is they're imagining only a very almost obsolete model of impacts is that they only happened in isolation randomly one at a time. They weren't even conceiving of the fact that you may have periods of time where you have multiple impacts occurring over a short period of time or even multiple impacts occurring all at once. Like Shoemaker-Levy 9, in terms, we could think that is, I mean, all of those impacts, 21 impacts took place in less than a week. So that you could think of as in a geological sense, that's simultaneous, right? So now the question is, and you get some of the same objections with the younger, driest boundary impact is that, well, where's the smoking gun? Where's the crater? So, but here's the problem, as I see it. If you've got an impact into an ocean, well, chances are, crater is going to be very difficult to find, right? And if it's a two mile deep ocean and a one kilometer diameter impactor, the crater, what's called the transient crater is only going to be a very short-lived. It's going to be in the water. Now it's going to create huge tsunamis, right? So now those tsunamis may leave deposits that could then be identified and dated, particularly if there's, you know, dateable material in there. If it's happened within the last 50,000 years, there's probably organic material that can be radio carbon dated, right? But so that would be one thing you could look for to try to identify oceanic impacts. Now, you go back to the Ice Age, there's approximately six to seven million additional square miles of the Earth's surface that is covered by massive ice sheets. Most of that is in the Northern Hemisphere. Now, if you have a bombardment in the Northern Hemisphere at this time, the chances are much higher that that impact could have been into an ice sheet. Yeah. And was it basically all of Canada was covered in ice? All of Canada was covered in ice and a lot of the Northern United States. And the accepted scientific theory is that this was a gradualistic climate change. Yes. But that doesn't hold, hold up anymore. I mean, in the old days, you could go back a few generations ago, coming say out of World War II, the belief was still that it was tens of thousands of years. Then radio carbon dating came along. The problem with radio carbon dating is the time span of deglaciation got contracted immensely. In other words, instead of being 50,000 years, now it was 10,000 years because here's the thing. If it was 50,000 years or 100,000 years that you had this slow accumulation of ice over, say, North America, more than half of North America. And then this slow disappearance. Right? Well, if it came on, let's say 75 to 100,000 years ago, the process began, well, where the ice is or was, you're not going to have forests. Are you? Forests aren't going to be growing where you've got thousands of feet of ice. Right? Well, now that we can go in and we can take core samples of where the ice was, what do you you think they're finding? They're finding remains of forests. They're like 30 and 40,000 years old. So what does that mean? Well, it means that you have to bring that was deglacious on a whole lot quicker and get rid of them a whole lot quicker than anybody had previously been imagining. Yeah. I didn't you say something like there was wooly madness that were flash frozen, like in an instant? Oh, yeah. Yeah. I mean, you say an instant, but you know, within a few hours, right. The most famous being the Berosov command of, uh, I think was found in 1901. And that's the most famous one that pretty much everybody. There's been a lot of flash frozen mummy. of, I think, was found in 1901. And that's the most famous one that pretty much everybody. There's been a lot of flash rows and mummy-fied remains of place to see mammals that have been found. But this is one of the most famous. And I still don't know the full, I don't know the explanation for this. Other than the fact that it had to have been a catastrophic event. But the the woolly mammoth was found, but I think it was six tons, right, body mass, found in a frozen, in the permafrost on a river bank, right? And with the, with the warming of the climb at the beginning of the late 1800s, early 1900s, the river bank collapsed and exposed this guy who had been sitting frozen in the, in the, in the matrix, this matrix of frozen permafrost, right? They were able to, in that first year, no, there was no scientific studies. I think it was a year to two years later when the, the first scientific studies took place. Anyways, they get there. And in the interim, the skull had been exposed and wolves apparently had eaten the flesh off of the skull. But the flesh of the remainder of the mammoth was still intact. And it was sitting on its haunches. And in its mouth was a mass of vegetation that it had been eating that it didn't even have time to swallow. And in its stomach, there was about 27 different types, species of hedges and plants and things, including flowering plants. Now, a mammoth is a which means that it, it grazes underground as opposed to, like say, to a mastodon, which is a browser. It likes to eat tree branches and tree leaves and things like that. But so by an analysis of the stomach contents, which was not future-ified, they were able to identify many of these different kinds of plants, flowering plants, even that this, this poor guy was munching on, right? And he's sitting on its haunches and both of his, his pelvic bones are broken, like we've suggesting that he was thrown back very violently and erect penis. Now, what that means is that was caused by suffocation. Yes, that's right. That's one of the things that, and it, because the suffocation, the pressure of the enclosing matrix of material, I guess, forces the blood out to the extremities. So that's wild. And that wild, I guess, fucking well, I did not know that. No, a lot of people don't know the labels of boners. Yeah. Yeah. So you start putting all that together. Yeah, think about this. The guy poor guy is standing there, munching is probably fall based upon the, the seeds and the pollons and the status of the flowering plants was probably a fairly, you know, benign day. The, the guy is standing there, munching is having this lunch or whatever. And then all of a sudden, boom, a shockwave throws him back on his haunches so violently that his pelvic bones are broken. He's immediately covered in a massive material. And then that massive material is completely frozen so quickly and so cold that the entire carcass basically has to be frozen through and through within 10 hours or the contents of the stomach would become putrefied, which it wasn't. Right. So the entire carcass is frozen, the six ton mammoth. How do you explain that? And the answer is, I don't know. Right. I really don't know other than the fact that one possibility to me is that if you have an object rapidly, you know, moving it say, you know, 20 miles, 15 to 20 miles per second, giving you the atmosphere is only about eight miles thick. If you've got an object that's coming in and moving, you know, at 15 miles per second, it's only going to take half a second to penetrate the entire atmosphere. So it may actually blow out a hole and bring in, you know, gases that are close to, to absolute zero. Oh my God. And that could be one explanation, but I don't know there. It needs to be, it's one of those conundrums of geology that needs to be addressed. You know, the old days, it's all well, he fell in a crevice and then got buried. And problem with that is that we can see modern examples of like caribou falling into crevices or modern elephants, you know, dying around water holes and things. And carcasses are not preserved. You know, you have to have unusual conditions to preserve, particularly of a mega mammal, which is defined as any mammal over 100 pounds in body weight. Right. You know, during the, some of those horrible droughts in Sub-Saharan Africa and the 80s, you had massive elephant mortality around water holes. Typically, you got an elephant to die there. It's carcass decays. Scavengers will eat the flesh and carry off bones and stuff. Typically within five years, there was no evidence that you'd had a, a five ton elephant laying near carcass laying near next to the water hole. So typically for any animal to become a part of the, the fossil record, they have to be removed rapidly from the forces that would normally recycle or remain. I mean, think about this, you know, during the post Civil War 1870s, 1880s and there, there was a tremendous slaughter of American bisons and you had thousands of bison carcasses just left to rot under prairie. They're gone. They were gone within a decade or two. There was no remnant of them there. In order for those carcasses to be preserved as fossils, they have to be removed from oxygen. They have to be removed from scavengers. They have to typically be buried very rapidly. Very quickly. Yes. So maybe we should look at some slides. Let's look at some slides. What's crazy about this is like, you know, modern, you know, today, we're so worried about climate change. It's such a political, it's such a political hot, you know, hot topic people to discuss and fight about and, you know, how much impact do humans have on climate change when you're looking at it from the, looking at the force for the trees? When you bring that up, it's, it's a good, humans definitely have, there's no question we have an impact on the climate and the environment through every all kinds of things. It's not just the burning of fossil fuels. It's deforestation, it's agriculture. It's mining. All of these things have an impact on the environment. However, what you just said is important because within the larger framework, the impact that we are having on the environment in that context actually is quite minimal. That's the thing that most people don't understand because they've taken, they're using, like you just said, they're using the impact of humans on the climate is now a political issue, right? And it is a scientific issue. And if you look at, you know, there's so many things, I mean, we could devote hours and hours to this discussion and it needs to happen because, you know, the typical response mainstream media and the, the, the purveyors of this, the so-called climate crisis now that if you question that or challenge it, you are now consigned to the category of climate change denier, you know, which of course I'm about as far as a form of climate change denier as you could get because I'm talking about catastrophic climate change all the time, right? Now I do question the severity of human cause climate change by releasing very much really a small part of the carbon dioxide that is locked up in the crust of the earth into the atmosphere. If we look at the long range, again, what's missing here is the big picture, the long range view and that's what I try to do is I take the long range view. The, the period known as the quaternary, which is the place to see them in the Holocene, the place to see them goes back to about two and a half million years ago, but which is only a very short period of time when you'd say look at go back to the pre-cambrian times into actually the beginning of life on earth, right? Within that period of time, the range of life on earth, which is the, includes the, the paleozoic, the mesozoic and the centozoic, right? Mesozoic was the, the age of the dinosaurs, right? We also saw Jurassic Park, right? So, Jurassic Park was the middle period of the mesozoic, preceded by the triassic and followed by the, what I say, Jurassic, followed by the cretaceous, right? And in fact, for, for people who are really into the most of the dinosaurs that were in Jurassic Park were actually cretaceous dinosaurs by the way. But really? Yeah, most of them weren't. But, um, I don't know, cretaceous park doesn't have the same ring as Jurassic Park. No, no, I have some dinosaur slaying tools over there in the corner. I showed you earlier. I saw those. Yeah, I've been a little concerned here. I saw those, but what did you keep those in the corner for? But then I realized, you know, you got Austin here. So yeah, yeah, Austin, Austin will protect us. Yeah. Oh, I thought it was for protection from Austin. Oh, no, Austin, we don't have to worry about that. Now we don't have to worry about them. Okay. Good. So, um, we're, we're wise. Yeah. Okay. So what I about to say was that if you look at the, at the, the ambient concentration of carbon dioxide in the global atmosphere, the lowest throughout the entire range of the so-called fanta zoeck, which is the great eon encompassing paleozoic messes, oh, a concentizolic, right? The Pleistocene and Holocene has been the lowest carbon dioxide has been in the history of life on earth. And this lowering of carbon dioxide coincides with the onset of this oscillating cycle of glacial interglacial ages. Now, carbon dioxide for has two primary functions within nature. On one hand, it is a greenhouse gas that can capture long wave, long wave thermal radiation emanating from the earth, right? It has been absorbed from shortwave solar radiation impinging upon the earth, being absorbed and then being reemitted once it reaches saturation it reemits. So it's a greenhouse gas and an important one, right? It's also the fuel for photosynthesis. Those, so it has a dual within an astral order of things. Without carbon dioxide, there's no photosynthesis, right? Now, carbon dioxide typically, once it gets below 200 parts per million, it starts getting dangerously close to the point where photosynthesis were shut down. Photosynthesis begins to shut down between 150 and 180 parts per million. During the last late so-called glacial maximum, carbon dioxide concentrations reached as low as 180 parts per million. Now, no greenery below that. I mean, the first plants that go or the so-called C3 plants, which is basically just describing a photosynthetic pathway, most of our food crops are those, that category. Most of your weeds are C4, which means that they have been adapted to low carbon environments, right? But most of the stuff we eat is adapted to a higher carbon dioxide environment. This is why commercial greenhouse growers ramp up the carbon dioxide to like 11 or 1200 parts per million, which is three times or more the present day concentration in the atmosphere. Present days are on 200? No, about 400 and 600 right now. And at the beginning of the industrial revolution, it was about 280. So throughout the 10,000 years of the Holocene, it apparently rose about 100 parts per million. It has risen another 100 and when it says 100 and say 120 parts per million, right? Yet, like I said, throughout most of Earth's history, carbon dioxide has been thousands of parts per million. Thousands of parts per million. And life was abundant, proliferating, and the Earth did not turn into a runaway hot house like has been predicted. So there's many nuances to this whole issue about climate change. And a couple of points to be made when we start talking about the increase in carbon dioxide, number one, we can compare it like we look in the last 10 or 12,000 years, where our baseline is now the lowest that carbon dioxide has been in 600 million years. Okay? So, and then as far as temperature change, you know, there was a mid evil warm period that was thoroughly recognized and admitted by the very first IPCC report that came out in 1992, but the one that the fall up by 1996, they had managed to erase the mid evil warm period. Because the mid evil warm period, even in the graphs shown in the IPCC's first report of 1992 showed that the mid evil warm period was warmer than the present, right? The modern warming. Well, this didn't fit the narrative. So by the time the 1996 report came out, the whole graph of climate change, temperature change from a thousand years ago to now was basically flattened. So what they did was they got rid of the mid evil warm period and the little ice age. And so when instead of the graph doing this, they flattened it out and then they added it's a complex thing what they did. Then they added instrumental record on the end that looks like it's going way up because it is not accounted for the urban heat island effect, which is a whole other question. But it was a completely contrived graph called the hockey stick. And this is the thing that has been utilized since the mid 90s now to incite this fear, Al Gore used it in. Yeah, could they do? How could they get away with doing something like that? They didn't get away. They were called out on it. But the point is is that the people that are calling them out on it are not getting the media coverage. You know, because look at this point, there's billions of dollars going into the whole climate change narrative. And so there's a huge disincentive to go, wait a second, the climate right now is no warmer than it's been many times throughout history. And I've written extensively on this and I'm going to be publishing a lot of this on my website talking about the periods of climate warmth that have been always times of human prosperity as compared with reproduction as well. Right. Oh, yeah. I mean, you know, you have because clearly when it's warm out, you have an extended growing period. Right. You know, there's more food to people get more food to eat. They get healthier. They get stronger. They live longer. When you eat your pee, pee gets smaller when it's cold. I've heard that. I haven't put it to the test yet. But I think it also happens when you get older, but I'm not sure. It's trust me. It's true. I jumped my pool the other day. It was freezing. Was it? Yeah. Okay. Well, that's good to know. I'll keep that in mind. Stay out of cold pools. I'll make it. Well, hot tubs are where it's at. Yeah. Um, yeah, why not a trip that I was doing up in Washington in October. We had Brandon Powell with us. Who's a student of, um, the Iceman. Oh, Wim Hof. Wim Hof. Yeah. Oh, shit. So he was, he was shaming everybody to get into the ice bath. Did you do it? No, I didn't. The reason I didn't, there was a good reason I didn't actually because I was leading the tour. And each day, I had to figure out what we were going to be doing at 8 a.m. the next morning, looking at the maps, figuring out where we're going to go, looking at the weather. I was consumed with all of that while he's, you know, leading people into the, uh, but he, he shamed me into promising that the next trip I would do it. So I'm going to work up to it. I'm going to start doing the cold showers. All in your head. The hardest part is just making the jump. It's just run you doing like the ocean. Well, listen, I grew up in Minnesota, right? So I mean, so the ice would melt off the lakes and we'd be jumping in the lakes. And, um, so yeah, I think that was pretty close to an ice bath. That's about as close as you can get. Yeah. But yeah, I was, uh, that was a long time ago. I don't know. Now I might just be shocked into, you'd have to probably drag me out and resuscitate me. I don't know. But, um, where was I? Oh, yeah, the whole question about the climate change issue is one that needs to be looked at, um, from all sides. And what you're going to see is that, you know, what I think with the point I was making was that you did have the little ice age. And it was very real. It's not an artifact. The, during the little ice age, it's now acknowledged. It was probably the coldest few centuries since the end of the great ice age with maybe a couple of exceptions. There was a, there was a cold spasm that took place around 8,200, 8,300 years ago, right? But other than that, uh, outlier, that anomaly, uh, the little ice age was very cold. Most of the Holocene has been warmer than now, believe it or not. When was the little ice age? Well, the, it was in several phases. The first phase started around early 1300s, right? Now this came on the heels of 300 years of medieval warmth, right? Now, it was during this medieval warmth that the Vikings colonized the west coast of Greenland and had farming for hundreds of years there where it's permafrost now, right? Um, it was also the era of the great era of cathedral building in Europe. And when you go back to pre-1900 to 1000 AD, that was the so-called dark ages, right? And the dark ages was a period of, of basically cold weather. Um, 536 AD is probably the coldest year of the last 2000 years. And that was kind of like what sort of inaugurated the dark ages. Not much happened during the dark ages. I mean, there was a lot, but you know, um, nothing like you saw with the great cathedral building in a prize in Europe. Now, with the warmth that came around a 1000 AD, you know, uh, so 536 AD, you had this extremely cold weather. May have been brought on by volcanoes, may have actually been brought on by a couple of impacts. There's evidence possibly of some cosmic impacts around 536 AD. The whole story of the Arthurian mythology and the quest for the grail is all set in that period from 536 to 540, the Battle of Camlon, the legendary battle work Arthur with killed is usually dated to 541 AD. Now, what's interesting about this is you had this period of cold and this cold caused agricultural failures, multiple years in a row. Agricultural failures led to famine, famine led to weakened, weakened immune systems. And then, uh, I think it was in 542 AD, you had the Justinian plague. So you have the cold weather, you have agricultural failure, you have famine, and then you just followed by pestilence or plague. And that wiped out a third depopulation of Europe or even more. And again, it was very much like what came at the beginning of the little ice age. Now, when the medieval warm period began, say between, it didn't begin everywhere all at once at the same time, but you had a general warming of the plans between 900 AD and 1000 AD. Um, Vikings and at the time, you had a tremendous recession of the polar ice that allowed the sea lanes between Iceland and Greenland to open up. Before this, you couldn't have made that journey because there was too much ice, right? The ice receded, the Vikings were able to sail to Greenland. Iceland became, became populated. Um, you had my immigrant, Iceland. And then, um, uh, the, uh, because of the abundant food crops, people were eating a lot. And with about 100 years, 100 to 150 years, population had increased that, uh, significantly throughout Europe. And people were living longer and they were wealthier and more productivity on every front was happening because people were being healthy and well-fed. Infant mortality declined life spans even, even human stature increased by three, four, five inches during this period. This is the warmth. This is the medieval warm period, right? Because of the surpluses that were created, you now had this possibility of armies of tens of thousands of highly skilled artisans and crafts people and glaziers and carpenters and stone carvers and stuff able to build these tremendous gothic cathedrals. And I don't know if you've been to Europe. Like Notre Dame. Like Notre Dame. Yeah. You saw Notre Dame, right? That was built during this peak. Wow. Amion, sharp, reams, layown. There was about 80 of these gigantic abbeys that were built during this time and about maybe 500 smaller ones, but it was this incredible prolific building period. What's interesting about that is simultaneous with the century and a half of this epic building phenomena that was going on in Europe, you also had major building campaigns going over on in Indochin and Southeast Asia that built the last phase of all of the great temples and Cambodia and Laos and Vietnam that are so impressive. You also had simultaneous the wave of the last wave of classic Mayan architecture that's now emerging, you know, in Central America. You had the last wave of monumental earthwork architecture in North America. All of this stuff is going on like the same century, century and a half. And it was during this period of global warmth. Okay. Now what happens? You get to the 1300s and things begin to shift. Right? The climate starts cooling and around 1314, 1315, I think it was right in there, you had some couple of really cold years and it and you can look and you can see that the onset of the cold and the end of the great cathedral building are almost perfectly coincide. Now you had a succession of cold years between like 1315 and 1340. During that time, you see it a total decline in European prosperity. You see the end of the great Gothic building enterprise, right? And then around 1340, I think it was you had the bubonic plague, because you'd had the succession of agricultural failures. The bubonic plague came along and wiped out at least a third the entire population of Europe. Now that was truly a pandemic. Yeah. I mean, a third or more there are places where whole towns pretty much nobody survived. And literally, yeah, thousands upon thousands of corpse has just left on the landscape laying there because there weren't people to bury them. Right. The dead outnumbered the living. And that was the Baba or also called the black plague, right? Right. So this is what launched the little ice age. Then that was the first phase. And then we see that there was a a a a period of remediation in the little ice age that pretty much coincided with the Renaissance. And then you had phase two. Luckily, we had enough momentum going that phase two wasn't as severe as phase one. Even though the planet got very cold during this phase two, particularly is when you had this episode where in Europe in the mountainous regions, you had the glaciers swelling to this enormous size. And you had entire villages and farms that were obliterated by the growing glaciers whole, whole towns that had to be abandoned because the glaciers are growing down taking over taking over. Yeah. So what's interesting is is when you look at this period of global cooling, it begins to end around the mid 1800s, right? And has been warming gently and steadily ever since, except you go to the last 20 to 25 years and you see it's almost level off. And where, but there's a lot of statistics out there that suggest, oh, the planet is, you know, and we're in a climate crisis and it's continuing to warm catastrophically. But there are studies and you know, I can come back and we could dive into just nothing but this this conversation about climate change. Recently, a studies has come out that, you know, when you look at temperature data, one of the things that you're looking at is, you know, we have ground-based temperature stations. We have, we have weather balloons and we have satellites. Those are the three primary sources of of of of of information we have. The ground-based ones are also very old, right? And they're like near airport at airports. You got it. See, so you started ground-based data collection station there and it's in a rural area, particularly like in a rural airport, let's say 50, 60, 70 years ago, well, then what happens is that it becomes urbanized. And so, you know, if you've got a temperature station sitting, you know, in a field, well, then you come at 20, 30, 40 years later and it's surrounded by buildings and pavement and air conditioning concrete everywhere. Right, right. That's the urban heat island effect. And generally, a lot of the modern temperature data doesn't really effectively account for that. And they also, and this don't include the role of the sun. And we know a whole lot more about the sun now than we did in 1988 when James Hansen did his presentation one hot July day before Congress. When this whole ball started rolling on, you know, catastrophic greenhouse warming. But one thing that should be mentioned is that the ability of carbon dioxide to capture long wave radiation in the wavelengths of roughly 14 to 17 microns right in that window is pretty much saturated. In other words, you can keep adding carbon dioxide to the atmosphere and it's going to have a exponentially declining effect on long wave thermal radiation capture, which means that, and typically if you look, you know, experiments going back decades and decades show that most of the heat capture of carbon dioxide is in the first 50 part per million. And when you add 50 parts per million when you've already got 400 parts per million, the heat capture of it is minimal. Now the computer modelers know this. So they have to introduce all kinds of positive feedbacks into the models in order to ramp up the effect of the carbon dioxide. Because they know that the carbon dioxide by itself is not going to have a huge effect on global temperature. Wow. So there's so much like this, um, Danny, that's just not out there in the mainstream discussion. And it's sad that this is the case, but, you know, again, like we're talking about, the science has been subordinated to the politics. Yeah, it really has. And there's too much incentive to suppress these types of conversations. Yeah, there's too much money on the line. There's too much, you know, political agenda, too many political agendas on the line. Yes. And there needs to be more debates between people like you and the critics, the skeptics or the people who are projecting this narrative in the mainstream. And, you know, coming to light on the internet or wherever. Well, you may have noticed that there is a the people who are projecting this narrative in the mainstream and coming to light on the internet or wherever. Well, you may have noticed that there is a very noticeable reluctance on the part of the proponents to debate these issues. Because it's hard, nobody knows anything about this. The people that are talking about it, they don't really know. How much time have they actually spent studying climate change? Right. Right. Now, I'm not a climate change scientist. I'm just somebody that's been obsessed and fascinated with things like that. Literally since I was a kid. I remember sitting on the roof of my house watching two tornadoes go by, which was crazy. But, you know, so from the age of probably 13, 14, 15, I was really, really fascinated by weather and it evolved into climate. I mean, my interest in natural history, I guess you could say, goes back to the early 70s. You know, so growing up in an environment like rural Minnesota, right where we lived, we had land on a lake that was a leftover meltwater puddle from the ice. And the ice, right where we were, was at the margin of the so-called superior lobe of the Laurentide ice sheet. And right where we lived was a place where the ice would expand and contract and expand and contract before it finally disappeared. And so it shaped the entire landscape of the, you know, the environment of when I was a kid growing up. And I always had this kind of undefinable fascination with the land because it always seemed to be even as a little kid that there was something about it. You know, a hill is not just a hill. It's something else. It's maybe it might be a it might be a drumlet. It might be a terminal mooring, you know, now it's just a hill with soil and trees growing on it. There are a reason why it's there, you know, and most people just look at the land around them. And it just is there's nothing you don't question. You don't think about it anymore. But when you do, then you discover that there's this underlying story there, you know, right. And why don't we jump to a couple of slides. What are we looking at right here? Okay. So this is this is a Greenland ice course study, which shows the extreme climate changes at the end of the place to see in how the same transition. And you see that dashed line. Let's see. I should have brought. Let's see. I don't have my, you know, have a laser pointer. It's okay. Yeah. No, I can see the, there's a that horizontal dashed line. And it says present temperature. Does, um, does Austin, do you have a cursor? Austin, you have a cursor, right? There you go. Yeah, he does. Okay. Go up there. We're talking up there. Yeah. See that horizontal dashed line. That is the present temperature. Now, look. Now, okay. So the present is all the way to the right of that graph. All the way down there. That's the present, right? Now, if you come over, you see that that graph there. Look, again, the dashed line is the present temperature. Now, if you look at the bottom, you see it says YD. That's for younger dryest. And then you see a scale of time at the bottom zero over on the right. You see 10,000. And then you see what is it there? 12,800 being the time of the younger dryest boundary. And you see that there's that gray band, light gray band that goes up there. And that was the younger dryest boundary. And you see, look what the graph is doing there. Look at how it peaks. This enormous peak there that actually dates to about 14,600. And then the climate just plunges down by about, that's about 10 degrees center. Let's see, we can look over on the vertical graph. And you see colder temperature, warmer temperature. And what you see there is that it is very peak. But like 18 degrees? Yes. Yes. This doesn't seem like a lot. It doesn't seem like a lot. 18 degrees. Well, let me put it to you this way. Now, that's average temperature, okay. Right. Now, since they begining this whole climate crisis in global warming, right, the estimated amount of climate of global warming is about 1.2, 1.3 degrees. Oh, wow. So this is this is like 10 times the warming we've seen post industrial right here. Wow. And I constantly hear people say the planets never warmed this fast in this much before. And I'm saying, where are you getting your info from there, my friend? But you can see there was this rapid decline in climate change into the younger dryest. Negative, it was roughly what negative 40 degrees. For it's got negative five, negative 50. So that's five to use about let's say, yeah, almost negative 50. So it, this is centigrade now, not Fahrenheit. Okay. So it, you'll see at the top of the graph, it's right at minus 30 at the bottom, it's almost minus 50. So that's, you know, 18 degrees centigrade. So we multiply that by 1.8. And we're looking at like 30 degrees Fahrenheit. Whoa. That's, that's a, that's a climate, that is a true climate crisis right there. Now again, and then look at there at the wave, I remember I said there was a, there was an event at about 8,200 years where there was a short lived cooling event. You see that right there? It is right there. Yep. Okay. But other than that, this last 10,000 years is almost all of it has been warmer than now, at least in Greenland. So the way you get around is you say, well, this was only in Greenland, right? But you don't have this. Okay. So this is a study coming from an ice floor. Yes, this is a nice corn Greenland, right? However, since these cores were extracted and first analyzed in the early 90s, we've got evidence from all over the world now showing that. Like the correlates with this, the correlates with this. Okay. How deep were these ice cores? Oh, let's see. I think the Greenland ice core was about 1500 meters when it hit bedrock. So 1500 meters would be about a mile. About a mile. Holy shit. I think it was actually even more than that. But yeah, so these, these are long mile of ice. Yeah. And that's, that's over Greenland at present. See, because presently, presently it's a mile deep. Yes. Yes. So look, you can see up there, see the medieval warm period. Now look at the medieval warm period and then look at the present global warming, which is right where that graph hits the vertical axis. You see right there. And I said that the medieval warm period was warmer. All of the evidence suggests that the medieval warm period around the world was warmer than now. And yet it was not a time of climate crisis. It was a time of human prosperity. But that doesn't fit the narrative, Danny. We're about right on par with the little ice age. Yeah, we're a little actually a little warmer than, see, this is going to be a little bit biased because it's in Greenland. Okay. You have to, if you have to go to the, like European, if you go to the southern, you know, farther south in the latitudes, what you'll see is that relatively speaking, yes, the little ice age was colder than now for sure. A couple of degrees okay. Okay. And then you see warming at the end of the younger dryness. And that was a spasm of warming. Now check out that huge spike over to the left. That's like within how long is that spike? That's a massive spike on the right on the very end of the younger dryness. That one, yeah, probably a few years vertical basically. And that is about 11,600. Now you have what you had there was two gigantic pulses of meltwater into the global oceans, which caused what John's John, his colleagues referred to as CREs, catastrophic rise events. And I believe that these events, these warming events, are associated with the gigantic floods at the end of the ice age because it was these warming events that melted the ice. If we go to the next slide, you'll see that the next slide is a late place to see mortality graph. Now, in these events that terminated the ice age, roughly half the great megafondyl species on earth died out very rapidly. And what we have here is you look at this graph from left to right on the far left, it's 50,000 years ago. And then it ends at 4,000 years over on the right. Yep. But now if you look at each one of those squares represents a fossil specimen. So for tens of thousands of years from 50,000 years ago to about 14,000 years ago, you'll see that it's generally fairly sporadic. And you get to 14,000 and it really peaks around 12,000 years. So all of a sudden around 12,000 to 13,000 years ago, a huge number of fossil remains were introduced into the environment. And so what, and then at the end of this, these species extinct, or extinct, they don't exist anymore. So these are, like it says, you're each square represents a fossil specimen of an extinct megafondyl species. Mastodons, mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, Pleistocene lions, saber-tooth cats, giant elk, giant beaver, giant armadillos, everything was giant by the way. Why were they so big? That's a good question. They were big. Wow. Huge. You know, the Colombian mammoth mammoth is in paratro, the Imperial mammoth should 16 feet high. It is shoulder. That's twice the height of an average African elephant, which is about eight feet, nine feet at the shore. That's bizarre. Yeah. I mean, they brought the remains, the skeleton of an Imperial mammoth into the Fern Bank Museum where I lived like about 10 years ago. And they literally had to remove the ceiling to set the skeleton up because it was so big. You give like the, uh, the big Imperial walkers and Star Wars. Yeah. Yeah. So this shows a precise correlation between the mass extinction episode and the graph we just looked at. So were that graph spikes that layer of ice had tons of dead animals? Yes. Yes. And if you go back one, go back one Austin, that spike, I would actually do a slot. No, no, not forward Austin back there. If you go, that spike, if we were to flip this graph over, that spike would coincide with that younger, driest drop right there. Okay. It's a very convincing correlation. Wow. And then now you can move Austin, go forward to slides. The next one right there. Okay. So now this is the graph of sea level rise at the end of the last ice age. Now bear in mind, if you're going to add six million, seven million cubic miles of ice to the surface of the earth, where's the water come from that forms those glaciers from the oceans, right? Well, if you take that much water out of the global ocean, you have to see levels going to lower. Right. So during the late glacial maximum sea levels were at least 400 feet lower than they are now. When in the old models, and sea level would have been a gradual rise that would have correlated directly as the glaciers shrank sea level would rise. And then once all the glaciers had disappeared, sea level would have reached more or less to its present level. Right. But if you look at this graph, this is graph of the sea level rise. And if you look at the bottom of the graph, you'll see that age in a thousand years zero on the left and 18,000 years ago on the right at right at the bottom. That's right. Good. Good, Austin. Okay. If you go up the left, you've got the estimated discharge rate in cubic kilometers per year. Now, if you look at that highest spike, it's almost up to 15,000 cubic kilometers of water introduced into the ocean per year. Now, this is an older graph. And what has changed is that the rates of introduction of meltwater have actually are faster than what you see in this graph. But what this graph does is it shows you that there were two huge spikes of meltwater into the global ocean. You have the first one on the right, the taller of the two is called meltwater pulse 1A. That was the first. And then, we noticed how many years ago that was right now the dating of that is around 14,000 years ago. Okay. Okay. Then you see that that's followed by a rapid decline in the volume of water flowing into the oceans, which is going to be a direct function of how rapid the ice is melting. Now, that trough there is followed by a second spike. And that trough of reduced flow to the ocean exactly coincides with the younger dryest. So in other words, when the world went cold again during the younger dryest, the water, the meltwater flowing from the glaciers into the oceans declined if it didn't stop altogether. And then about 1300 years later, boom, it started up again. And that gave us meltwater pulse 1B. So these three graphs are really interesting to correlate because what you see is that first big warming spike that we looked at in the first graph coincides in meltwater pulse 1A. Then the younger dryest of the planet jerking back into full glacial cold corresponds with the trough where the meltwater stopped. And then the second warming coincides with the lower spike, which is meltwater pulse 1B. And right in the middle where that trough is, hey, between those two spikes is when all the megafauna disappeared. So there is that where the instantaneous freezing occurred? Good question. You know, that's that's a tough one. The dates, the dates are ambiguous there. Okay. Dates are ambiguous. So the spikes coincide with massive flooding. Yes, catastrophic floods. It would have to because one would think, okay, if you've got 15,000 cubic kilometers of water being dumped into an ocean in one year or maybe even quicker, that means a whole lot of ice is melting really fast. That ice melting has to create giant floods. Right. The piece is pretty much all fallen to place. So yeah, that's fascinating. Isn't it though? Really is. So let's see, let me see. We should jump ahead. Okay, let's do this. Jump ahead to slide number. Let's see. Whoops. I'm anticipating that. Not end. If you start clicking forward, you'll get to a picture of a flower. There you go. Is that the flower the mammoth reading? No, that is driest octopatala. And let me bring this, I accidentally accidentally closed. I didn't mean to do that. Age of really. Oh, here we go. Okay. I'll just reopen it. 17,000 year. Glasic. It's your static sea level record. Influence of global of glacial melting rates on the younger dries event and deep ocean circulation. Yeah. Okay. So your static is the rise and fall of sea level. Okay. That's a function of growth and shrinkage of ice sheets. Okay. So this is your core. Okay. Ice sheets grow sea level drops. Mm hmm. Ice sheet shrink sea level rise. That's called you static. Okay. And it's generally thought of as being more or less uniform around the planet because all the oceans are interconnected. Right. So if you look over here, the flower on the right count the petals should have eight petals. Yep. Octopatala literally means eight petals and dry as octopatala is like it says it's an eight petal to polar wildflower that grows in really cold climates. And when the climate warms that particular flower disappears because it likes cold weather. And so anyways, uh, the younger dryest is a period where after disappearing from northern Europe during the ice age, dryest octopatala suddenly came back again for 1300 years. And then of course, there was an older dryest. Yeah, that's why you have any younger drive. If you didn't have an older dryest, it wouldn't be a younger dryest. It would just be the dryest. Right. Right. And that's dryest, not dry ass. Okay. When was the older dryest? Uh, I think it was just like around 15. I think let me see it. Let's think if I go back, I think I even have it on a on a graph here. Uh, yeah, go back to slide number eight. You'll see that you've got an oldest dryest and older dryest and any younger dryest. Okay. I see it now. Yeah. And the oldest dryest and the older dryest, they were not as cold as the younger dryest. And notice the younger dryest ends at 11,500 years ago. Right. Right. Now that as that graph moves up, that's warming. See temperature in degrees centigrade over on the left. So you can see that the climate dropped in temperature very, very cold. Um, and then it rose again. And this graph, it's dated at about 11,500 years ago. And there was a warming, a massive warming, then massive warming would have been associated with huge floods from melting ice and a rapid rise in sea level. Now 11,500, interestingly and coincidentally, going back to the thing we mentioned earlier, geomithology in Plato's accounts of Atlantis, his two dialogues, uh, Timaeus and Cretaeus. We talked about Atlantis. He dates it, his 9,000 years prior to Solon's exile in Egypt, which took place roughly at 600, 500 to 600 BC. Okay. So that puts it at say 25 to 2600 years ago, add that to 9,000 years. And what did he get? 11,500 for the destruction of Atlantis by a great earthquake that caused it to sink beneath the Atlantic Ocean coincidence. Wow. Yeah. No, I think that Plato was, you know, see, this is where, you know, modern academia just dismisses the whole Atlantis account. Right. Right. You think of Atlantis. You think of some fictional woo woo, tail. Yeah. But it's only in books. Right. But if you go back to the source, I mean, the source is Plato, the greatest metaphysician of, you know, right. But the big question is civilization. The big question is was it a moral tale or was it a physical place? Was it a real city? I think it could be both. Why, why would not an ancient commentator utilize an actual historic event? Right. A plan which to graft a moral teaching. Doesn't Plato recount in his writings that it doesn't he say more than once that it was an actual real place? Oh, yeah. Multipipimes. Yeah. He affirms the veracity of the account. So this, this may have the appearance of myth, but it's real. It really happened. He says that. Yeah. So, um, so which brings us to the recent video of the guy who was just on Joe Rogan's podcast who talks Jimmy. Jimmy. Yeah. Jimmy. What's the name of his channel again? Bright insight. Bright insight. Yeah. So he had a conversation with Joe Rogan about the eye of Africa. Right. Being the location of Atlantis. Can you, do you have that little video clip that I showed you earlier, Austin, where he talks about he shows the map. Uh, Plato's map of Atlantis and where it could be and why he lays out all of his reasoning on why that could be the location. I need no Plato had a map. So I'm not, I could be wrong. Maybe it wasn't Plato's map. This is somebody's map. Let's watch this quick clip real quick. Okay. They described an empire named Atlantis, which consisted of 10 kingdoms and the capital of Atlantis was on an island that consisted of three wings of water and two of land, which of course, when we look at the Rishod structure, you see that it would precisely match that specific detail of threugings of water and two of land. And not only that, it was said to open to the sea at the south, which is exactly what you see here at the Rishod. In fact, you can literally see the striations in the sand where water once flowed through it, but not only that those white blemishes are indeed salt, an unbelievably significant detail, which I'll discuss more of in a moment. But Atlantis was also said to have mountains to the north, mountains that were said to have rivers run through them, which yes, there are mountains with evidence of ancient water flow north of the Rishod. Atlantis was also said to be surrounded by a large plain, which also exists for hundreds of miles on both sides of the Rishod structure. Another striking similarity is that Atlantis was said to consist of black, red, and white colored stone, which is incredibly interesting when you see all the stones of that color in and around the region of the Rishod. There was also said to be an abundance of elephants, and elephants live in Mauritania today, and have for thousands of years, in fact, there's an even ancient cave arc depicting elephants not far from the Rishod. And Atlantis was also said to have an abundance of exotic fruit and vegetables, which makes the case for it being in North Africa even more compelling, considering that we now know that the Sahara Desert didn't even exist until summer around 11,600 years ago, where it went from green to desert and practically in incense. But many people are not aware of this incredible fact that the Sahara had previously been a lush green tropical paradise at the same time that Atlantis was said to exist. In fact, it was said to be made up of the largest freshwater lakes and rivers ever known to exist anywhere on earth, which of course would support that the region of the western Sahara would have naturally growing fruits and vegetables, but alleged vegetation that no longer exists in this region aside, Atlantis was said to have an abundance of metals, including iron, copper, and gold. Well, it turns out that Mauritania's most common exports today include iron, copper, and gold. But the similarities do not end here. You see, Atlantis was said to be created by the god Poseidon, and Poseidon had 10 children that came from five sets of male twins. And each of these 10 children would individually be ruler of the 10 kingdoms that made up the empire of Atlantis. And the first born would rule the capital and his name was Atlas. So does anyone want to guess who the name of the first king of Mauritania was? King Atlas, who ruled over the Maury people, which is why the land is called Mauritania today. And not only that, the vast mountain region located north of the Rashad, just so happens to be named the Atlas Mountains. What a coincidence. Now, another incredible detail involves this map. This is the map I was referring to. Is considered by many to be the father of history due to his extensive historical documentation. In fact, we won't even know about the Greco-Person Wars if it wasn't for him. And some 2,500 years ago, he made a written detailed account of the known world at that time. However, he himself did not draw out this map. Others, and I do not know who or when, read through his various works and annotated that the people of Atlantis live in this region you see here, which just so happens to be the same general location of the Rashad structure. What are the odds? You can stop at their Austin. Very same place. Okay, so he lays out a very compelling, he sells it. He sells it. Yeah, and generally, I like his stuff. He does a great job. We would disagree on this for let's go. Listen, I have done an entire treatment of episode 9 of Cosmographia, which is very compelling. And that follows upon what six or seven episodes, about 10 to 12 hours going into the Atlantis account of Play, the background. All the stuff he's talking about there, and it's good stuff, man. Yeah. But I have some issues with it, and I get into that. Why I believe it's not there. And you'll need to watch that, Danny. And then we can talk about that. We could do an Atlantis episode when I come back after you've had a chance to watch. Well, I've listened to a bit of it. Okay. And there's a lot to unpack in that. There is. So could you sort of briefly give an overview of your thoughts or your studies on Atlantis? Well, very briefly, you know, I've read four or five different translations of Play. And I've actually procured the original Greeks. I've been able to go in and laboriously translate the various words used. And I mean, it's clear. You know, right at the outset, you know, this power came forth from the Atlantic Ocean outside the pillars of hair, please pillars of hair, please is what we call the rock, the, the Straits of Gibraltar. It describes that when you pass from the Straits of Gibraltar into the Atlantic Ocean, you encounter some islands. And then you encounter would have encountered Atlantis. And then beyond that was the, the Greek continent. So in other words, when you look into geography and there is like the Spartell bank, there's a sunken island right there at the mouth that would have actually been an island that sailors could have stopped at. And then there's Madeira, possibly even other islands. That's my problem is that that Plato very clearly to me puts it in the Atlantic Ocean. And also very clearly describes that it sank within the ocean. So what I have done is shown Okay, throughout hours of video that there is solid evidence for post glacial subsidence of particularly long, the mid Atlantic Ridge. So all the things that Jimmy is describing there, I could show essentially the same same configuration to the sunken Azores plateau as it's called. Okay, open to the south, mountains to the north. And that's what I do in, in this series that I did, because I was not really familiar with the theory that the eye of Africa was considered to be Atlantis. When I did those, I may have heard it, I had heard of it. the theory that the eye of Africa was considered to be Atlantis When I did those I may had heard it I had heard of it but hadn't looked into it so then so many people were asking about it that I did a follow-up specifically focusing on the reshat structure and I basically go into the studies see I accumulated the number of studies on it in the probably the early 90s When it was still being considered an impact crater and So when I was thoroughly reaching researching impact craters That's when I first learned about it and it looked to me like a multi-ringed impact structures just like we were talking about earlier right well it later You know Ground penetrating radar and analysis of the rocks and stuff show that it was a deep-rooted volcanic feature So it's it's natural it is not it is not human-made. It's natural and I think all the geologists have looked at that would concur that it's natural um So the fact that it's what 1400 feet above sea level to me is problematic because The whole thing about Atlantis is that it sank beneath the waves of the Atlantic Ocean So yes, there's some amazing coincidences there as Jamie points out But again, I'm going to come down on the side of if there's any If there's any reality to this thing right my reading it's and see people go. Oh, a Randall says Atlantis was the a's or No, Randall doesn't say that Well Randall does say that if you look at the 15 or 20 different locations around the world that have been proffered as being Oh, well, this is Atlantis or this is Atlantis. I think the one that fits the details of Plato's accounts Almost to a T is really the a's or is and the a's or is are the a's or is our mountain peaks Right and those mountain peaks have their roots on a it's called a micro continent It's about the size of Iceland, but it's sunk and how do we know it sunk? Well, there's numerous studies that I get into all of that In that 10 hours or 12 hours that I've done um To make the case that if There is a reality to Atlantis And we look at all of the candidates for where Atlantis was and I think the one that comes down over and over again is being the most plausible would be the a's ores and so Um, but yeah, and in a few minutes here that we're discussing it here would be you know Again like I said, I did 10 or 12 hours right is there any is there any sort of graph or any sort of like aerial image We could just look at the area of the a's or is that you're referring to yeah, I would have to open it Okay, can we do that? Or do you do we have that I did not give that to Austin? Oh, I haven't here? Okay Okay, so we're looking at the mid Atlantic ridge here. Yes, we are and if you look over The one wanting to sit here with my oh, you think you're controlling it. Yeah Okay, so you see Spain over there north Africa Okay, come down over to the land up north and then east right in there between Spain and and Maraco is the Straits of Gibraltar Also known as in ancient times as the pillars of Heracles so That is where we put my glasses back on I feel like cluster fuck over here. Yeah, okay So now if you go If you put you you'll see too little green spot. Yeah, right where your cursor is now starts slowly moving to the west Right there you see remnants of former islands keep going and there's your microcontinent the a's ores plateau right there and And then if you keep going then you get to of course north America and let's see here if I can go back to Plato's So this is quoting directly now from Plato from Tameus Then listen Socrates to a strange tale which is however Certainly true. This is the Benjamin jowlettranslation. Are you on a specific slide here? I'm on slide 43 but I would narrate it if you you could keep looking at this slide. Okay uh As so long who was the wisest of the seven sages declared He was a relative and great friend of my grandfather Dropitis as he himself says or maybe drop at us as he himself says in many of his poems And drop at us told cretius my grandfather who remembered and told us so he was giving us the The lineage it goes back to the original tale So let's see we'll jump on a head Yeah, so then jumping on ahead We've got the forum there and and Socrates is there and Tameus is there and Cretius is there and several others Socrates says Very good. He's speaking to cretius very good And what is this ancient famous action of which cretius spoke not as mere legend But as a veritable action again veritable meaning true Which salon recounted so again another reference to that this tale that salon brought out of Egypt is is a true tale And cretius says I will tell an old world story which I heard from an aged man For cretius was as I said at that time nearly 90 years of age And so he goes into them and it's because of time. I'm gonna skip over some of this And let's see Yes, again tell us the whole story and how and from whom salon heard this veritable tradition again that it's true So then Let's see here so So salon now is asking the priest the elderly Egyptian priests. I'll just read this. This is again from the the Dejawa translation Thither came salon who was received by them the Egyptian priests with great honor and he asked the priests Who were most skillful and such matters about antiquity and made the discovery that neither he nor any other Helene or Greek Know anything worth mentioning about the times of old On one occasion when he salon was drawing They am on to speak of antiquity He began to tell about the most ancient things in our part of the world About phronius who is called the first and about niobi. No niobi was the queen of the ebs the daughter of Tantalus And after the deluge after the deluge To tell of the lives of two cally and in para or pyra and he traced the genealogy of their descendants and attempted to reckon How many years old were the events of which he was speaking and to give dates? So then we get into the dating of these things He says there upon one of the priests Who was of a very great age said oh salon salon new Helenes are but children and there is never an old man Who is a lien? Salon hearing this said what do you mean? I mean to say replied the old priest that in mind you are all young There is no old opinion handed down among you by ancient tradition Nor any science which is horry with age Now that's interesting. He makes this reference to a science Which is horry meaning very old and venerable right And I will tell you the reason for this There have been and this is this is really I think some of one of the most important lines it has come out of the Western metaphysical tradition There have been and will be again many Destructions of mankind Arising out of many causes But the greatest have been brought about by the agencies of fire and water and other lesser ones by innumerable other causes Um, then he goes on to say this is the preface now This is the preface to the story of Atlantis which I find extremely Significant There is a story now. This is still the old priest talking to so long. He says there is a story Which even you Helene's that are like children who don't know anything about the past like we do Right there's a story which even you have preserved that wants it upon a time fate and the son of Helios Having yoked the seeds in his father's chariot But because he was not able to drive them in the path of his father burned up All that was upon the earth And was himself destroyed by a thunderbolt Now if you're familiar with the myth of fate and it all Not really know. Faiton was the son of Helios, but didn't know it. Okay. Okay. So he's there It's going to his school and all of the boys are bragging about how great their fathers are But fate and didn't know who his father was so he goes to his mother And he says I want to know about my father and she says I guess you're old enough I'm gonna reveal it to you now. He is nothing nobody less than the son God himself and so fate and the sides that he wants to make this journey to the you know To where his father the son God resides and Meet his father so he goes there eventually finds the place and in the heavens right and then He His father is so glad to see him. He says I will grant you any boon or any promise that you want Now the thing about the gods the Greek gods is that they have tremendous capacities and powers that mere mortals don't have But they also have certain restrictions on them like for one thing if they make a promise They're bound to it absolutely bound to it right So Helio says that he would gladly give fate and His Whatever boon he wants So then fate and says well I want to drive your chariot And then fate and base I mean Helio says well No, how about anything but not Not that kind of cherry do you have? Well, it was a chariot pulled by these great powerful seeds. Okay So this is actually an extract now from both edges mythology Extract from the fall of fate and this is Helios now speaking. He says suppose I should lend you the chariot. What would you do? Could you keep your course while the sphere was revolving under you? Notice the use of the word sphere revolving Right just written about 2400 years ago Perhaps you think that there are forests and cities the abodes of the gods and palaces Temples on the way on the contrary to road is through the midst of frightful monsters. You pass by the horns of the bull Right Taurus Taurus in front of the archer Sagittarius and near the lion's jaws and Where the scorpion stretches its arms in one direction in the crab and in another so he's describing the plane of the ecliptic Right, which is also the the region of short period comments Okay Nor will you find it easy to guide these those horses with their breasts full of fire that they breathe forth from their mouths and nostrils When hapless and then so he finally he gets the chariot, right? The gates open the seeds run out pulling the chariot and immediately realize that The hand on the reins is weak and not Powerful and commanding like halios so then they immediately take off and so they're running You know Helter-skelter through the plane of the ecliptic And then it goes on when hapless fate and looked down upon the earth now spreading and vast extent beneath him He grew pale in his knees shook with terror In spite of the glare all around him the sight of his eyes grew dim He wished he had never touched his father's horses never learned his parentage never prevailed in his request He has borne along like a vessel that flies before a tempest when the pilot can do no more and be takes himself to prayers He turns his eyes from one direction to the other now to the goal when he began his course Now to the realms of sunset which he is not destined to reach He sees with terror the monstrous forms scattered over the surface of the heaven Here the scorpion extended his two great arms with his tail and crooked claws stretching over two signs of the zodiac When the boy beheld him wreaking with poison and menacing with his fangs His courage failed and the reins fell from his hand The horses when they felt them loose on their backs Dashed headlonged and unrestrained went off into unknown regions of the sky in among the stars Hurling the chariot over pathless places now up in high heaven now down almost to earth The moon saw with astonishment her brothers chariot Running beneath her own So it's passing within the orbit of the moon Is what it's telling us wow yeah yeah The clouds began to smoke The mountain tops take fire The fields are parched with heat the plants wither the trees with their leafy branches burn The harvest is ablaze But these are small things Great cities perished with their walls and towers whole nations with their people were consumed to ashes The forest clad mountains burned with fires within and without and Parnassus with his two peaks And rodeope Forsted last to part with his snowy crown Her cold climate was no protection to skithia Caucuses burned Aasa impendus and greater than both Olympus The Alps high in air Then fate and beheld the world on fire And felt the heat intolerable The air he breathed was like the fire The air of a furnace and full of burning ashes And the smoke was of a pitchy darkness He dashed forward he knew not wither The Libyan desert was dried up to the condition In which it remains to this day The nymphs of the fountains with disheveled hair Morn'd their waters Nor were the rivers safe beneath their banks The earth cracked open and threw the chinks Light broke into Tartarus And frightened the king of shadows and his queen The sea shrank up Where before was water it became dry plain And the mountains that lie beneath the waves Lifted up their heads and became islands The fishes sought the lowest depths and the dolphins no longer ventured As to sport on the surface So it goes on Um Wow Describing this great catastrophe So now what's interesting about this That is that is a fucking fantastical tale Isn't that it is amazing Yeah, that's why I bring it up Yeah, so Atlas himself fates and scarce holds up his burden If sea earth and heaven perish we fall into chaos Ancient chaos Save what remains to us from the devouring flame Oh take thought for our deliverance in this awful moment And so what happens? Thus spoke the earth overcome with heat and thirst Could say no more Then Jupiter omnipotent Calling to witness all the gods Including him who had linted the chariot And showing them that all was lost And some some speedy remedy were applied Mounted the lofty tower from whence he diffuses clouds over the earth And hurled the forked lightning But at that time not a cloud was to be found to interpose for a screen to earth Nor was a shower remaining unexhausted He thundered now this is Zeus And brandishing a lightning bolt in his right hand Launched it against the chariot here And struck him at that moment from his seat and from existence Faiten and here's an important clue right in the myth Faiten with his hair on fire Fell had long like a shooting star Which marks the heavens with its brightness as it falls And erudonis the great river received him And cooled his burning frame The Italian nayads or nearads reared a tomb for him And his sisters the helliades as they lamented his fate Were turned into poplar trees And on the banks of the river and their tears Which continued to flow became amber as it dropped into the stream And also by the way in according to some of the myths it was their tears That then caused the great flood So we have this account Now why did I go through all of this? Well the reason is is because if we go back to Plato What is Plato say remember? He says um he says uh yes about the many destructions of man And he says uh so this is now this is this is the preface To the tale of Atlantis There is a story which even you have preserved that once upon a time faiten The son of Helios having yoked the seeds in his father's chariot But because he was not able to drive them into path of his father Burned up all that was upon the earth and was himself destroyed as a thunderbolt Now listen to what Plato says Or this is the Egyptian priests Speaking here through Plato Now this has the form of a myth But it really signifies a detonation a declining Of the bodies moving around the earth and in the heavens And a great conflagration of all things upon the earth Recurring at long intervals of time So right there he say this is what Plato actually begins the the account Of Atlantis is by referring to this myth Of the earth having this encounter With what is undoubtedly a celestial object Right Right And it sounds like the sun you know something to do with it like you said earlier Parts of the sun down and scorching the earth Well this is the this is the chariot that's on fire Right exactly It's coming down Um Wow If you go to slide 65 for a second there Austin This is Sebastian out of the fall of fate and there's many artistic depictions Getting chills us into you talk about recite those There you go Yeah, you just passed it Or go to yeah go to 65 Okay And then put it on presentation view so we can get the big picture here Good, okay, so what you see here? This is a you see up in the upper right-hand corner There's Zeus about to herless thunderbolt And then you see the cherry with the great steeds plunging down to the earth And you see poor hold hapless fate and falling out of the chariot Right So this is this idea of the fall the falling of the chariot after it's been struck by the thunderbolt And now go to uh let's see uh We can go to Let's see do I have the quote here from proclus um Let's see And this was all okay, okay, here we go here's here's proclus right here the commentaries of proclus On the tameus of Plato in five books translated from the Greek by Thomas Taylor volume one go to slide 68 And this is this proclus is here expressing a very widespread view 68 You're going up 68 Should it should be right there Now here's what proclus is saying when he's commenting on On tameus and it will be among the number of things which may easily be accomplished If it is supposed that this fateon was a comet Which being dissolved produced an intolerable dryness from the human heat For this supposition is generally adopted Poor for you therefore says that certain signs may be assumed from the motion of comets So what he's proclus is saying here is he's confirming the idea that in the ancient times That was a belief that the myth of fateon actually referred to a comet Wow, and this would be the comment that one of the comets during the younger dries period Well, I tell you what now go to the next slide Austin Just roll it right on. Okay. The fall of fateon by Gustav Morone. Now Gustaf Morone was a very Mystically oriented Artist who is very immersed into the ancient traditions occultism and all of this now take a look at this slide very interesting because Look what he's showing here. He's showing the fall of fate lion top left. Yeah Right the lion What is that and see the belt the band there that is the plane of the ecliptic right Okay, see the plane of the clip because often in astrology and ever So in it's the belt that that wraps around that encompasses the orbit of the Sun the moon and all the planets Okay, right Now you look there And you see the lion you see fateon the chariot falling to earth You see the great serpent rising up Right the great dragon serpent right right the great dragon serpent. What's that a symbol of it's a symbol? for What do you think We'll come back to that. It's a symbol of what you see down there to the lower left See that coming out from behind the the Gustav Morone wants to make sure that we make the connection Do you see what that is go down there? Media the left you got you got the full moon rising and then what's right above the full moon a Comment a comment you got it So what is the snake a symbol of the comment? Oh, it looks like the snakes coming up. Yeah, you know that right Okay, now If you could go jump back now If you still got the age of Leo open Okay, go back to slide number four Yep dawn of the age of Leo 12,900 years BP So this is the younger dryest right here. This is the vernal equinox at the dawn of the age of Leo Right on the cusp of Virgo Leo so the beginning of the younger dryest was at the beginning of the age of Leo which is represented by the motion of the vernal equinox when you talked about Everybody served the age of Aquarius, right? Right? Right the age of preceded by the age of Pisces preceded by the age of areas preceded by the age of taurus Right this goes into your sacred geometry and the universal language of time. Sure. Absolutely all of that so Using that as a model for for time change Hmm what we got here is that at the beginning the dawning of the age of Leo 12,900 years ago the end of the age of Leo encompassed the younger dryest and the dual catastrophes that ended the ice age Okay, now if you go back to Gustav Marose Painting he's showing us exactly when the comet came he's showing us exactly when faitins chariot You see holy shit man you're blowing my mind over here That was that was my intent Yeah, geez The amount of synchronicities and coincidences through all of this All of this is just mind-blowing I would have to agree with you So there's the lion Yeah for the age of Leo. Yeah the comet The serpent and Now the serpent symbolism is definitely Worthy of further explanation. I think I gave Let's see did I give you I didn't give you that one. Oh yes, I did You should have this um if you go there should be one called apocolip's three ancient legacy All right, so go to Slide 60 and we're just going to look at some artwork taken from mythology and stories and legends And we're just going to not spend a whole lot of time. We're going to just kind of go through just so somebody can see that there's this tradition of The slaying of the dragon serpent so if you go to open Apocolip's three ancient Legacy Forever awesome Well, I will read you a quick quote here. This is from the book the cosmic serpent Okay, a catastrophe view of earth history by Victor Klub and Bill Napier 1982 one of the really early books that I read that helped me to really put these pieces together in place, right? So page 192 they're talking about myths, right? And they say the earliest recorded myths are those of combat between a god or hero and a dragon The dragon was a familiar figure in Greece. Egypt Mesopotamia Babylon India China North America and elsewhere Usually he has the form of a winged serpent He is a gigantic monster He spouts fire and smoke bellows and hisses he throws rocks and is the creator of terrible destruction And his home is in the sky So the whole premise of this book is that the ancient myths of serpents and dragons were referring to celestial advance involving comets, asteroids and impacts on her Whoa Right, so that's the connection there. Okay, right? Okay, to the serpent in that in that draw that piece of art with the lion. Yeah, and and and what I was going to get Austin to open was a whole bunch of imagery that I have okay from my end stuff from okay art Renaissance art and down mythology North mythot north north mythology a Mayan stuff from okay art Renaissance art and down mythology north mytho north north mythology you know all of that stuff but we save that for next time right right but yeah typically there are some of them i mean i'm just going to show you since okay see that oh wow yeah so it's a guy riding like a donkey or something yeah and a serpent coming out of the sky a serpent coming out of the sky yes and this guy's holding across some sort of a cross yes wow and then let's see can i go the next one giant serpent coming out of the sky yes that's just a snake doesn't look like a dragon there's no wings no there's there's various right pigeons um yeah let's see wow i can't see you okay wow there's a lot of this stuff and basically what it's showing is this tradition right long established tradition of associating dragons and serpents with things meteors fireballs comets right asteroids all of this stuff happening in the sky so um yeah so it's it's like in that painting by gustab moro he's got all of those elements right and he's even giving us the timing right you know which coincides right with the younger dryest yes so let's come back to Atlantis after we've taken this little segue yeah right exactly we were on uh so then i'll go on here one more i'll finish the quote that i was reading from um so the old priest says now this has the form of a myth but it really signifies a declination of the bodies moving in heavens around the earth uh and a great conflagration of things upon the earth which occurs after long intervals they go on to say the fact is that wherever the extremity of winter frost or of summer does not prevent mankind exists sometimes in greater sometimes in lesser numbers and whatever whatever happened either in your country or in ours or in any other region of which we are informed if there were any actions noble or greater and any other way remarkable they have all been written down by us of old and are preserved in our temples whereas just when you and other nations are beginning to be provided with letters and the other requisites of civilized life after now this is really really important right here after the usual interval the stream from heaven like a pestilence comes pouring down and leaves only those of you who are destitute of letters in education so you have to begin all over again like children and no nothing of what happened in ancient times so he's telling us right there you this idea of repeated destruction uh a site they're talking about cycles yes twenty five thousand year cycles he doesn't give any time okay for that but he just says after the usual interval right interval right so they they've apparently got some knowledge some understanding of the cycles that you just said right because this after the usual interval the stream from heaven like a pestilence comes pouring down so okay so we're talking about the intervals basically of like the Leo interval which was can you explain what that is the intervals of the different cycles so that's basically ever since ancient times as early as we can go back the ancient peoples who are in veteran obsessed sky watchers right identified these constellations the 12 known ones right you know right as being unique because they were the ones that basically all of the movement of the heavenly bodies the sun the moon in the visible planets all moved within those constellations right now in addition to that the vernal equinox the equinoxes and the solstices which are formed like a giant cross in space because they're right angles to each other it's rotating slowly right so the vernal equinox was always was like considered to be the marker for the beginning of the year and it was moving it was not fixed it was moving and it's called precession of the equinoxes because it's moving east to west whereas all of the other planetary motion lunar motion and solar motion is from west to east so if you're standing facing the south looking up into heavens from the northern hemisphere all that motion is going to be from west towards the east except the vernal equinox is in the opposite direction so roughly and this is very rough roughly every 2000 years that vernal equinox will be passing through or transiting one of those 12 signs so like for the last 2000 years it's been passing through the constellation of Pisces hence we've been in the age of Pisces right now there's a lot of course new age woo was associated with that but underlying that new age woo there's actual authentic astronomical phenomena which is the precession of the of the equinoxes which is simply an intersection point between the plane of the ecliptic and earth's equator celestial equator projected into space and this is going to get complicated and we'll save this because it requires some graphics for people actually envision it right other than the fact that the earth's axis is it's not stable it's it's it's right doing it's moving it's moving multiple it's it's rotating the sun for one it's doing the it's doing the rotates sun attacks revolves the term revolves around the sun and then it does this precessional motion like this well which is called the wobble right yeah now if you picture that the earth's equator is moving with it and then you project that plane out into space that baked great plane it's called a celestial equator and it's moving at the same rate earth's axis whereas the plane of the ecliptic the orbital plane of the planets and the sun and the moon remains fixed so the plane of the ecliptic is fixed the celestial equator is moving like this so the intersection of those two planes is moving at the same rate as this and this and that's roughly just a little less than 26,000 years wow right ancient peoples were really obsessed with right tracking this motion and they were able to measure it like act very accurately oh yeah yeah which is insane it's insane but in it over such a long period of time like how do you do well it would take it that motion if what you were to try to put it into some understandable form it's about it's 50 arc seconds per year okay so what does that mean it means that if you look at the whole circle of the ecliptic it's 360 degrees right each degree is divided into 60 minutes and each minute is divided into 60 seconds so if you go 60 seconds time 60 minutes time 360 degrees you get the total number of arc seconds in the full circle of the ecliptic and it turns out to be 1 million 296,000 years or I'm sorry seconds of arc right procession of the equinoxes is 50 seconds of arc per year so if I take my calculator and I go 1,296,000 years 1,000 million oops 1,200 and 1,296,000 years right here in the calculator right okay you see this Austin okay now I divide that by 50 and that's how much it moves there's the number of years it takes to make one full cycle 25,920 yeah just a little less than 26,000 that's one full cycle of the earth's wobble yes equinox yes the equinox moving through all 12 signs coming back to where started if we took where it is now and we backed it up if we went back 25,920 years the vertical equinox would be in the same position it would be a cuss between between Pisces and Aquarius and each one of the what these myths are saying each one of these full cycles of 25,900 years there is a major catastrophe probably more than one more than one and in fact I would argue that its catastrophes associated with the transition of each of the four seasons of the great year and this was the term great year just as there was that the great year is one full rotation of equinox yes okay at least if you you know within the the the arguments of Hamlet's Mill which I think is I think is credible they were the ones who wrote the book Hamlet's Mill in 1969 Georgio de Santeod on hearth of Andesha and wrote this book scholarly tone very dance came out in 1969 they make the argument that and we do know that there was a great year concept in many ancient cultures they make the argument that the great year was ultimately had its roots in the processional cycle which has come down to us in the ages you know the age of Aquarius the age of Pisces the age of areas which is a remnant of that even though it's been watered down into the new age who right behind it there is an authentic tradition and the belief was is that in the course of that cycle there were certain shall we say points of vulnerability where our susceptibility to cosmic catastrophe was increased by maybe orders of magnitude right and so if if there are these points of vulnerability and we are able to learn from previous civilizations and these myths and all these legends wouldn't the primary focus of our species to be able to get off the planet and become interplanetary to avoid these things like what we should be focusing on ways to preserve the species whether it be avoiding asteroid impacts or comet impacts either or that or getting off of Earth for certain I like both because anything we can do to maximize the probabilities now you know the dark mission that's just underway is an attempt to rendezvous with an asteroid and deflect it right okay so that if we it's to learn to learn and understand the technologies and whereby if we see that object coming towards the earth and it's on an impact trajectory we could nudge it so that it misses the earth now that would work with an asteroid it I don't know how well that would work with the calm how would you do that with an asteroid how would they do that with an asteroid all you have to do is nudge it a little bit so there this is what the dark mission is testing so we could actually get into talking about that but but yeah all you need to do is is you know if you attach a rocket to it and you know again all you if you catch it early enough then you just a little bit of a nudge right like it turns a direct hit into a wide miss right like it's like the theory of hitting a golf ball if you just the a millimeter angle difference when you're hitting a golf ball it quates to you know 50 100 to 100 yards any direction well there we go sure I believe yeah that's pretty much I think the idea I think that's the idea now but if you're talking about something like the shoemaker asteroids that you know we're broken into 21 different pieces and hit Jupiter within the period of a week how would we deflect 21 comments we'd be screwed right we would be screwed yes we would definitely be screwed so yes and that would to me make the argument for and this has actually been proposed that be a good rationale for a lunar base where we could offload a lot of our technology and information and things to the moon thereby perhaps preserving it kind of like a hard drive like a safe like a safe storage for everything we have because if we got if we did get wiped out by something it would it would virtually erase us from the planet it would if anything like the younger dryest happened now yeah oh yeah I mean the remnants of the human population would be reduced to a stone age existence because isn't it isn't it true that it only takes about a hundred years for if you erase human civilization off the face of the earth right now within a hundred years all of our buildings all of our structures everything that we have would be consumed by the earth all you'd have would be it would take longer than that okay I mean you know reinforced concrete structures are going to take probably 400 years to a thousand years okay but that's just assuming but a thousand years is nothing on the scale of things that we're talking about yeah when we're talking about things from 12 thousand years right now that's assuming you know you know there was that book came out about 10 years ago called the world without us where he kind of goes into talking engineers and material scientists and all of this and tries to get to the bar what would happen if all of a sudden all people disappeared and human infrastructure was still there what would happen to it over the millennium and pretty much the conclusion was there wouldn't be anything left to speak of after 10 thousand years with the exception perhaps of the pyramids. I'm not Rushmore. I'll Rushmore was one I think they mentioned but you know the thing is there and that's just assuming gradualistic processes that's not even counting you might have some serious catastrophes in and what I've tried to so in fact there's somebody now who put out a video called why Randall Carlson is wrong. Oh yeah yeah and I can't make you feel. Oh it doesn't make me feel bad I mean I'm look I'm totally cool what that reason is is that this particular video basically is just your standard issue response to these kinds of questions and basically what it boils down to as this. Well if there was something existing and of course what this guy does is he basically takes some quotes of mine out of one of the Joe Rogan podcasts out of context and then he kind of contrived his own scenario of what I'm saying which isn't what I'm really saying. Right. And then he you know. Yeah total straw man. Total straw man that's exactly what it is. But what it's clear from what I watched the video a few months ago was that he had no concept of catastrophism and what the implications of that would be in terms of you know because his basic argument was that well if there was some civilization you know back in the ice age we would still be finding artifacts and this kind of thing to prove that it was there and this is this has been a you know a rationale that's been proffered by these guys for decades now that well where's the pochards where's the evidence you know well I mean now like Graham Hancock like to point out well we got the evidence you know every year we're learning more and more stuff and he cites go back to the cafe right right now now this guy what he says is well he says he makes assertions like this he says well we know that Stone Age hunter gatherers could build monument we're capable of you know monumental structures look at go backly tepi my first thought is we'll wait a second you have no idea who built go backly tepi you don't know and you're just projecting your own imaginary scenario like wait a minute nomadic hunter gatherers oh they're fully capable of creating monumental architecture and I'm like okay I guess they've got a lot of spare time and a lot of extra people not you know I mean hunter gatherers we know from Stone Age from multiple and this guy's an archaeologist he should know better I mean nomadic hunter gatherers are typically you know just extended families of maybe 40 to 100 people for the most part right to accomplish these kinds of monumental infrastructure workings you have to have an organized society you have to have leisure time you have to have abundant food you have to have the people that are doing this are not spending their time out hunting hunting right no and why would you do it what's the motive there come on I'd like to know a motive you're not consumed by survival let's just put it like exactly the shit and then in the case of go backly tepi you know it's uh it's been buried right now some say purposefully right oh yeah yeah so you know why would you do that well I off I think this I this is my thought first thought that comes to my mind because you know I've studied nuclear strategy I've studied you know our cold war doctrines and you know the ideas of mutual assured destruction and learning about you know all of the different capacities of nuclear weapons and what that what would happen during the course of a nuclear war and the first thing that should come to your mind is this is that um you know we're talking earlier about Tunguska and a you know 15 megaton bomb well you'd drop a 15 megaton bomb it's gonna wipe out anything under surface but why is part of our nuclear doctrine do we put missile silos underground essentially we bury them same with hardened command and control centers isn't it to hide it from like aerial surveillance or aerial aerial detonations aerial explosions surface explosions of nuclear weapons oh yeah so you've got a super hardened missile silo that's you know stories underground remember in the in the late 80s when we were developing that new generation of missiles like the purging two missiles the tried and three missiles you know if they were designed to do they were designed to penetrate up to 50 or 60 feet into the earth before exploding why because you had to do that if you're gonna take out a missile silo or a command and control bunker you've got to be able to explode them underground if they're buried they're going to be uh you know they're going to be protected from what's the blast and the fire and everything that's up on the surface that's why it was done so now again think about the correlations the parallels between the tungusica but you brought this up yourself you said uh here was sheman Nagasaki were actually detonated in the atmosphere in the purpose of that again it's because the radius of destruction is much greater with a on the surface on on the surface when you have an atmospheric detonation right so if you want to preserve a monument from an aerial explosion bury it that's what you do you'd bear okay now if we had the stream from heaven descending like a pestilence and that stream of heaven is hundreds of tungusica objects you would bury it you would bury it you would bury it yes what about the pyramids well yeah good question i mean when were those built that's a controversial question you asked me about it yeah to say the least right the the Sphinx i think the evidence is pretty solid that the Sphinx has to be older than hold kingdom because i've looked at this i've been there i've examined it firsthand i've had extensive discussions with Robert shock and John Anthony west both John when he was still alive Robert it's been a while but yeah i mean way back whenever we were i helped him put on a a public presentation in ashville god way back by 2004 2003 and we had some very fruitful conversations about you know rock weathering rates and limestone exposed to the atmosphere and so on and uh you know what it boiled down to was that it's really difficult to explain the erosion of the Sphinx as being something purely limited to hold kingdom times 43 to 45 hundred years ago right so um i think that it's very clear that the erosion on the Sphinx's water erosion and is very very pronounced and would have required some rather extreme either extreme shorter lived flooding or longer term now like in jimmy's account he's talking about when the sahara was green covered in green right there would have been a lot more rainfall during that period of time right so here's the question was it prolonged rainfall over thousands of years that's one possibility or was it intense flooding much shorter and much quicker of highly abrasive flood waters flowing off the giza plateau causing the erosion then if that was the case at what point can we document any evidence of there being massive floods in that area and we can but we have to go back 12,000 years right to find those those flood events and those are very vehemently uh objective those those ideas of water erosion on on the on the Sphinx those uh that's frowned upon round of topology does not yeah but not so much by geologists right exactly you know right that's the thing so i came across a hilarious meme yesterday i showed you i want to show it to you on here okay can you pull it up okay he's just taking a moment uh about the the ancient pyramids but anyways like i'm about here talking about before we were out the pyramids you know it seems like like like you said getting everything that we know you know to preserve what we have you know up our humanity to date the best way to do it to save it from some sort of catastrophe is to get it off the planet somehow and that would be one way to really maximize the probabilities that it could survive and i think the most logical place for that would be the moon right and do you do you put any merit to the idea that it could have that could have already been done not necessarily to the moon but there could have been any sort of previous civilizations that thought the same thing we need to get off this planet well you know i just i read to you that quote earlier right about the tree of heaven right that there were two branches on the tree of heaven one uh that the celestial tree one that went to heaven and one to went to earth well that's a that's a fairly common belief this idea that there was this bifurcation of the human species and that some state and some left some state and some left so you know how credible is that well you can't prove nothing with the um based on myth alone right you have to find some objective uh some objective evidence there's something too there just there's something to that idea of humans somehow making it off earth and you know mixing DNA with some sort of other or somehow surviving for millions of years and then coming back to check up on us apes that are still around today it's a uh it's a perplexing idea yeah yeah this is the meme i wanted to show you oh it shows the guy it shows the uh the ancient egyptians building the pyramids and says this is a crime he says yeah but at least people in the future will appreciate the effort and the skill it took to build these pyramids then it shows the girl people in the future a girl sitting there stinger the pyramids aliens obviously built those i tend to i tend to align with graham handcock and this that you know we don't need aliens if we assume that there was some level of advancement in human civilization we don't need the aliens now which is which is going to be more credible or difficult to believe that it was aliens that came from where and came down to earth and built these things or helped us build them or there was a some civilization that had the capability super advanced humans something yeah super that yeah something like that i see i find that really easier to believe at this point now this is the whole question of aliens is really complicated and fraught with a lot of different conspiracies yeah yeah yeah it is created instantly it's still a fun thing to talk about it's still a fun thing to talk about yes absolutely um and i usually don't go there um because of that and i have my own interpretation of the whole eatief phenomena and i think we talked about it a little bit um and at some point in the near future i'm going to get into that because people are always asking me but i what you see this stuff that's going on today with these crazy aircraft that are flying all over the place all over these military yeah battleships and and military bases and these things that you can't they that modern physics does not allow to happen these things moving at incredible speeds passing these military fighter jets and yeah you see that and it just bolsters this discussion it makes it more it's a mainstream thing to talk about now like ten years ago yeah you would be considered a crazy person to talk about that talk about UFOs right now it's it's common thing everyone talks about it it's one of the things that people in the government in the pentagon is opening you know has opened up right yeah and and yeah so that's why i feel like it's timely to talk about it and the one thing i would say for now is that you know you've got you've got for one thing we know that at least a number of some percentages of the UFO sightings a really experimental aircraft um and the pentagon is perfectly happy to let people believe that it's UFOs if they're trying to keep experimental aircraft secret the other is that there are natural phenomena people like Paul Devaro have documented things you know that fluctuations into geomagnetic field can produce interesting phenomena in the sky you know where you have you know let's say along fault lines where you have great masses of let's say courts bearing minerals moving with respect to each other under with great shear force which is what a fault line is it's it's a crack in the earth but unlike a static crack the two sides of the crack are moving with respect to each other right that movement can set up fluctuations into geomagnetic field that can actually impinge upon people's what they're experiencing and witnessing can actually produce visible luminosities in the atmosphere um many times this has been documented to have happened before earth quakes can actually produce visible luminities in the atmosphere. Many times this has been documented to have happened before earthquakes that there will be lights that appear in the atmosphere and things like that. So there's another side of that. Whole another discussion. In fact, I did a discussion with Paul years ago where we talked, got into all of that and it's recorded somewhere. I'd like to get them back on my show to talk about that further. Now the third thing is where you'd say, okay, there are authentic craft of some kind that we have no explanation for. So what if people immediately jump to us, oh, it's aliens, it's extraterrestrials, and where did they come from? You know? That's the thing where I'm saying, it's not what people think it is. It's something very different. And you're kind of on the right track. But we'll leave it at that for now. And I'm going to jump back to it and land this. And a quote from Plato. So now this is, this again is the old priest talking to Solon. He says, many great and wonderful deeds are recorded of your state and our histories. And he's talking about this proto-ith- Indian state that allied with the Egyptians to fight off this incursion of this great Atlante and Empire. He says, many great and wonderful deeds are recorded in your state, in our histories, but one of them exceeds all the rest in greatness and valor. For these histories tell of a mighty power, One provoked made an expedition against the home of Europe and Asia into which your city put an end. And here's the key passage right here. This power came forth out of the Atlantic Ocean. For in those days the Atlantic was navigable. Okay. Very clear. Mm hmm. Came forth out of the Atlantic Ocean. Now in Plato's day the Atlantic Ocean was no different than our Atlantic Ocean today. Right. Listen to this. And there was an island situated in front of the Straits which are by you called the pillars of Heracles. The island was larger than Libyan Asia put together and was the way to other islands. And from these you might pass to the whole of the opposite continent which surrounds the true ocean. Look back up there again. You're looking back at the mid Atlantic Ridge. Yes. Now he's talking about sailing west from the pillars of Heracles. And there were islands right there in that light gray area. So that would have been listen. There was an island situated in the front of the Straits which are called by you the pillars of Heracles. And was the way to other islands. And from these you might pass to the whole of the opposite continent. And there it is right over there. It almost is if he's saying these Egyptians knew about the presence of North America. Right. Yeah. Which surrounds the true ocean. Because as he says for this sea which is within the Straits of Heracles which he's talking about the Mediterranean is only a harbor having a narrow entrance. But that other is a real sea in the surrounding land may be most truly called a boundless continent. If you go now to slide number 89, Austin. Okay. So here we have Straits of Gibraltar. Okay. We're looking at the Gulf of Caddies. Yes. Okay. With the Africa on the bottom connecting to the Iberian Peninsula on top and the Straits of Gibraltar going right through the center. Now roll forward one slide. Take a look and you'll see the mid Atlantic Ridge is very prominent. Right. Okay. And it's really it's one of the weakest areas of crust on the entire planet. Why is that? Because it's a spreading center. It's where it's where crust is being born. It's the origin of the crust. That's a huge crack there. And molten lava issues up from the crack and then spreads laterally. And it's this that's driving the motion of the tectonic plates at least within the framework of plate tectonics. Okay. Okay. So now listen to what the priest goes on to say. Now in this island, island is the word of its land. This was a great and wonderful empire which had rule over the whole island and several others and over parts of the continent. So he's very much distinguishing between the continent and the island and the island. But any saying it had rule over the whole island and several others. So it was not limited to a single island, but then and over parts of the continent. And furthermore, the man of Atlantis had subjected the parts of Libya within the columns of Harry, here at least, as far as Egypt. So they would have if that was the case, they would have been colonizing the area of northwestern Africa, which is now Morocco, what is now Libya, including probably what is now Mauritania. So if you assume that it might have not at all been implausible to assume that, you know, that land in explorers could have traversed the area of the reach at structure, right? Then this vast power gathered into one and never to subdue at a blow our country and yours and the whole region within the straits. Okay. And then salon your country shown forth in the excellence of her virtue and strength among all mankind for she was first encouraged in military skill and was the leader of the Helenes. I'm going to jump in the sake of times. So then they have this big war and led by the the the peoples within the Straits of Gibraltar around the Mediterranean, led by these proto-Athenians freely liberated all the others who dwell within the limits of Heracles. So he's describing a very explicit. You've got this power comes forth out of the Atlantic. It rules over a series of islands. One main island rules over the series of islands comes within to the Mediterranean, which he describes as just a harbor compared to the real ocean. Subdue all of these nations and then the proto-Athenians managed to organize them all. They fight off and they liberate all those others who dwell within the limits of Heracles. And then afterwards there occurred violent earthquakes and floods in a single day night of rain. All your war like men in a body sank into the earth. So in other words, she's referring now to something that's happening in the Greek peninsula. And the island of Atlantis in like manner disappeared and was sunk beneath the sea. Now to me, that is pretty explicit. You got an island. There were earthquakes. It sank beneath the sea. There's no ambiguity there. In that part of where the eye of Africa is, that was never completely underwater. No. Not since probably Cretaceous times. Because our Cretaceous limestone's there. Which shows that it was then underwater. Right. Like 60 million, 70 million, 80 million years ago. Now, Jimmy is absolutely right when he talks about water flowing over. And I discuss that in my discussion of the recast structure that there is evidence that there was these tremendous floods flowing over. That's probably why the structure is exposed as it is. Because these floods would have ripped away the bedrock concealing it and exposed the core of this ancient plume. Yeah. Volcanic plume. Yeah. There's so much here we could get into. Yeah. It's lengthy. It's a lot. It's a lot. Anybody who finds this captivating and they want to learn more about this, I highly recommend you to episode 9 of Randall's podcast. Well, that's the one that specifically addresses the recast structure. The recast structure. There's many episodes that talk about this. I think I've got five episodes leading up to that. six, maybe a couple hours each. And I go into all the geology, geography, and oceanography. Like we were doing here, aligned by line analysis of Plato's account, plus a few other peripheral accounts, you know, Herodotus and Proclus and so on. It's called Cosmographia with a K. With a K. Right. I like words with a K. Okay, me too. Well, that's the Greek spelling. The Greek for Cosmographia. Oh, is it really? Cosmography in the English spelling starts with a C. But it comes back from like Renaissance times and it was the study of, you know, the study of big things. It included geology, astronomy, geometry, geography, all of that. So the Cosmographer was the one who would try to understand and comprehend basically all the knowledge of their day. Hmm. So interesting. Yeah. Well, Randall, we've hit about three hours and 15 minutes. Oh, wow. Then we should probably get on our way. Thank you so much for doing this, man. I could do another three hours, but we'll have to save that for episode two. We'll do that. Give me another excuse to get back. Yeah, absolutely, man. Well, tell everyone where they can research more, find more of your work online. Well, okay. Couple of, just Randall Carlson dot com will be the gateway to a whole bunch of stuff. I'm also partnering with a new internet platform called How Tube, which I think could be an important player in the next few years because of their opposition to censorship, their desire, our, I'll say, because I'm partnering with them to provide a forum more or less censorship free and yeah, so we're getting new content up all the time. And the other thing is, you know, organized, we're actually looking at organizing a tourist the Azores next year. That would be an Atlantis tour. Yeah. Yeah. So we'll see how that sounds exciting. Well, it would be. So, you know, we've got a tour coming up in March, which is going to be not Friday. It's going to be up on the Cumberland plateau of Eastern Tennessee. And there was a remarkable landscape hiding beneath the forests of Eastern Tennessee. And the ideas to take people up there in its multiple multipurpose, one is going to be to show people that there are these landscapes hidden from view. Now when we go out in Eastern Washington, we look at the scab lands, these are landscapes, pretty much visible to the eye. And I wish we had time to get into some of that tonight because it's so extraordinary. You know, when you see the effects of hundreds of millions of cubic feet of water ripping across the landscape, what, you know, the in the aftermath of that is pretty extraordinary. Well, when you go up in Eastern Washington, Western Montana, that area up there to Pacific Northwest, that evidence is very spectacularly displayed. And you've got a semi-arid climate in Eastern Washington. So, you know, the coolies and the great boulder trains and things like that are pretty much exposed to view. You get to other parts of the country and unbeknownst to most people. And this is why we're going to Eastern Tennessee. When you look beneath the canopy of vegetation, you see the same type of features. Really. Not quite on the same scale, but still spectacular. You know, cataracts is a thing that is produced by gigantic water flows. And one of the things that I've been developing in our podcast series is that I'm showing how all the major rivers of North America are what are called under-fit streams or underfit rivers, which means that the rivers are flowing in channels that are way supersized relative to the modern river that's flowing in it. The old thinking about that is we've got this big channel and it formed over millions of years of erosion. But we know now that's not how they formed. They formed by these gigantic catastrophic water flows that left these huge channels within the earth's crust. And the modern rivers are just using those. I mean, you name any river. And I can almost show you that it's a so-called under-fit river. So like when I grew up in Minnesota, I've told this story about how I was at a summer of 1969, I was at a rock concert on the bluffs overlooking the Valley of the Minnesota River. And I saw something there that made an impression on me was this the phenomena of scale and variance. So I looked at the small small. It's a pretty good sized river, but down below me, hundreds of feet below these bluffs I was standing on was the modern Minnesota River. And I could see that it was flanked by small bluffs on either side. And then three miles across, I saw another set of bluffs matching the 250-foot high bluffs that I was on. Right? And I was probably in an altered state of consciousness at the time. Probably. Probably. Yes. Which maybe made me look at things in a slightly different perspective. But I remember thinking it was like what I was looking at this little ribbon of this river down below me was sort of recapitulated in this huge valley that I was looking into. And I kind of forgot about it for years until maybe a decade later when I started really learning about catastrophism and giant floods and stuff. And then I came back to that. There have been studies now made that, you know, I remember I was doing a lecture and I had a he was not a geologist. He was a photographer, but he had a degree in geology. And I was explaining how I looked at this valley and I thought maybe there was a giant catastrophic flood that came through there. And that was my first impression, my first awareness of scale and variant phenomenon in the realm of geology. But then he goes no, no, no, no, no, that was produced over, you know, tens of thousands or millions of years. You know, that was, and there was no big right. And I said, I don't remember his name. John, his name was John. I said, John, I think you're wrong, but I couldn't make a good solid argument. So this would have been, you know, early 80s. So that was really a trigger for me. And that was one of the things that actually made me pursue formal geological studies, right? Wow. Of course now, that was sort of the seed for this. It was an invoice. It was a, it was a, it was a kind of an annoyed me and I thought I knew I was right. I knew I was right. Now since then, I've gone back. I've visited and traversed that river valley. I took Graham Hancock along portions of that river valley. And as it turns out, yeah, it was a gigantic glacial meltwater flood that came through there. Geologists that have studied it actually call it glacial river warren. The peak discharge of glacial river warren was approximately 4,000 times greater than the modern Minnesota river that flows through the valley. So if you took the modern river times 4,000, that was the volume of glacial river warren. See, it's a fuck ton. It's a, yeah. Yeah. So yeah, I mean, there's so many things we could get into here. But anyhow, so if you go back and you look at the North American continent, the majority of rivers in North America are under fit rivers. And I've got several episodes, multiple episodes of the Cosmography of podcast where I'm getting showing the lidar maps and everything where you don't really see so much from the surface. But when you look under the surface, you see these enormous features that are these gigantic things that are on such a grand scale that, you know, until the last generation or two, we were totally oblivious. But we can, I'll put it this way. And I don't think this is, this is hyperbole. There he is right now engraved into the surface of this planet, a script that tells a story about these gigantic cosmic events, which our planet has been involved in. And for 12,000, 13,000 years, this engraved script has been lying beneath our feet unbeknownst to us. Memories of these events have come down through us through myth, legend, folklore, and so on. And now we have the technical means to see things that previous generations couldn't see. And now that we're seeing things on a planetary scale and we've got satellite photography and we've got aerial photography and now things like ground penetrating radar in Lidar and the list goes on, we have new eyes and we're now in a privileged position where we can actually begin to read that script that's been waiting for us, been waiting to be rediscovered for 12,000 years. And now it's happening. And that's what my podcast is mainly about. Well, it's fascinating, man. I, like I said, I've been listening to six to seven hours of it straight. I still got a long way to go. And I highly recommend it's hard to stop. Once you start listening to it, it's almost impossible to stop. It's like any of the podcasts that you've done in the past on Joe's podcast or anything else. It's fascinating. And I'm so happy to see that it's becoming more of a mainstream interest to people. So anybody who wants to know more, just Randall Carlson.com and you'll find out about all the stuff that we're doing and the tours we're planning that are coming up. So if you want to get involved in any way. There's multiple ways people who would like to get involved somewhere or another. You know, because this is, I see this is, you know, like I mentioned how to, and we've got a really incredible team group of content creators that are coming together under the how to banner. I don't know if you know Mark who does the after school animations, really incredible stuff. Yeah. So we're going to be we're going to there's this network coming to you. And you're now, whether you like it right, you're part of this network. Perfect. I'm ready to go to the a's or's. Yeah. Okay. Maybe you'll join us just to Tennessee. Yeah. Absolutely. Absolutely. But quicker and cheaper, but it'll be fun. I'll pay, I'll pay my own way to go to the a's or as I got all the underwater camera, cinematography, equipment we need. All right. All right. Well, we've, we've leased, we've reserved 20 rooms at the new resort that's being, that's just being finished in January at Falls Creek Falls, which is, um, and we got a couple of cabins and we're going to be, um, and leading up to it into, in the probably six weeks leading up to it. We'll do a series of zoom conferences where we're kind of, you know, briefing everybody on what we're going to be doing, what the objectives are. Some of the background to understand the science and the geology and all of this. Right. And then I think it'll be five days. Okay. And we'll have two big Tennessee. Two or fancy at Eastern Tennessee and, uh, revealing, revealing the landscape that's hidden under this canopy of vegetation. Well, that sounds fucking fascinating. Man, I would love to be a part of that. But you can. And Austin can be too. Austin, you're coming. He'll probably be somewhere, uh, on the other side of the planet. Okay. One last thing I'll mention is that there is a website out there that I once once affiliated with and it's no longer due to, um, multiple issues I had to break away from it. Um, it turned, it was, it was launched ostensibly to be a showcase for my work and it turned into a, the webmaster turned it into, uh, his own soap box, uh, to promote conspiracy theories. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. And, um, what was that? Sacred geometry international. Oh, really? Yes. So, uh, he continues to fraudulently use my name, my face to sell my work. I receive no money and have received no money in over three years now. But if you go to the website, you'll totally think, yeah, this is Randall's website and I'm going to donate. I'm going to buy this. It'll go to Randall. It doesn't. It's too bad because it started out good, but then along the way, it just, it's not what it, what it appeared to be and, uh, turned into a con job. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's fucked up. Well, the Sacred geometry thing is a whole nother can of worm. It ought to dive into next time. We will. That just your video on YouTube, uh, I think it's like a two hour video of you, of you presenting Sacred geometry. I think it's to some sort of universities, to students and you're doing a presentation and that is enthralling on his own just talking about the dodecahedron and how that correlates into the cosmic, the universe and. Yeah. It is amazing. It is amazing. It is amazing. And that's some of the stuff that, you know, you can trace back and you go, it's origins appear to be very ancient. There's so many things that go back to the very beginnings of recorded history that just don't make sense unless there was something preceding that. Right. You see, right. So we'll hopefully begin into the next one. Well, uh, Randall, thank you so much for your time. Thanks for having me, Danny. I appreciate it. Man, I enjoyed it. Goodbye world.