Was the original pronunciation? Well, my understanding is back in the old days It was Sam the butcher and Joe the barber and and my great grandfather was a cousin Which is a singer of holy songs like the actor would be the term now and when my grandfather came to El Asylum, he didn't speak English and they wrote it up as HASSA in and so I've lived my life being thought of as an Arab Being persecuted at times by Jews. I'm actually Jewish and I belong the Jews persecuted you I've had Experiences where people made yes because of your name because of the spell did you have to let him? Hey you asshole I'm one of you well first they'd say you're you know being a bigot and then I'd say by the way I'm Jewish What did they say I'm so sorry? They would look at me and then they'd say you don't look so far at a comes on Ashkenazi but Anyway, you know like act with some dignity and compassion and kindness Yeah, especially for no reasons. It's not like you did something anti-semitic right? The first time I was actually physically assaulted was during the six-day war back in the 60s when I was in elementary school and On a stairwell In Queens New York you assaulted because of your ethnicity. I was assaulted by Jews who thought I was an Arab Jesus Christ And they attacked me and I threw them down. I grew up in my father's hardware business So I kind of like knew how to pick up hundred pound bags of rock solids. Oh So they like fell on the floor and then I said you schmuck some Jewish I like how you schmuck that way you let him know Isn't Judaism sort of a cult? So let me just explain what Steve does anyway Steve Hassan Hassan Hassan Hassan? Yes, yes You wrote a book if Combating cult mind control. I got a hold of you because of my friend Nate quarry who used to fight for the UFC and he is one who Connected me to you and he was a Jehovah's Witness for a while and You grew up in it. Yes. Yes, he did and he wrote me a really interesting email about the mind Control process of that that particular cult Your book combating cult mind control is Right here it says number one best-selling guide to protection rescue and recovery from destructive cult is Judaism a cult So first let me just say that book first came out in 1988 and it had a Fellow on the front cover who looked a little bit like you But but clean shaven and he had a padlock and a chain around his forehead He did it. I told the publisher. I hated it. Oh, they they created the artwork for they did the artwork and anyway It's been out for 25 27 years now in hardback and I've finally bought the rights back And I've updated it post internet including terrorists and human trafficking and Including people born into cults like the Jehovah's Witnesses so that said I grew up in a conservative Jewish family the youngest of three My mom was an art teacher my dad had a hard wrist or his musician before that and after that and I really didn't like the Judaism that I was taught But I was very close to my mom and my maternal grandfather is Orthodox And I grew up with a spiritual feeling and connection and I still feel that Connection and I'm actually part of an alternative Jewish community for the last 17 years But the the point that I want to say is that there's a whole range and I actually gave you a blow-up of a graphic I don't know if you're gonna use it button of ethical influence and unethical influence and the idea is that one can look at specific behavioral components and determine whether or not It's a destructive cult or a benign cult or constructive cult So the word cult in and of itself tends to be pejorative But as someone who is quoted in the book called the cult of Mac as a disciple myself in the book uh, cult of Mac Yeah, that was literally interviewed by this writer who actually has a website called the cult of Mac and he said your editor My editor said I have to interview you and I said what about my single book about computers. I said That's weird Not the typical interview like what's it? I'd all he said the cult of Mac and I laughed I said I'd been using Apple since 1982 and I have five max right now But if you still want me to do an interview I'll be happy to do it I do believe that people there are certain people that are in a cult of Mac a hundred percent I noticed it in the 90s when I was on news radio all the people on the staff all the people that work behind the scenes They would get so excited when a new OS operating system came out. Yeah Apple OS and they would talk about it like we've got a new one now. It's gonna be better than windows It's gonna be amazing. Yeah, there's a science So as there is a social science to creating a cult, but again, I cite the bite model and cite that you know if there's deception so there's lack of informed consent if this extreme use of hearing guilt if this information control where people are being told you can't talk to critics or defectors or you need to cuddle off from family or friends who are questioning you that's I'm concerned about human rights. I think the easiest way to understand what I do as a former cult member myself It's really in support of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights So you're not necessarily Anti-cult you are Anti-negative cults that have a detrimental effect on a person's life Yeah, and I would actually blow the frame up a little bit bigger since I've been doing this work for 39 years And I would say I'm against undue influence undo how do you it's a legal term for exploitative influence as compared to ethical influence where like a therapist is trying to help somebody to confront their fears or Influenza of helping somebody who's addicted to something that's that's killing them But wouldn't you put a lot of religions in that category then that classification of undo influence right? So the beat you asked me is Judaism a cult the answer is there are Jewish cults for sure and there are lots of other Jewish Temples and affiliations that are not destructive cults. So what would you consider them? Them the positive ones the positive ones. I belong to temple Beth saian and Brooklyn, Massachusetts novel Brooklyn You would appreciate that my my rabbi wrote the big book of Jewish humor and he was a comedian for most of his adult career became a rabbi later on Moshe Waldex and he cracks jokes even during Yom Kippur and he's my kind of rabbi It's not it's gay friendly women centered social justice But we love to sing we love to chant we love to doven. We love to doven. What's a doven? Davening is is Religious prayer okay going through the cedar and learning Torah. I love to go to Torah study it it resonates for me in terms of my spiritual path that said I've also studied Buddhism and I have a teacher who's teaching me a Korean form of meditation and movement He's a martial artist by way. Oh, yeah Korean martial arts. What kind is swordsman swordsman? So does like kendo or something something like a real version like the real sword thing What kendo is a real art of sword? They just use bamboo sticks Because it is like yes, it is yes. Yeah I learned a little bit of that in the movies say what you in the movies that teach you kendo really mmm Chinese nice to see chilos on probably just in case they have to take over the world and everybody's out of well I hope we have a chance to chat about the moonies. It's all we will definitely chat about the moonies so So you would you say you're By doing this being involved in an organized religion an ancient organized religion in the sect that you feel is positive Would it be just more of a community of philosophy and maybe just a just a nice group of people that Well, it is a nice group of people we are independent Although we're influenced by the renewal movement of Zalman, Shaula me, but we're trying to what does that mean? Where that's the name of a of a Spiritual leader rabbi who passed away who basically said he liked the smoke pot by the way I like him already he he talked about like updating the traditions for the modern time and that we need the whole point is Growth and connection to other beings in a loving compassionate way. It's not about being exclusive It's not about putting other people down to be on your path. It's about Awareness and consciousness. Well, that sounds like a very healthy perspective I don't think I would be part of a spiritual community after everything I grew through that wasn't super healthy and giving me more than I was taking from me Do you are you allowed to be a group? People eat bacon. I personally don't eat bacon my wife loves bacon, but We're not we drive to temple. I live several miles away my rabbi drives to temple even on Saturday on Shabbat Whoa, but you know, it's more important to show up at temple than To you know into Miss temple mystical So that each all of the you of cars the rules should serve the spiritual Purpose and not the other way around that is all are just compressed into this rigidity Right of conformity and obedience and guilt and shame that we are not into guilt and shame We're into joy and love and laughter and helping one another that sounds very ideal as far as cult go I think so so it's a cult is just a really good one. It's a good Some people in Boston call it a cult and I'm like I'm a happily say I've been there for 17 years from the very beginning of his his invitation to become a rabbi there and We've had our ups and downs, but it's it's healthy. It's accountable The membership make the agenda. It's not tapped top down. You know a dictatorship type thing It's it's the membership and What's the downs? what's the downs? There was some personality power conflicts between an assistant rabbi and Moshe there was some other yeah Always on works. There's always some power struggle. You know human beings where you know imperfect and The key is is you know if somebody calls you on your shit That you step back and you listen and you reflect and you either correct your your your behavior Or you don't and if you don't and if you're a part of a community like that in a leadership role then they ask you to leave And so that was what was going on there In that particular case, I think she wanted more say so she didn't want to be the assistant rabbi I don't know all the chicks be rabbis. Oh, yeah We haven't we have an assistant rabbi right now. Rob Claudia who's amazing Is Rob like the form like doctor. Sorry. Yeah. It's like rabbi Rabbi means teacher okay, but a female you call Rob or is it distinction for a male as well? No, you can call her a male a rob also See this it's so weird to me that you're like an anti-cult guy, but this is clearly At the very least a very strong ideology with some pretty rigid sort of classifications of things that that fair to say I Mean Judaism as a You yeah It seems that I'm gonna get no started nobody makes me it's fine It's not the typical interview that I'm asked to do but then again, I didn't expect us to be what is it? Well, so just conversation really now trying not to interview people. Oh, okay For me, I just want to grow and I like being part of a group that's bigger than myself Particularly one that's interested in helping Boston where members of the greater Boston interfaith organization where we're fighting for justice to raise minimum wage to help Get rid of egregious banking fees on immigrants We bring in Pro-Palestinian peace activists to speak we bring in Steve has to speak about cults Interesting programming and I love being part of a community and on a personal note when I had cancer nine years ago At Hochkin's lymphoma People were offering to drive me to the hospital make us meals And it was just great to feel like we weren't alone facing that that's great And that's what I always hear from people that are in Christian churches that really really enjoy it They really enjoy the community and they really enjoy the bond that they have with all these folks and that It seems like coming together and sitting together on Sunday or whenever you do it in worshiping The really in fact Part of what's going on there is you're all making this sort of agreement to look at the possibility of Being a higher good for all of us and that you all join together in this and then you get this Bonding this feeling of community that we kind of don't really have that much in this world a lot of folks don't know their neighbors They don't you know, they just I have a buddy lives in apartment building It's like 54's. He doesn't know a fucking single person entire gold. Yeah That's so crazy Hundreds and hundreds of people you don't even know who they are right and that's part of what needs to be changed in my opinion In the world a healthier place where people do know their neighbors and they do offer help If somebody needs help That's the beauty of small pounds The beauty of less people is those people get appreciated more it's sort of like you know You can have too much stuff and then that stuff doesn't have any value anymore or you can have one cherished item Like wow, this is the baseball glove my dad gave me when I was 10 and I will cherish it forever Instead of like a fucking warehouse full of baseball gloves. They don't mean jack shit to you and I think human beings are kind of a warehouse Full of baseball gloves. It's just so many of us that it's we sort of lose value Lues in appreciation for us because there's so many of us That's part of it. I also think that you know modern culture and civilization and technology has created a false Construct of what's important and what's real where beingness and being part of a family or community or a tribe mattered as a central theme of our identity Now it's consumerism and and what status you have at your job or how much you're making or what car you're driving and where you're going on vacation and this information overload and Sleep deprivation that is very troubling sleep deprivation. Mm-hmm. Yeah Um It's probably one of the most studied Phenomenon the effects on the on the mind and on the on the brain lack of sleep and it's one of the classic Techniques used by destructive cults by the way sleep deprivation But if one analyzes American society my understanding is that the average American is sleep deprived Isn't that one of the things that Scientology supposedly does to those folks that they have that work for a pennies that would they call them seacore? It's the it's a seahore Seaward a billion year contract billion in the hilarious sign a billion year contract. Yeah And I want to mention that I was part of a five-day seminar in Toronto a few weeks ago called getting clear and Some of the top former officials of Scientology were interviewed on stage I was on stage talking about hypnosis because Hubbard was a hypnotist and a lot of the processes In Scientology are straight out of a hypnosis textbook from the 20s and 30s which is when Hubbard was reading about it The process is like doing auditing such a me. Yeah, so to sit with your feet flat on the floor in your hands in your lap And you're closing your eyes and just being there Not reacting for 20 minutes the Scientologists will tell you oh Joe you just licked your lips or your your knee quiver No, you've got to Just freeze for 20 minutes. It's creating an altered state of consciousness known as trans And I know we're going to talk more about trans. I'm sure There's nothing wrong with trans states, but when you're in a trans state you're more suggestable Someone who has authority and who has an agenda to implant ideas in your head Because you're not in your critical analytic Part of your mind really so just sitting for 20 minutes of your hands in your lap and your feet flat would lead you To be more influenced by someone's aggression. That's the first one The next one is sitting opposite a Scientologist three feet away staring into the Scientologist eyes For 20 minutes. That's the next that's the next one The next really hot here, okay? Is this young? And the next one after that is Bulbating where you have to stare straight forward and the Scientologist tries to get you to react or respond It's like a bowl with a red cape really yeah, so they are training obedience their deep the Decensitizing people from normal social cues and interactions and they're cultivating a compliant obedient drenched identity as a Scientologist I Didn't know that just staring at someone just staring into someone's eyes can create an altered state of consciousness A bunch of kissing Staring at a candle staring at a spot on a wall that's known in hypnosis language as an eye fixation technique as a very very common Technique for inducing an altered state of consciousness Why because the eyes are pretty wired to move and scan? And when you and I should also say hypnosis is not sleep It's an altered state of consciousness that's best characterized as concentration or absorption and I just want to say one more time There's nothing wrong with that state. I like that state. I do self hypnosis. I do meditation I do many different altered states Techniques the point is I'm in control Deciding I don't have somebody who's alienating me from my own inner voice in my own self and trying to imprint me with an Aetotalistic ideology that's black and white us versus them good versus evil So let's talk about you you you got into the moonies That's and you were there for two years. Is that what it was? Yeah, two and a half years Two and a half years and that led you to try to get a greater understanding of cults the cult mind control and to help people What was your experience? How old are you in nineteen's that we were yeah? I was it skipped eighth grade. I was an extra honor student I was a creative writing major Queens College humble brag see that just kidding So you were on I was reading played out when I was eight I wasn't to utopia novels when I was nine, but aside from that utopian novels You know I was I was wanting an ideal world and looking around at what I saw in the media and Russians were gonna nuke us and Already I was sensitized the global climate change way back then I Was in the last draft lottery to go to Vietnam Anyway, I was I had been basically dumped by my girlfriend checks I do it every time and I was kind of bombed and I was sitting in the cafeteria waiting for my new the new semester to start and three women Pretending to be students dressed like students carrying books like students Asked if they can share my table and they started asking me about the books that I had from the world students now they were moonies Wow, and it was a deceptive systematic which I later learned how to do as a leader I learned how to recruit people and I had a similar situation college to do yeah Well, there was this Italian class that I was taking is this beautiful Puerto Rican girl check glasses. She's so hot Oh, and She was always asking me to go to these parties She's always inviting me to these parties like come to this come or go to the Cape for the weekend You should come I was like whoa, oh my god But I was always busy. Oh so mad. I was like fuck I gotta find a date where I was busy To I was a waiter on the weekends. What year is this? I graduated high school in 85 I took a year off before I went to UMass Boston and wasted three years Just fucking around there that was so it was probably 86 86 in church or Christ. I don't know what church they were in because they were hot and heavy that period of time Could be in Boston. They were they were inviting me to these retreats and they had invited me to more than one and I couldn't go I was still competing in martial arts tournaments back then I was always busy But I really like this girl. She's pretty hot and she's very friendly too. It's like wow, maybe she's the one really friendly loving cute This is how it goes down there was an airplane crash in Boston and it was one of those weird plane crashes where the Did Trump have an airplane at one time did Donald Trump have an airline? Maybe I don't know why we're connect him to it in some strange way But whatever it was this airline the the wheels wouldn't come down You know how sometimes they make those crazy landings where they skid across the one way and sparks flying everything like that so I sat down with these girls and we're at lunch in the cafeteria and I go Did you guys hear about the plane crash and they go know what happened and I said yeah, well some The wheels wouldn't it was Trump airlines. Yeah, that's what it was. I'm pretty sure is his you could probably find the actual date that this happened Find the actual date that Trump airlines Wheels wouldn't come down so anyway It's a Logan airport in Boston skids parks the whole might have been Boston might have been somewhere else But I was living in Boston anyway boy, I'm like getting off track these I tell them how it's more than that then to by the way so they go what happened and I said well the wheels Didn't come down and they had a skid across the one way was anyone heard I go no no no was hurt They go oh praise God praise God and I just went what it was just it was weird They all clasped their hands together like this praise God pray it wasn't like wow Whoo thank God nobody was hurt, you know, which is like a normal expression, but it was it was a very Pius like a devoutly religious praise God. Oh praise God. I looked around. I go Pray, okay Like what do you guys do and then and then I started realizing fuck man She didn't really want me to come to a party like there's something going on here and Save your soul man. Yeah. Well, and then then I started to ask them I said to do you think God like saved that oh absolutely I go well Why didn't God just make the wheels come down why freak everybody out? Weird and then it got ugly and you know, I mean then they never talked to me again I forget where it went I was a dick back then I probably said something stupid well a lot of Bible cults Jewish Christian and Muslim are into Armageddon You know the apocalypse is coming any moment. It's a good way to get people to sign up Exactly the heavy pressure scarcity times running out if here if if the world Ended tomorrow. Are you ready? I'm definitely meant to hell You know it doesn't matter. It's already or not the world's gonna end. You know it's like are you ready? Let's sign over your real estate and your bonds and So you're sitting at this table these girls come over there weren't even students right so what are they doing in this school? How'd they get in? They lied. They just walked in College of city University. I'm shitty security. Puck in do that And only that but later when I got recruited into the group I was told to drop out of Queen's College from the cult sent back to Queen's College to start a student group on campus To get people into the student group so they would drop out of Queen's College. That's adorable It's very slick So you're sitting there at this table your bum doubt you're broken hearted. What was the girl broke up with your was her name? Let's call her Debbie fucking you is a shoe model That's all I remember shoe model. I shit great legs And I have no recollection of what her name is oh, okay, let's call her Debbie so Debbie tears your heart apart and Just leave you there at this cafeteria alone vulnerable poor Steve You know like what now when now I thought she was gonna be the one and these gals come over and were they hot? They were cute and they were very flirtatious. They didn't say by the way masturbation is a sin and father's gonna line us up with thousands of people in the sign who you're gonna marry and You have to wait four years to have sex with them. Is that the moonies? Yeah, how'd they do it? Yeah, four years They didn't say anything about that one so and I said it you part of some religious group. Oh, no Not at all We're just a group of students care, you know go concerned about modern issues So what was their approach to you they sat down they started talking to you what what what what are they? They open up with hey nice glasses No, I think I had it was the spring semester I had a pile of books. I was taking philosophies Call it I think I had you pawn a shots. I think I had high diggers being in time and they're like By being in time is that thick. Oh, wow, you must be really smart. No What is what is that about? Oh, so they start flattering you butter. Oh, serious serious The cult is known and other cults are known as love bombing You know pretty sure it's that Puerto Rican girl did to me too damn she was hot Steve It's it's all about saving the person soul and you know step-by-step incremental Recruitment finding out as much as you can about the person saying almost nothing about what you You are about and what the group is about well unlike you I wasn't particularly vulnerable at the time So it was a good time for them to get after me because I was in the middle of some pretty intense stuff My I had a goal. I was pretty focused. I wasn't get Roped up in some religion, but If they got me a couple of years earlier, I think they could have got me. I was real vulnerable when I was like 18 So the reality is as human beings we have life cycle events where we're situationally vulnerable death of a loved one Break up of a relationship, you know moving to a new city-state or country illness There are things that every human being goes through and for me is a overwhelming ignorance of the public to kind of blame the victims like you were Stupid for believing in this like what was wrong with you. You are weak for falling for this as opposed to Tell me about your experience and tell me what? You know what happened You know, there's a principle on social psychology called the fundamental attribution error I know that's a lot of syllables But it basically is the single most important principle of social psychology and what it means is What I was basically saying before when people try to understand why other people are doing what they do They over attribute individual variables and they under attribute social environmental variables social environment variables are gigantic The over-attribute individual variables and they under-attribute social environmental variables. Social environment variables are gigantic. I think that's correct. One of the things about a person being older and wiser, like that you always hear the expression older and wiser. But if you really look at it like mathematically, well what is it? It's data. It's accumulation of data and the understanding of the relationships between events, reactions and consequences. And when you're 18 years old you don't have a lot of data. You only have a few things that are going on. And for me when I was 18, it was the breakup of me and this girl that I was dating and the all of a sudden becoming a man, being responsible, having to go to college or get some sort of a job or some sort of a career and just the overwhelming possibilities of the future. And not having any clue how it was all going to play out, it was terrified. And if someone came along with it, I feel like they could have got me. I feel like I was real vulnerable around 18. When I met this hot Puerto Rican girl, I think I was about 20 and I was pretty determined at that time. So I was okay. But... Well that said there are so many different types of destructive cults. So they're not just or religious cults. There can be a therapy cult. The political cult can be a cult, the personality. That's very important. That's very important because there's a lot of different things that can lock you in and then start to control you and start to suck money off of you and start to really dictate your behavior in a very unhealthy way. And that is so common. There's so many different versions of it. It almost seems to be like a pattern of human behavior and thinking. Like a code that you can kind of crack at, cheat code and people. We've experienced a revolution in science and medicine and in psychology and in particular social psychology. There's been so many pivotal experiments in the last 50 to 100 years that give us windows into understanding our vulnerabilities. So for example when I'm counseling someone who's involved with the destructive cult, they don't start out by saying, hey, you're in a cult. Let me liberate you or something. In fact, my older broaches empowering people, I think, for themselves. So I ask them questions with respect because I really wanted to think about it. In any case, I showed them the Ash conformity study, Solomon Ash. What is that? So the Solomon Ash conformity study was framed to the people coming into it as a visual perception experiment. Basically they'd be brought into a room with several people in a semicircle and there'd be a person in the front with a card with four lines on it. A sample line and then three other lines of different sizes. Okay, let's say a three inch sample line, a three inch of four inch and a five inch. And everyone is in on the experiment except the person in seat six. And after going around twice giving the correct answer, everyone confidently starts giving the wrong same answer. And the test is how many people will start to conform to giving the wrong answer even though they can see what their own eyes, what the correct answer is. And that study's been replicated thousands of times and the answer is two thirds start giving the wrong answer even though they know intellectually that it's the wrong answer because it feels too uncomfortable to be in the room. And is that the test money they give when they're asked? I'm assuming the interview these people are absolutely. They say it's uncomfortable. And I even show a date line and old date line episode where they asked Anthony Pratt Canis is one of the foremost social psychologists to actually do the studies they could film it. And they start out with this Asian woman who is the heroic resistor who gives the correct answer but she's grimacing as she's giving the wrong answer even though she knows it's the right answer. But because of the social forces we are have mirror neurons we want to fit into the people in the room. It's just human nature. Well, Zao people survived exactly. Exactly. It's hardwired. So I showed that video that experiment. And I always like to ask people so tell me something you could do if you were in that situation to scientifically reality test that situation. Scientifically reality test meaning you're in this room. Everyone's saying a five inch line is a three inch line. What would you do? Let me ask you what would you do because you have the data now. You're a cult expert. I get a measure. I get a measure. Right. But you would obviously understand what's going on. Right. Exactly. But if you asked me prior to my induction into the moonies that I understand the Ash conformity study or the power of being I would have said no I'm an individualist. I'm a nonconformist. I had the mumpur sticker question authority. Right. I had the ponytail and you know the word. You were typically unique. You fit right in. You rebel. Totally. So anyway after the Ash conformity study the Milgram obedience study Stanley Milgram did a test at the time the dominant theory and psychology explaining how the Nazis could do what they did was called the authoritarian personality. And Milgram said I wonder if Americans would do the very same thing and he developed this ingenious shock box which really was set of switches. I had no electricity at all but it sounded electrical and he basically would bring people and tell them that doing a scientific experiment that's very important that tests memory and punishment and learning and set people up into a situation where they thought they were giving an electrical shock to the person the next room and it was well tape recorded with and it would increase 15 volts from mild to moderate to severe to extreme to XXXX and there'd be a guy in a white lab coach acting very proper who happened to be a high school teacher who was moonlight few extra bucks. And the test was how many people would electrocute a fellow human being in an hour because an authority figure told them they had to because they had made a commitment to do a scientific experiment and the answer was two thirds. Yeah I saw a radio lab or listen rather to a radio lab podcast on that very thing. It's in fact there's a movie that's coming out about it called the experimenter and the next study that I'm about to mention the movie just came out a week or two ago called the Stanford Prison Experiment. Phil's father. Phil's a part of who's one of my mentors. Trying to get him I was trying to get him on the podcast but I was out of the country when he wanted to come on I was really bummed out. Well try to get him back again. Yeah I'm going to find him. He's amazing. He taught a course at Stanford called the psychology of mind control for 15 years and used two chapters of my original book in it and he was also president of the American Psychological Association. In his experiment he randomly divided guys into guards and prisoners and he did basically control behavior information thoughts and emotions and people started having nervous breakdowns and some of the guards started becoming sadistic and instead of saying you know what I don't want to do the experiment anymore they had gotten so sucked into the experience that they are only out was to have a nervous breakdown. Wow it was extraordinary. So when I'm helping people understand what happens in the Scientology cult the Mooney cult the TM cult or any number of other destructive cults I want them to first. What's a TM cult? Transcendental Meditation. That's a cult? Oh yeah. Really? Big time. I thought there was just like a method of cleansing your mind I didn't know that there was even a cult behind it. Oh my. Masha Shogi oh yeah this is not. The people practice it. The practice techniques of transcendental meditation alone by themselves. Are they in a cult? So the answer is you don't need to be in the room with other people to be in a mind control cult but it can get inside your head and create a new cult identity that suppresses your real identity and it's not healthy. I have a very cursory understanding of a transcendental meditation so if you could please tell me what exactly does that mean? So and I have the story of a woman who is raised in TM in chapter 6 of the new book Gina Katania. So first of all there's a thousand or more ways to meditate and there's not one way that everyone has to meditate. In fact neurologically it's very detrimental for people to do for some people to do a mantra meditation with it repeating it over and over. It actually increases anxiety. Really so like Buddhist meditations were they home? So breath meditation the point is is that it's a tool for training consciousness and ultimately depending on your level of training you want to not be a victim of your thoughts or your feelings you want to not only develop a perspective and a wisdom consciousness you want to also get out of the entire frame of self dialogue and total being this but any group that says you have to do it our way or else or if you're having bad reactions they say that's good you're unstressing keep doing it. Is that what trends dynamite tastes like? I'm afraid so. When you say bad reactions how so ticks headaches barking like a dog. I've heard from some of you who are meditating. Their person go to a book about TM and some of the negative after effects and what you need to understand about a destructive cult is that there are many levels if you're just doing a meditation and you're not doing the advanced and the next advanced and then becoming celibate and then oh that's all in trends dynamite tastes well. And my harishi was saying if we didn't if if they didn't have 40,000 cities which meant people were hopping around thinking they were levitating. That's what the world would blow up. So he was using the whole fear trip thing to raise a lot of money to get people to be these devotees. Yeah this yogi flying. Is that yes. First of all how dare you. Dare you this met these people are flying and you're claiming BS. You're very very very happy on not another fly. Matrices dude and they take a picture when they're in the up see they're flying. We got the proof. Someone is just like you're poo-pooing magic. Have you ever seen what Jamie you've seen it? You've seen yogi flying it's adorable. It's hilarious these fools. I want to plug a dog watch. Let's look at this. Here it goes. Look at this. I mean no effort at all right. You know Phil Donahue actually on I did a show on this and it filled put his legs in lotus and hopped. Well it's really funny as well amazing the Phil can put his legs in lotus but it's a major way back when this guy is getting tired. So his hops let's go back to the beginning Jamie. His hops in the beginning were much higher because he was fresh. See look at that kids getting some air. Now let's go a little bit further Jamie. Look see right there he's getting tired. I'm a fight commentator. I understand what people are fatiguing. This guy is getting lactic ass. He's in flying. But for my she said you know this raises the energy level of the planet earth so that there were fewer automobile accidents. Unless war. I feel for all these people. I really do. I feel for that guy right there with the glasses in front of this cat because he's fucked all these people. They're fucked in its social anxiety. Lack of friends and a lack of community and there's so many different things that can lead someone to to want to seek comfort in these ideologies. Or they could have been born into it or they could have been deceptively recruited by a hot chick. And a cat who is a little bit hot guy. But the thing is is emotions if you're having doubts or if you're having bad feelings they're like tell it's telling you to like look at what's happening and maybe you need to make a change. But if you're in the TM movement and you're having bad feelings about the group you're told that that you need to meditate to get rid of that. That's known as thought stopping. It's one of the techniques in the tee of the bite model to shut down any reality testing in the moonies. We were taught to chant crush Satan crush Satan crush Satan crush Satan crush Satan so he's a good person. Gloria seven I want to tell you a true story Joe Rogan. But not be about Satan it is. So I'm raised in a Jewish family. We don't believe in Satan at all. Do you believe in God in the Jewish family? Yeah. Well wait a minute. If you believe in God then you have to believe in the God of the Bible. Is that what you're defining God as? Now you're asking me to define what I was believing as a child as a conservative Jew. Yes. Yes. Yes. So the God of the Bible. No. No. Satan's not in the Bible. No. Not in the Torah. Oh that's a Torah. The New Testament was an invention later. Of course. Yeah. He's Constantine. How many bishops? He put it 300 AD. Yeah. Right. So here's the story. So I'm in the frickin moonies if I may curse because I've watched you. I don't think he's hit frickin is not a curse. I don't think he said a curse. The exorcist movie comes out. Oh. 300 members including myself to into Greenwich Village to watch the exorcist party. Watch the movie. We all get in our vans go to Terry town to the police. The state and the police. The had multiple ones. This one particular one at Terry town is where I got a lot of my indoctrination. It used to be owned by the Seagroom's family. Moon gets up and he says, God made the exorcist. The movie is a prophecy of what happened if people leave the unification church. Okay. Now, before he gave that speech, we were singing holy songs for three hours. That's after watching this crazy exorcist movie. And I only remembered the exorcist movie four years after I got out of the cult and I was studying psychology and we were learning about phobias. And I was thinking back about so what was how was I install with phobias? And then I remembered this movie and this lecture and it's like holy crap. I believed in 100% Satan was everywhere and only by being in God's holy family. Yep. That's it. And the heads zips around and the levitates. Great movie. Not a film. It's scared. There's a jeepers suckedo. In any way. So how can intelligent person from an intact family who is going to be a professional writer and be a college professor get sucked into a cult that wants to take over the world, make an automatic theocracy, abolish satanic democracy, kill everyone that doesn't believe. It was literally what we were pretty much told by moon that we needed to reclaim the earth for God, not unlike ISIS and a few other cults out there. I was told the Holocaust was necessary because the Jews didn't accept Jesus. Well, I had been educated about the Holocaust. I mean Israel to the Holocaust Museum. When you heard that, what was your reaction? I had been so. So mind control in the extreme cult example is a dissociative disorder, speaking as a mental health professional. And Steve Hassan, son of Milton and Estelle Hassan from Flushing Queens, became Steve Hassan, son of Sunmian moon and Hakja Han, the two parents of the universe. And he needed to be a clone of moon and he was evil. And my whole time in the group was suppressing who I was. It totally shutting down any element of me. I was sleeping three to four hours a night. I was working seven days a week for no pay. I was recruiting people. I was indoctrinating people. I was doing political events for moon, including fasting for Nixon during the Watergate. Fasting for Nixon because God wanted him to be present. That's how you know you're in the wrong cult. So I'll tell you a quick funny story. So my father voted for Nixon. I voted for McGovern and my father was a business owner. He thought Nixon was good. I said, daddy's a crock. How could you vote for me? It's pathetic. I'm in the cult. I call him up. I say, dad, we're fasting for Nixon. We're in the capital. And he says, Stephen, you are right. He's a crook. I said, dad, you don't understand God wants Nixon to be president. He said, now I know you're brainwashed. He's a crook. I said, dad, you just don't understand. And how old are you at the time? And this was the 20th, 2020. It was. Yeah. So I want to take you back to the cafeteria if you don't mind. So you're sitting in this cafeteria. These girls come up to you. They start flattering you. They're flirting with you. And then what's the next step? So they're part of an international group of people, students who are trying to make the world a better place. They happen to have a house kind of like a commune, which was kind of interesting. Would I like to come over for dinner? So it was the free dinner. Would they cook? I have no recollection. And it's interesting because back then, I was feeding them all the information about myself, how I thought what my values were, what my interests were. So I was telling them how to manipulate me. You say in this day and age, you can go on the internet and read people's Facebooks and all the posts. And you don't even need to ask them. You say this, right? But I'm assuming the girls you're talking about are not much older than you. Right? So how would weren't they being manipulated themselves? Were they essentially a part of this whole thing? And that they were really victims along the same way they were making you a victim. Like they were bitten by the vampire. If the victim victimizer model and their cult identities were suppressing, they were sent away from Japan, from their family and friends. And they were Japanese, Japanese. Japanese, Japanese. And Asian chicks. Asian chicks. That's what's up. So but here again. They were, had knew that they would have to report each other if anyone deviated. So that's why they would not send people out individual. Like it's like this tattled tail system. I'll give it. But my point being is if they were not much older than you, if at all. And they were also victims of the same ideology, cult, whatever you want to call it. Why would they be looking to manipulate you? Wouldn't they be a part of it? No, so members were taught to believe as they still are. Right. That the world is headlong into an Armageddon situation of any moment. Judgment day is happening. And as much as you can to bring people into God and save their soul, saving a person in the moonies meant saving 10 generations of their fathers and sisters that are in the spur world and their mothers and sisters in the spur world. And they're all looking at you all the time. Hoping you're going to make good decisions because if you do good things for God, you're going to make good vitality elements that will feed them in the spirit world. And it got, I mean, and every cult has its own convoluted yet internally, a totalistic system. So, but unlike Scientology, the moonies are like save others. Scientology is like, you know, become a God and control everybody, control matter, energy, space and time. But we'll get people to do what you want them to do. Right. But my point was that they, these people were also manipulated. So they knew that they were manipulating you, but they didn't think that they were being manipulated themselves by the same cult. Like they were trying to find information when you're a cult. Joe, you're not having that refraction. Right. You know, observer looking back and going, hey, what just happened just then? Yeah. There's no meta comment thing. It's like your program to think the right way, feel the right way, act the right way. And you're self censoring. And in my particular case, I guess because I'm somewhat competitive and some level, I know you have no relationship to understanding what feels like to be competitive. I wanted to be the best moonie I could be. And it was chosen by moon and one of his right hand people to be the model leader in America. So I was hand groomed to help take over America and the world. You're only in it for two years. So this had to be a very quick transition from you, Steve Hassen, normal college student to boom, full on fasting for Nixon. Yeah. It was very fast. It was about two weeks after my first contact to me. Having what I thought was a spiritual experience and believing that I was being directed by God to this organization. Wow. Yeah. So this Matt, this attribution happens a lot. Now for some of my clients, they're literally at a vulnerable point in their life. Maybe they're religious and they're praying, dear God, tell me what to do. Should I lead my marriage? What should I do? And the next thing they know, the doorbell is ringing and it's a Jehovah's Witnesses who want to study the Bible. And they're like, miss a tribute and thinking, God just ran in the doorbell, as opposed to these people are going ringing every single doorbell within a six block. Of course. Yeah. It's like my friend Gary, he hits on every girl he meets his ideas that if he swing enough pitches in their own. Never know. You're going to, it's like, he hits on girls way hotter than him, just way above his head. And he never works out, but he's like, you just got to keep swinging. He never know. Oh, he's hopeful. Yep. So that's what they're doing. They're swinging at every pitch essentially. They're they're knocking on every door and every now and then they get that one ball that's in the strike zone. And that's Steve Hassan sitting there. What is pile of books? Well, in my case, so I went to the three day workshop. I didn't want to stay. I was a waiter on the weekends. I was busy. I can't go away on a weekend and they just kept saying it's going to be so great. And I didn't even know it was a workshop. And I have two years of working at the holiday in and him instead as a banquet waiter on the weekends. I call up to find out when I'm supposed to report in. And he says, Steve, you won't believe it, but the wedding was canceled. So take the weekend off. And I had just had this these women working on me all week. And I was like, well, maybe I'm into. Well, I did give them my word because, but I gave him my word, thinking I was never going to have a weekend off. And then I was kind of like, well, maybe I'm meant to go. Mm. I should do this. So I say, I'm OK. I'm free for the weekend. Let's go. And we're driving up. It's in the middle of the winter through this. Police are a state. And they say, by the way, this weekend, we're having a joint workshop with a unification church. And I said, what church? Nobody said anything about church and workshop. Nobody said anything about a workshop. What's up with that? And they did the typical turn it around on you, technique of Steve. What do you have issues with Christians? Do you, do you buy us against Christian and all of a sudden now, I'm on the defensive. Right. But there were no cell phones back then in 1974. It's the middle of the night. I have an option of getting out in the snow and trying to hitchhike. Like, what am I, well, just wait for the morning. Just stay here and we'll drive you back in the morning. They slid around your bed like sirens. Well, they, I was in a room where I wasn't sleeping. Yeah. So you've learned a little bit. No, so there. In any case, the morning comes. The van is left now. What? You know, and I fucked. Well, let's just go in and see what you think. And it was all orchestrated because I later learned how to orchestrate it. And how many people were in there with you that were also new recruits? So that was another trick, a little bit of a scam because they had people there that were acting like there were newcomers, but they weren't. Oh, so creating small groups where there's the illusion of. So essentially a lot like the study where they have the one. There's a lot. And it's not in on the study. Yeah, there was it was very systematic. Wow. And how does guy get so good at that? Or with his money character, how did he create all this? You want the long shorts, the short, really answer. Okay. Did he have a background in psychology or something? Well, so moon himself was apparently in a cult in North Korea. And it turns out that most cult leaders were in a cult themselves. So they didn't learn the techniques out of thin air. But the interesting thing about my former cult was that the CIA set up the Korean CIA. Because there had been two coups in South Korea to that point. And they were very worried about North Korean brainwashing. And they thought, you know, we need to do something to stabilize South Korea. So they had this brilliant idea of creating a private group that would help to reeducate political dissonance. It's called Victory of a Communism. And I only know about this because there was a Korea Gate investigation from 76 to 78. Where the founder of the Korean CIA was interviewed. And he said he quote, organized and utilized the unification church for use as a political tool. Unquote. Wow. And this was at the point where Americans were getting fed up with Vietnam, wanting us to withdraw. The hawks were very worried about like needing a stronger stance against communism. So they thought, oh, yeah, we need to have student groups on campus saying we need to have a military response to communist. We should be in Vietnam. And the moonies were used for that too. Later, I was part of the fasting for Nixon thing. So there's a whole political, very shady piece here. So you go from this. You get out. How did you get out? How'd you figure out that it was all bad? I was rescued by my family, essentially. They didn't know where I was for a year. I drove into the back of a tractor trailer truck on the Baltimore Beltway at 80 miles an hour and drove and basically nearly died, broke my leg really badly. You fall asleep on the wheelers? Fell asleep three days, no sleep. And two weeks in the hospital sleeping, eating away from the group. I missed my sister Thea, who was the only person in my, And two weeks in the hospital sleeping, eating away from the group. I missed my sister Thea, who was the only person in my previous life that didn't say I was in a cold or brainwashed. She was always just like I love you and I don't understand. This doesn't seem like you, Steve. I reached out to her, not because I wanted to leave, but because I missed her. And she was like, you have two nephews. I want them to know their uncle Steve. Come and visit and I'm like, if you promise not to tell the parents, I can arrange it because I'm a leader. And she promised, unfortunately, she broke her promise and she told my parents and they hired some ex-members. And they did a deprogramming intervention with me. Ex-members of the moonies. Yeah. Wow. So your parents went deep with this. They knew exactly what they were dealing with. They put everything on the table because they knew they could have gone to jail too if it didn't work. One of the one of the team was a woman I had recruited. It could have gone to jail. Yeah. Why? Because it's illegal to abduct an adult. You abducted? You were abducted? In my case, they just took my crutches away. I had a cast from my toes to my groin. It's not a duction. Correct. But at the point that I said I want to leave and they wouldn't let me leave, I could have been something about false imprisonment. But the long and the short of it is, as I was so confident that what I was doing was correct and that I wasn't brainwashed and a critical juncture where they were moving locations because the cult was coming after me to rescue me. My father's weaped. He just started crying and said, what would you do if it was your son who quit? You dropped out of school, quit his job and during his bank account and got involved with a controversial group. How would you feel? And he was crying and I never saw my father cry and it's just touched the real me. And my cult self thought he was brainwashed by the communist media against father. But the real me was like, dad really loves me and I want to prove to him that I'm not brainwashed. So I said, what do you want me to do? He said, I just want you to talk with him for another four days, like have an open mind. And if you want to go back, at least your mother and I will be able to sleep at night knowing we did the responsible thing. And I agreed and I had this four days where they were teaching me about thought reform in the psychology of totalism, which was a book by Robert J. Lifton about Chinese communist brainwashing of the 50s. I had all of these experiences that were starting to surface that had been suppressed during my leadership. It's the same mechanism that allows people to be inspired, the same mechanism that allows people to be manipulated. You know, that mechanism being, you see something that's something about it that makes you excited like a great performance, a great concert or an athletic performance. We get out of there, you just feel inspired, a great book that inspires you. It manipulates your brain waves, it manipulates your consciousness. And it steers you into a certain direction. Is that same sort of mechanism that allows people to be influenced by others? What allows people to be manipulated by others in this form where you can actually literally change the way they think and view the world? That's a big piece of it, I would say. Is this sort of a law in the beautiful thing about inspiration? Is it a flaw in that? Because inspiration is beautiful, it's fuel, right? Well, I think you need to have the analytic part of your mind and a consciousness that just because it sounds great and looks great doesn't mean that it isn't great. But you know what I'm saying? You know how sometimes things happen and you just carry it away by them. You go see a movie. You're like, God damn, I just want to go do something. I just feel so good. It's just like it got you. You see Braveheart? I have. I saw Braveheart man for like two hours I wanted to sword fight. After that movie was over I wanted to join. I'm like, freedom. You know, there's those minds. You know, I'm up with watching combat on TV and just, you know, anti-Nazi and you know that. I don't mean I really wanted to fight. What I'm trying to get at is there's, when you see things and when information and data gets into your mind, it influences you in this very strange way that can be positive and it can be inspirational. Like whether it's seeing Michael Jordan put on an incredible performance or Ronda Rousey, you know, beating someone or you know, those moments where someone does something true. really great. And you have it's fuel for you. It's fuel. Is that the same sort of mechanism that they kind of tap into to change your mind? Definitely. It's a piece of the emotional and the brain stimulation. It's like the hack your mind. It's kind of like hacking. I talk about in the book the like a virus that gets in and corrupts your operating system. He still had the original one, but now this malware has been inserted and now you're working. You think that it's you. But you know, I thought it was Steve just the true Steve. And that the old Steve was the fallen Steve. But stepping back and getting perspective and seeing the patterns of mind control and manipulation in other groups and then reflecting back on your own experience is one of the basic tenets of what I do in my work helping family members to rescue loved ones. or helping people who were either born in a cult or recruited into a cult. So in a sense that this this experience that you had when you were 19 was incredibly beneficial for your career. Yeah. I have mixed emotions when I hear you say that because I didn't I don't want to do this work to be completely honest. Really? Really? You don't want it because you don't want it to be work that it would be done. It's traumatic. It's helping people who are suffering. But don't you get a benefit out of that? I get I get a fulfillment that I'm doing something really helpful to individuals. I'm trying to help people around the world to understand this phenomenon. I'm trying to counter some of the major forces against totalitarianism, but to suggest that, you know, wow, you know, you have to be a part of the world. You know, you have the moonies to thank for doing this career. I'm saying it's beneficial for you having a negative experience. You don't have anyone to take it. It's it's a wounded healer model. Yes. Yes. Yes. It definitely deepened me in a way that I could not have been deepened before. Because when you wake up from being in a group like this, the shame, the embarrassment, the confusion. I felt like I didn't know who I was. Right. I was real. Yeah. I literally had to have my family and my friends show me videos of who I was before to remind me. Wow. What go to places that I used to go to? Like I had a belief and this is very common. And I want to touch on stuff on Malano, which is how I learned about you seeing your interview with him. But I believe I had an abused childhood. It was part of how they conditioned this new cult identity, suppressed my old identity as they poisoned me against my past. And what coded everything. So what did they tell you happened about your childhood? It wasn't that someone stood over me and told me, but it was it was part of the whole indoctrination system, that I had seen other people talking about abuses in their families, etc. But I literally when I first got out of the group, I thought I was miserable, depressed, that my father was physically abusive. And when I said to my sister, well, that was physically abusive, she went, what? You really thought it. I have false memories. I have false memories. Yes. Wow. That's so, but what did you have an actual image in your mind of your father doing it? So it was one real memory that everything else was built off of. And it was an actual event that happened, I think I was 11 or 12. My father wanted to know where the change was for lunch. And I had bought baseball cards or something and I lied. And my father slapped my face. That was the one true, that was the one time my father hit me. But I really believed it. And my sisters were like, dad never hit us because his father beat the crap out of him. He never, you know, that issue wasn't you didn't want to hug us or hold us, but that was not physically abusive. So just one moment where he lost his patience with you and you just formed false memories based on that. Right. And what what Scientology does is they have you go back and remember abuse from the past. But then when you're done remembering whatever, then you go into your past lives to remember all the abuse. That's where it's really. And it keeps going on and on. But don't they when they're doing that in that auditing process, aren't they trying to get you to let it go? Like isn't the idea that you, you repeat a traumatic event so many times that it means nothing to you. Like if you've ever been around someone who doesn't swear, like your grandma or something like that and she says, fuck you like, whoa, what the hell, like your grandma doesn't swear. But if you're around one like Jamie, this kid, it's got a total potty mouth. It just comes flying out of him. You know what I mean? Like if you're around certain people, they swear all the time it seems normal. And then the word lose its meaning. It just becomes a part of the normal vernacular. But if you're around someone and it's very, very, very rare, it becomes like this, this big moment. The idea being that you repeat this thing, this event over and over and over and over again. So it loses its meaning. It loses its impact. So is that what they do? So there's a qualitative difference between the sensitization around the word or something and actually trauma processing. Harvard was using a very old model of catharsis that you have to remember the abuse. And you have to re-experience the abuse over and over and over again. And that's been thrown out by the mental health profession decades ago. Why? Because you're, you're re-victimizing people. Having them suffer the experience over and over and over again. If I want to help someone who's been abused, I tell them you have to be in your body, in the here and now. And you have a window or a TV screen seeing the younger you. But you're safe. You're here. The abuse happened over there. And I don't want them to have associated memories of abuse. I want them to know that they're safe. That that did happen. But it's not, it's just incorrect to think the brain and the emotions are battery. And all you need to do is drain it and then it's gone. It's just not true. Isn't, but doesn't work. These theories about how to approach various past traumas, traumatic incidents. These theories are essentially a variable, right? Like what work with one person might not necessarily work with another person. And a lot of these ideas that you put into practice, I mean, don't they, I mean, aren't they flexible? There have been therapy cults. We were open this up by talking about different types of cults. And if any ideology that's black and white and that you're trying to compress human experience into the ideology is worrisome. Because no model is, is true. Everyone's different. Everyone's different. But the goal as a therapist is do no harm and empower the person to be functional. Right? It's the goal isn't to trauma process. So in the last few years, I've been trained in a form of attachment therapy where people, people who have personality disorders, which were hitherto believed to be like permanent, can actually be cured in two to three years. And the technique is basically using hypnotherapy technique where you're asking the person to go back to a key traumatic moment in their childhood. And imagining, asking them to imagine if they had the ideal mother or the ideal father that was uniquely suited to them. And they did exactly what you wanted them to do in that situation. And ask their imagination to fill in the scene. You do it. The person literally can create a positive reference point of safety, of security, of love, of connection. All the things that children need to experience, to have a sense of self. And people know that they were abused, but they're repairing it to use another term. They're internally using their imagination. They're repairing themselves. And what we is now proven neuroscientifically is there's neurogenesis and neuroplasticity to the point where people can remember it, but they can act as if they had that healthy mother and their healthy father in a healthy childhood. And be functional. Doesn't that seem to work? It works. It works. It works. You're act as if they believe. I mean, this sounds like fantasy. Am I reading it wrong? Well, it's interesting for me to hear you frame it like that. People are not coming out of a therapy like that, thinking that they had a great childhood. But they're no longer walking around, bleeding all over the place afraid to trust somebody. Having self doubt, unable to touch and have sexual contact that feels good, because they've created these reference experiential states for themselves. Now, these reference experiential states that they create these theories and these practices of therapy, someone has to invent these. Like someone has to look at the problems, they have to figure out what's the best way to approach these things and come up with an idea and hope that it works. And as you said, there's like the Elron Hubbard methods that he was using that were really ancient. Those, they thought that was going to work and it didn't work. And he was never a mental health professional, but he was arrested for practicing medicine with that a license and they did call it a religion to try to. Right. But these ideas, there are essentially people come up with ideas of how to treat people that have various ailments. And then they apply them to people. I mean, how do they practice this stuff? I mean, this is not like something like, hmm, I need to figure out how to chop this tree down. I try to invent an ax like in my I'm saying in my case, I was out of the cult for four years when I first saw a formal hypnotist do a trance on somebody. And my reaction was I used to do that when I was doing lectures. Like I had no awareness. I had been taught to do hypnotic methods. I was taught to model the older brothers and it was kind of a behavioral modeling kind of thing. And I started wanting to learn hypnosis. I wanted to understand what it was, what it was and how to do it ethically. And essentially there has been a lot of trial and error and a lot of people have gotten hurt by the misuse of it. If you're in a professional organization with a strict code of ethics, where they're clear boundaries, and people can trust that you're there just to help them. It's not about keeping you as a client forever. It's like the faster you can get out of treatment and just live your life, the happier the therapist is. And the more you can teach the person about how to know themselves and how to control their feelings or control their thoughts, etc. The better. What is happening right now in Europe, because a socialized medicine is they really are testing a lot of these approaches and demonstrating that people, for example, with narcissistic personality disorder actually get cured after two to three years. It's a shame. But coming back to my work, when I was first doing this work and I was struck by people who were saying, but you were recruited at 19. You had an identity before. I was born into the group. I don't have a pre-cult self. What do I do? I didn't know what to say to them other than make one up. Right. And that is, and they started doing that. Now, 39 years later, it's actually a treatment modality. I'm not taking credit for it. So they make up a successful, happy, positive childhood. Free of this ridiculous confining idea. Well, it's like if your real life is this story line, you're making a reason to create an alternate one that you use as a default, where instead of a parent beating you when you're asking for help or saying you're being a sissy, but you have someone saying, tell me what's wrong, you need a hug, and they're visualizing that and feeling like there's someone who's really there for them. It's an anchor. That's a good role model for them. It really can enable them at the point that they're parenting their children to not just reenact the modeling that they learned and beat the crap out of their kid, but actually behave like a healthy person would want to act. It seems to me that it's beautiful that all these theories are being developed and tested and applied. But it seems to me like it's all work in progress. Is that incorrect? It's not like there's any hard, fast method for definitely curing people of weird psychological ailments or cult-like thinking. I think the human species is evolving. I think we're very at a very low level of evolution in terms of our understanding of things. However, people are able to get out of the most horrendous abuse of childhoods and be functional. They're not just commit suicide or be drug addicts, or be psychotic and a mental ward. But they're able to function. And what we're learning about the brain is just wonderful. I'm excited about the future in terms of that. That said, is a huge potential for abuse. No, you, it's techniques. But you're saying that you don't like doing it. Is it just because it's too taxing on you? Or is it because you really wish that this wasn't something that you really needed to do? Correct. Yeah. I mean, we can all sort of empathize with that. Of course, anybody who has children will look at, you love your children, you look at people who were abused as children or abused by their parents. And it's just this unbelievably painful thing to hear. And it's just a kind of a witness or be a part of it to hear about someone being beaten by their parents or abused in some sort of a way. I had my friend Barry Crimman's on the podcast yesterday. Great stand-up comedian from Boston. And he has a new movie that's out today. It's called Call Me Lucky that Bob Goltaway directed. And it's about his, he was raped when he was four by his babysitter's boyfriend. They would, you know, multiple times. He's this horrible, horrible, horrible traumatic story. And a big part of his life is his perseverance and overcoming this thing that happened to him these 40, 62 years old now. Right. You know, I mean, this trauma has sort of like defined him in some ways. And strengthened him in other ways that his ability to overcome it, showing his perseverance, but fuck man. Right. And often people who've been suffering a trauma like that if they become comedians, they're compensating to try to balance the pain. And maybe cult members, right? Because that would be someone who'd be vulnerable for someone who, you know, would have some reaching for a utopian view of the world or some better way. Because you know the horror of the abuse. So, the truth is, is that the bigger cults don't want people who are seriously emotionally disturbed because they can't control them. If they're seriously disturbed, they don't want them. Okay. So if you're signing up? They want your money, but they don't want you on staff and they don't want you to be part of the pyramid. So do they, okay. So do they have like hierarchies? Like say, if you want. So if you join Scientology or something like that, you should go. If you go to Scientology and they give you one of those personality tests, which I took, by the way, is hilarious. They make you hold on these folders, coffee cans. This is the pyramid. Right. So if you're in the sea org, you're in the upper quadrants of the pyramid. The leader Tom Cruise. You're in the fringe. He's a fringe. He's on the leader. I think he's a leader. I think you're wrong. I think you got a medal, dude. He did. He did. Medal. Yeah. But he's not staff. He's more like a symbol and he gives tons of money and he's good for recruiting, but he's not running the group. What do you think is going on with that? You think he's gay? Uh, I've yet to hear. And argument against it. And argument against it. I would say John Travolta apparently is a secret gay. John's gay and he's by. Tom's by. That's my impression, but I've not heard from any former science. If we could all just accept people being gay, would Scientology go away immediately? Well, it's homophobic. It's totally homophobic. It's a demonious. Oh, yeah. It's a degraded human being if you're gay. None. Covered sun quinton was gay and he either killed himself, or was murdered. So when you saw going clear, were you happy that I'm in the middle of the book right now? It's goddamn amazing. It's amazing when you go over Elron Hubbard's past and how absolutely ridiculous. It was. How many times he lied about things, all the nonsense he said, and all the different times he was caught lying and all the different people in his life that he would just make up crazy stories about being this world war two hero. He was blind. He's fucking completely crazy. He's completely crazy. It's amazing that a guy that's that damaged could get that many people to buy his nonsense. Yeah. And it is. So Larry Wright and HBO did a documentary based on that. Yes. Larry Wright and it right. And they all took their material from my friend John A. Tak who is a former member of OT five who wrote a book called a piece of blue sky. And John and I put together this conference in Toronto called Getting Clear, the website is getting clear. and we debunked not only Hubbard, but the entire policies inside the organization. I was explaining mine control and it's going to be made live on the on the internet that people can watch. All of this. The reason that he did this and why I encourage him to do this was people were leaving David Miscavige's church of Scientology, but starting their own splinter group of Scientology where they were still idolizing Hubbard and still doing the tech. And we wanted to debunk the whole thing from start to finish. And I think it was done very masterfully. So they were starting like subgroups where they came up with their own side. No, they were taking they were on automatic pilot of all these. Trying to get you to the age of my car. So I'm close to your face. Yeah. Yeah. Sorry about that. So for example, the number two man, number three man, Marty Rathbun and Mike Rinder had left the group. And we're spilling all the secrets of what, you know, all the criminal activities that were being done. They were creating independent Scientologists and trying to keep doing auditing and keep doing the processing. And it's like dudes come on like wake up. Wow. The whole system was warped and weird. And like so they were trying. Were they trying to like find some beneficial aspects of what they had based most of their life on? Is that what it was? Right. And trying to like salvage some of it. But like there, if to use the cult identity thing, their cult identity was trying to redo things. That Miss Cabbage guy is a trip. Mm hmm. Listen to him talking those conversations. And especially that giant speech that he gave, you know, when they got tax-free status. Mm hmm. Like wow. That was amazing. So there's a really good book by Tony Ortega as a v-blog. If anyone listening wants to know about Scientology, it's Tony Ortega.org. He wrote a book called The Unbreakable Miss Lovely about Paulette Cooper, who was a friend of mine when I left the Monies in 1976. She wrote a book called The Scandal of Scientology. And the book is all about her life story and how this group harassed the hell out of her. In Scientology. Yes. Because she told the truth about Hubbard and the organization. And Hubbard said never defend always attack. And they did all these criminal activities systematically. Which still goes on to this day. So, I'm having a book release party after this. And you're invited if you want to meet some of the people in the going clear. Oh no, gosh. Handle it. I don't know if I can handle it. I'm too busy today. But you're doing that. You're doing something at the Steve Allen Theatre? Yes. It's more a night to Steve Allen Theatre. Steve Allen, by the way, son, was in a cult for 11 years. And he was a big supporter. I watched you on the Steve Allen show. That was one of the first things I saw of you. Yeah, he was a substitute host on CNN back in ADA when the book first came out. And he gave me a big plug. And I loved him for it and how I get to be at the theater named after him talking about the book again. But the new edition. And these days, I'm particularly focused on helping victims of pimps and traffickers. Pimps and traffickers. Is that like sort of a form of cult in someone's? It is. A commercial cult. They do all the bite model, the behavior control, information control, thought control, emotional control. Make people over into a new identity. And they are dependent on obedient. And I've co-developed a curriculum to help survivors to end the game. To understand because that's what pimps call what they do, the game. So to basically understand that they don't love the women in their stable, that their products for exploitation. And the only way to win the game is to end it and get out and have a life. It's fascinating that you equate those because it makes sense. but I've never done it before. I've never put it in my head and thought of a pimp and a prostitute being like the pimp runs a cult. So if you read some of the manuals online by pimps, how to brainwash the hose, is there terminology for women. I actually tell the story in chapter six of Rachel Thomas who has recruited it while she was a junior at Emory College. She's a beautiful black woman and she was recruited by a pimp who basically said, you're beautiful, you should be a model, I want to take your picture, put you in some rap music videos, which he did. And then he started beating her up and farming her out for sex and threatening a killer family if she told anybody. Fortunately she turned to the FBI, he's in jail. She's doing a project to help young girls. And we've co-developed this because she read my book. She said, this really helps me to understand how he did it to me. Have you ever seen those documentaries like pimps up hose down or American pimp? Yes. Yeah. It's a big part of it is they would talk about how they would find people that came from broken homes that had daddy issues and they would foster this feeling of family. Right. Right. Well, and the cult that I was most experienced with helping victims of was a cult called the Children of God, which the leader was Moses David Berg. And he was a pedophile and he had to leave the U.S. because he was going to be arrested. And he in his cult he had women be happy hookers for Jesus and he basically told people they had to have him. was going to be arrested. And he, in his cult, he had women be happy hookers for Jesus, and he basically told people they had to have sex with two-year-old, three-year-olds, four-year-olds. So it was a sex cult. And when people would be either kicked out of that cult or run away, my theory is that pimps found them on the streets and started learning from them. of religious terminology, the family, et cetera. So the sex trafficking. And then the other thing that is occupying a lot of people's consciousness is terrorist cults, like ISIS, Boko Haram, which are trafficking women, by the way. And they're taking not just weak, stupid people, but, for example, one of the architects of ISIS's social media recruiting network was the son of an endocrinologist at Mass General Hospital, someone who was raised in Boston, went to Catholic high school. And unfortunately, fortunately, he was killed by a drone strike a few months ago as a kid. But my heart goes out to them. People who get deceptively recruited in mind controlled, because it happened to me. And if I hadn't been deprogrammed, I could have done horrible acts of violence. So that's how I was trained. Wow. So they were training you to swordfight, you said. Yeah. They basically trained me to die or kill on command. And they trained me that if I allowed a doubt when I was given an order by my superior, that the Satan was going to be invading me, all the exorcists. And so whatever I was told to do, I did. And it's incredibly frightening. What literally, when I saw the bodies face down a jones town, my first thought was I could have done that. And when I saw the planes going into the World Trade Center, I thought, yeah, I could have done that, too. That's part of my passion, what propels me so many years later, because the problem hasn't gone away. It's gotten worse. Have documentaries like going clear, the HBO documentary has that helped? Definitely. It's been great. My gripe about his book and the documentary is that it didn't deal at all with mind control or brainwashing. It didn't give anyone who is watching the documentary reading the book tools for how to protect themselves, or if they were in a cult to self-reflect and analyze what was happening. Well, he's only done enough time to just fill an hour and a half or whatever it was two hours. But there's so much to do with his hands. So my rins, Joe, when Wright's book first came out, I did a short video, I said, saying going clear is the definitive book on Scientology. It's like saying you've written a definitive book on cars and leaving out gas, combustion, and engines. That was what I said. So I was frustrated in other words. Because he had brilliant people like Paul Haggis who has incredible Hollywood career saying I was stupid for believing this for 30 years and giving so much money to them. And what has happened? He's not stupid. Right. What is happening to those guys? Are they being attacked? The group has changed dramatically because of former leaders coming out and speaking out. They've been the group anonymous, helped a lot initially by powerful and anonymous. By wearing masks and saying, come on, let's protest. It's scared them. And it created a culture where people were more empowered to speak out against them. Right now we want the tax exemption to be stripped. There's no reason to be able to be subsidized in a group that's paying millions of dollars to harass former members. That was one of the most disturbing aspects of the movie. And you find out that they, how they achieve tax exams status by a litany of lawsuits, they propelled against the IRS. And also hiring PIs that they got dirt on the IRS commissioners and hiring powerful lobbyists. And it's dirty. The whole thing is dirty. Just seems too easy. Like how can they be so easily influenced to give these, I mean, I have to do as read one of his fucking books. And you go, this guy wrote Scientology. The guy wrote Battlefield Earth. Like fucking Christ. So but the bottom line is that if there's a totalist group that has a black and white us versus them, good versus evil, simplistic ideology that says that we have the vision for how the world has to be. We have the tools for how to be the best person you can be. One needs to operate with some consumer awareness and say, who is this person? What it is background? Is he trustworthy? And whatever it is, seek critics and ex-members and know that if it's true, it will stand up to scrutiny. And if it isn't, if it isn't true, why would you want to invest your time and your energy and your money and something that's not real? Do you think people are just searching for meaning? I mean, that's what a lot of this is. All are searching for meaning to make their life a better way. Well, that's how they suck you in, right? I mean, they suck you in with Dianetics. When I was living in California for the first time in 94, there was no internet or I hadn't been on yet. It was just starting to get on. I think I might have gotten a computer around then. There was a late night television commercial for Dianetics. And the volcano, remember the volcano? Of course, the OT3 story. Yeah. Is he new in the Galactic Cictictatorship? Yeah. Well, the volcano just looked like, you know, unleashing your potential to me. Like, yes, Dianetics powerful. I had, you know, listened to some Anthony Robbins books on tape and I was ready to rock and roll, you know, trying to try to be a study. He was studying Ericsson and L.P. And that is basically covert hypnotic. Do you have a happier marriage in 1989, page 111? How can you have more jobs satisfaction in 1989, page 227? Yeah, this was the commercial. So I bought the book. I ordered it online. I don't even remember how I paid, I guess I had a credit card. And these fucking people would not stop sending me things. I mean, for years, like every week or so, every month or so, whatever it was, I would get something in the mail inviting me to this, inviting me to that. I mean, it was just amazing how persistent count it is one of the eight million followers, even though there's really 20,000 or less. I was a follower. So you went down to the game somewhere? Your name exactly. Am I in a database? Like a Dianetics member or Tintal? So am I in Scientology? Was I at one point in time? No. How would I count it then? Because they cults like to fudge statistics and claim that they're much bigger than they really are. So what is the actual number of Scientologists? I think the number that my friends tell me is it's 20,000 or less. That's not that many. In the world. That's it? Yeah. So how do they have so much real estate? Millions of dollars. They've sucked a lot of wealthy people dry. That's incredible. Paul Haggis paid a shitload of money, right? That's one of the things he talked about. Yeah. Hubbard was into money and power. Money and power. Sex. So three. Universals with all destructive cults. Yeah. Like the Waco thing, right? They always want to have sex with everybody's wife. Yeah. Power money sex. Interestingly, I met Byron Sage last December who was the lead FBI negotiator with David Kuresh at Waco. You see the guy that sent the tanks in to burn everybody? Yeah. I'm afraid so. Or somebody. That's such a good negotiating FBI. No, he was clearly unhappy. And he more or less said that we didn't know what we were doing. And we wish that you had, you know, we had known what to do. We were clearly, he was clearly unhappy with the result. Yeah. He knew that they screwed up. Well, that's a nice way of saying they murdered a bunch of people. Because that's what they did. The videos. Well, they should never have gone and established. You know, they should never have gone with guns in the first place. David Kuresh was molesting miners and they were, you know, making automatic weapons. But they could have lured him into town and arrested him and they could have taken away the guns. They were sure that he molested miners? Oh, yeah. Yeah. How old were the miners? Ten. Oh, very cool. Very jewel testified before Congress. It was one of his victims. But I guess because of, I want to come back to how I learned about you and your good work with Stefan Molla knew if I may and free domain radio. Well, you can say good work is just a conversation where I asked him some questions. It helped a lot of members wake up because they respect you and they got to listen to their divine leader lie. You know, and it was powerful to hear him say, oh, no, I don't tell people to default. I always tell people to go to therapists before they cut off from all their family and friends. People knew that that was a blatant lie. And it took a chink out of the mysticism of people who were true believers because you held your own with him. You know, he didn't, you know, wrap you around his finger as he's used to doing with the followers and their respect for you. So I, my hat's off to you. Well, thanks. It wasn't my intention. I was just to have a conversation with him and trying to figure out what he's doing or what his thought process says. He's got some really good ideas about things. It's fascinating. He's a very eloquent guy and he's very smart, obviously. And he has some really interesting concepts, but he's very firm in his belief about certain things as well to the point where like one of the things that I talked to him about, we played a video of him yelling about some of you believe in the state that you want him killed. You want me killed and that you should get rid of all of your friends that believe in the state. You know, and this idea of anarcho capitalism or anarchism, like you don't want any government, whatsoever, like who's going to fix the streets? And there was no answers to those who's going to pay for anything. Who's going to organize? Where do you, how you going to like, this is not like a well thought out thing. This is like this. Someone said it best that he's an incredibly eloquent man that is screaming north while pretending to be holding a compass. Hmm. That's interesting. Well, he's another one of those, you know, into corporations while he's owning a corporation type people and, you know, saying that he's liberating people and he's in fact enslaving people into a totalistic belief system. Do you think that he's, do you think this is just something that sort of happened along the way? Like as he was, you know, doing his philosophy and I don't know enough about him. I was hired by a family to consult to help a young man who was getting sucked in and they were worried about that he would try to cut off contact. Unfortunately he's okay. So it was a relatively new phenomenon for me, but was particularly interesting about this particular cult was that he was recruiting over the internet and that's how ISIS is largely recruiting as well. So it was an interesting, well, you say recruiting though, how is he recruiting, how does he recruit? He just does videos where he kind of talks about his ideas, right? Right. And he gets followers to tell other people to watch the videos and they watch for hours and hours and hours and they, it, they re, he re wires their thought processes. To the point where he gets them to question their own belief systems, their own value systems and because he's a bully and he's a loud mouth and he talks so confidently about a lot of things that he doesn't really know very well. Like what? Like what? We talked a little bit before about Robin Williams and that as just one small example. Yeah, the Robin Williams one really disturbed me. That's one of the things that I question him on because he said that he believed that Robin Williams, he made a video, we're saying that Robin Williams killed himself because of all the women that were addicted to free shit. I think is the way he described it, that these women who were addicted to getting money from him, they sucked him dry. Robin and I had the same agent. He was worth millions of dollars when he died. He was not broken in any way, shape or form. He certainly was diminishing in his ability or his ability to earn money was diminishing as he was getting older but that's just normal for actors. He had real depression and he also had Parkinson's and the Parkinson's medication that he was on, one of the side effects was severe depression. Also there's a good friend of mine, Dr. Mark Gordon, he's done a lot of work with people with traumatic brain injuries. He wrote a paper on surgery and how people who have undergone large, very traumatic surgeries like Robin went, had opened heart surgery. Oftentimes experience post surgery depression and that it's a physiological response to your body being under an anesthesia for long periods of time plus the physical trauma of the actual surgery itself. The injury and your body's healing and especially as you're older, that is a massive task to heal a heart that has been cut open and stitched up and your chest plate has been spread apart. It's very traumatic, physically traumatic and that oftentimes can lead to a diminished state of consciousness and then depression sets in. Also the reality of mortality sets in on a lot of people. So I was upset at that because I just didn't understand why he would do that but I didn't I didn't have that conversation with him like trying to expose him. I had that conversation with him just asking questions and then after it was over, that's when all these videos started coming out and that's when I realized that he was deceptive about a few things in the conversation. Yeah I was initially fantasizing that you would invite him back and I would be here and and some families who have been cut off from their loved one would be here and we could be like, you know, do tell all your followers to get a therapist and reconnect with their families like if you really care, like do something. Yeah the de-fooing thing was one of the things. The swing is family of origin and we'll owe family of origin. And he apparently is fond of telling certain people to get rid of all of his followers and not just your family though, your friends, your childhood friends that have nothing to do with your family because he wants people not to have other influences in their life that can say, hey dude, what are you doing? Do you think this is conscious? Do you think this is a conscious thing or do you think this is a natural state of someone trying to achieve power? I mean what is the mechanism behind that? I don't know about him specifically, I would say most cult leaders are not cold, calculating con artists, they're delusional, they often wear victims of mind control themselves and are kind of playing out of an identification with the aggressor type scenario. I don't know enough about him to comment intelligently but for me it's about wanting people to reclaim their personal power and I want to say to anyone who's involved with Malan who may be listening to this is take time out, step back, learn about mind control, learn about cults, talk to former leaders, talk to former members, reflect over your own experience, ask yourself when you were first getting involved with Malan, what did you think you were getting into? When you were first getting involved, did you believe you were going to be cutting off from your family, your friends, your life dropping out of school, turning over your trust funds? And if the answer was turning over your trust fund, who's turning over your money? What do you mean? And who's turning over money? I can't quote a particular person but that's the pattern with all these groups is if they know that you have money, they want it. But as far as I know more than you. He's not asking people to give them all their money, he's not doing that, he's not asking people to turn over their trust fund, he might ask for small donations but I don't think it's fair to say that he's asking people to turn over trust. I don't want to misspeak so if you are sure about that, I will. Yeah I've never heard that, I've never heard that accusation but my impression from him when I first met him is that he's very intelligent and oftentimes very intelligent people are frustrated by really stupid people that around them. And when he has solutions for particular issues that are in society or particular behavior patterns, he speaks about them very confidently and people become enthralled with that. And then I think that's a very addictive process. The addictive process of offering solutions, having people crazy for those solutions and then having people come to you for advice. And sometimes you get ahead of yourself, you just see there's momentum in that and sometimes you get in front of the wheel and you can't stop it. And then you're spouting off about everything. Like you would do these videos, the truth about this or the truth about that, the truth about people that died. And you're talking about people that had very complex lives, they lived 100 years or whatever the fuck they lived and you can't just boil that down into one video with very little research. Especially when you're doing 100 other videos a week and you're doing all these interviews and doing podcasts and doing all these things, you're talking about someone's life, man. You can't say the truth about Lincoln unless you fucking study Lincoln for a long period of time and even then like Dan Carlin is my favorite historian. He doesn't even call himself an historian but as a podcaster. He's brilliant in his podcast, Hardcore History, one of the best things about it. He will offer opposing points of view. He will say some people believe that this is what happens. There's some dispute about this because it seems to be that there's certain schools of thought about why this took place. I think that's super important. So whenever you start saying the truth about something like man, you just can't do that. And that's why the truth about Robin Williams as a professional stand of comedian was particularly offensive to me because I'm like, come on man. You know, you're talking about this beloved guy who had this incredibly complex relationship, not just with his ex-wives but with show business, with life, with depression, with drugs. This is not something you can just boil down to a one hour podcast or a one hour YouTube video and just call the truth about someone. So I want to mention there's a retired child protective agency, social worker named David Cooperson who wrote a book about corporal punishment because that's one of Molly News claims, etc. And Cooperson has studied a number of all of new videos in the whole ideology and he's written a great book by the way. It's on stoplegalchildabuse.com as David's website. And he just more or less says, as someone who's worked with children who've been traumatized whether it was beaten by their parents or their foster parents or sexually abused, the best thing is not to cut off contact with the abuse of family. It's to have therapists and to have a healthy frame to work within it and not just to impose from the outside or buy some authority figures as that they know what's better for them. Because even kids who are being abused still have feelings towards their mother or father that are positive because of the way we're wired. So anyway, I wanted to get a plug in for his book and the fact that and then I wanted to mention Molly Cotch, Molly B. Cotch, K-O-C-H.com wrote a book on parenting called 27 Secrets Erasing Amazing Children and she too when I asked her to comment as an expert on parenting about what Molly News was saying. With saying this is not going to help people to be healthier human beings to cut off contact from family and friends no matter what happened in their childhood. But the best thing is with therapy and ideally with a family therapist to approach it to the extent that people are protected so they're not further abused by their family of origin. Well this seems very black in my mind because if you're coming from an incredibly abusive family and your family was brutal and they beat you and they did horrible things to you which I know people have come from. You do. Cutting them off is a great idea. I disagree. Really? So you think if your father sexually abused you rapes you, beats you up, comes home in an alcohol rage and breaks your skull, you should still call that guy. I didn't say that. But what do you mean? If you're in that scenario. If you're in that scenario, I'm saying you should be in therapy if that's happened to you. When your therapist should consider depending on the course of treatment approaching the father or the mother and getting them into therapy, maybe they need to get off of alcohol or drugs or maybe they need therapy but just cutting off your entire background and past as a chop it off for me is really not a healthy long term solution. Not even saying cutting off your entire past and saying don't have contact with someone who was horrible to you. You don't. So what I'm trying to say Joe as a therapist and I've seen these situations, I'm also involved with parental alienation cases where there's a divorce and the custodial parent brain washes the children against the father or against the mother which is horrendous. People can grow, people can change, people can evolve and whatever is also there's a false memory syndrome where people were getting with not good therapists or using hypnosis or getting into cults and being like I was believing I had this horrible childhood. Just cutting off and saying I can't ever talk with them again is not a healthy choice in my opinion. Being with an ethical therapist and finding a way to evaluate what's happening with them and getting them into treatment and then potentially to have some type of family therapy situation. If it's not going to be helpful ultimately then of course don't, don't, we victimize yourself, don't allow yourself to continue to be abused but this kind of, this notion kind of lapping off your father, your mother, your sister, your brother because they were shitty to you 20 years ago or 40 years ago I think is a mistake as a therapist. You think it's a mistake across the board? I do but there are gotta be scenarios where you shouldn't be hanging out with your brother because your brother used to rape you or your brother used to be. I'm not talking about hanging out. I'm not even communicating with them. Why have any contact with someone who horribly abused you? Just because their family would you do that to a friend? This idea that blood and DNA somehow are another make you inexorably connected to some person that was horribly abusive to you. If you had a friend that you grew up with and your friend used to rape you and beat the fuck out of you, are you supposed to still contact them because they were your friend they'll always be in your life? I think a friend who raped me is a different category than a father or a brother. A brother? A brother. Because it's blood I guess. That seems crazy. That seems like ape thinking. That's like monkey thinking. That doesn't make any sense. Well, if someone was horribly abusive to you and they're an evil person and we both agree that there are evil people in the world. Yeah. If someone was evil to you 30 years ago, the question is are they still evil today? Why find out? Why not? Because it's not enough time. If 100 years of you're lucky, you know, I mean if you want to really try to fix someone who raped you and beat you up most of your childhood or would you rather just move with people who were like raised in the children of God and they were raped by their brothers and sisters and fathers and mothers and they want to have a healthy relationship with their children because they realize that's the past. It's not now and that they were doing the best they could under those circumstances because that's how they were indoctrinated to be. Right. But this is a different thing. People having you just said people having relationship with their own children. You're not talking about people that rape them and abuse them. You're not talking about people having relationship with those people. So for example, I mean when they were in for example a cult like the children of God, they weren't thinking that their father and mother were raping them and they're aunt and they're uncle raping them. But they were having abusive sex. That was not something that they were ready for or wanted to have and it hurt. etc. Now they're out and for me to just say look, you know, cut off or contact and assume there's no possibility that they could grow, they can change, they could evolve, they could apologize, they could make it up to you. For me that's not the ideal. It's not what my position as a healer, as someone who's worked with so many other people. Now what I'm not saying is if you've been hurt by someone to just call them up and then have them hurt you, that's not saying that. I'm saying use professionals as mediators to see what's possible in terms of constructive healthy change. But you're putting this in this family context and this is where it confuses me. You should do that because they're your family but you shouldn't do that if they were your friend. I guess I'm not meaning to sound so absolute and every case should be evaluated individually but I do have, I guess I've had too many cases where it was this kind of total cut off. I see what you're saying. Maybe it's justified but maybe it's not, maybe the person really got great therapy and they're incredibly remorseful and they want to apologize and they're a decent human being. You can keep carrying the pain and the judgment and say, no, I'll never talk with you again or try to accept them for where they are now and see whether or not they're going to be beneficial to your ongoing... There shouldn't be on the person who victimize you. If someone raped you and beat you, shouldn't you on this being on them to come in the apologize to you or attempt to apologize to you? I agree. Not to see them out and bring them to therapy and try to hash it out with them. I would agree with that. I think everyone ultimately has to take responsibility for their own lives and their own actions. I mean, I felt terrible for a lot of the things that I did in the moonies and I did my best to reach out to people I had recruited, whose lives I had interfered with and it was a burden for many, many years as long as they continue to be in the group and they're all out now but virtually no one wants to talk with me. I think they still harbor really bad feelings towards me. Wow, that's got to be so strange for you to be in the position that you're in now to have these people that look at you as someone who victimize them in the very way you're trying to shield people from today. So that's probably flavoring this idea that you want people to always try to hash it out or work it out because of your own personal experiences. Well, they think people can grow and people can change. They can or they cannot. Right. But I'm an advocate for change. I am too. But I also believe there's some people that are just beyond fucked up and there's nothing you can do about them. It's not a bad idea to cut them off. No, I certainly cut their parents off and they're very happy because of it because their parents were evil and their parents are fucked up. I mean, every time they would be with them or communicate with them with them with just being incredibly damaging and they would have to deal with it for months on end and to stress in the pain. We're just not worth it. And ultimately they felt better to, you know, to forgive that person but not communicate with them. See, here's where we differ. I guess. They felt better to, you know, to forgive that person, but not communicate with them. See, here's where we differ. I guess I have more of the Jewish angle on forgiveness. Like, I don't believe in forgiving people who don't apologize and don't offer compensation, and don't promise never to do it again and then never do it again. That's kind of the Jewish formula. And only then is the person who is wrong in a position to forgive. But I'm not of the thing of just forgive. But I guess I think ultimately the more sense of fullness, of wholeness, of knowing that we do everything that's within our power, our sphere of influence to do, to be a good person, to bring goodness to the planet is the way to operate. And I think that for me with my father, he didn't beat me, but he didn't hug me. He didn't, you know, give me a lot of praise when I was growing up, because his father never gave him that. And instead of, when I was in therapy, instead of being angry at him, he, me, understepping into his shoes as a child, realizing he was doing the best that he could. And at 30, I just, when I saw him, I just started hugging him and he'd be like a board. And I'd be, I just say stand there, because I need a hug. And by the time he was in his 80s, he was actually wanting the hug. And he was actually years. Yeah. Yeah, it took 50 years. It actually said, I love you and I'm proud of you. He died in mangy too. But I got to see my father evolve. But there's a big difference between that and someone who beat the shit out of you and raped you. That's a lot of people's reality when they're dealing with their parents. I mean, your dad doesn't sound abusive. He just sounded like he's the victim of his own upbringing. He wasn't abusive. And I had a relatively normal char, you know, boring in many ways, because they didn't smoke, they didn't drink. They didn't have affairs. I lived in the same house. I wasn't like moving all over that, you know, wasn't a child of divorce. But I guess I want to just come back to everyone needs to kind of be in touch with their inner voice, their inner intuition. And instead of holding a frozen frame in their mind of what happened 30 years ago and just keeping that, I can't be with him because of that. Find out what's going on. And I'm not saying put yourself in a position where you can be harmed. But you can use third parties to find out what's going on there. And there could be some really radical positive changes that happen. That could be a really good thing. I see your point in up to a certain degree. There's a certain degree of abuse that I think some parents have enacted on their children. There was a story that someone told me recently about this brother that was raping his sister. And you know, this went on for years. And then the dad found out about it and the dad joined in. And this went on for more years. Those people can both go fuck themselves. If I was that girl and if I knew that girl, I would tell them to, I would tell it to never, never contact them, never talk to them. There's no need. You don't just because they're your blood. That doesn't mean anything. That's nonsense. Your family, you know, you can have family that's not related to you. The people that you love and trust. And if you treat them like their family, they'll treat you like family too. I think you choose the people that you can be in contact with. And that's the problem that a lot of people have with this whole idea of family is that you're born into them. You know, it's like just, you just get a random hand of cards. Right. You know, and that's your family. And you just have to accept that for the rest of your life. And then when they fuck up, you have to keep trying to forgive them or help them or bring them them to get or not. I say not. I say, what's certain people like that girl, who's brother and dad raped her, there's no fucking need to bring those people into your life. If you can get away from them, stay away from them. Hopefully they're in jail now. I don't know what happened in that particular situation. But I grew up with a father that beat the fuck out of my mother. And I saw it a bunch of times when I was little. And I was five years old and my mom left. So these images are very old and they're very distorted. But they're 100% real. There's certain things that were undeniable about the physical abuse. And I haven't had no desire to talk to that person ever since. And I don't ever want to. I don't need it. You know, this idea of blood that this, because this person had sex with my mom and made me that I have to forgive this dummy and spend time with them and try to work out why I beat the fuck out of my mom in front of me. I don't need that. And I don't think you need that to heal and grow. I don't think it's necessary. And I'm not imposing my point of view on you. I'm just sharing my point of view as a therapist who's seen literally hundreds and hundreds of different cases. And people can change. I also want to go come back to the false memory point because there's a lot of people who went into therapy or they got into a cult and they came to have the belief that they were in a satanic cult or they were beaten and tortured by by their family. And it's not true. But they're still acting as if it is. And there's no effort to reality tests to actually talk to the siblings or talk with the neighbors or see if there's a most sexual predators have multiple victims. They're usually not enacting on one particular person. And what I've been saying from the beginning is find a good therapist who's experienced with trauma and sexual abuse and such. And do it do your process and consider and especially if there's anyone listening who's a follower of Stefan Mahlenu who's cut off contact with their brothers and their sisters and their mothers. How many people have done that? Is this an epidemic? I think there are hundreds. Really? I think there are hundreds. And I'm just saying take a time out from Mahlenu. Stop listening to his podcasts for a few weeks. Learn about mind control. Learn about cults. Read the book. I watched a video that was put online by a follower of Mahlenu who was you know had just left. And I reached out to him. They said I've got three videos on my Freedom of Mind website. Check out my book. And he just emailed me literally yesterday. It was this morning saying you know it's given me a new understanding about everything. Thank you so much. And if you have cut off contact for years and years and years find someone to reach out to your family and create a way back because a lot of people are afraid to even reach out and they're confused. Because they're embarrassed. Yeah. I've had some people who've left Scientology for example come to me because they many years of being in the cult didn't go to mom when she was dying in the hospital and they didn't go to their brothers' wedding. Yeah. And they were supposed to be the best man or they borrowed money over and over and over again. The family's like screw you. We never want to hear from you again. Now the person's woken up. They've left Scientology and nobody in the family wants anything to do with them. And I feel like I at least should make an effort to say to them you know there is such a thing as mind control. And then they were doing what they thought they were supposed to do by being in the cult. And you know you were right to be angry at them for not being there for mom and for not being there. However, it doesn't mean that they're bad, bad people and that there isn't some value in reconnecting again. It was one of the most disturbing parts of going clear. We're seeing the people that were just emotionally devastated by the fact the family wouldn't talk to them anymore because they had been excommunicated. Right. So this disconnection, the JW is called this fellow shipping. It's a common mind control technique to manipulate people to cut them off from family and friends if people are breaking rules or questioning the authority etc. It's not something that should be done by any legitimate religion, certainly not any legitimate organization. Telling people you can't talk to your sister, your brother, your mother, your father because some some authority figure says God doesn't want it or that you've violated the rules. They're taking it to another level. Right. They're saying you can't talk to them because against the rules to talk to them. They're not encouraging, defooling, getting rid of your family of original origin. They're encouraging. They're saying they are. There's no rule. There's a rule. It's not encouraging. They're actually saying like you can't talk to them. Right. And if you do talk with them, then you risk being kicked out of the group too. That's the threat. Now one of the things about mind control cults is like I was shown the exorcist. If I was going to leave the moonies, part of unconscious saw that little girl with the etc. In the mind of someone on the mind control, they can't visualize themselves out of the group being happy and fulfilled. And in the mind of Scientologists, if you leave, you're going to go insane. You're going to commit suicide. You're going to become a drug addict. There's no possibility. And they put phobias and members' minds against any mental health professional. So if you're feeling suicidal, if you're having major migraines, only do auditing, only do Scientology techniques. And at the point that I think it was Paul Haggis that refused to refute his gay daughter when he learned that Scientology came out. against the Bill in California. That was his wake-up call because his love for his daughter trumped the cult ideology. How bizarre is that that Scientology has anti-homosexual ideas? I think it's very bizarre, but a lot of cults are very anti-baw. But why? What is what is- Because Hubbard was a homophobe. Is that what it is? Yeah. Yeah. Probably he had sexual drives towards men that he couldn't deal with. So he decided to make a rule and make it into a horrible thing. So how does it fit with a guy like John Travolta who's allegedly gay? That seems so bizarre. It's incredibly horrible because essentially you can't- the cult identity does not want to acknowledge the person's true self. And every time he acts out his true nature, he feels bad. But the speculation is that they have some dirt on him. The speculation is that through the auditing process of the files that they keep on you, that was what they implied in the documentary that they have these stacks of files on- And they do. These sea-folders, etc. They send that in the Time Magazine cover story. In 1990, there's a huge amount of fear and threat that if you leave the group or speak out against the group, they're going to come after you and ruin your life. And unfortunately, a lot of people have fear. And for me and other people who've left, you kind of have to rise above it and say screw you, I'm not going to live like that. We're certainly going to tell whatever you want to tell that screw you. For certain people though, the ideology of Scientology, the tenants or the principles, seem to help them give them sort of structure. I mean, is there any way that there's anything beneficial to like the way they, I mean, there's a lot of successful people that are Scientologists. And they seem like ambitious and motivated. It seems like there's part of it, and I'm not trying to support Scientology. But I'm trying to look at this in a balanced perspective. Seems like at least some of what they're doing is trying to enhance your ability to function as a person, right? Is that not true? They say one thing and what they do is another thing. They say that they're going to give you power over your mind, your body, over matter, and are doing clear space. But a lot of it comes down to the belief that's programmed into the Scientology identity that you have this higher truth that you understand the nature of reality. That a certain technique is going to work. But what we know from the placebo effect, the power of authority and the power of suggestion is what's happening here. It's not the techniques itself. It's not the ideology. And also the feeling of being empowered by being a part of a successful group, a successful group and the motivation that they give you, you got a boogie? Yeah. It's pretty late. It's 5 or 30. We're just in this half an hour ago. You're bladder-stocking. Go ahead, man. It's about through right over there. We'll just wrap this up and I'll tell everybody. All right. We're going to wrap this up here. Combating cult mind control, Steve Hassan. And you can get a hold of Steve on Twitter. His Twitter handle is, hold on. It's called expert at cult expert on Twitter. So, I don't know if I agree with him on everything, but obviously a very knowledgeable guy and a very nice guy. So that's a, that's a wrap you, folks. We'll be back tomorrow. That's right, bitches. The fight companion returns tomorrow, 7 p.m. Pacific time, Eddie Bravo, Brennan Shaw, Brian Cowan, the full boat, God dammit. And it'll be fun. All right. We'll see you soon. Much love. Bye-bye.