Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. It must be very easy to get people to do your show. Well, I mean, yeah, I think how we give away millions of dollars. It's usually people are very excited about it. The actual, the only hard part for us is, you know, if it's a longer one, just the time off work. So because sometimes when we shoot like these games or stuff, you know, it can go for a month. But besides the work stuff, of course. Does other people that haven't been able to do the show because they couldn't get a month off work? Oh, yeah, tons. Of course. So we always have like, even like the day before, you know, sometimes people will get cold feet. So if we're doing something with 100 people, we'll usually have 10 backups just because, you know, the, I would imagine the type of person that would do your show would have a job that they could quit. Well, yeah, I mean, I guess it depends, right? Whether it's the YouTube channel where we're, you know, doing, you know, 100 families can be for $250,000 or it's B-Scams for their compete for $5 million. The $5 million people are way more excited for. Some of the, you know, the YouTube videos, it's not as like grandiels are like, I don't know if I want to lose my job for one percent chance of winning 250K. So. Well, how many people when you do B-Scams, how many people are competing? So the newest season we just shot, we grab one person from every country on earth. So it was around two people. Whoa. Yeah. Which I was actually pretty cool because you would put them in these like crazy games and you'd see how someone from like the Asian, you know, Pacific countries would react versus like someone in South America and they play and think so differently because they have such different upbringing. So this really cool. Did you have, I mean, you must have had a thoroughly vet these people, right? Make sure they're not insane. Yeah. You know, the serial killer. We do the psych and background checks, of course. No. How do you get that information? If you're going, I mean, if you have, how many countries are there first of all? Is it 190? We went off of whatever the Olympics do. So it's like something around 200. Yeah. Plus, I'm minus a couple. So some of them have to have some shitty infrastructure. Oh, I mean, I think one of them has literally 40,000 people living in it. Like it was, what is it? Not the, it's something sea islands, not the Cayman islands. It was, but some island country. And yeah, I was like, wow, like my town, which has 100,000 people's two and a half times the population of your country. Well, I was joking with the contestant because I was like, if you win the $5 million, you could technically give a $200 dividend to every single person in your country. It's like, it's that crazy. It's that little people living there. Wow. Yeah. That's a kind of country. I wonder if you could buy that country. Mm. I mean, the GDP is probably, you know, a couple hundred million dollars if I were to guess. Like someone like Elon or something like that could buy the email. There's probably thousands of people in America that could. I mean, I feel bad. People from that country listening that Well, we didn't say the country. Okay. We're good. We didn't say it. It's like yours. They should know what they are. Yeah. They were, they were a country of 40,000 people. That's just what it is. Nothing wrong with that. But it's, it is weird how many countries there are. And if you've got a person from every country, what are the odds you're going to get good data as to whether or not they're a criminal? Well, that's why I mean, if you saw like our budgets on what I have to spend on casting those people, it was ridiculous to be able to get them all because basically what we did is we got multiple options for each country. And what I was worried about is that like the contestant from Blaine Country with Suck and then the country would be like, Jimmy, you hate us and you purposely pick this, you know, absolute moron. So we would pick two or three from each country and then we let people from those countries vote on who should compete. Oh, it was even more. And I had to get multiple from each. So I think I ended up spending over a million dollars just on aggregating and casting and background checks and everything. And then putting it out there so people could vote on it. But that way, you know, whatever, like Georgia and Europe, if that guy's an absolute moron, it's on them. They picked them. You know, that's actually very smart. Exactly. How did you come up with the concept for this show? Like, first of all, how the fuck do you have time to do that show as well as do your YouTube show? Yeah. I just don't sleep much during those because like B-Scam basically is 30 days of just, you know, 18 hours a day filming. And so for people who might not have heard of it, it's essentially the largest cash prize of any show in the world. It's season when we had the most contestants of any show in the world and the largest sets of any show ever to exist. And I was just like, what if you take like a reality show, but you just ramp everything up to the absolute maximum and like, like season one, we give away $22 million. Just about season, right? And you know, some of the biggest game shows in the world right now, give away $250,000. Like we're giving away $2 million every episode. Yeah. That's wild. That's so crazy. That sets amazing. Yeah. And then we build a city. And so, also, holy shit. My whole thesis behind it with this is, you know, when you watch these, you know, game shows or reality shows, there's a lot of takeaways and like after the show, they'll put people in a room and they'll be like, hey, talk about what happened here. And it's like, in her cut. And I was like, well, what if we just have a thousand cameras and we just let people be themselves and we kind of just show it in real time. So we also like in season one, we broke the world record of most cameras ever used in any production of any movie show, anything ever. So like this set right here, there's over 1,200 cameras in there. Oh, and the most of that room is so big. Yeah, it's bigger than the football field. And so there's a thousand contestants. We have to have an A cam on all of them. So there's like a pole on each of our platforms on them. Plus there's hundreds of cameras in the roof and blah, blah. I think there's over 1,200 here, which outside of this, the most ever used to a production was 400. So like, I literally had to and this might seem insane. But this is why I think the show appeals to quite a few people because normally in a show, they would have a story producer walk up to you, hold a camera and be like, all right, you got three minutes. You're kind of the bad guy, say roughly long these lines. Almost basically put words in your mouth and then they'd go like person to person with like one camera. Whereas I go on the microphone, I go say whatever the hell you want. We're recording you for the next 10 hours. I don't care. Right. And you all have a dedicated camera on you. So then instead of like putting words in people's mouths, they can just do whatever they want. So do you have someone who actually has to go back and watch all that footage and edit it and then put it all out as a show? Yeah. Well, this is why many people do you have doing your editing? That season over 150 editors worked on it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. And that's obviously why people don't do it because it's like basically we had to spend millions of dollars in cameras. It was the world record for most cameras ever used, which then we also brought the world record for most camera cables used because it's 27 miles of camera cables for the world record for large control of each of these is millions of dollars. And you have to bring in millions of dollars of extra editors. And so next thing you know, you know, to take it from 10 cameras where you just essentially put words in people's mouths to unlimited cameras and they can do whatever you want. And you can show who they actually are as opposed to what you think they should be, right? With the story producer, it costs a lot of money. It's a lot of effort and time. But it shows through in the final product because now you know, you get more natural, like less scripted things when people are just themselves. You have a great ability to like see the big picture and a great ability to put together things regardless of what the budget is, like regardless of how much money you're going to make to do the best product. I always thought that about you when you were doing, when you first started doing your YouTube show, I'm like, the amount of money and time and effort involved in this is like above and beyond what most people will want to do. Yep. And it's way more than a traditional television network, whatever it do because a traditional television network would look at the upside. They would look at the money and they would go, we're going to spend X amount of money to make it this much better. But if we just take it down a couple of notches, we save 80%. And they would do that. But you're like, can we make it even cooler? Let's put all the money back into the show, which is very risky, man. Because not just very risky. It's just very, you have great foresight. Like you really see the big picture of it. Obviously you have the number one show in the world. Like you have the most watch show on earth. You know, your YouTube show is the most watch show on planet earth. So it's obviously working. But it's like that ability to make that set must have been bananas. That is in fucking enormous building. Did you have to build the building? No, so that's in Toronto. But it's basically an airport hanger. I mean, we spent months trying to figure out how we could make this. That also is like a thousand trap doors because every single one of those, the trap doors open when they get eliminated. So that set alone was like $15 million. I mean, it was crazy. Thousands of people's time and stuff like that. It's actually where we film B-Scams is actually a pretty big deal because it creates so many local jobs for people. Oh, I'm sure. Yeah, like there it was like pretty wild every time. Can you say where you film it or you keep it on the rock? That one was Toronto, Canada. Okay. And every time I'd walk around and set people were loving it because even though we film for 30 days, there's months leading up to it and months after. Sure. It gives people like consistent work for six months where it's like before they're going project to project every week. But yeah, back on the going above and beyond. That's kind of my whole thing is like why make content that isn't great. And we just ask ourselves, how do we make the best content possible as opposed to how do we make the most money possible? And when you just shockingly go on with that approach, you just kind of make a lot of it. Yeah. And also it's I tell my team all the time too, like a big difference between us and other media companies is usually like people at the top will always shoot down crazy ideas or tell you it's not possible. Whenever you have like these crazy brainstorming sessions and I tell the team, technically anything's possible. If as humans we really wanted to, we could technically blow up the moon with enough nukes. Now we're not going to do it because it's not worth the time and it's not worth spending the money. But you have to have that frame of mind. Everything's for the most part possible. If you're willing to spend the time and spend the money. So before you do the work and just figure out what time it takes and how much money it costs, you can't say no to something because almost all the time, like we filmed in the pyramids and I spent a hundred hours living in the pyramids of Egypt. It was fucking awesome. And for years, everyone's like, they're not going to let you live in the pyramids for a couple days. That's crazy. And I'm like, why not? Did you get a no from the leader of Egypt? No. Then I'm like, well, technically it's possible. And after years of talking with them and helping them understand that it's going to be more of an educational type video and it's not like I'm not going to run up the pyramids and take my shirt off and be like a lunatic. It'll be really cool. Eventually they came around to it and they loved the video and it worked really well. And it's literally like I could go anywhere in the pyramids for a hundred hours. I went all the way up to the top of the middle pyramid we went underneath it is really cool. And I like tell my team it's like, you know, even some of my most veteran people when we get these crazy ideas, their default reaction always is to go, I just don't think it's possible. And I go, look, it is. Sometimes it's just time and money, you know. And is it worth the effort? The pyramid one must've been nuts. Oh, it was crazy. It was one of my favorite videos. Is that your first time ever being there? Yeah, actually it was. And so that made it even more special because I was like learning things at the same time as I was just walking around. And I'm, I mean, to be honest, it was like a year and a half ago and it's like all a little fuzzy because I was like so tired. I was just walking around all night. But it was pretty crazy and surreal. And then going down into what's that tomb cold where you go down the ladder and like a couple hundred feet underneath the pyramid. Mm. I don't know. Is that a cyrocyrist? Yes. Yes. It was like flooded and swimming around under there. It was pretty wild. Yeah. Wow. I feel like you should do something like that. A hundred percent. I need to go there. I've been talking about going there for years. I just, there really is just the time thing. My time is I've had so many different jobs. It's not like one all consuming job like you have. Yeah. It's like commentary for the UFC, doing stand up comedy, doing the podcast and also married with children. It's like I have a lot of responsibilities. It's tough to just jet off or really ideally if you're going to go to Egypt. I feel like you should go for like 10 days. Yeah. Like at least 10 days. Do you think the, yeah. I feel like they maybe honestly really like five days you could do it. Yeah. And like I'm curious though if they let you just like do a video where you walk around and go everywhere because. I wonder. Yeah. Because I've talked a lot of shit. Exactly. So without saying it, I'm kind of implying I don't even know if they want you there. Well, I had never said anything bad about it about it. I just think that the people that run it have a very narrow minded perspective of how all that stuff was made. And I don't, I think, I don't think they really know. And I think there's a lot of gatekeeping in terms of what the official narrative is. Yeah. It's like how it was all made and who made it and what it's all about. That's why they're really hesitant to accept any alternative perspectives. Because they have a timeline and they attribute all this construction and there's a lot of evidence that that timeline doesn't make any sense. Yeah. Did you check out the Sphinx? Yeah. And you can, you know, you can go underneath it and go in that little room. Yeah. Did you do that? Yeah. That's the stuff. I feel like it would mean even more if you did. You've talked to Dr. Zahi. Mm hmm. Did you have him on the show? Yeah. Yeah. I'm on the show. Yeah. Okay. Good. Yeah. I'm going to go through somebody else. I didn't listen to that episode. I'd rather go ahead and go with one of the historians that I know. Grand Hancock. Yeah. Grand Hancock would be the perfect guy to go with. Yeah. You and Grand Hancock's walking around? Oh boy. There would be some crazy stuff. Yeah. Well, whatever happened in that part of the world during that timeframe is pretty spectacular. And it's kind of amazing that no one has ever achieved anything of remotely similar to its sense. Yeah. It's at least 4,500 years old. That's just a guess though. They really don't know. Yeah. You know, it's a crazy place. The fact that you got to film a show there is nuts. Yeah. I love how you call a show and to me it's just a YouTube video. But it's just funny. It's a show. Yeah. Of course. It makes sense because you do stuff with the UFC and you're old a lot of it's called shows. I mean, whatever it is is people are watching it. Yeah, I know. It's just funny. It's just funny. It's just funny. It's just funny. It's just funny. It's just funny. One thing that I'm really proud of that we did for season three of these games, which I like in hindsight, I'm not even sure how we this one we pulled off. So I want to see your reaction to this. Okay. So basically the finale where we have the $5 million. You have the final contestants. We filmed it in the Roman Coliseum. Whoa. Yeah. We crowned the winner of season three with the $5 million cash prize in the middle of the Roman Coliseum. Play the first game there in over a thousand years. Wow. Wow. That's crazy. I'm so grateful. I like we just filmed that too. So I'm like coming off the high and I just like, it almost makes like brings gives me tears. Like what we shot was so cool. We had like a live orchestra. I'd like the top ring of there too. So like as the game got dramatic, we would have them like play louder music and stuff. It was like so surreal. Like there's multiple because I've done really crazy things in my life. But there's multiple moments during that where I'm just like looking around in the middle of the Coliseum as we're like filming this show. And I'm like, this doesn't feel real. It was pretty wild. It doesn't feel I mean, I went just to visit a few years back and it didn't feel real. It's so strange to imagine like what what that was like. Yeah. You know, how many thousand years ago to what when what year were they doing the games in the Roman Coliseum? I would guess 1900 years ago. So I mean, what the fuck was it like being in there? Well, that was happening. And imagine when they blood it and they did have that. It's like, whoa, I know. I know. I know. And it's just it's nuts that you could go walk around it and just trying to understand like this used to be a place where people was to go to see people die. Yeah. See people get hacked to death by swords to see people get killed by lions. Like what the fuck was it? Well, it's also interesting too because I did a lot of research, you know, before I filmed there. And it's also did a good job of you know, back then they had like the hierarchy and like the old people would sit at the bottom and the poor people would be at the top. And it also played like a good role of like showcasing unity even though there are all these different people from all these different, you know, economic statuses. They would all be in the arena there, but also remind them where they are. And there's like so many political implications of it too. Yeah. And so just everything about it. Like basketball games. Right. Yeah. I guess I'd pick it. I didn't even think about that. Yeah. Jack Nicholson. Same as people. Yeah. Or it's like tickets. True. Yeah. I mean, it's the same thing. I think in the Coliseum though, that was the most dangerous seats because like there was a couple of incidents. I believe when either a lion or a tiger leapt up and got hold of some people. Yeah. Well, I didn't hear about that, but when I was walking around, you know, they would have the, you know, emperor like seat right there. And I was like, man, I thought it was the warrior. I could throw a spear at him. Like this is like, this is a killer view, but like how did no one ever just kill this guy? You know, right? I was like, that's all I could think about. It's like this is a little too close to the battlefield. How close is it? It was like whatever four rows up. It wasn't like anything too crazy. But like there's like obviously walls when you're walking around like little walls so you can't just, you know, walk into the stand. So they're like kind of trapped in the arena. But it was definitely within spirit-throwing distance. When I how long it took to build that place? Because when you're walking around like this is an epic piece of real estate. Like look at you guys built like. an insane structure and they did it, you know, almost 2000 years ago or whatever it was. Yeah. So it took eight years to build. Wow. From this AD 72 to AD 80. Yeah. Wow. Construction started under Vespasian between AD 70 and 72. It was completed and inaugurated under Emperor Titus around AD 79 to AD. So the main build phase lasted roughly six to eight years. The cup is down to its final matches. One trophy, one champion draft kings has you covered for every single one. The draft kings app is now available in all 50 states and includes all markets bringing the game straight to your fingertips wherever you are. From Florida to Texas to California, you're in on the excitement at the speed of sports. No matter where you're watching, you're always connected and in the game with one app. New draft kings customers sign up with code. Rogan spent five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days. That's code. Rogan in partnership with draft kings. The crown is yours. Bet with DK Sports book gambling problem called one 800 gambler one 800 mile reset. Connecticut call 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of boothoek. The Sinoan Kansas that tax pass through may apply in Illinois 21 and over void in Canada event contract trading with draft kings predictions involves risk of loss availability varies bet to get bonus bets that expire in seven days trade to get $50 in predictions dollars that expire in one year issued every seven days via click to claim for 21 days one non withdrawal reward redeemable predictions offer void in New York and July 19th terms at DKNG.co slash audio. Yeah, it's it's fascinating too because I like to think of like something equivalent now would be like maybe so if I stayed in like that's such a beautiful massive stadium. I wonder if like 2000 years from now what that still be there. Right. Like the Roman call seems like relatively still intact. It's pretty crazy. That's what's great. Well, it's because it's made out of stone. All of our stuff like cement will rot out. There's no way cement lasts a thousand years. All the glass all the everything will just get absorbed back into the earth thing. Do you ever see that show that had a show like what was it on the history channel or something like that where it was after humans. I think it was called and it essentially showed how long it would take for cities to completely be absorbed back into the earth. It's not that long. Yeah, it's not that long. No, it's like a few hundred years and there's nothing left. Wow. Yeah, it actually seems like a good show. Yeah, it was kind of interesting. You know, it was a while ago. So it was probably like shitty AI. It was shitty CGI. I think it probably do it really good now. Yeah, but I mean, if you go to Detroit, there's houses in Detroit now that have trees growing out of the basement of the house through the roof. Yeah. Like they've taken over the house and nature is slowly but surely absorbing the building. And then skyscrapers are a bigger endeavor, but it's still nature could still do it. It just takes a fair time. That makes me where my brain goes through is it makes me want to do a video where it's like a bit you there's like a abandoned village or city that's been overgrown and like doing a video titled like last human on earth simulation and then like living there for a month they're so and seeing what it's like. That kind of cool. Kind of like the Will Smith movie back in the day. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That would be so fascinating. Or maybe do it like with a contestant. Like hey, if you spend one month in this like isolated civilization, like I'll give you a million dollars or something and then see how they like, you know, use, you know, 100 year old buildings or something. I don't know. It's got my brain churning. It was not a bad idea. I am legend type deal. You have a real unscripted. Exactly. But then also hire people to be zombies and honks. You know what I mean? You know what I mean? Yeah. Hire higher people like CGI them up to get a fuck out of people. I've been wanting to do that for a while, but I always get like hung up on like, okay, I can make some real zombies, but the problem is like how do they kill them and then, you know, well, the other problem is what happens if you if you're not telling these contestants that zombies are coming, you're just trying to get a reaction out of them. What if this guy thinks it's a real zombie and kills one of the people? Yeah. Well, I mean, I would have to say this is a zombie simulation and, you know, then I'd have to set rules on here. So you kill a zombie. You don't use a sword. You use this foam to end its land, which is why we never got around to it. But if there ever was a way, I do think that would be cool to like recreate a actual zombie apocalypse and like let someone try to live in for a week because it just be cool because everyone's exposure to this is through scripted shows, but to see someone like truly live in an unscripted one where we build rundown gas stations and there's like food that like we would say this is set in the year 2060. So I'd have set designers and everything designed it where it's like only laffy, taffy, still edible and stuff. And it was like a true recreation of it. I've always wanted to do stuff like that. You could totally do that. There's a bunch of abandoned towns. No, it's just the one thing we could never figure out is how does someone kill a zombie and it's not lame, right? Because imagine someone with a nerve sword hitting a zombie. Oh, now it's like, okay, this is fucking lame, you know. Yeah. Maybe a paint ball type deal. Yeah. And that's where our head goes because we're, we have a different video similar thing, but the problem with paint ball and airsoft is then you have to wear a mask, right? People get shot in the face, obviously. And then it kind of kills it. Oh, yeah. And lest the zombie masks were what was the protection. Yeah, we put it over top of people. Yes, that's that's for poor actors. They're going to or you just have instead of like a regular paint ball mask, have something that's just a hard structure that is like your, the shape of your face. Exactly. And then you know, you give them goggles, something clear so their eyes are protected. And then you do all the makeup on top of it. Yeah. You know what? I should hit you up for these zombie things. That actually would, there you go. Exactly. Yeah, perfect. That's an airsoft mask. That'd be pretty cool. I mean, dude, that's actually dope. Look at those masks, the half face zombie ones. Yeah. That's fucking dope. Like you could, that would be terrifying coming at you in the middle of the night. I mean, if the shooting was listening once the living in an abandoned town for 10 days, all zombies try to kill you. I think we're onto something now that I saw those masks. I'm like, okay, I like it because that could be the zombies. Well, where my head goes because the videos are so big, right? This is probably a five, 10 million or project. It was probably would build this abandoned city. I'm the last man on the planet and it's like me there for some time. And then afterwards, like a couple of months, like filmed then right after some of the video where I give someone a million dollars they lived there for 10 days, but they have to fend off zombies with their friends. And then we reuse the set location because if I'm going to completely set deck of basically a whole city, oh my gosh, that's going to be a monster. But yeah, if I did both those back to back, that'd actually be pretty, pretty gnarly and worth the effort. I think I like the idea now. Yeah. Now that I see those masks, and I think about like paintball or something, a little bit of along those lines. Well, what I'm picturing too is like I ideally can find a city with a skyscraper because I want like someone with a long lens pointed down of like someone pictured them on a street. It's pitch black and they have like a fire and it's them and they're three friends. And you know, then they hear noise and zombies and stuff. Like those shots would be so beautiful. Like that, I mean, that would probably be one of the most beautiful videos ever. And I'm picturing we put like vines like on all the buildings and stuff too. So well, if you wanted no one around, it's going to be hard because you're going to have to do it in an abandoned place. Exactly. And you're not going to get an abandoned skyscraper. Maybe. So it wasn't. Lesser in Detroit. Well, we also, it doesn't have to be in the US. We did a video seven days in an abandoned city where there's like someplace in Europe where there was a city that was like war torn and stuff like that. And it had like hotels and tall buildings and everything. It was pretty, pretty wild. So really. Yeah. And there's no one in it. No, no one in it. Like tourists go there. But they let us close it off for a week. It was pretty crazy. Well, that's the place then. Yeah, I just wondered though, you know, it's a little bit of history there. So I doubt the lemme go in and like set deck everything like crazy. But we can also paintball everything. Exactly. Yeah. Well, with those masks, we could do airsoft, which would be maybe even easier. Oh, actually, no, the problem with the airsoft then is the trust system. You don't know if they got hit. So paintball is probably more. Yeah. You need paintball. Paintball. And it needs to look good when it's splatters against them. I just, you know, someone on my team's watching this just clipped the last 10 minutes of this and send it to the creative team. I got you guys. I believe in you. Is there another way to kill a zombie other than paintball that would be wild? Like, is there something else? Well, one thing we've been working on because we, I've always wanted to like do Hunger Games in real life as well as to like these like suits where you could, you know, electronic, like a laser tag where you could just shoot and then it just like lights up. So what about shotguns with bean bags? You know, because they use those for people to like take out like when they're not on lethal loads, you know, they have like bean bags. They shoot out of a shot. The question I wouldn't need is like if I shot you with it like three feet away, would you still be fine? I guess you could probably adjust the pressure and stuff where it's not really. Okay. Well, you couldn't bury it. So this is a fear factor. This is Mr. V's. I understand. But it's great. It's a great line. You know, it's so funny. I need to give you a blood and let you just help me cook on this video. I can see there's something here in there. You just have to figure out an exciting way to kill them where it doesn't actually hurt the stunt people or whoever's wearing the masks, whoever pretends to be a zombie. Who would have to be something. I was thinking light him on fire, but that's we could you pull up the seven days of band and city video. I and just give to a summer and a part. I love from to see like the like how it looks because that with what you're picturing. And that really would be something you can't find anywhere else. And that's when like gets me excited is when it's content you can't find anywhere else. Typically, you know, a huge indicator that if it's done well, people like it. Have you seen the show from from? I don't think so. That's great. Great show. But it's about the look at that shot. Positive right there. Like like or not. So that's just one random building. But you can maybe go to the intro or something if you want to just show them like, yeah, this whole place like look at these. Oh my God. This is perfect. Yeah. And then like, yeah, if you pause it there, those are all the buildings in the city. I mean, oh, dude, this is the spot. And the show starts at sundown every night. Okay. As soon as the sun goes down, that's when the games begin. It does nothing happens until it gets dark out. Everything is in the dark. And these people have no idea when it's going to happen, when they're going to get hit. And so they try to get their sleep whenever they can. But you keep them awake during the day with tasks. You keep them away. So during the day, they they have all sorts of materials. They have supplies. They have all sorts of things. And they have to figure out how to protect themselves, how to develop shelter, alarm systems for when the zombies are closed. They give them, yeah, give them time to like figure out stuff to do to keep the zombies away. And eliminate amount of materials that they can work with. And just let these people get creative in their ingenuity. But then you keep it so they'll be busy during the day. So they're not going to be able to sleep. So at night time when it gets dark out, then they don't know when it's going to hit. So you have these people sitting around and it might be 7 p.m., 8 p.m., 8 p.m., and then 3 in the morning should start happening. The zombies come in and they got a shimmy all the painful. And they're creeping in. Like they're creeping in. Bro, you're getting me excited. It would be so fucking cool to let them build a structure or something. And then like an I'm legend where he has to point the lights because they hate lights. But like at night time, like they'll have to, we can hide lights throughout the city that they'd have to collect and then set up so they have good vision around their fort and everything. And then they have like, you know, cycles where they take turns watching and stuff. And then we only send the zombies out theoretically at night or whatever the structure would be. So they have chill time or maybe every night 40 zombies are leached. And then so they're like, they shot like 35 of them. But they're like, oh shit, there's five hitting around the city. So that day while they're walking around, they're like on edge and the tension throughout the day would be phenomenal. Yeah, there's so many cool ways to do it. And you know. They're like, oh shit, there's five hitting around the city. So that day while they're walking around, they're like on edge and the tension throughout the day would be phenomenal. Yeah, there's so many cool ways to do it. And you know, you don't have to tell them that the zombies are only going to come out at night. Yeah. Just have it that way. I'm excited. We need to stop talking about this because I'm going to leave and go film it right now. And then I'm fighting the urge to go call my team. This is you also with the zombies, they can come out in the daytime. These people don't know because they never do it. Like the three or five days is only a night. Yeah. And then six. Exactly. So people get snatched up in the middle of their house. Oh, my God. We used before as a gel blaster. It's almost like aerosoft, but it doesn't hurt as bad. Oh, it shoots water in these vests that they have set up our sensors so you can almost like what you're saying. It's like VR laser tag. So lights up when you hit it. Yeah. And there's like a whole talking system that says like you have this many shots left. You have this much energy. Can we see a video? Yeah. We did this at night at somebody's house. Oh, you did? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Why did you do this? A couple months ago. Oh, nice. Oh, shit. It's like, oh, wait. Actually, no, you've got music. But you pointed out, I have seen like nerve gel blasters. I actually never thought of that. So that's, I mean, you could just redo this up the suits that it makes. Yeah. And the rescan, the guns, because it looks a little lame. But yeah, that would be. It's kind of lame or exist. I kind of like shotguns with being bad. I think I, I think we both can easily picture the aesthetic. You're looking forward. I gotta, I have to find the blend between shows like re-creation of this video and like what I could actually do. But there, I actually am more inspired than ever. I think it's very doable. It's very doable. You just have to figure out a way to make it exciting, but still not hurt anybody. Exactly. You know, that's really not hurt the zombies. You'd have to like armish people up somehow. I mean, well, the thing too is like, you know, one way, one thing that would help is like if the zombies were ex Navy SEALs or something, then it's a little different than if they were like typical Hollywood actors and things like that, which so I've learned from like some of these other things. Like it's also who you cast to do it. Like, you know, the Navy, if it was like Navy SEALs dressed up as zombies and I paid them up, you know, they wouldn't care. It also could, wow, it could be like a zombie army, like an army, some, some army somewhere got taken over and turned to the zombies. Yeah. And those are the people you're fighting against. You could, you could put them with like plate carriers on and, you know, you could armor them up a little bit so they could take some hits. Have some lore behind it. Yeah. The motor, it would make sense too. I'm, I'm, I'm sold. I just got to find an abandoned city. Give them glowing eyes. You know what you know that. You know what you know that. It's all fun guys is going to be joke, helping me figure out to do zombies. Dude, it would be fucking terrifying. It would be imagine as people that are in like this city. There's no lights. There's no electricity. And then at nighttime, it goes dark. And maybe they have flashlights, but each flashlight only has like one hour of battery life. And so you have to like judiciously use that flashlight throughout the evening. You're not, you know, so you give like a little extra tension at the flashlights get to die because you only have one hour of flashlight battery. And then you see these red eyes, like give them like a slightly glowing red eye. Yeah. And that's how you can find the zombies. Bro, that would be cool. Yeah. And then you just look out into the woods. Yeah. Because you see the fucking eyes man. You see the eyes. That would be crazy. Yeah. And the other thing too would be because I go to like how do we execute it. We could do it too where like there's like every, every day at like a certain period. We, we pull off all the dead zombies which are humans and we just swap them with like, I can have recreate a version of them there. So there's like actual zombie bodies like piling up. Right. So as the video progresses, they're like literally stepping over like mannequins that are set decked identically how the, the people were so when they die. And then they're just like literally stepping on zombies as they go building a building that would be crazy. That would be crazy. You know, and actually because if I put it many more. Anybody chalk outlines around the zombies. Wow. So you can identify the fact that this one's a dead zombie. Uh, or no, don't. Yeah. You know, let that be the fun part. But then we, if we put like a crazy prize on it, we could do, you only get the, or maybe the prize is split amongst everyone who survives the whole 10 days or whatever. And then it's like to really build up like this Christian, at the end, we can have it where the final day there's a massive invasion coming or something. So it's like the whole time. It's a lot of like every day more and more camps. So day one, it was 10, day two is 20 and then 50 and then I'm like, you know, we're going to have 400 zombies come on the final day. So the whole video they're prepping for this like game of Thrones type invasion. Not only that, but the people that get killed by the zombie, we think they're out of the game, but they actually become zombies. So when you think you won at the end, now the final game is you're competing against the zombies. The zombies who can't win because they're already dead, but they know you're made you lose. Yeah. And they know you're for. You don't actually even crazers if instead of, well, you know, maybe we have Navy Seals as a zombies, but also what if the contestants are like X Navy Seals too. So they have like, we're strategy and that would be cool. Just get the most badass people that you can get for this zombie thing, like survival lists, martial artists, like yeah. That's crazy. Actually, that's a bad like, you know, UFC champion Navy Seals. Like Taekwondo, blah, blah. And it's like, all right, what happens if you put six experts in different fields together and simulate a real zombie apocalypse. We have 50 acres of this abandoned city sealed off. We sat decked at all and every day a wave of zombie that gets bigger and bigger until the big Christian note the end hits. Yeah. Survival all you split a million dollars. I think the really difficult challenge is figuring out a way to kill zombies that's not lame. Exactly. And doesn't hurt anybody actually doesn't kill people. I love how that's your second thought process. But of course, yeah. But it has to because if you're hitting them even with a gel so I feel kind of cool, but it's like, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, pew, no, it's got to be a bang. But I can add those sounds to posts, but we're big fans of practical. So I'd have my team take apart the guns and see if there's some way they can make it, even though it's shooting the gel, like make a bang bang and then add like the effects. And we'd have to re-skin the guns to look like real guns. It would have to be some, it doesn't have to look like real guns because it could look be a gun from the future. Yeah. But that's lame. When you think of zombie pockets, you think it has to look like a gun that they grab from some dude to say it that they found in a house, right? That's what a zombie apocalypse is to me. Yeah. I guess. Yeah. Yeah. So it would have to look like a real gun. So that's why I like the shotguns with the bean bags. And also with a shotgun, like you're only going to get so many shells, like you, like as long as you don't have one of those big like tarantactical ones that has actually a magazine, you can hold like 15 rounds. If you can, I think a regular shotgun, like a banellie, how many shells can you put in one of those? I think six. I think maybe six. Something like that is good too. You have a limited amount of bullets and reloading is hard. We just got to find out like maybe if it was like 20 gauge, maybe it was like 20 gauge shotgun, like bird shot with, with a bean bag. Maybe that wouldn't fuck people up, but it would make a big bang. Yeah. And you'd be hitting them. And if you could find a way to light up wherever they got hit, like if you could put them in some sort of a suit where when they get hit, there's like gel packs. No way you can see the shotguns at people. Yeah. That's a real one. You're so wrong. Let's see his eyes light up like this in years. No, no, no. I feel like I got it. Okay. I don't know a lot about shotgun. So let's find out we're going to have someone point a real shotgun at someone else. But yeah, you will trust me. We're going to work this out. Oh, you want to help code the record? Yeah. You'll actually see him like the background one shot joke. Just like this. He's like, yeah. It's like the name he steals our find off is on it. Fuck. zombie one night. He's like, he's like, who's that bald guy over there? It's like, oh, yeah. Shotgun damage on a zombie. You have to blow their head off, right? How would you? Oh, God. No, this is the point we can have started. We'll just hit damage for 20 minutes forever. But depends on what kind of zombie. Like walking dead zombies are so stupid, you can stab in the head with a pencil and they die. Remember it was just going through the head because they would shoot them with those crossbows. And like crossbow wouldn't even kill a person. Like with those field tips, they're using field tips. This is basically a pencil going through you. It's not like a broad head. Like if you shot an animal with a crossbow, you would use a broad head, which is a big, sharp blade that cuts a giant channel through an animal. What those things are using is target points. Like that dude in walking dead, it would drive me nuts because they would shoot them in the head. It would just stick in their head and then they'd be dead. It's so funny because it's like, that the fuck out of here. I watched the same thing. I'm like, oh, that's cool. That's a different audience. Well, it just all it takes is like one arrow to go into your head and your dad if you're a zombie. Yeah, totally. One arrow. This is nonsense. Yeah, right guys. Watch. Yeah, one arrow in the head. You'd be, yeah, you wouldn't die. The thing is people have lived, humans have lived through arrows through the head like that. Accidentally, gotten shot in the head with a bow and arrow and with a field tip and lived. Because it basically just, it's like a pencil going through your head. Really? The way people die from an arrow is hemorrhage. You die from massive hemorrhage. And it's usually because there's a blade. So like this, like this is what the Native Americans used to use. But that, that's just, this is actually, yes, that's an actual arrowhead. But the thing about this is when it's attached to a stick, this is cutting. So it's causing hemorrhage inside the body. The little field tip doesn't do that. And the field tip wouldn't puncture enough veins where you just bleed to death. Maybe, but most likely not. I mean, if it went through your heart, yeah, you'd be dead. But if it just goes through like this side of your lungs and pokes out your back, you'll live. Wow. Yeah. Would you want to live? You would be in pain. It would suck. Yeah. It would certainly suck. But it's not like getting hit with a broad head. My point is, I don't remember my point. But if I had a point, it would be a level of shotgun that's the, what is the lowest power shotgun available? It's not a, I know, 20 gauge is light. I've used those before for like shooting clay pigeons. And I've used 12 gauges. You don't want to get hit with a 12 gauge, even if it's a beanbag. Oh, there we go. Now we're talking. That's a bit jazz round. Oh, God. Let's see what that looks like. If you're so sure. Shoot. Let's see what a 410 gauge shotgun or 67 gauge shotgun looks like when they shoot. Double shit gun. It looks like it's going to still hurt. No, no, no, you'll be fine. Okay. Can I test it on you? Yeah. Yeah. Just give me a plate carrier. And if you're going to use a beanbag, yeah. Because that's what I'm thinking. Like if you have a chest plate, you know, so a plate carrier is a bulletproof. Yeah. Yeah. But what are you going to hit? Everything you'll cover up. You'll cover up the shoulders and the arms. You give them like military style armor, like body armor. Because it's not, none of this is going to penetrate. So if it's a beanbag round, what it is is just like, it's basically a bag that's going to like shoot out of the shotgun and blast you. But I don't, they're not lethal. Let me see what it looks like. Just go to a video. Just go to a video of a lowest power shotgun. That's weird. Look, that's cool. That one looks cool. That one looks cool. That's not exactly what you're doing. That's a revolver shotgun. Yeah, that's dope. I've never seen one of those before. The power it says. Interesting. Yeah, the tower's smallest, but deadliest. I think it's smallest in terms of like the size of it, not the round itself. Yeah, this isn't, I just for lowest powered, but that's not what people want to click on video. I know. I feel like most people who buy shotguns are looking for shotguns that don't. Well, how about this? Look up 67 gauge shotgun. I've done that here. And does it show you a video of that? Okay, let's see what it says. Let me see what it looks like when it's shooting. This is 12 gauge. Oh, that's a big. Yeah, that's, I'm trying to. Yeah, they're like, modified 12 gauges. That's a lot. I just don't like the point the shotgun isn't going to kill a zombie. Yeah, but it could in this game. Yeah, but it could in this game. I know, but you have to get so close to get a fucking headshot. I don't know. I don't know if you have to use headshots. This little kid's going to shoot a shotgun. Yes. So that, okay, let me see. Can you give me some volume? Let me hear this. Put back that up a little bit. Yeah, that's what we need. We need that kind of shotgun with like a beanbag round or a rock salt. I got it. The team, they're listening. They're on it. Yeah, something where it makes an impact. There's a sound like a gun going off, but you can't really kill anybody with it. Yeah. This is totally possible, dude. You'd have to have like very strict safety protocols in a set though, because one of things, when I was in, when I first moved to LA in like 1994, there was a guy that had a friend of mine actually knew who was an actor who was on a set, who took a gun that had a blank in it and thought it'd be funny to just put the thing to his head and pull the trigger. And he didn't realize that just the actual air coming out of the gun, if you put it right to your head is lethal. And he blew his brains out. Oh my gosh. Yeah, with a blank. He just didn't, or like that was Baldwin situation. Yeah, that was actually probably negligence because it seems like, it seems like there was an error where they were using like real rounds. And then they would take the same guns that would use like real rounds on a range, then take the same guns and bring them to set. And they didn't clear everything. So I don't know who's responsible for that. I don't know what ultimately came out of that, but you're never supposed to point a gun, even if it's not loaded. You're never supposed to point a gun at someone ever. In movies now, like if you were, you were just going to be moving. I'm like, so has it to this whole shotgun thing. Welcome back to reality, Joe. We're going to be fun. Okay, movies, you're supposed to like if I was shooting at you in a movie, I'm really supposed to shoot over here. And I think that came out of the movie The Crow because Bruce Lee's son died because there was something that was in the gun itself. It wasn't even a bullet that killed him. It was like there was a particle or something that hit him from the blank. When there's effects in CG and everything so good now too, like you probably don't even have to put a blanket there. Just overlay the sound effect and put the effect in knowing what to even be able to tell sometimes too. That's true, but you want something that's scary for the actual people. And they're very coylin. Yeah. So it's more real. Like a really light shotgun. And I guess even if you know it's a blank, like having a gun pointed at you as an actor makes you feel more in this situation too, probably. Well, just rock salt. If you have a really light shotgun, even if it's a 20 gauge with rock salt, it would sting. But if you've got these guys all protected and you could find a way where when it hits them, like you have gel packs on them or something. So if you have them all, they're in like these like tattered looking white outfits. And when you hit them, there's red gel packs underneath and they splatter. And you could, you know, if you get a direct tip. We did something similar when you recreate it. We put like squibs on them and they got a little bit of glue up. And so yeah, you'd put like little squibs. And then when the sensors went off, it would just and liquid would go across their body. Yeah. So you could do that. So if you do that, actually, you could have blanks and maybe a laser sight. Exactly. That's where we went with the hunger again. Stuff is laser tag. And then it would just trigger squibs if you pointed out them and then maybe in a imposed, like we'd have a track where the trajectory of where the bullets were. we could just overlay like the lasers or whatever, uh, impulse so you could visually see it. But obviously in the time you were actually filming practically, it would just be, you know, invisible. You just know if you got hit if you're suit lit up. And it seems like you could sync up a laser tag with an actual blank round to make. So you can make the boom and then the laser actually hits the person at the same time. Okay. Right. Yeah. Because if you have lasers, you have guns that shoot lasers. That's what laser tag is. That's a pretty simple mechanism. All you would do is have like sort of a dual trigger set up where you have, as you pull the trigger back, you get the explosion from the round going off and you also get the laser at the same time. Oh. And so the squibs go off, you say the boom and then the squibs go off and you have it all coordinated together. And then it looks wild. And so then you have these zombies. Boom, you shoot them. You see, splatter all the other thing we have to figure out is where is this going? Because what's going on my YouTube channel, we don't usually show gore. So we might have to hit up wherever you're used to put fear factor and stuff. Because that definitely seems like a more, it's going from like, we're usually family friendly to now. This is very rated R. But it is a family friendly because you're killing zombies. Yeah. Yeah. You know something's family friendly or not, if you say eliminated instead of killing. If you're eliminating zombies, that's family friendly. If you're killing zombies, no, no. That's rated R. Well, they're already dead. So you're eliminating them. Exactly. They're already dead. And like you can tell, like shows like for 18 plus or like 13 plus of like before they shoot the person or whatever if it cuts away, right? And like there's all these little things. Not that we've even heard of. This could be wild. I mean, it could be fun. If someone streaming platform was like, yo, here's whatever, whatever blank check just may get happen. I know something should do it. They need people over there anyway. Yeah. I mean, really even Netflix anyone, right? Yeah. Like it's the biggest no brainer of the history of ever. Like the fact that no one's recreated this is kind of absurd when you think about it. But it's also like if traditional, you know, independent of like the shock and stuff you're talking about like a traditional people with traditional world views did this, it be so stringent and structured and stuff like that. Whereas like if we did it with like the B-Scam's mindset where it's just like, there's cameras everywhere, they can truly do whatever the hell they want. And it's not like this like guarded thing and it's an actual abandoned city. Oh my gosh, it would go crazy. Now we need a task. We need a goal. It's a goal would be survival. But maybe survival while you're trying to accomplish something. Okay. Well, then this is like a mechanism that usually would work well is that the tasks every day will grow the prize pool. And if it's on a streaming platform, then the prize pool could be crazy, right? It doesn't have to be a million dollars. They could grow to 10 million theoretical. If they weren't being cheap. So then it could be like every day if you complete the task, I put up a million dollars in the prize pool each episode's one whole day. It's 10 episodes, 10 days. And so they could technically grow the prize pool to $10 million. You put some like, you know, the UFC people and like, you know, Navy SEALs and like these hardcore people and Utah, I'm like, they could potentially share $10 million dollars. But they would be trying their butts off those 10 days. The footage would be crazy. I mean, they would probably be like practicing during the day like their rotations and everything on like holding off zombies. It would be really cool. Yeah, they would run training routes. You know, it's really interesting. We'd have to figure out how the zombies get them because you don't want physical conflict between the stunt people, the zombie people and the contestants. You don't want to actually fight. Exactly. So like, yeah, we'd have to have rules as to what it would probably be in my default intuition is if the zombies just purely touches you, then you're just dead. We wouldn't be able to take any further than that. Yeah. But if they like, right, like 28 days later zombies, all they have to do is like scratch you or freeze in front of you. Yeah. But in this case, if they touch you, that way it's not like the Navy seal like pushing and flipping them off. Like because if you would push them or touch them, then you'd be out. So people would be keeping their distance. But even then, it'd get pretty crazy if they were like, because they're obviously they would run and there'd be chase scenes and stuff. So honestly, like I know some great stunt choreographers like Ken and a bunch of other people. I would just call him and be like, yo, how do I do this? And they'd probably be like, oh, here's how we do it or whatever. Do this could be mad. Yeah. This could be a mad show. Set the stage. It's like abandoned city, dozens of acres sealed off. Like we literally build like a wall around it. So the seals and whoever the contestants know, like this is the edge, they're walled in. And then yeah, they're walking around and then we have some of the best set designers in the world come in. And like basically we'd pick a time in the future, we'd say this is 50 years in the future. And they would match exactly what all these buildings would look like 50 years from now. They put vines on this. If there's a gas station, they'd go through and like this is what would happen to Doritos 50 years from now. Literally mirrored identically across, you know, 100 buildings. And then we'd drop, we'd have a helicopter fly and drop them off. And then it's like, you know, every day, like we can have like an eagle fly over and drop their tasks of the day. And then in the middle of the city is a million. Oh, that's what we could do. The price pool in the middle of the zombies touch it as well. Then they lose the money. So they're not only defending themselves, but also the price pool. So in the middle of the city, so that's why they have to build a fort around it. And then every day if they complete their crazy task, right, which is distracting them from building their fort, then a helicopter will drop another million dollars on their prize pool. So then it's like episode one, they complete the task before the zombies come at night. And then it's like, I come in on a helicopter. We have a rope lower down a million dollars. It's massive in ones, right? And then it on hooks and now they have two million dollars there. Like good luck guys. And if there's six of them, then it's like, you know, if you survive, are all winning over $300,000 and then, you know, but if you grow the price pool, the six million dollars without getting eliminated, you're all millionaires in nine days. Bro, that would be crazy. And then yeah, the zombies come in. We figure out the practical guns with their right sound effects and practical guns, right sound effects and what what entails you getting killed by a zombie. Yeah. And the other thing too, to make it fun is if a zombie eliminates one of you, they get one six to the prize pool. Whatever something now the zombies are incentivized to try to. So then it's like, if a zombie touches the Navy SEAL, whatever the way is, it's like, congrats. If it's later on. So then like as it goes on, things are going to get really tense on both sides. And then we're really cool. Yeah, dude. Because that's how you take it where people don't want to be zombies to now they're like, excited to be zombies. They're like, ooh, I actually sneak up behind them and I get a million bucks. People are going to want to be zombies anyway. True, because it's going to look sick. It's going to be sick. Honestly, I would want to be a zombie. Just like you imagine walking in a horde and role plane being a zombie, that actually would be a pretty cool thing. To be so sick, it's total pitch black. There's no power, no electricity. Red eyes in the woods. Oh my gosh. What these dudes are sneaking in. And you'd have to have some sort of rules like how the zombies can move, whether they can run, whether they can, you know what I mean? Yeah. Because like we have to decide are these 28 days later zombies that run at you? Yeah. Or these like walking dead zombies, they're like kind of like, we'd probably start off that way, but they evolve with time. And I'm a big fan of like, usually when you have like people who are playing heroes, they usually end up going to a rogue. It's really hard to get hundreds of people to do like certain things, like you know, in an unscripted sandbox environment. So we would have to constrict them in a way where like if we didn't want them to move past a certain speed, we'd probably have to figure out some way to put like a chain around their feet or something that physically wouldn't allow them to do it. Or like if you have 300 zombies going, right? You can't redo it, right? Like if one of those zombies goes rogue and scratch, it's like I can't reshoot the shell, right? That's what's so high stakes about the things we do in a scrap. Well, so we'd have to physically make it where they couldn't do things they're not supposed to do in a perfect world. Or when if you have 300 people, a 2% go rogue, that's still six zombies going rogue, which is brutal. This episode is brought to you by Blue Choo. I'm sure you've heard of Blue Choo by now, but let me tell you what they've been up to. They've been on a mission to get you bricked up for years. And now the number one brand for better sex over five million happy men have bought Blue Choo for better sex. And you know what? Girls love the results too. Their new four and one Choo-ble Blue Choo Gold is for performance and passion. Two ingredients maximize blood flow for stronger longer lasting boners and two get you in the mood. It's designed to dissolve under your tongue for fast results. They are number one for a reason. And we have a special deal for our listeners right now by two months of Blue Choo Gold and get the third free with my code, Rogan. You also receive free overnight shipping. Visit BlueChoo.com for more details and important safety information. This ad and the products being advertised are intended for a United States audience. Yeah, it is brutal. But I think with proper planning, if you really sit down and plan out what the zombies task is, what it means. and what these people are doing and what goals are they trying to achieve while they're there and while they're defending against zombies. You got to give them stuff to do during the day so that they're fully occupied so they can't sleep. Really important. The more they do during the day, it optimizes the amount of money they can win. As they complete tasks, if they stay alive, they have a higher threshold. Where does someone just fucking sleep all day? Yeah. Even if they survive, they can't make any money. Yeah. I get what you're saying. That worst of these are hardcore people so it's good. Normal contestants, they'd be like, oh, this is horrible. You want that though. You want people to bitch out. You want a few people to quit because there's going to be people that want to hold to different standards. If I did that, there would be maybe 10 trillion articles written about how I'm the most evil man on the planet. What? If I made it too hard where people couldn't sleep or whatever. Well, listen, you can't read those articles. Fuck those people. You just got to make an awesome show. The awesome show is you keep these motherfuckers awake and you make it so that they can choose to sleep if they want. But there are tasks to achieve. If you can complete these tasks, you have a potential to make a lot of money. But if you don't complete the tasks, you can't make any money even if you survive. For household Amazon Netflix, whoever wants it, let us know. Right. You got to keep these motherfuckers awake. So that nighttime is terrifying. You imagine seeing people sitting there with their shotgun? Exactly. Because not only now. They're opening their eyes and looking out seeing red eyes. Well, they're like, fuck! We get to touch other faces as they're asleep. And then one of the other guys who goes, zombies and you're bang, bang, and they wake up and they grab their guns. Well, that was the problem of people randomly shooting wild while there's other people around them. So it kind of would have to be blanks and lasers. Because now that I'm thinking about it, people are going to spaz out and actually shoot some of the face. It's where, especially if they're tired. And I'm done, obviously you did unscripted with people. I've done lots of unscripted stuff with lots of people. Exactly. When you're talking about the shotgun stuff, I'm like, you know, there's just no shot in hell that we'd ever be able to. It would have to be like, but I love the gel rounds. We could do it in a way where we set that the guns where it looks really cool. And we could recreate the sound effect. But then gel rounds, like, it's essentially like the nerf ones. Now I'm remembering them. Like they're like water that explodes on impact. Those would be perfect on the list. Yeah, but you want blanks because you want the bang. You want the bang for the people for the psychological effect, the fear. It's the middle of the night. It's dark. You're making a bang go off the flash of the bang going off. And then maybe to avoid people being able to shoot each other. Maybe at nighttime, they're completely separated. Maybe at nighttime. No, you want them together. I'm telling you, like if they built a fort around the money, what you want in the shots is you always want people to be able to tell what they're competing for and like they're why. And you usually, but you don't want to have to say it, right? You don't want to have to say, oh, I'm competing for this money. But if you have the money in the background, the shot, intuitively viewers will be like, that's what they're competing for. So like a fort built around it where they have walls and they're standing on it. And you see the money behind them in the shots. Like intuitively to a viewer, you're going to instantly understand the motivation. And it's going to be like, I mean, it will just be so crazy the shots. Maybe it's like a super advanced game of hide and seek at night where the people can't talk. They have to be very quiet because the zombies have like hyperhearing. Like you give the zombies like walker game ears, you know what those things are? No. It's like, do you ever go to a gun range? Yeah. Because you know, you have those headphones. Oh, and they can hear everything else way louder. But when guns go off, it kills volume above a certain amount of decibels. So they can hear everything. So a few years, someone was behind them. Zombies like we'll be able to pee in on it. They'll know where the people are. And these people have to hide from the zombies at night. True. Because I guess the other thing is if they built a fort around it, how would the zombies even get to them? Right. So instead of that, you have people that are trying to hide. So you've got these zombies slowly creeping through these abandoned buildings looking for people. Yeah. We'd have to get it to them where the seals and stuff couldn't like lock doors or anything right. No locks. So it basically, no doors have locks. That's what makes the hide and go seek so good. All the handles are all the doors removed. Yeah. There's no locks. So every night, maybe we would brainstorm more, but theoretically they all have to hide in a different building or something. Yeah. It couldn't be in the same building. Yeah. And the zombies scatter across the city. Yeah. And then wherever you are in the building, people have to be able to get to you. The zombies have to be able to get to you. Unrestricted. Right. Yeah. And so maybe before we were released as zombies, we have a producer just go in and walk a path of it. All right. There's a factual path where you could die to zombies is good. And then we'll let them loose. Let me see if I can cheat. We released the zombies. We have a producer just go in and walk a path. But all right, there's a factual path where you could die to the zombie. This is good. And then we let him lose. Let me say that you. There's something. This should be wild. This could be honestly. This is one of those things where I say this to my team. But it's either going to be the worst show imaginable that people would clown on. Or it's going to be the number one show ever. And there's no in between. Like you don't do this kind of art where people are like, I like it. It's either like cringe. We failed this sucks. Or it's like, this is the greatest thing ever. Why did this not exist before? Like the Walking Dead or what's the HBO show called? The one with it? The Last of Us. The Last of Us in real life. Like how has no one done this? You know what I mean? Like actual true simulation. And like if we executed it properly, I really could see it be like a number one show on the world type thing that people would like. Because also you have to think like the world is ran by clips these days on like TikTok feeds, Instagram meals, and YouTube shorts. And like it is arguably the most clipable thing ever. Like any 10 second scene of that. You could just throw on YouTube shorts and go viral because it's freaking zombies can shot at. And you know how cool they can make those masks look? Yeah. Let me get a real special effects guy to work on those masks. Yeah. Like one of those experts. Can you search up Mr. B zombies? We have a video on our channel from like, I mean, God knows all of those seven years ago where we did like make like a mini zombie horde. But not like in a simulation like this, just for fun to see how people in public are to react. And like the, it looks disgusting the things they were able to do. It's pretty crazy. Yeah. Like 100 special effects and makeup artists. They could do amazing stuff man. Like if you can find like a close up of my face or like it was like crazy. We just brought in people for. People with a human. Yeah. Like that kind of stuff. Like look at my face right there. Like pause it. It's freaking wild. Dude. You could totally do something like that on the outside of one of those masks. Yeah. 100%. Exactly. 100%. Oh yeah. That was really old. That's the look. What yours looks like with like the teeth and everything and fucked up flesh. That is the mask. Exactly. So you take that hard airsoft mask and you put that shit on it. Joe, the problem is I want to go work on this now. We kind of like, it's funny. I have this thing where this might sound like crazy to some people. But when I, you know, when you feel your heart rate get elevated, when I talk about an idea and I can feel my heart rate get elevated, I'm usually like that's a good indicator that it's like a good idea. Because it needs to be like, do this is a good idea. Yeah. I know. I can literally feel or not anymore. But like a couple of minutes ago, I could feel my heart beating because I was getting excited. And that's like that usually almost always correlates with people because if I'm getting excited talking about it, you have to think like a lot of things right now are because of TikTok and real stuff. They go viral because of word of mouth. And so like if just talking about the idea, get someone excited, then that usually means like a lot of people are just going to talk about it. And if a lot of people talk about it, obviously a lot of people watch it. And so as I call it kind of like the heart rate effect, like that's like my number one signal that like people are going to talk about this and freakin' love it. If we do it. I can see it. I can see scenes. I can see darkness starting to settle in on the town. And I can see the people like trying to figure out where to hide and what to do. And the eyes that back, that was genius. Yeah, dude. I can see the eyes. And it's interesting because it's like, combining the vindiogram of us, right? You're kind of representative of the very like, I don't know, you're like just ability to really think deeply of like what makes it fucking cool. And Evan, you're really hyperfixating on what makes the zombie school and like the realistic nature of it. And I'm hyperfixating on just kind of the overall set design and things. There's like a vindiogram in the middle where we combine like the two like obsessions and it really like merges together and makes something beautiful. Yeah, man. And you could also have like not just zombies. You can have like some other things that are out there too that can get people. Yeah, Jamie, could we get 10 days on a schedule? Can you do one of the, well, actually now because you don't need the money, but it would be cool if you were competing in it because then that would be insane. Yeah, it's too much time. Exactly. Just cancel some podcast. I like the idea of it though. How about we, or never run? You pick them up in the car to take them to a podcast and they're like, oh, whoops. We're in an abandoned city. Oh, here's your shotgun. You're talking about that. You're a go Joe. Wow. Anyways, zombies are coming tonight. What he's going to leave and not shoot zombies. Come on. Have you ever done sandbox VR? Is that the one where it's like the, you just go in and there's random worlds you can walk around on. Uh huh. It's a warehouse. You go in there and they have fans and stuff. So it like simulates like the wind and you go in there and you put on a headset and you put on a haptic feedback vest. And one of them is called Deadwood Mansion. That's my favorite one. Okay. And you go in there and you shoot zombies. You're in a mansion. You're in this like abandoned mansion and rats come out and zombies and there's guys in the ceiling. It's fucking awesome. Yeah. You would love it. But you might get some ideas if you do that because you mean, we were co-produced. Yeah. You're, you're, you're too invested. You just been 34 minutes on a whatever, probably because like rippin' on it. Well, there's something to it, man. I just, I see it in my head. I'm like, that would be an amazing show. I just see these people like in the like in a parking structure, like setting up, getting ready in the sun's coming down. And they're like, look, we got it. We have about 20 minutes of daylight left. Yeah. And you realize like, God, I'm so fucking tired. Well, and that, they're like, God, there's still $200,000 left. We could earn today. We need to start prepping this. And one guy's just reading his hell and another guy's like, we're gonna lose if you do that. Yeah. And then like, infighting and stuff as we're getting like, dramatic, like, you know, b-roll of it from like wide shot. Cause everything too could be shot really far away. So like, it's like, lenses are punching in. And so it's not like there's a camera crew on him. And you could have each day when it's tasks, right? So they have to accomplish something in the more you accomplish the more money you could potentially make. each day is an escape room. So every day there's new puzzles to solve. There's, and then you're getting fucking tired. Cause you're not sleeping. Actually, the escape room's a good, a good through way to do the task. It's not like some goofy stuff like, move this rock from one side to the right. But like an actual escape room and maybe the million dollars at Wednesdays inside like, like, so it could be like, I drop a volt every day in the middle. And then like you have to do a series of things that figure out the combination that are far and then you solve it. Then it goes on the money. Have you done money escape rooms? Like I live in Greenville, North Carolina. There's not like many there. But then me and my family would be doing everywhere we go. Yeah. Fucking awesome. And the best ones are in Vegas. They have insane, they have an it one in Vegas, it one and it two. Yeah. It's fucking incredible. It's so good. And it's huge. It's like 30,000 square feet this place. And they actually have Pennywise, the clown. They have an actor. Where's the fucking suit? And looks just like Pennywise and scares the shit out of you. It's amazing. But those kind of people, you could recruit those kind of people to design puzzles and things where people have to do every day. And then you're dealing with sleep deprivation and people having to work together. And now all my God dude. And I know the perfect people for it. We did for Salesforce. We did their Super Bowl commercial this year. And in the commercial, I hit a million dollars in it. Like basically, if you watch the commercial just with your computer in the commercial, you could win a million dollars. And there's like a bunch of random clues and puzzles hidden through it. And over, and so the first thing is to take Tokyo to a website that just loosely explained it. Over 60 million people visited that site and attempted it. But it still took weeks for people to find the million dollars. And it was like one of the craziest internet like puzzle hunts ever. Because it would take you to this website, which would then would take you to this other one where you'd have to call a number. And like it's a four hour voicemail. But at the very end, I would say like, once you're three, four, eight, a bubble bottle. And if you weren't recording this, you're going to have to listen to all four hours again, hang of. And then it's just like sending you everywhere. And it's basically like 100 of the most complex puzzles on the internet. And like it took this group of like really high level puzzle solvers almost an entire month to decide that you're with a million dollars in the line. And millions of people were trying. And there's a whole subreddit dedicated to it. And so I just basically went on Reddit and I got all the like the most cracked out like puzzle solvers in the world. And I was like, if you had a limited budget, how would you make the most insane puzzle ever? And then that's what they came up with. And it was like hard to even articulate the steps on it. Like some of it was, how do I even how to describe it? It was like so complicated. Like sometimes there's like a page with like a bunch of buttons on it. Like a million buttons, but only one works. And like you have to go through and click it all. And so some of them were mundane. And then other stuff is like, you know, paragraph attacks and you have to like use some old language like decipher the text to figure out what the words were. And so like each puzzle required like a different skill set to like get through it. Wow. Yeah. I could think of all sorts of different things you could have these people do. like during the day, these different tasks, different puzzles that they have to solve. Yeah. There's like languages I didn't even know it exists. So like in the commercial, I'm wearing a belt that just had different colors on it. But if you put the colors in order, like translates to this thing and like, I mean, I don't even understand what half the things were, but people were able to figure it out eventually. Like they're just showing me like, oh, this represents braille these dots. And so we put them in this wave. And then if you combine it with these colors and it got like pretty insane. And like so it all ties back to like the Superbowl commercial and like all every little thing in there. And like one part of the puzzle, which you have to find locations on a map and like in the commercial, I'm holding up a grenade. And it's like a one plus question mark equals is like whatever. And it ends up being like, but the text is yellow. And like it's like a stone was drawing on it. And like it basically meant yellow stone. And then you put in yellow stone in like this location thing on a different website and then it unlocks this. And you had to draw like a circle on a globe. It got like pretty crazy. Wow. Which is why like 10s of millions of people attempted it, but it took almost a month for someone to win a million dollars. And like there's a million dollars online and all you need to win it was your computer. So it was like pretty cool to see like community's form. And like people are doing like daily like podcasts and updates on it of like what the next step of the puzzle were. Cause what you'll see in these puzzles too is like, cause we also did one years ago. I loved doing these like online scavenger hunts that was just your computer. You can win a bunch of money. And you'll see like one person will solve a thing and then hundreds of people will solve it right afterwards because they'll go post it on Reddit or they're working in groups. And so it will be like stand still at like step 42. You know, no one's there. And then you'll just see one person goes on this website that step 42 and then tens of thousands of people will go there. But then as you get closer to the end, you stop seeing that effect. They start being more secretive and quiet about it. And so it's pretty cool to see like the psychology of how they do it. You could have these people completely unarmed in the beginning. And the only way they can get guns is to solve puzzles. Yeah, or just find them, right? Because if it's a big city, we just go. Well, maybe that's the puzzle. The puzzle is finding guns. Like if there's some sort of a puzzle and if you unlock that, it'll give you the location and work on them. Yeah. Yeah. And maybe, you know, I also think of like fun stuff too. Like we could give them like there could be a gun safe or army in the city, but it's like they have to like break into it, right? And that could just be a thing that takes like a ton of time. Like so they have to like go find, you know, maybe one of the contestants we make sure is like certified and like explosive and stuff. And then they have to like, oh no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, shot a stream platform would be okay with this, but it would be cool if we let them like, there's like, mixtures and stuff to make a bomb that hit in throughout the thing and they have to go find it. And he makes like a moxie for him puts it on it. You know, and then that's how they get in the gun safe. But maybe it's more like a, what's that hacksaw or whatever? It's like, we make, you get a safe where if you hacksaw for like 10 hours, you can like break the lock on it and get in. So then someone just has to stand there and hold it. Or you give people a stethoscope and a book on how to crack safe. True. And you have like, click, click, click, click, you know, try to figure it out. Yeah. And someone's just like there for like two days straight. But then if he gets in, it's just straight loaded with ammo and stuff. So it's like a risk reward. There are old school safes that you can do that too. I don't know if they can deal with the new ones. But if you have like an old school safe, where you can actually hear the tumblers turning. Exactly. Well, we could also just build the lock. I mean, the beauty of what the team like ours is like, it's possible. Just like get the safe that looks aesthetically how you want. And then just replace the lock. Right. Yeah. Just make it so that it's fix it's solvable. Exactly. Complicated. Yeah. Yeah. That would be cool. Because then it's like, well, I'm a big fan of when they have agency. And so it's like, you know, it's like, we could even lay it out there like this will take days to solve. Yeah. And so you could spend days going collecting guns or days making money to grow the prize pool. Or you could spend days trying to get lucky on this like safe that is doable. But there's no guarantee you figured out. And having tons of stuff like that, that's what like makes it interesting too for the viewer. Because you're like, I love when these kind of reality shows where a viewer can ask, what would I do? Right. Yes. And that's what tends to be what like people and families when they watch together. They love like like in B schemes when I offer someone a million dollars, but you have to limit your friends. You know, sometimes people turn down the million dollars. Sometimes people take to a million dollars and eliminate their friends. And like that's an interesting thing to go, well, if I was in their spot, I don't care. Like it's a million dollars. The point is to make money. That's why I'm on the show. I'll take the run. But other people see that. And they're like, no, like my integrity is worth, you know, I wouldn't take a billion dollars over my integrity. Right. And for, you know, and some people, you know, even though it's a game show, they're like, no, I care, you know. And so, but giving them like these kind of dilemmas all throughout it too. So then as a viewer, I can be like, yeah, I wouldn't do that. I would just go scavenge, you know, it'd be cool. Also, you could make it so that ammo and certain supplies are only available at night. So they're incentivized to move it. You have to go out. You have to decide whether or not it's worth getting caught, whether or not you can sneak around and grab the ammo. And then you also have to find it. You have to find the ammo, maybe find food, find supplies. Like supplies are left in duffel bags at night. You know, bro, there's so many ways we can take this. Something that would be cool is every night we move their pile of money into a random building that they don't know. But it's all pre-selective. So it's not we were screwing them. So like we as producers know the 10 buildings each episode. So then night comes, come in, lift up the money. And we put like a helicopter, literally lifts it up, puts it on top of a different building. So now they have to get set up in this building to defend it. But they weren't planned on it. So that's why, because also that's the other thing. You have to make it where every episode's not the same. So then now every nighttime would be different because they're in a different building. And they don't know that. Yeah, that's cool. Yeah. And finding like having like random ammo caches, maybe during the day, they have to solve the puzzle that lets them acquire a map. And then they have to figure out where these random ammo dumps are and supply dumps are and food dumps are. So they're already hidden. Well, actually, you know what you have to go out at night to find them. You know what would be really cool is if we can find a vanity that had like miles away, like some other little location that we could like, so they find a map. And it's like, yeah, on the other side of those woods, but it's like a 10 mile hike, you know what I mean? And so could you get there, go grab tons of ammo and then get back before nighttime. Right. And so then that's also like, I'm a big fan of like, scene diversity and biodiversity. So things don't feel repetitive. So then they're going to a different city. But they're million or whatever the price will is still in the other one. So you have to go and then come back to defend it at night. And so it's like, now you get like, you can like dual cut because you can have the people in the city. You have the people journeying through the woods. And it's like interesting to come back before. And then if they go out to that city and they make the journey and they realize, it's going to take us 10 hours to solve this by that time. It'll be two in the morning. It's already got dark. We should go back now. Look, don't fuck it. We're here. Exactly. And they, agency, right? Do they stay and spend the night there and trust their friends and they have no, maybe no walkie talks so they can't communicate. And their friends are like holding down a four with the million dollars on top. And they're like, where are they at? They're like, and we get so many cool shots like that, you know? There's so, I mean, we've only done this in an hour, right? An hour or so. There's so many different possibilities if you just sat down and worked. It must be so fun to do what you do, dude. Exactly. Well, this is what we're doing right now is we're, what I would call blue skying. And we're not thinking about for the most part restrictions. We're just thinking about what's a great content. And a lot of that's lost. Like people in a lot of writers from them, they didn't say, you can't do that. Or that's not possible or whatever. And it's like, we're right now, we're just figuring out what is the best show possible. And then I'll just have people go figure out what is possible or not. And in reality, everything we've said is possible. It's just certain things will require a little bit of time. Like the safe, using a modern safe or changing a lot. That's possible. What does it cost and how long does it take, right? Yeah. And you just go through and you attach all that to everything. And you do a very first principles way of going about it. And then it's just subjective. It would take x amount of time and it costs as much money. And then like, you know, and then you just go through and figure out what's worth it. What's not as opposed to, you know, every step of way people will be like, no, you can't do that. Go ahead and redo it. And it's just like a, it seems obvious, but I'm not really sure of many media companies that approach it like we do, which is. No. Well, the thing about what you've done is you've built it from the ground up with yourself and with your team, right? So you've never had a bunch of executives telling you what you should be or should not be doing. And that's why it's so great. It's like these a bunch, you have creative people and then you have the business people and the business people, they think they're creative, but they're generally not. And they want to tell the creative people what to do so that they can say, that was my idea. And so then you get a bunch of people in meetings that give you terrible advice and terrible ideas. And then they also want to compare it to shows that have already been successful. Exactly. And you've done this and why don't we do it this way? And then you don't get the purple califac, whichever one knows. And you, these, what's the purple califac? So if you're driving down the road and you see a cow who cares, you'll never think of it. But if you're driving around the world and you see a purple cow, you're going to think about it like, why was that cow purple and it was sticking your brain? It's the same thing with content. If it's a show you've seen multiple times or a format that's similar, you won't think twice, but if it's a purple cow, but something you've never seen, then you'll think about it again. And that's what's counterintuitive to how like you were saying most execs think, they think, well, we did this before it did well, repeat it. It's actually the inverse of how you should look at it. And thankfully that's why with Beast Games, I've worked with Prime Video because they just give us creative control and they're like, you know what you're doing? You can do it, but a lot of everyone sees that creators are growing bigger and bigger audiences. And so a lot of, you know, every platform I'm not just trying to work with them. And I can't count them at a times like a creator's work with this streaming platform. And then, you know, what they have is great, but then the execs start giving notes and it starts to lose a little bit of the soul, a little bit of the quality. And then it goes from this like, amazing thing to like, it's all right. And it's like, it's just so frustrating because it's like you're paying them because they get millions of views of video because they have a core audience. And then you're stripping the thing away that got them that core audience. And it's like, why are you even working with them at that point? And more and more platforms are like waking up to it, but it's just like, comical how slow they are to it. And like, they should just trust them more. Well, it's hard for them because they have to put up so much money and not everybody's Mr. Beast. Yeah. You know, that's the problem. It's like, you have a great vision and you're really good at executing, but some people aren't. So if you're gonna dump a bunch of money into something, you see them making a disaster. You're like the Joker too or something. Like, hey, hey, hey, yeah. The fuck are you doing? Of course. And that's where it's like, well, what to, an exec might be a disaster until like a creator might be a master piece. And so that's obviously where, but it's evolving. I mean, I think obviously with obsession, I mean, they just gross $400 million. That crazy. I know. I've still haven't seen it, but I heard it's amazing. Oh, you wouldn't love it. I know. I just don't go to movie theaters anymore. I don't either, but like that one as with how well people are talking about it, I had to see it as a gaming. It'll be streaming soon. I think it'll be streaming in July or something. Yeah, obsession, back rooms which made by a creator, a major visual circus, they've been crushing it ironed like. So it's like Hollywood seeing it more and more, but the writing's been there for years, but now that, I mean, we just had essentially four hit films made by creators back to back to back. Well, did you see talk to me? No. Talk to me in the horror movie? No. It was great. These two guys from Australia, they were hilarious. These two brothers, they came in, and they talked to me about it, but they were making YouTube videos. Yeah. And they made it. It's called Talk to Me, right? No, what's the creator's name? Jamie, pull it up. Brothers. Okay. So they're so funny. They're on the podcast. What's the YouTube channel? What's the YouTube channel? A million miles an hour. Yeah. I can't think of their channel. They're the... Rackerack? Yeah. Yeah. That movie is great. Have you seen it? No, I haven't seen it. No, it's really good. It's really scary. And it's very original. When did you have to Rackerack a brother's on? A couple years ago. Okay. Two years ago? Yeah, they talk fast as hell. Dude, they're just... I'm not like trying to corral them. It's like, hey. What the fuck are you doing? They're super cool guys. Last time I hung out with them, I weirdly enough, they're really into UNO. And I, whatever. I like competitive games. And I played a thousand dollar game of UNO. I gave some of them. And so we filmed it for like a little short for them. And I lost. And I was like, okay, well at least this will be funny. And then after they leave to like go back to our show, they're like, fuck, the SD card's corrupt. And I was like, oh, what? So we're gonna get it all loaded. Oh, no. It was just funny because it was like, we had this mini set and we were playing like a really intense game of UNO. We were like slapping cards to. Card to corrupt, that's crazy. I know it was like wild. And like, we were like flipping desk and like going, like we were just the most batshit game of UNO. We were seeing. And it's just funny the kids game like taking over top. Yeah, those guys are super cool. Well, they made a movie about a hand. And so it's like this ancient hand that it looks like a sculpture. And it's got all this weird cryptic writing on it. And if you put your hand on it, you hold on to it. And you say, talk to me. Like all of a sudden you get possessed by something. And you're supposed to let go within a certain amount of seconds. And if you let go within a certain amount of seconds, you're okay. But somebody doesn't. Somebody doesn't let go. And it's, I don't want to say anything more like that. It's really good. Is it like scary, scary? Yeah. It's a horror movie. It's fun. It's really good. My fiance loves horror films. You'll love it. It's really well. And it was like when I saw it, I was like, this is crazy. These guys like super young guys, just energetic, enthusiastic, creative guys, just figured out how to make a horror movie. And it's all done in Australia. So it's like that everyone's driving on the wrong side of the road. And they're all Australian people. So it's like you don't have to have famous actors to make these amazing movies. Yeah. It's like it's not really necessary. Like the back rooms, I think the director, I think, is like 20 years old or whatever. I mean, very, very young. And I think it just crossed 100 million. And it's the same thing, right? Yeah. Yeah. I think they're a little older, but yeah, in their 20s, youtubers. And they make like curry, like just the silliest goofy as like skits on TikTok and Instagram reels. And now, you know, and then you watch obsession. It really is like one of the best movies I've seen in a while. And it's just like hilarious to see like the jump. But when you look backwards, it's kind of like Steve Jobs said. It's hard to connect it out. It's going forward. But you can connect it really backwards. And when you look back at the skits, they were very well shot and very, you know, like beautiful. And you can like kind of connect in your dots. I can see how this person made hundreds, hundreds of these like little scenes on TikTok and Instagram. And then that led to, you know, the compile a bunch. And it was like essentially practice for the movie. And it's just cool to see the progression of so many directors going over. And what's interesting though is when you see these things happen, there's obviously a delay, right? Because producing films takes sometimes years. And so like now that you see all these hits, bang, bang, bang, coming out of the creator space over in traditional Hollywood, then it's not, you're not going to see the fact six months from now. But 18 months from now, I bet, I would bet money. You're going to see dozens of other movies, you know, made by creators. And obviously these people are going to get more funding. And because now everyone's eyes are being open to like what should have been open a while ago, but that this is what people are watching now. Like especially people on the age of 30, they grow up watching YouTube and they're spinning, you know, two hours a day flipping through sub 60 second vertical feeds of TikTok, reels and shorts. And this is, this is culture for them. This is their world, you know. Yeah. I don't watch besides Christopher Nolan, like I'm not really going to a movie theater for anything, but when a creator drops a movie, I'm like, okay, like I want to see what they did, you know. I always want to see what new innovators are coming up with, like people that are just like thinking outside the box that aren't, they're not trapped in that sort of a weird world of like how to make a successful film. They just, they're just, they have a creative vision. They just try to follow it out. And people are not limited to whatever genre you know them from just because someone makes like funny TikTok reels doesn't mean they can't make a great horror film. Exactly. But think about like Jordan Peele, right? Make Keem Peele, make this comedy sketch show and then all sudden he makes these, you know, like get out and you're like, what the fuck? It seems like comedy sketches is the gateway to great horror films. I mean, I'm sure people have connected that dots and I'm probably like two years late to say that, but I never even realized that, but yeah, Keem and Peele, Curry, Baker, a bunch of other people, it's so funny. What seems like if you're creative, you can be, like most people have a variety of things that are interesting to them. You know, you like comedy movies, like horror movies. And just because you make comedies doesn't mean you don't have some good ideas about something that's absolutely terrifying. Yeah, and I wonder too, I feel like horror films, it's a little easier to do on a smaller budget because it's like a lot of it is like the unknown and you're not necessarily having to show it and suspense and stuff where like, you know, you don't really see like, I can't really think of like a sub like a couple million dollar action film that like really crushed because like obviously those are very expensive. So it seems like also a good place where you can make something like the difference between a hundred million dollar horror film and like a ten million dollar horror film. I would, are you honestly really isn't that big? Right. Because it depends on what you're doing, right? But it's like what makes it good is the premise behind it, right? Like the tension and like if the thing that's scary, it like makes you feel that way, like feelings aren't directly correlated to money spent and like, you know, you, you could have like this monster that doesn't appear to the end and you don't need to like CGI throughout the whole thing. But if you tell the story in the right way and the concentration, you can feel like phenomenal throughout the whole day. Yeah. And a lot of the older films that didn't have the kind of special effects that they have today in terms of like CGI, like there was something better about not seeing the monster like American world in London. It's the best example. You barely see it. You see it for like literally half a second a few times in the early parts of the movie. I haven't seen the movie, but you haven't seen it. No, I got some amazing. Speaking of not seeing a movie, I did watch X Machina after the last podcast. That's good. Yeah. It was really good. You know, honestly, I was like, uh, I was probably silly, but I watch it because you know, Joe told me it years ago. I loved it. I didn't realize it was that good. It's one of my top 10 all time favorite movies. Also because it's coming. That's coming. Oh, and now yeah, it's more relevant than ever. Did you see the computer electronic show from Vegas this year? Computer with the drone. CES on. Well, they have everything. And one of the things they had was in AI companion and this AI companion is a hot Asian lady with big boobs. And the lips don't sync up with the mouth, which is with the way the sounds coming out, but it's talking to you in AI. So it literally can have a back and forth conversation with you just like perplexity can you can. Yeah. Or chat to be to your. Yeah. And it's like that's common, dude. Well, of course, I mean, the language models are already there, right? Yeah, you can open up Jim and I right now and talk to it like a normal human. Yeah. And if you just tell it to respond quickly, it will talk to you with slang. It'll talk to you and say that part. Like you'll say it'll, well, one thing that's it's funny. I, um, I play this board game a lot called doing whatever like a big nerd, but there's like this one's called doing. Yeah, doing the movies. Yeah, it's a recreation. What's funny? I mean the movies when I started playing the game. I didn't realize there was movies. I didn't even know there was books. I just was looking for like fun strategy board games that I just to play a lot of content, but prom is Katan. It's like dice roll and you know, if you get unlucky, you don't really win. There's like games where, you know, there's a skill ceiling where, you know, the best player always wins, which just chess is a perfect example that. But then it gets to the point of like, well, if you want to be really great at that, it's who spends the most time doing it. So I don't want one that's a hundred percent skill, but I don't want something that's too much randomness. That's our I take board games a little serious because I love strategy games. And like, because if it's too much dice roll, like theoretically monopoly or Katan, then it's like, who cares? It's just whether you're not, you got lucky. So that it's like, I did a lot of research into like finding a game where there's like a little bit of randomness. So it's not just a vote all your life, but there like as an infinite skill ceiling. And that's where I kind of landed on this game called Dune. And I started playing it. And it also had to be a game where enough people played it where I could actually find people play it. And I got really hooked into it. But it's ironic because then I saw like the movies are dropping. I was like, oh, that and then all the characters started to make sense after I watched the movies. I'd probably have thousand hours into the game. I was totally backwards on the IP. But you know, because we were talking about talking to one of the top players, like makes YouTube videos on it. And I was like kind of curious like what he would do if he was like in certain move, like positions as me. So I just took all the transcripts of like a hundred of his YouTube videos. And I just put it into Jim and I and I was just like, hey, you know, respond to me based how this person would and talk to me like this person would and like what would this person say in this scenario? And then when I was like playing a game, I just asked the questions like the players names dino, whatever. But it's not called a dino dot IO. And I'd be like, what would dino dot IO do here? And it was pretty funny because it would respond just like him because it had so many like words from all his videos like dozens of hours. And it was like, and like I know one of dino's friends is name is Che. And I was like, would you take a bullet for Che? And dino's like a very analytical guy in like that AI was like, well, it depends. Is it in the foot? Is it in the chest? Exactly how like my friend would like to a tee like what to say man, you're in some sense and everything. I was like, this is crazy. Like this is absolutely insane. And and it's I would put it where it was on a disc or call and like dino, we would be playing. And then I'd ask question and be like, no, actually, dino don't say anything and I'd ask dino dot IO and respond exactly how he would respond in mostly situations because it had so much like contextual relevance from all his live streams on his YouTube channel. And it was it was pretty crazy. And yeah, so it's it was just so surreal. So talking about like the robot thing, I just wonder too, it's like if you put like a pendant around someone's neck and you just recorded them talking for like a week or two. And then you just fed that into an LLM and then you're like, hey, talk to me like this person talks like you could have that, you know, whatever Asian robot you're talking about. You just recorded them talking for like a week or two. And then you just fed down to an LLM. And then you were like, hey, talk to me like this person talks. Like you could have that, you know, whatever Asian robot you're talking about. You could have it literally talk to you like some other human. Right? Um, because it's interesting too, because I was like, hey, give me a breakdown of Dino's speech. And it was like, hey, point one five percent of his words are, um, uh, around point three percent of what he says is like, it gave me like a full breakdown of like the last hundred thousand words he said. What percentage they are, how he typically structures his things. Like if you put him in a stressful situation, he'll like kind of respond more like this. But if it's more chill, he'll use this vocabulary. It was like really cool. Uh, but also scary because I was like, man, I have a lot of me talking. Right? Like this podcast theoretically, people could just take dozens of hours of this and just make like a little Jimmy dot IO. And it's enough where it can pick up on my speech patterns and how I'd respond to certain situations. A hundred percent. Yeah. That easily. And then just put you in a robot and now Jimmy lives forever. Exactly. Or you could just have your robot view whoever, which is like kind of, weird, like ill. That would be very weird. You live with you. Imagine you have a robot and you get the robot to do stuff around your house. Sort of hiring a housekeeper. Yeah. You come home and Jimmy's vacuuming. Or more cynical or not even cynically just sad is like, you know, if you lost the loved one or something and then yeah, I know, but that's a pet cemetery talk. Yeah. But if someone's like really grieving, they might, you know, do it because they want some normality back or something. I can probably feel empty and hollow and even creepier. You have a robot that's pretending to be your husband. Of yeah, yeah, fuck off. That's crazy. I know. But it just, I don't know. These next few years, we could be crazy man. Everything's developing so rapidly. Yeah. It's just, yeah, it's a 2036 is going to be completely different than 2026. I know. It's not everywhere. There's never been a time where the future's so uncertain where no one can give you a really accurate map of what 10 years Chanel looks like. The difference between 1930 and 1940, not much other than world events. You know, yeah, the difference between like 1600 and 1700, not much, not much different. Maybe better boats, you know, maybe better muskets. Yeah. The difference between 2026 and 2036 is going to be who fucking knows. I know, man. Full on blade runner. I mean, it's just like that it's some of the people I see working on, like, augmented reality glasses and like where, you know, like there's enemies where people get trapped in video games and stuff like that. And I could really see like, you know, with AI advancing it with more and more compute where you could just, you know, put on a headset and live in a video game. And you could literally just gender or generate whatever the, the world is you want in literally like, you know, 10 years from up, potentially just real time generate the video game you want to be in and in cater to what you like. And just so many possibilities and obviously with humanoid robots, just skyrocketing. I mean, it doesn't take a genius to see, well, with intelligence, you know, computer intelligence getting better and humanoid robots, all these just tens of billions of dollars pouring into it. There are obviously, someone's going to figure out how to merge them together. And yeah, I mean, 10 years from now, we're definitely going to just, there's going to be humanoid robots and so many things that now would seem weird as hell, but 10 years from now, we'd be like, oh, it's normal. 10 years from now, you're going to have a show where people have to figure out whether or not someone's a robot or a real person. I would say 10 years from now, that would be five years from now, probably. 10 years from now, I feel like that would just be like, you know, is this a rock or an iPhone or whatever. Like no one would get there, it's going to be normalized to especially like younger people, like younger kids who grew up with chat, TBT and AI and stuff like that. It's like, it's just intuitive to them, you know, to use these things or as opposed to other means. And so it's just like as that generation, you know, once they become a thing, then give it a couple years for people to get used to it and normalize to it. And then, you know, it's not going to take that long. Yeah, it's going to be very, very, very weird. Yeah, it is. It's, and it's also like scary because you don't know the implications, like whether it'll be negative, positive, you know, some people will be negative for other people who will probably be positive, right? You know, like if you're a VFX artist in media, you'll probably be able to spend more time doing cool stuff and creative work and last time like going frame by frame and like, you know, like no one actually enjoys like rotoscoping someone's hair and like, you know, so you can, you know, remove a background shot or whatever. So like for certain people like that, ideally, you know, it allowed them to, you know, instead of you just, you know, draw a circle around them and then it just collapses on them and AI just figures it out. So you're not going frame by frame and drawing around their body. And it does that. And you can spend more time doing actual like creative fun work, you know, and hopefully that's where it goes and not to the point where you just don't even need the person entirely. But it's like anyone's guess where like the puck ends up stopping, you know, yeah, it's going to be very weird, man. Real weird. It's going to be interesting. You know, hopefully we'll survive. But I mean, I'm an optimist. I think we'll survive. But yeah, I'm an optimist too, but I have a feeling that we'll have a different role in society. That's for sure. I don't think we'll be the leaders anymore. Oh, that far. Okay. Yeah. I think AI is going to take over most things, including government, including allocation of resources. It's going to probably restrict people's ability to make decisions because we're so destructive. I did I listened to your podcast with the Mark and Jason. And I do like what he said or not like, but it's just interesting when he pointed out that like, you know, AI is the smartest doctor in the world. Is the smartest blank in the world? Is the smartest of everything, right? And typically, you know, billionaires like him would be only have limited access to these high level professionals in each industry. But now it's essentially democratized that everyone has access to the smartest person in the world and each these industries. And so it is pretty interesting because if it is, I'm not, uh, not omnipotent, but all knowing and knows all these things. Like it's like scary because it's like, we don't want as a human. I'm like, no, I don't want to make it those decisions. But if you like purely take a motion out of it, logically, it's like, well, would you rather a human with flaws that could do something fairly bad or this thing that has a lot more context and, you know, knowledge and experience, right? You say you want an experienced person making a decision. Well, technically this has the experience of everyone ever in history on the internet, right? So yeah, but it's also I have a no man. It's crazy. But hopefully for the most part, right now, at least it seems like it's allowing people to do less like busy work and less things that they don't enjoy and focus more, at least in media when I'm seeing focus more on things they, they do enjoy. Like I was saying, like the example of not having to rode every single frame on a body or, you know, being able to previsualize scenes or, or whatever. So it's like, it seems and everything I'm seeing and maybe I live in a bubble on Twitter. It seems like it's, it's not killing that many jobs yet, but not yet. Yeah. But it could. But the idea is that it could also provide so much wealth for everybody that we no longer have to think about money in terms of like you need food, you need shelter. Like yeah. Like this is universal high income as Elon's concept. Yeah. He thinks that literally people are not going to have to work anymore. Then the problem with that is like, then you run into human nature problems. And so we have to teach children how to pursue their interests rather than how to just worry about having a job to feed themselves. Yeah. And so then you have to give them motivation. So you have to explain to them at an early age that going after tasks, completing tasks, doing things that are difficult and challenging is actually exciting and fun. Yeah. And that's what you should generate to. And then we're going to have to reward people based on that. And it's just to figure out like what incentivizes people to do things. Yeah. Because if they don't get incentivized and then we also have VR and AR and games that you can play all day long that are way more exciting than real life, that you don't want to just take your government on and play call a duty all day. Yeah. Especially if it becomes VR call of duty. Exactly. That's where it's going to get hard because I think of like how addicted to video games I was when I was a kid. I mean, still to some degree now. But like, and if it was in a headset and like a completely different world, like oh my gosh, like my poor mom, like good luck in me out of that. Like she struggled to give me to stop staring at a screen and making call duty YouTube videos and playing called duty when I was younger. And you know, but if I was like actually in a headset, oh, and all my friends are on it, yeah. You know, then you take it off and now you have freaking homework and like real life stuff. And like you went from the most overstimulating, beautiful, different utopia world where everything's amazing and you're with your friends and you're having fun. And then you take it off and you're back in like real life, which sucks. Like that's like a whole different level of addiction than like current video games would have. And I mean, I don't know what the timeline is on that stuff. But it's clear that that's going to happen in our lifetimes. That's the matrix and that's coming. And there's going to be multiple levels of that. And it's also going to exponentially get it better and better with each iteration. Exactly. There's no way to stop it. It's going to happen. And that's sandbox VR, but times a million. If you go to play those games, you're in a small room. That's like a part of a giant warehouse where they have these things set up. And your room is, you know, like 50 feet by 50 feet and you move around and there, you do a bunch of stuff. But if this is an actual fucking warehouse, you have physical boundaries that exist. And then you're in a virtual space where as you're walking, it looks like the actual ground that you're walking on. Yeah. And you're involved. You won't be able to tell. Exactly. What's real and what's not real. And what those Omni directional treadmills and stuff on someone cracks the code. It's a, you've probably never heard of it, but there's a pop that anime called Sword Art Online. It's where it's just a guy gets trapped in a video game and he lives his life through there. And I remember watching that when I was younger. And I remember like when I was really young, where fresh off of watching that anime, I was like, man, I hope they fear this out of my lifetime. So I'm like 80 years old. I could just put one of those on and just live in the video game. And it's like at Percy's scare, but then he ends up loving it because it's just like everything's great. And yeah. So I think, yeah, there's just, well, the problem is like what's real and what's not real. You know, is it really important for things to happen physically in the real air quotes, the world or will be just as fulfilling to exist in these virtual worlds? I mean, I remember when I was younger, I'd play like this game called Wizard101. It's like World of Warcraft like in MML RPG. And like there are definitely times in my, maybe there are short periods where like when I was a young kid, like my character in that game definitely mattered like pretty similar to like me in real life. Like I was really hooked on that game. And so like I could see it, like, you know, where people like look at people who've dedicated their entire lives to World of Warcraft, there's probably hundreds of thousands or at least tens of thousands. And it's like, you know, if you could recreate that same effect, people would feel that same way. Well, if I'm 90 years old and I'm bad or in like, I don't care. Put the headset on me. Like I'm done. Let me just live it out in here. You know, someone come in stretch my, my limbs every couple of days like, you know, put an IV in me. I don't even want to take the headset off to eat. Well then there's a question of is that already happening right now? So if a simulation exists and it's so good that it's impossible to differentiate between the simulation and real life. And you know, there's a lot of people that are very intelligent people that believe we are inside of some sort of a simulation currently. Elon's one of them. He said the odds of us not being in a simulation are in billions. Really? Yeah. So something akin to a simulation he believes is running right now. So maybe we are in beast games. You know, some me a thousand years. Yeah. The hundredth version of beast games. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. With compute growing and growing. It's someone figured out how to harvest the energy of a single star. Maybe that's what this is about. As we grow older technology becomes crazier and crazier and it reaches some sort of a tipping point while we're alive. And this is the end of the game. That would be great. Which is some sort of a voice. Some actual civilization similar to us. But then they just want to, they lost, you know, like how we lost a lot of our ancient history they did too. So there's a simulation to see how did we come to be with all this stuff. And so, yeah. I mean, yeah, if you're harvesting the energy of a sun and you have all that compute, I mean, look at what we're currently able to do with just data centers on the planet. Like it's not far-fetched to think you can put, have someone put a headset on or whatever and simulate, you know, trillions of things. Not just that, but then there's the reality of the structure of the universe itself. Like subatomic particles acting differently when they're observed. Yeah, the double slits are spinning. Yeah. So it's like, okay, what effect is consciousness having on reality itself? And are we limited in our senses and our ability to recognize the impact of it? And do we live in a siloed version of reality that's we're imprisoned by our site, limited senses of sight, smell, touch, exactly. Like there could be way more weird shit going on around us all the time. We just don't have the ability and that's what the simulation is. Exactly. But it's not as simple as like you show up with your lunch pill and your go to work. No, there might be some weird shit that's going on all along with consciousness. It's, you know, we did a video where we helped a thousand, you know, blind people or people who couldn't see see again with cataracts or trees tonight. I didn't think about that. It's like fascinating because, you know, if they didn't have other humans around them, they would just would have never known that site was a thing. Like they, you know, if we as other humans didn't tell them, yeah, I mean, they couldn't see. And so it is like, is there a sense that we might not be aware of that? A bunch of them are that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, but that is like an interesting thought experiment and like, because like to those people, it was, you know, actually a random memory I just got to. We also did a video where we helped a thousand deaf people here again. And a lot of them it was just giving them like really, really advanced hearing aids so that, you know, and they just hadn't heard in years. And there's this one scene we did where I, a guy had a newborn child that was like a couple years old, but it was deaf since the child was born and I never heard his child. And so we, we put it in and it like really, really amplified sound where he could actually hear and her sound and God knows how long. And then the first thing he heard is we had his child to say daddy and he like lost that was the first word he heard in years and he was the first time he ever heard her. And I don't even know why that memory popped my head. But yeah, that was like, that was like one of the most special things we've ever filmed was like that moment right there. I was like, wow, that's crazy. Yeah, we, we assumed that the senses that we have detect everything that's around us, but we know that's really not true because they're so limited just in terms of our ability to see things, right? We see more things of the microscope than you came with the naked eye. Exactly. No idea what the senses are missing. And all you have to do is ask yourself, if you were those people and you didn't have other people around you telling you, you wouldn't have known. Like you would have thought that was reality. Right. It's just, yeah. Yeah. I don't know if we'll ever know. But what's think about the sense of smell? How weird that is. There's an invisible thing and when someone farts you go, oh, exactly. You know? And like, yeah, it is kind of cool. You have no idea. If you didn't ever sense of smell, you would just be existing just like everybody else and without a sense of smell, life is not that much different. You know, it's different, but not that much different. Like everything looks exactly the same. But no one could smell anything. You know, but think about gases and all sorts of like your gas leak and your house or weird shit, these smells, skunks, all that stuff you'd be missing out on. I guess if you had to get rid of one of the five senses, that would be the one. Yeah, exactly. I feel like that's the least necessary to survival. It would suck food wouldn't taste as good. Yeah. You would know if you had BO. Yeah. Most part, your eyes of living don't really drop that much and like you're all happiness when changed. Yeah, the only thing that would be a problem is impact by chemicals. Like you wouldn't be able to smell like horrible chemicals that your body's rejecting. You know, the certain things you smell, you go, oh, what the fuck is that I got to get away from that? Because your body's letting you know like this is toxic, whatever you're breathing in, it's not normal air. You would, you would, environmental poisons would be a problem. But other than that, regular life, if you lived in a contained safe environment like most cities, most offices, most places that people work, it's not that big of a deal to lose your sense of smell. Yeah. You know, it's funny because on the car right over here, I was listening to podcasts we did whatever four years ago. And it's like, it's like the entire podcast. I was way younger back then was all about like YouTube data and analytics. I don't know if you remember that. And it's like, I do like one thing I've noticed. It's interesting because like I started making videos on was 11. So my entire life is on the internet, right? And like my puberty, every development and stuff. And I look at that our old podcast and like it is so like brutal. Like I have borderline like autism on like this one subject. And it's like I was so one dimensional back then because I was just young and I had only ever done one thing. It's just so interesting because it's like if someone were to theoretically search Mr. B's Joe Rogan and they you know, if they clicked on either one of these podcasts, they'd be two completely different experiences. Right. But you look differently. Yeah. I mean, you look great man. And we were saying before the podcast, you look fantastic. You lost weight. You look really healthy. Thank you. Yeah. I was telling Jupyftopakas I lost 50 pounds between the last one and this one. That's awesome. Yeah. And last time when you would ask me about movies or you asked me about all these things, every because I was listening to it on three XB like I right here, every single thing I was like, I don't know. I was like one thing and one thing only I know YouTube. And it was like, I know nothing else. And I blocked everything else out of my like my world, which is interesting because I actually think that wasn't a positive. Right. I think if I consume more other medians and culture, it would have been better inspiration. I would have been a better storyteller. So I actually don't think it was a good thing, which is why I've like since then opened up and like I let more things into my mind. If I could push back on that though, I think it allowed you to be hyper successful because you were so focused on it that I think it really worked out to your benefit. Yeah. I don't think it's a bad thing. Yeah. No, I think the hours put in yes, but it's like instead of consuming four hours of YouTube a day allowing like a lot of my stuff to occasionally watch a movie, I think I would have been more tapped in and understood how to tell someone who's younger. And you that's a part of the process. I know. It's just so funny listening to that podcast because I even I as myself I watched that, I was on the car. I was like, wow, I like seeing like borderline like a freak on certain things here. I was like, you were like, you would like change the subject on certain things and then I instantly bring it back to the one thing I knew like YouTube data. And like I could like tell that I didn't even know and I would just be like, oh, yeah, that I think anyway, it's retention. And it was just so funny listening to it. But it's just interesting though because you know, I'm sure you see like a lot of your podcast you do. Most people consume it through clips on social media, right? That's like exposure to it. Most people consume most things through clips. Yeah. And what's fascinating though is clips don't have context on the time range, right? And like, you know, so like whatever clip from the podcast we did years ago, I'll see my feed or it'll just randomly start going viral. One of them now and like and like sometimes there'll be things that like, you know, I've grown up or I don't like necessarily agree with or whatever. I speak differently. But because they're not like time stamped, it's like interesting because of clip from something you did years ago, can randomly go viral now and people won't even know that it's like years ago. Yeah. So yeah, fascinating because they just like pop off and it's like more people are going to listen to this podcast through like random clips probably 10, 15 times folds and like actually going on Spotify or wherever you posted I think. Yeah, probably. And it's so interesting because that's like the new form of culture, especially for younger people is sub one minute is vertical content and out that they swipe through the feed. But it doesn't inspire people to listen to the whole thing. Yeah, only a certain percentage of them will do that. But it's like that's a thing with sporting clips like you see the game winning touchdown and you watch that it's probably just watch more than the actual full game. I saw a survey of like 56% of people now prefer to watch a sporting event through clips as opposed to like the actual thing like that. Yeah. Like guarantee you that's the case with like the UFC because I know for the UFC when they analyze the performance of a show like how many people watched it on Paramount+. Versus how many people consumed it on TikTok. Oh my God. It's many, many fold. Yeah. Like, you know, they get hundreds of millions of views on social media. Yeah. A different, I have different fights live in a while but like you know the White House one. I saw everything on my TikTok feed. I mean, I probably saw 150 clips of it. So I have like a relatively good grasp of what it looked like and what happened. But yeah, I don't watch it live. You know, if you wanted to watch that one live really you should have been there. Like that was when you really absorb how bizarre it was to actually be at the White House. It was very bizarre. The whole thing was very surreal. Like me and Daniel Cormier and John Anick, there were so many moments like the day before the event where we were rehearsing and so we're standing by the octa and I made a video of it where I put it on DC is like the White House. Like I'm showing the White House. There's the cage and then the White House is right there. Yeah. And the flyover and everything. But see, that's how when I was talking about the Roman call is seen before. That's how I've got it. But I didn't get the like, you know, they were going to do Elon Musk versus Mark Zuckerberg in the Roman call. I know. But it was going to cost $150 million just to secure the venue and set everything up. I mean, I could have hooked him up. Also been a terrible fight. Like he would have been destroyed. They would have just been a big. He takes these big and so that's going to be enough. But Mark knows how to fight. Mark is like really into it. He trains all the time. I mean, he's obsessed. He brought this guy that I know Dave Camarillo who's a world-class coach who's a Brazilian Jiu Jitsu Black Bell, Judo Black Bell has been training him. Like he's training with like far people. Well, because I don't think he'd care of it until the story. Like the first time I talked to him years ago, like, you know, we just shooting the ship chatting. And then like at the end of it, he's like, yeah, you want to come train him and there or whatever at my lake. And I was like, oh, no, but I usually do. But it's just like instantly like that. I could tell that's like his way of like bonding and building friendships. And like, yeah, he's just like, he was being very serious. Like he wanted to roll it. I've never done that in my life. And I was like, I'm getting invited me to go bow hunting with him. So it's definitely not fake. Like that was a one on one conversation. Oh, no, no, no, no. You know that. I mean, I think he's just like puts on the facade or stuff. But like unironically like our first time eating. He's just like, yeah, let's hang out. Let's do like go roll on some mats and stuff. Like he was being dead. Well, the way you could tell that it's not fake is watching him train because there's no way he could be that good if he's not actually putting in the time. Because I want even his striking his jujitsu all that stuff is like, it's clear. There's many hours been spent working on technique to achieve this level of proficiency. He doesn't look like a world champion or anything like that. But he looks like a guy who's training a lot. Yeah. There's no way you can't be enthusiastic about it and be doing that. So he's definitely really good. Every time I listen to whenever you have a podcast and you talk about the UFC and stuff. It always makes me feel like I feel that masculine urge to go train and do it. But it's like, I wish I could like, I wish I could fork my life and have like one where I keep going down this path of just grinding 18 hours a day and building all these companies. And then another where I could like pursue fun stuff like that and like, because that would be fun like the, well, how old are you Jimmy? 28. Yeah, you're still so young. You could just do this for another 10 years and a mass so much money that you could never spend it. And then 10 years from now, you know, just slack off a little bit on that and just go do a bunch of stuff. And not only that, you could create content doing a bunch of stuff like Mr. Beast discovers the world. Like you could, you could do anything man. Yeah. I think we're so young. I give so much time ahead of you. Yeah, it's hard to even, I think you, you like, as humans, we like build the patterns and stuff. And I've been working so many hours every day for so long that it's like, like literally like ingrained in me that it's hard to ever really imagine a world where like it shuts off because you have to think like I started when I was 11. So basically now all I really do is just, you know, work where there's building that companies are making content and like another 10 years from now. That would be essentially 20 years straight of like training my nervous system of like, this is what you do all day every day, like constantly being warm out obsessed with it. So it's hard to envision a world where I could ever shut it off. But you know what's interesting? You and I have been doing it about the same time. Like we started this podcast around 17 years ago. Holy crap. Yeah. It'll be one of these 17 years in December. I think so right. I think in this December it's 17 years. So it's basically we're on these parallel paths. Which is crazy. You know what would be funny is if like I'm vision like 17 years ago, you had 11 year old me sitting here and then you sitting there. Like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, I'm like, how is a day do you spend waking up content? Hey, man, go outside. Go talk to a woman. I mean, back then too, I was so like introverted and self conscious. I probably would have been like, yeah. You know, because you have to kind of be a little, it's, it's interesting too because it's like very accepted to be a content creator. It's like cool. People love it. It's like, even parents now, like, you know, they're like, do it. And they realize that while being a content creator, you learn a lot of different skill sets and teach yourself agency, et cetera. But back then, I mean, it was like your batch. You're crazy. Very round upon. And like, so it's so funny to see how that changes because like, you know, it's the number one most coveted job in America right now. Like if you were to go survey like 100 random teenagers, a lot of them, a good chunk of them would say they want to be a content creator. Maybe not specifically a YouTuber, but between TikTok, Instagram, influencer, like, you know, like, and so it's probably the number one job that kids want. It is, actually, yes. And so, but you know, when I was coming up, heck no, it is like, what do you have? A weirdo? That's not a job like, youtubers don't even make money. How are you going to make money? You're going to be homeless. Yeah. To see how it changes. And same thing with podcasts. Back then, I would tell people I'm doing a podcast and they would be sad. Like, oh, poor guy, like, what the fuck's wrong with? Used to be on TV. Like, oh, man. Yeah, you're falling from grace. And it's so interesting too to see, like, you know, as YouTubers and stuff, first got started getting big. Like, they all used as launch pads to jump to Hollywood. And it's like the ones like me who are just like, who really cares, you know, like, just stay over here and focus on YouTuber, the ones that are the biggest. And I just believed in the future. This is the same as podcasts as well. Because there's a lot of people that started off podcasts and then their podcast got a little bit of popularity and they went and did a show somewhere. Yeah. And they got, and they sort of stalled them out in the podcast world. Exactly. Because now you're working for the man, air quotes, and you're working for some studio or something like that. In split time, and you're not just passionate stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's something I think about too, which is a message. I feel like a lot of people need to hear because a lot of people don't realize that, you know, not everyone can make tens of millions of dollars or maybe be a successful or is like, you or I can. But I do believe most people, if they, you know, find something they like, put in a lot of hours, like a ridiculous amount of hours consume, you know, basically everything's available on the internet. Now consume all knowledge available on how to be good at certain things and then, you know, do a thousand iterations on it, then they can come out the other side and do it for a living, you know what I mean? Yeah. I feel like they're, but most people aren't exposed to that kind of, I mean, to be honest better, like they think still, you know, their parents went to college, that's how you get a job. And so a lot of people today, because obviously your parents, education, teach you a lot of these things. And I'm not saying college is bad. Just think it's the same pathway and then they get in a lot of debt and they don't fully realize that, you know, if you just like, there are like, you know, certain content creators that might blow up in two years and there are others like me that take 10 years and it's just like a distribution chart and, you know, probably the average somewhere in the middle. And you just have to like, there's no like set timeframe you can give yourself. But if you're surrounded with other people obsessed with the certain thing you're obsessed over whatever it is, you put in 10,000 hours. And in those 10,000 hours you do a thousand iterations and you consume all knowledge available on it. It's like, you know, the better you do it, the further to the right, like the two year mark you'd be able to do it for a career. But you know, sometimes it will take longer and you just have to give yourself enough time in it. But eventually you can make it happen. And I think that just more young people need to hear that really because they just don't even really, the dots don't connect in their mind that that's really even an option, right? Well, it's a completely new career path, right? And the only way that people really can get a map of the territory is from someone like you who's gone through the very early days of it. And they could show, hey, not only is this guy successful, he's fucking hyper successful. Like this is not a dream. Like this is a possibility. You just have to figure out your version of what he did. Yeah. And it's a process. But I would argue it's not even just for content creation. Like if you want to be on a accountant or really anything, it's like just put in a lot of hours, do a lot of iterations around yourself with great people and obsessed over. state focused, stay focused, consume it. And then recognize like you might be like, oh, well, this person did it in 10 months. Why is it taking me so long? It's just, it's average and statistics and just give yourself enough time frame and like it's hard to, again, I'm not saying you'll make tens of millions of dollars. But if you want to do that thing for a living, if you follow those, those, you know, traits, like it's going to happen eventually because. Well, you have to be a process where it did not go warranted. You know, the process is getting better at stuff. The goal of being financially secure comes with it. Eventually, but if you think I want X amount of money, well, that's what you're going to think about. You're not going to think about the actual thing you're making. So it won't be as good. So you'll probably never get there. Bingo. Yeah. And this is, you know, one of the cool things about owning a comedy club is that we've set up the club. So there's a real path like these people understand how you can become professional. Because becoming a professional when I first started was this very vague, weird thing. Like you never, no one knew how it was done. Like you went to open Mike, 90 did open Mike. Now, how do I get paid? How do I ever be a professional? Yeah. Someone has to ask you to go with them on the road and then you wind up getting mentored by another comedian, which is nice because they usually need opening acts. And that's kind of how we did it. But we set up at the comedy club. We have a real creative director, this guy Adam E. Good. getting mentored by another comedian which is nice because they usually need opening acts and that's kind of how we did it But we set up at the comedy club We have a real creative director this guy Adam E. Good who is the creative director of the comedy store the town coordinator He watches all the open mikers He finds people that are good. We have two nights of open mic nights and then we have kill Tony So we have kill Tony the show which is every Monday where these people pull a random name out of a bucket and you I'm gonna show if people don't watch it. It's hilarious the best fucking show ever Yeah, and these people get to do one minute of stand up and if it blows up and they do well They get to come back and if they get to come back then all said millions of people have seen them do stand up And now they're selling out comedy clubs and they have real careers and some of these people were just grinding it out and you know My friend Dedrick Flynn he was out Atlanta doing it and my friend Ari Maddie was in Estonia and he went to Australia for 10 years just grinding trying to make an economy gets on kill Tony boom Yeah, now he has a career. It's incredible and I don't recognize those names But like as me a case study right if they're doing stuff in Estonia or other I've never would see it But if they're on kill Tony, I'll see it exactly there are millions of people like me that we're not like we're casual comedy Watchers right I don't you know maybe I'll watch an Netflix special here there and I watch kill Tony and so like yeah If you don't exist in one of those two things you just don't exist in my world and there's so many people like me There's a lot of people now like that particularly and We wanted to set up a network. We wanted to set up like a real pathway where these people can you can see hey other people like like like Camp Patterson He was a door man at the commestore and now he's on Saturday at live or yeah, do I'm at the mothership brother and now he's on Saturday Life he started out at the mothership and he's working there as an employee And he's funny and I know he is he's a man's a kill Tony. Yes because of kill Tony exactly But there's multiple versions of that now that are coming out of the club And so we wanted to set it up like that so you still have to do all the work But we want to like like illuminate the pathway exactly there's a clear path well because the it's a different skill sets right like being able to get Attention and get in front of people might be a different skill set then being funny and being able to make them laugh and you know The things that make a great comic and so it also makes it a little straightforward for people who might be just world-class in in one comics But they they don't know how to scrounge up enough money to travel the world and do all these things and smart enough to figure it out And so like handling that part because at the end of the day like as a viewer I just want to watch funny people right? There's also you have to be able to see other people who've done it already and how they did it So because of a guy like Camp Patterson goes from being a door man at the mothership to now being on SNL People see it and they go oh it can be done. What did he do? Well, he kept killing every time he got on stage So that's what I got to do. I got to work on my set really grind it out And I was with this guy three years ago and now this guy's rich and he's famous. Yeah, this is amazing He was poor just like me like literally working for You know You pay well yeah, but I mean doing road gigs and doing whatever you can guys are barely getting by But that's the key. It's like you got to know that it's possible Yeah, and before someone like you became you know a real content creator But imagine just trying to explain to someone what your YouTube show what your goal was Imagine this imagine 15 years ago you sitting down with someone when you're 13 years old and trying to explain I want the show to have hundreds of millions of subscribers I want billions of hours consumed worldwide I wanted to be like one of the biggest shows in human history And I'm gonna do it on YouTube they believe you're out of your fucking mind. Yeah, right? Yeah, I went back then like viral Videos back then were like two million views, right? And so like if you would have said back then I want to get a hundred million views of video Like I mean people would call you the the lunatic like you're just delusional The delusional like a certified like lunatic like you're not even living in reality But now that you've paved the path and then you've shown people that it can be done now You see everyone's a lot more confidence to read it's a real career path It's a real career path if you pursue it the way someone pursues Learning how to play guitar and being in a band like do it the right way I want to be a pilot whatever to do go to a pilot school You're gonna put in go through the process like actually Or I mean I don't know if it's actually but it's like millions of people over the next 10 years that will you know Find a job, you know being a creator of working for creators, right? I know yes I mean dozens of on dozens of creators who are hiring dozens of people each I have 150 open racks in my business I mean there you know these creators hundreds of thousands of people are gonna become creators themselves full-time And those creators are gonna hire millions of employees over the next you know Decatur so so even if you which is what I've seen a lot of people who try to become a creator who end up feeling they end up being phenomenal you know partners or employees for Other creators right and they're the space is growing so big and there's just so much demand for it because not everyone who did stuff and traditional Hollywood, you know accomites as well over here So there's just so much like everyone I know just needs like five or six people So it's like it's pretty useful thing and it's like almost like the equivalent of getting a college degree Right if you're a teenager now and you put in five thousand hours 500 iterations You obsess over this thing blah blah you come out the other end Even if you don't make it as a youtuber, you know, you know how to edit now You know how to tell a story now you have all these characters traits and yeah Some other youtuber will pick you up in heartbeat. Yeah for sure and it's also it's this is the new Hollywood I mean this is really I mean literally now before the biggest films came from creators It's like not even like it is like a factual thing now some of the biggest new IPs are coming out of them Yeah, it's where all the viewership is going. I mean when I was on this podcast last time I was probably like whatever 1.8 billion people use YouTube every month now. It's over three billion I mean it's it's growing and it's not slowing down. It's growing more more more Which is what I said would happen. You know last time I was on here and what I still believe I don't think these things up Peak I think they're gonna keep growing and you know, it's just what younger people use They they never watch television which is obvious to me and you but yeah, but to some older people who still watch You know news and get it through there It still blows your mind that they're like they never use cable and it's like like a 15 year old right now Outside of like you know watching an NBA game or an NFL game has never used cable television They've never even seen it. They don't like they don't even believe in wow And like they're like like sometimes when I'm talking to like a younger person like if I'm like trying to get a gauge of What do you think of our new video like I'll just ask like have you ever watch cable television to see what they say and like no And I'll explain to them that there's like two to three minutes of commercial breaks kind of like when you watch NBA But instead of like a sporting event, it's like Entertainment and they'll be like why why would you do that? Why would you? Like why would you put like three minutes of ads every four minutes like well, and I'm like well that's just how things were and they're like Why it's so dumb that they still do it that way? Yeah, well, it really is so dumb. It makes no sense It makes no sense you don't have to do it that way They could probably make as much money through product placement and having an ad at the beginning and doing it and you probably get more Retention you probably get more views like no one is gonna sit and watch CBS and crazier's you'd have to pay money to Like you'd have to pay like $50 a month for cable to then have like 33% of what you consume be ads Which is a high ratio than when you watch a YouTube which is free It's like it's like it's like wow and then you wonder why people are moving in hundreds of millions of droves over to this new form that Yeah, and then there's podcast which is like how many podcasts are there now? Oh Millions obviously but how many? Yeah, obviously there's millions, but but I mean the barrier to entry is the lowest like at least what you're doing is Complex, you know, it's I mean you've created a show you've game shows you have charity shows You're giving waste off you have a bunch of crazy things you guys do you have tasks you have you have to plan it out Yeah, podcast you're just sitting down like we we talked for five minutes before we started this podcast. Yeah We said hi, hey, what's up? Good to see you gave me some caffeine to give me Yeah, let's go. Yeah, that's it. Like so there's zero preparation other than you know The preparation that the host does beforehand but yeah, the difference between that kind of preparation the kind of preparation involved in one of your shows It's fucking immense. Yeah, and so the barrier to entry just to be someone who's a content creator like a podcaster is How many podcasts are there? What's guess? Oh? If you're gonna how many do you think there are Jamie active podcast? How many have been uploaded this week? How much that's what you know active? Yeah, it's still posting on him Yeah, let's say seven million or something like that. That's crazy. Yeah, that's crazy I would guess to well active probably one one million Please do please put this this is what I want to know how many podcasts were active in 2009 oh Let's guess that okay Put that into our AI sponsor perplexity perplexity probably has the answer to that. Wait. They sponsor you guys Yeah, that's how you had the the founder on yeah Well also because he's cool I talked to him and we started talking about ancient Hindu mythology I was like dude is kind of a cool guest. I have a download. I haven't listened yet Is really entry he's fascinating guy. We were talking about these temples in India I've been down these multiple rabbit holes about these temples that they carved out of a single saw 2009 there were 69,000 podcasts, but that's not active that just means 69 in the apples directory So that means roughly 70,000 people had done one at some point, but then yeah, I would wager a small percentage Or actually active at the time still that's a lot so that's when I started so now what is it now that I'm curious now 2026 how many podcasts are there oh I bet seven million Yeah, I'm gonna I'm gonna I guess I'm not meant to 10 million worldwide. I'm up a mind to 10. What is it say? So it's just 2009 there are 69,000 versus several million shows today depending on the database you look at Okay, but what is the number that's four point five to four point seven million podcast shows globally as of 2026 you know I'd be curious of how many people Do content creation full-time I'm wondering what that's a good question. Okay. Let's let's figure that out Yeah, I'm gonna make a little Yes, let's guess how many people make a living doing content creation in 2009 versus now I'd say 2009 maybe zero You know, I was a 5,000 okay, maybe fun little content creation is like a very online content creation. Yeah But the problem is that's like bloggers and yeah, there's social media 2009 social media is just coming out, right? You're right 5,000. So let's let's just think let's just not even think about that Let's just think about today how many people are professional content creators today. Let's guess I say 25 million I would say lower probably Let's see what that's eight million. Yeah, that's probably one of what the barrier to entry you're making me look up here is also tough in the US Like taxpayers people who are like Do content creation full-time right? Yeah, just just how many content creators How many professional content creators are there worldwide? Slip perplexity try to figure it out. I will but I'm just like I know what it's gonna do. That's what's not what do you think it's gonna do it's gonna freak out and say there's a lot See what it says though It's gonna say the same sort of thing. What does professional mean? Okay people that make a living they pay their bills off a content creation I Know it's not a great question, but let's just see what it says just out of curiosity. It might have an answer How would it know really? You know filed you're like it could guess because it gets there 4.5 is 7 million Probably just gonna look for any database online eight to 12 million professional content creators worldwide Depends depending upon how professional is defined roughly 200 300 million people identify as content creators globally in 2026 holy shit Holy shit. Are they making money? Are they right? Yeah, this seems relatively like it got the gist though. Yeah, I got it It wasn't a problem Jamie. You were pessimistic. No, wait. We don't have an answer It's given us 300 million data the rough data is eight to 12 million professional content creators 200 300 million people identify as content creators So out of those which kind of make sense that you know a small percentage of them are gonna be able to figure out how to make a living entirely off of it One analyst estimates that about 4% of creators are Professional meaning they treat content creation as their main job and earn a full-time living So that that's that makes sense. Yeah, that seems about right and that's about right with kind of a lot of things Yeah, it's there's a bunch of people try it and a small amount of people actually like if you think about how many people if you go to an open mic night on Instead of comedy and how many people are Actively participating in open mic nights where they visit one or two open mics a week and how many will eventually become professional stand-up comedians and make a living off that You're probably in the same range of like 4% or something like that probably less Yeah, it makes sense. Yeah, but the interesting part is that numbers gonna keep skyrocketing year over year I don't see any signs that any of this stuff is slowing down and so especially if people see that this is a real path There's this isn't a pie in the sky dream. There's a lot of I mean at this point if they don't see it then I mean I don't know what to tell you I mean I'm literally spending hundreds of millions of dollars a year or investing hundreds of millions of dollars a year into Content and so I mean it shows what the upper bounds look like well Your really wise in that regard is that you spend so much money dumping it back into the business and By doing that your content is just so much more advanced than anybody else's and that's such a big risk Because a lot of people would say I'm making all this money who knows when this is gonna end let me squirrel this away Yeah, and make sure that I've got money saved up forever. You just like fuck it. Let's just spend it. Go hard well, it's what I used to call the Creators would back in the day reach like five million subscribers and then it was a real inflection point that I would notice Where they'd either keep growing or that's where they'd start to teeter off because it's around the time where they'd start to make good money And it's either like okay now they have a house they have a car paid off and like the ones that were really money motivated They kind of got that security and so that that burning fire that was pushing them to do crazy things like kind of Yeah, die off and like it's like a the fermi paradox like for quite a few people It's around that range is where you see like your favorite creators start to get lazy upload less not put as much effort and not care as much And so yeah, I never really had any of that I just like you know I mean like I probably talked about last time we're on here I used to live in a apartment that I would share that was $720 a month so like 360 rent and I drove a 2006 Dodge Durango that cost a couple thousand blocks and I just didn't have any liability So I was just like screw it. I'll just keep my lifestyle cheap so I just reinvested all and You know that's so wise most people don't do that and most people don't have the discipline to work as much as you do Well, and yeah, the the card reports who is when you have the pressure of your parents and stuff and I don't know I'm weird like when my mom would I mean as sad as it sounds like she would literally cry sometimes and be like man I'm just so weird you're gonna lose everything like what if these videos stop getting views and I don't know what would come over me But I'd be like it'll be fine mom don't worry and I just like very calmly just say it to her I wouldn't argue with her I'd be like just just have faith. Well, you were right I know we're great now, but it's up to parents parents always worry about their kids exactly so I don't think it's like She was doing anything wrong, but all purposes like she was doing the right thing It's just so you also have to overcome that pressure as well because there's so many forces around you Or even if you believe in yourself all it takes is one person like saying something like that puts self doubt in you And then you're like you know But that's where I'm a big believer if you really want it just keep your liabilities low like live below your means and that way It's like you know It's a little easier to be riskier if you aren't you know have all these things you got up forward because what really changes if you fail That's definitely smart, but there's something happens also to people where Just the constant grind of work it diminishes their enthusiasm and they lose their perspective They lose this perspective of God you're so fortunate to be able to do this. Yeah, you're so fortunate exactly and People just get really complacent. It's That's so easy for people to just forget how fortunate they are to be able to do what they're doing. Yeah, and But it's sometimes I get hit with that where you know It'll be a late day of shooting and I'm in an airport and you know, bunch of people are following me around and filming me And I'm like, you know, and you get those thoughts in your head where it's like This is really the life I wanted and you like start to like like you kind of regret your decisions And but then you got to like snap out when you're like, okay, like the small subset of time Yeah, it might be brutal, but for the most part I'm doing dope stuff like I'm in the pier I'm in the Roman Coliseum. I'm doing like beautiful amazing things I get a entertain and and help people and it's like and you just have to think it's very important You're around people who like you if you have a group of people around you who when you get in those negative Thought loops encourage it and help you spiral It's bad, but if you have people who are in which you know not everyone in my spot position has like people who are you know Willing to tell them how it is right who are just like broke grow up like it's fine You know this will be done in 20 minutes and then you know your life's pretty good like you know It's like it's a weird thing like you really because like I've had some of those conversations with people where I give them the perspective And I can tell like they haven't had that perspective fed to them in a very long time and you can like see it in their eyes So they're like yeah, you're right And it's like yeah, you really need some like better people around you because you feel like you're you're like spiraling And these like really weird thoughts But like if you look at it objectively it's not as bad as you think that's the really difficult resource Resource to acquire is being around positive people powerful people people that really get things done People that are motivating and people that are really exciting. That's because so many people have vast things So many people do just enough just barely enough. Yep. You're supposed to go all the way You go three quarters of the way, you know so many people so many people just they don't And but if you're around someone who really gets after it really is enthusiastic and really is powerful and very positive Then it's contagious. It's literally is it's infectious and it makes something mundane honestly fun to And especially if you respect each other then it just like it really compounds and so so important like even at this stage Like I say for newer young grandkids or people trying to be content creators referring groups everything even at the stage I'm at it's really is because you are like you think speak talk act like the people you're around and like they say Showing the five people you're on the most. I'll show you what your future is and it it applies at every level, you know So my friend Brian Simpson has a great saying he said you can't be your own boss and be a shitty employee Wait elaborate on that so if you work for yourself if like you're the one who's out there doing it You're the one. Yeah, like so you don't work for anybody But you also can't be a fucking lazy half-ass employee It's like you can't be both things he goes if you're gonna be your own boss you better be a great employee I was like oh shit like you can't be your own boss and a shitty employee Like if you are gonna work for yourself You got to get some shit done because that's a very rare position to be a person that works for themselves Yeah, do the thing you actually love to do yeah, and I think one of the things that's really powerful about this time It's opposed to any other time in history is that there's so many Conversations like this where you get to hear from a guy like you who is doing that So people young people who are listening to this right now. Yeah, they listen to you like this fucking mr Beasts is just getting after it man. I want to do that instead of like hanging out with your friend just gets stoned and place called duty all day and is always complaining about everything in his life and But meanwhile, it doesn't do anything. They're like that's not how I want to think and behave That guy is and so you get examples outside of your own personal social circle because maybe they don't know a mr Beast, maybe they don't know Someone who's out there doing whatever they want to do with their life But they get examples of it online and they can listen to these people talk and they get inspired exactly and I would assume You have a lot of parents who watch these that you know have kids and and I would encourage the Parents like the last three minutes of what he just said there like maybe play that for your kids And I can like go on top of it to say because I agree I don't think enough young people get exposure to this kind of mindset that you know You it really is time friend group, you know iterations on certain thing and consuming all knowledge available It's those four things and do those four things and like you'll make it further than you can imagine and like you know There's outliers like you this is what like skews a lot of people's perception They'll find an outlier of like well this person became very hyper successful in this thing But they didn't do those four things and there's there's outliers everywhere But if you look at statistically the average right the person listened to the right not gonna be this one in a million freak out I statistically you know if you want to make a good income doing something You're not currently doing and you're not currently very knowledgeable in it or have much experience It's just those four things find those people put in the time do but it's like if you just listen to every joke Or in podcast you're not gonna be great podcaster So it's time plus iterations right you'd have to go do an example of that would be do 500 mark podcast While also consuming all of Joe Rong's podcast right so you're doing both also consuming all knowledge available About podcasts also surrounding yourself with other people who want to be podcast and then yes This podcast might have blown up in a year, but statistically that's not gonna happen right you have to give yourself like The average might be four or five years and some people like me take 10 years And you just have to be so in love with the journey that you're cool with it. You're just like I'm just gonna do it till works out And um, you know it could be as soon as this one the likely will be here But there's a chance we could be there and have that freaks you out and then scares you then you probably don't love it enough But if you're like well I'll have fun while I'm doing it Then yeah do those four things over the long horizon and you know again I you probably won't make a hundred million dollars But if you want to make a hundred thousand dollars a year or whatever It's not out of the realm of possibility and just those sentences alone For a young person they hear it. It opens like a third eye in their mind where they've just been told their whole life Go to college get a job. It's this doesn't even exist to them You know, yeah again It's like you have to be concerned about the process and doing the thing that you love to do and trying to get better at it And you know, it's like If you say let's say you want a million dollars Well, you could win the lottery You might win the lottery But the odds are very low Or you could find a bunch of people that work really hard and what do they do Well, they just kept working hard and they figured out what it is they do and they made money Like yeah, dude, that's probably more likely So just going the general direction who knows along the way You might hit it quick Something might happen really quick or you might figure something out and you might be an outlier But the point is the process is available And the process is available to anybody Do you just keep doing something you'll get better at it be objective be self analytical Recognize what you're doing wrong what you're doing right and get better at it and constantly try to improve and Just because something doesn't exist as What is your occupation you know in a form from 2001 doesn't mean it's not a real job You know and just because you can't tell you you know if I told people at a cocktail party in 2009 that oh I'm a podcaster like that means zero you tell them today. They go oh amazing Yeah, oh you've been doing that. You know it gets a job now Right, so how did it become a job a job because people figured out how to make a job and they did it and it worked And so there's a process so that process exists with virtually anything you want to do that somebody does for a living I don't care if it's rock and roll star stand up comedian novelist There's a thing out there that you want to do that someone is making living But meanwhile, there's going to be people like all the odds you're making it and that like okay Yeah, is that what we're doing? Yeah, we just work on playing odds The odds you're dying are a hundred percent. So what once you adopt this mindset though then the the naysayers go from being Uh brutal to actually being good because now the naysayers are what stop other people from doing the thing You're doing which actually increases your odds right? So let's you get over the hump where you know You reach a certain point where you know someone as you're going on the climb like where someone going This is stupid this is unrealistic or whatever where you just like it starts to feel like it goes from like Something that makes you nervous and keeps you up at night to like you don't even really care anymore because you've just heard it So many times and then it's like but there are people who hear it and they quit and so it's technically a benefit for you So I like to always not always but on a lot of things. I like to try to spin it as like a positive too Like what this thing that's annoying What's the positive side of it in the positive is technically will make less people do the thing you're doing Which makes it easier for you, but I guess it does, but I don't ever think that way I just think if someone can do it you can do it and the problem is You have to make sure that you're not spending too much time doing it the wrong way And so that's where it helps that someone's already paved the path. Oh, yeah, I mean if you can get a mentor here's the real question So 2009 content creators are fucking very few of them, right? What is what are we missing like what is what is going to be a job that no one sees coming That's going to be like a content creator or a YouTube creator 10 15 years from now You know, oh gosh, I mean it would have to be something with AI that yeah, I didn't even see you know So what could it even be like what would it be that people are missing that other people are gonna Hmm It's changing so quick like on my brain can't even comprehend it like nobody even thought only fans would be a possibility That there'd be a large amount of girls that just show their naked body for a living Yeah, I mean it's not even for a living like most of them don't even get paid very much But a lot of them have only fans pages Something some crazy number. It's like 10% of girls 18 to whatever have only fans is that in the US? Yeah, wow, that's a nutty number. It's crazy Yeah, and an enormous number of people subscribe Yeah, I think it's like literally half of American males Have at one point in time subscribe to only fans that can't be real. That's nothing. It's like 150 million holy crap Yeah, I think it's crazy. I think the numbers are crazy high. I mean I mean where my head's going if we're trying to predict the future Maybe it would be like AI filmmakers or like something like that But I don't even put it me what are you doing there? Are you doing just recreating the prompts and making thing like yeah But what are we missing because the YouTube thing nobody saw that coming the podcast thing nobody saw that coming either Only fans of not new though. It's just change the money. Yeah, I just got the money from a normal ad to the screenplay What also centralized it in the like word? Playboy was always a thing where you had to get picked by Playboy You know now all you have to do is just take a photo of your box and now There's always the local Yeah, I mean, but it's not centralized like only fans is where you go there and there's like thousands and I don't know how many more than that Content creators, you know Yeah, I don't know time will tell yeah time will tell but it's just such a fascinating world that we live in where the number one most watch show in The world is yours like you have the number one Well if it's on YouTube that is the number one watch most watch show period Yeah, it's in the known universe well right now the most watch person in the known universe I opened it up on the way because I figured we'd talk about the size of show in the last 90 days I'm just just our main channel so I can around 850 million unique people have watched a video in the last quarter That's so crazy. Yeah, so we're doing around four billion views on 850 million people is so crazy You need to because we do we did around 12 billion views in the last 90 days on just the main channel and I'll those 12 billion views Oh like whatever 8% of them are different humans So it's like factually like 850 million like when I say that people are like oh that's 850 million views to like you know 80 million But no, it's 12 billion views 850 million unique. So it's just like it's crazy man And it's like what's fascinating is you like 10 years ago like even with cable or whatever 20 years ago 850 million people didn't use the same platform, right? It's like you wouldn't have even been able to reach that many people even if you're the biggest in anything It's like a very interesting time where Essentially as internet usage grows worldwide outside of China So does YouTube usage because if you Google something YouTube pops up or you know now if you're jam-nying something You know they'll eventually have YouTube where you buy an Android phone which most phones have their operating system YouTube's there so like everyone just as you use the internet you end up on YouTube And so that's why you know even though it's whatever theoretically 3.2 billion monthly active users I would be shocked if they didn't hit 4 billion in a couple years and yeah Like it shows no signs of stopping as the internet scrolling and so it's like to be number one on this platform That is basically mirrored to the internet. It's like it's like it's it's like it's crazy It's it's it's a really wild Opportunity and because it's a platform where anyone can upload the variety of content is Extraordinary because there's no gatekeepers like a lot of it's trash and nonsense But there's so many interesting shows Yeah, there's so many interesting shows on science on cosmology on history on Feel in the blank there's so many people that just have a passion for a certain thing in the meta channel and now that channel Also, no, our pages are very similar problem. I have so many like old history videos Or it's like some old guy that's just breaking down over to battle scenes or whatever agreed and like they go as niche as possible down to like this is like the most you know largest fights in history and it like a ranking of like Yeah, and you know definitely spights or yeah, like I would say like a third of my home pages like just history videos was here YouTube upload users upload roughly 500 hours of video every minute. Okay, not to be that guy. That's that's a very outdated I believe but maybe or or actually no Sorry, so people watch a billion hours a day on YouTube. I believe so this is upload never on this might be I guess So 500 hours of video every minute three 30,000 hours per hour uploaded 720,000 hours are uploaded per day Watching just one days new upload 30,000 hours per hour uploaded. 720,000 hours are uploaded per day. Watching just one day's new uploads would take over 82 years. Day. Wow. Well, this is the 20 million videos uploaded a day. That's quoting. That was probably before short. I bet you now that so many people are posting short. It's probably way higher now. That's nuts. But I mean, what we're talking about, like having a platform like that where anybody can upload anything, it just makes the variety so intense. Like there's anything you want to watch. Any video you want to watch on nature, any video you want to watch on. You have a question about science. Just put it in there. And there's some guys that got a fucking one and a half hour lecture on it. Exactly. It's nuts. And that's the beauty to tie everything together as a bow. That's why you can learn anything. And you can do anything you want for a living for the most part. If you allocate the tide because it's all there, there's literally on YouTube Harvard classes that are recorded. The same thing you would go into crippling debt to attend is literally there for free. It's all there. All knowledge is available there. And if you, it's not easy, no one's laying out like how you're doing the mothership. Here's A to Z on how you can become a cam pattern. It's not necessarily there, which is why it's hard. But you can, all the ingredients are there. You just have to go collect it, put them together, and put in the work to get A to Z being the career you want to do. It's because all the knowledge is there ever. Even I've literally gone on podcasts, countless times, and to set everything I know about YouTube with no gate keeping whatsoever. I literally have people, where was it? I was in some gems. I think it was in LA or whatever, in between shoots, just working out. And a guy literally came up to me. And no idea who he is. But he's like, I have 3 million subscribers on YouTube. I started 18 months ago. And I just listened to one of your podcasts. And I just did exactly what you said. And I got a friend group. I started obsessing over it. And I did these analytical things. And I just quit my job a couple months ago. And I was like, no shot. This is like a coincidence. You were like, you're tracking me or anything. He's like, no. And he's in Jim Close Sweat. He's like, I just running on the treadmill. And I just wanted to tell you that. I literally just quit my job. And I'm making more money because I just listened to one of your podcasts. And I was like, whoa. And it was crazy. But I've had experiences like that countless times where these things are just why I'm so passionate about sharing it. Like opens people's minds. And he's like, yeah, I didn't realize that was a possibility in life. Well, you're coming from life with a perspective of feast, not famine. And that's the good thing about it. There's enough opportunity for everybody. And I have a country in view on that because a lot of creators do see other creators as competitors. But I've always been like, someone's doing well. I don't get threatened. I'm like, yo, let's just film together. Like collaborators, not competitors. But there's literally trillions of views going around. If you think this person getting an extra, even if they crush it, billion views a year, has any impact on me. Like you're crazy. It has no impact. I mean, people are sometimes spending four, five hours, a day consuming content. They watch their little 20-minute video that they upload every two weeks. No impact whatsoever. And so I think it, and I was really the first person to kind of adopt that mindset. And more people are doing it now. But yeah, that's why I go and share everything. I'll help people make some people end up making millions of dollars that have helped mentored. And I'm just like, yeah, it's just fun. Because they always ask me, like, where are you doing it? I'm like, why not? What's the downside? It's only positive. It's an abundance mindset. And that I think the internet encourages that, fortunately. Because television is the opposite of that. So television, the problem was there was only a certain amount of slots. So if the Mr. B show was on NBC, and then there was another guy who was on CBS, he might also be at 8 p.m. on Wednesdays. You're like, fuck that guy. You're not going to give him my seat. Yeah. You would never. But because the fact that YouTube is available literally to anybody and the amount of people that are viewing it is so immense, it's an abundance. And you treat it like that. And it actually just makes you grow. Exactly. It's awesome. It's also if you share with people that'll share with you. And there's no one who will, at this point in my career, be able to go tell me something that'll make me 10% better. But there are infinite amounts of people that can make me a better storyteller or better, like, leader or better communicator or better set design. And it's like, it's more about grabbing those 0.1% here and there and adding them together. And so sometimes I'll give someone something that might fundamentally change everything for them. But then they'll teach me something very small. And I'm like, oh, that's actually very useful. And if I retain it, I could see how that'd be really cool. On the set design on how we could do a background or hey, after X amount of feet, you don't need as much detail. So now we can put more time into the detailed stuff up front. But sometimes it would be too particular and things really far. It's all these little things that you just accumulate over being around different people at different expertise. And you just have to, like, yeah, you just have to, like, some people don't see the value and that kind of stuff. But you can learn anything or you can learn something from almost anyone. And I do believe that because everyone has different things and different experiences and stuff like that, especially as a content creator. Because you're also making content for millions of people. So even just learning what a normal person is going through or what their life is like. It's helpful for being able to relate with them and through the content and make something that is interesting to them. So if you approach people like that, where it's like, I can learn something from you, no matter who it is, it's also, I feel like not many people take that approach either. Fuck it, dude. I think your approach is very valuable for a lot of people to hear. A very valuable for young people to hear. Because if they just follow those principles and just follow your passion and really be disciplined and focused, you could do a lot of things in this life. Exactly. You'd be like Jimmy. You could? Probably not. It's just a thing not. But could you be? You could be a person with a couple of zeros and all the numbers, of course. Yeah. And also just be enjoying your life because you're doing something you want. You're actually creating something. Yeah. And something you'd be proud of and something that people enjoy. And that makes you feel good. The people are enjoying your work. Yeah. And speaking of something you're proud of. So since the last time I was on here, a big thing I've been working on is, are you aware of how many kids are working at Legal Child Labor on Kick Out Farms? I think last time I was on here, we talked about how I still chocolate. Yes. Yeah. Do you know that there's over a million kids that working at Legal Child Labor on Kick Out Farms? Wow. Yeah. Where? In West Africa. So Code Devar and Ghana, which is where like, majority of the world's Kick Out comes from. That's, there's rampant child labor. You can ask perplexity. I'd love for you to pull up data so we can see it that I'm not just making it up. And when I think when I last came on here as right after I started a chocolate company, and I had no idea how bad it was. And the last few years I've been trying to figure out how we can build our own supply chain where we can actually get kids out of a legal child labor. And there's, it's like, really, I don't know if you're interested in it. It's like a lot of stuff I'd love to share on that. No, that's very cool. Yeah. So basically, if it just asks perplexity, how many kids working child labor in West Africa on Kick Out Farms? And right here, 1.5 to 1.8 million people. Wow. Yeah. It's pretty wild. And I had no idea. And like, it's like been like this for decades. So it's so normalized in the chocolate industry that when I would talk to other people who work at child companies or execs, they're just like, yeah, just kind of use what it is, that's how it works. And that's just how they get their chocolate period. Yeah. I mean, it's not all the labor. It's around whatever 46% of the labor. So if you were to work with how it works, there's well over a million farms in those areas. And you don't buy from farms because they have no leverage. So farm cooperatives, it's like these 100 farms will gather, aggregate their beans, so they have a little leverage and they'll sell it to you. So you buy from a cooperative. And statistically, 46% of those farms will have child labor some will. And so you're buying at a cooperative level. And so when I went to all the biggest distributors and everyone that does all the sourcing for cow, and I was like, so is there any way I can pay a premium and not have little kids work on my farms? And it literally didn't exist. I was just so mind blown. And it really was frustrating because it's just like, it's not even did it not exist. No one really seemed to even think it needed to exist. I was like, you guys, these are kids. You have no issue of making billions of dollars in profit on little kids working on the farms. It was like a very weird thing. So that's crazy. So that's most chocolate? Well, majority of the world's kick out, as you saw, comes from West Africa. So I mean, it's a holy shit, man. Yeah, I know. And so that's what I'm, I'm thousands of hours deep into this. And so I met a different company called Tony Shockolone, who is like a reporter who started talking about this. And wait a minute, his name is Chuckolone. Tony, but the Chuckle brand is Tony Shockolone. Oh, they did ethical sourcing. And I spent a lot of time learning from them. And like, I've just been on this journey with these tools. It's how can we ethically store it, you know, a few stables kick out. And so we actually, this is a fun thing I've never said publicly. So we started doing working with certain farms. But then I started around seven months ago, a big case study where we went to five villages that the average child labor there was like 45%. So 45% of the labor on the farms in these villages was a legal child labor. And we went on the doors and we collected every single data point. We knocked on every door. We got, there's around 10,000 people that live in those five communities. We knew everything from the child labor rates to school attendance to everything. And then we've throughout the last few years, we've just been collecting tons of data on why kids work in child labor, how you get kids out of child labor, which most of it comes back to poverty. Big chocolate pays farmers so little that they just can't afford to not use children. So part of it is you, there's this thing called a living income reference price, which looks at like the cost to actually live there. And you just guarantee your, so we guarantee 100% of our farmers that will pay a living income reference price. And then we work with fair trade, which the cooperatives I was explaining to you, sometimes they're not democratically elected. So you can pay more money, but if the cooperative is like someone's skimming off money or taking it, it doesn't flow through to the farmers. So we go through, we make sure it's complicated. It's like I thought this would be an easier problem to solve. This is a multi-year journey for me. But we go to the cooperatives, which again, is just a collection of farms that pool their cacao, so they have more leverage so you can't take advantage of them. And we make sure through fair trade that they're democratically elected cooperatives, so the farmers actually get the money. We pay a living income reference price. And in exchange for doing those things, they have to let us audit and remediate the child labor on the farms. And so in this five village case today that we did, there's around 10,000 people living in there. And about seven months ago, there's around 550 kids that were in a legal child labor in those communities. And so then we started taking over sourcing from there. So we started doing our sourcing principles and paying the farmers living in our preference price. Fair trade came in, come in, started paying the premium. And now seven months later, we just got the initial results after we did our check-ins. And some of the communities, we were getting so many kids out of child labor, there literally wasn't a school because kids just worked on the farm. So like some of these, we literally built a school so they could go to school because the goal isn't just to get the kids out of child labor, it's also to get them in education. So they're not, because if you grow up only working on a cacao farm, you have no education. So then you're basically doomed to working on it your whole life because you don't know anything else. Right? And so we just did our recent wave of check-ins, we're knocking all the doors, check school attendance and everything. And so seven months ago, it's 550 kids, ish, roughly, in a legal child labor. What do you think it was now, basically six, seven months later? I don't know. We were able to get a 90% reduction and get to where there's only like around 50 still in child labor with our first check-in. And now we constitute a kid remediate our child labor with two check-ins, so that was just the first one. So technically buy our books, they wouldn't be fully remediated because you know, there might have been an accident or whatever. So we like to double check it to make sure things are accurate. So we'll do another check-in in the future so not technically officially remediate it. But it just shows that like it's possible to reduce the child labor in these areas like dramatically, right? Like if you were to apply the things we did there, but macroly across the whole country, I mean, you're talking you could get swerves of hundreds of thousands of kids out of a legal child labor. And so the big way I've been doing or been on is like, step one is up to prove it's possible. So then we can start, you know, like most people, like you, they just have no idea that there's this much rampant child labor in chocolate. I had no idea until you brought it up. I know, which is like crazy. And it's like, it honestly really frustrates me because no one has any idea. And like everyone's just kind of cool with it. And I think part of the problem too is if you were to Google it, they use like confusing language or they're like, yeah, this is our ethical sourcing strategy. But at the end of the day, obviously most cows going to big chocolate and you know, they can say they're doing all these things. But factually there's all these kids in a legal child labor. So it's like, I mean, I don't know what's put in the effort that you're doing. What you just said that. Yeah. And so that's amazing, man. Yeah. And well, that's what I'm really excited about. And I just wanted to mention it. A, because obviously your biggest podcast in the world, I just want to educate people on it that it's fucking crazy when you're buying chocolate. And yeah, I'm really excited though with what we're doing. Because I were essentially with feasible building one of the most effective like systems for getting kids out of a legal child labor in the world. Right. By the more kick out we're sourcing, the more we're able to pay a living in conference price and then audit the farms and then get the kids into schools. And it's like, it's pretty interesting. Like with that village, you know, right now, you know, it went, it was a 90% reduction. It went from over 500 kids in a legal child labor down to 50. And obviously we're not done. We're going to keep over time trying to get those 50 out of each child labor. But now imagine that if we can keep sourcing more kick out as we keep growing and we keep getting more and more kids out of legal child labor. And then eventually, because you know, I have over a billion followers across all my platforms, you know, I can show these case studies and then just like, you know, berate big chocolate into switching over because they make billions of dollars here in profit. They don't have to use child labor. And you know, and I think step one is showing that it's actually possible to not use it. Because right now technically, there's not really a way you could like, you know, I think what's really important is getting people to understand that that's happening. Exactly. And you talking about it right now. Now people will be aware of it because I think the vast majority people, me included, were not aware. I know. So then the here they're going, hold on. What about this company that I'm buying chocolate from? Are they using child labor? And then, you know, and technically I can never like teaspoons, I can't say child labor free because, you know, it's not like I have security cameras on the farm. My kid could just walk on it. And then, you know, well, he lied, right? So I'll be able to say making, we're doing everything. We kind of make it as ethically sources possible. And that's why I'm doing these case studies where I can literally factually show like people knocking on the doors show like without it. Because obviously I know, as I start to talk about this more, there's no doubt in my mind, they're going to sue me because obviously big chocolate doesn't like the idea that people are learning that there's so many kids in illegal child labor and because my microphone's so big, they're going to want me to be quiet. But in a perfect world, they'd hear these messages and they would have a soul and be like, you're right, we shouldn't make billions of dollars in profit off the back of little kids. Let's just put a little bit of the money towards getting the kids into school and putting people that aren't kids on the farms. And so ideally that's what comes of it. We'll see in the long run. But right now, I'm just really focused on building these case studies and really showing like in depth exactly how they can do it. So then, hopefully, they just come around to give it on the avenue to go, oh, we just didn't know. This is cool. Cool. Well, we'll start doing it. Because statically there isn't really all these chocolate companies are so old. Like technically the people who built and grew it, like the founders, they're dead, right? These are third, fourth generation people. Some of these people have never built a business from ground up. So maybe you could give them a little slack and be like, they just don't know any better. And it's a problem they don't know how to solve. Fuck them, they know. I mean, they know. They have to be the one for it because of the current world. And we can get them all to switch. I mean, I don't maybe force their hand. I mean, maybe just making people aware of it will help force their hand. If I was in the biggest YouTuber in the world, if I were, here's a crazy sentence that I do believe to be true, if I stopped caring about this issue and did nothing, then them 1.5 million kids in a legal child labor. I guarantee it wouldn't change at all. Like it wouldn't change at all in the next five, 10 years. Like, who else? It's been, look, look at how many kids are in a legal child labor in West Africa on Kick Out Farms? OK, we're back. We're back. Big chocolate, synthetic attempt. We've had this issue. You're good. But listen, man, it's just another example of that you're an awesome guy. And the fact that you don't just care about money, and you really care about doing the right thing, and that you've decided to do this is just another example of why you're great. Thank you. Well, and I wanted to educate people on that. And another thing I'd also, I think, is a thing that people should hear, is especially in America. Do you know that, I mean, it's probably not going to surprise you, but 40% of food that's produced in America ends up getting thrown away. I have her. Yeah. And so a lot of what we've been doing is we're going to, we're going to nonprofits and setting up, essentially, like, so many stores and restaurants. Just throw away perfectly good food, or they'll have things like, if something's like within a week of being expired, they just toss it out because whatever. But it's like, it's perfectly edible. There's literally nothing wrong with the food. And we've been just setting up like many, there's a 501c non-profit called sharing access who crushes at this. And we've been funding and building like these small logistics hubs like one in New York. And we've been through them, and then also our food banks. We've been able to distribute over 40 million meals to people in need across America. And instead of buying food and taking and storing in the street, just taking food that would have been thrown away, but it's perfectly fine and perfectly healthy. And just figuring out how in a couple of days to just get it to food drives or people in need. And that's another thing too. A illegal child labor in Kekau and that, or like two things that I feel like people should just be aware of because it's a very solvable thing. If you work at a retailer, I'm sure a lot of people here do, that throws away perfectly good food because they're like, you know, they never want to run a risk of something being bad on the shelf, so they'll preemptively throw it away. Just call a local non-profit and be like, hey, we're, every week, we tend to throw away food around this time, come pick it up. Like, little tweaks like that is like so simple, but would feed so many people in need and save us so much money. And I feel like it's kind of a no-brainer. And I've literally seen it in a fact, like we're opening up another facility that over the next 12 months should be able to distribute around 10 million pounds of food. So whatever that is, maybe like 7 million meals. And it's like just taking food that would have been thrown away. And it's kind of like mind blowing that in America, like more people aren't aware of that because it's a very solvable thing. I think there's so many people that are only concentrating on what's gonna make them money. And of course, you know, it's very rare that someone like you thinks about greater good and actually before I ever ever. That one doesn't even cost you money. We're just talking about it. But it's just you're putting in a truck. The effort to, well maybe one of you, if you're a Walmart or I don't even know, some random store owner listening to this, just consider it, don't throw the food away. You're an awesome guy, Jimmy. Thank you. Thank you for being here, man. It was really fun. I really appreciate it. Congratulations, everybody. The zombie show. We'll do it. I've been doing it. I'll handle all the work and stuff, but you gotta go do it. I'll think about it some more too. I'm gonna bounce this around, because I got excited. I think there's something to it. Next time you see me and Joe together, it's gonna be fighting off some zombies. All right. Sounds good. Thank you. Thank you. Oh, my pleasure. Thank you. Bye, everybody.