Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night. All day. Subs and headphones, we'll spread a little syrup. Our old friend would be so happy. Not just that picture, but so much that you've done. Like do you believe that people who have gone on know what we're doing or see us? I don't know. You'd like to think that you're that important. I'm feeling they have more important stuff to do on the other side. I guess if you're in heaven, you're not thinking about the mothership. Right. Well, the mothership definitely is from her. Yes. Yes. I mean, that's an incredible tribute to her. Well, the bar is named after her. Yeah. I've heard all the comments. I've heard Jane and Ian and all the guys talk about it after they came back. And that's just an honor, man. That plus you know, I used to say to people if you haven't taken something from watching Richard Pryor, you're probably doing it wrong. Right. And Mitzi made the greatest comedy, Mecca ever. And you got to copy what she did. A hundred percent. Yeah. Wow. And this is she taught me everything I've done out of run a club. How to do it right. I kind of let the comedians run it. Let the inmates run the asylum. Yeah. You know, we're a perfect inmates for that. And right now, the comedy store is greater than ever. That's awesome. Yeah. It's wonderful there because you know, I even got Jane Leonard to come back, you know, because he remembered the old days and hadn't gone back. And I'm like, dude, it's different. They pay you for coming. They split the door in a different way now and there are phones in bags. I had to explain that concept. Yeah. We had encouraged them to do all that. Yeah. That was your era. Yeah. Well, once we left, we started doing that at the mothership for all the shows, then other comedy clubs started falling. So it's the way to do it. People are too fucking distracted. Yeah. And I think it frees us up in a way. I'll say things and try things and not worry about seeing them on YouTube when they're not ready or when I've made a mistake and gone too far and said something, you know, 100%. It's also you have to be free to fuck around and experiment. And if someone takes that fucking round experience, you don't know what's coming out of your mouth. Like right now, I don't know what's coming out of my mouth right before I say, right? Yeah. And people have to understand that. This is not like when you're on stage and you're working out, like a lot of it is free balling. You've got material that's like pre sort of established and you're, you know, you've got the bones of it, but you're also fucking around in the moment. And sometimes you fuck around in the moment and it works and sometimes you fuck around the moment and it does nothing. It goes, or it's terrible. You said something awful. You're like, whoops, sorry. Yeah, we just make mistakes. You're just fucking creating something. And then stand up is the only art form that you have to kind of create in front of a crowd. You can't really, you can get ideas in the concepts and the flesh of it alone, but you have, it comes alive in front of the crowd. You have to be able to fuck around. Yeah. I mean, Chappelle, and you've, you've done this kind of thing. Me and Chappelle met Chris Rock and Cleveland because Chappelle lives in Ohio obviously. He's done something very similar to what you've done. But we'll get you later. Yeah, he's done something really cool. It basically took over a whole town. Yeah. Yeah. And it's funny. And especially at a really funny joke about it, about how when white people move into a neighborhood, it's called gentrification. And he goes, they don't have a word from doing these motherfuckers. Yeah. It's crazy to be David Chappelle the most important man in town. Yeah. But Chris Rock was doing Cleveland and we met him there. And that was the first time I saw the bags and people and I was apprehensive. As a matter of fact, I saw a celebrity in LA who didn't want to put his phone in a bag. And so they had them a fucking stay outside. You know, yeah, there's too many snitches in the world. Too many people just want to film everything for the gram. Yeah. Like stop. Yeah. Sometimes we're seeing the wrong thing. Sometimes we're drunk. Yeah. For sure. A lot. Dave loves to get lit. Go on stage. But it's also like that's one of the ways he creates. Like I've seen him doing tire shows when he's just completely fucking around and he films everything. So then after he goes over, it's like, oh, there's a seed right there. And we plant that seed. Yeah. Yeah. There's an idea there. And then you know, it's how you come up with stuff. Yeah. I never drink or smoke before going on stage. But I love to create it home. The next day, because sometimes you can write something down and it'll be like, uh, blaze a button in the low. And the next day, you're like, I don't know what the fuck I thought was funny about that last night when I was smoking. But I like to smoke and create it home and then take it to the stage. But when I'm on stage, I've had bad experiences trying to do it high and say, this will make me creative. I'll be like, Hendrix of comedy. Yeah. Uh, that's all wrong. Your memory will go. Yeah. Your memory will go. I was at the last factory and, uh, I came off and George Lopez said to me, why you come off? And I said, I told you, I do 20. And he says, you did five. I was in tonight's show, I got to clear something up speaking of this has nothing to do with you. But I did a podcast last week with Theo Vaughn. And uh, in it, what there's like a video on the internet is accusing me of lying about something. And what I said was that I was in the mountains of Utah when the Charlie Kirk thing was going down. What it actually happened was I was here doing a podcast with Charlie Sheen when the Charlie Kirk thing went down when he died. We stopped and took a piss break, right? And that's what we found out about it, right? Um, and then when I was in the mountains of Utah, that's when the Jimmy Kimmel thing was happening. When Jimmy Kimmel was getting in trouble and I was getting all these messages. I didn't have any service out there. So I had to hook up the star link in order to find out what was happening. Yeah. When I did the podcast the other day, it seemed like I was saying that I was in the mountains when Charlie Kirk got shot. I probably was saying that I was exhausted when I did that show last week. I so I did a show on Tuesday night at the club. And I have this thing that I do, unfortunately, where I come home and it's the only time that I get a loan time is when everyone's asleep. And I stayed up way too late. I stayed up super late. Then I had to take my kid to school in the morning and I was like, I was just power through. The problem when I do that, when I get no sleep is my memory is dog shit. Like I have a really good memory and a terrible memory. It's really good a lot of the times. And then sometimes, especially when I'm tired, it's fucking terrible. It's like from doing thousands of podcasts, my memory is like a room that's filled with boxes and files. And I don't know where the fuck everything is. So as you were talking, the first thing that everything goes to sports for me, some of our greatest home run hitters, they strike out a lot because they're swinging all in a motherfucking time trying to get into some of the coffee co-workers. Of course. And I think that's how we are not we. You especially right now, you're doing this constantly. You're talking to lots of people saying lots of things. And every now and then is going to be swinging a miss. Let me explain that. But the real problem was sleepy. The real problem was not going to sleep. And I'm not going to do that anymore. Because I keep doing, I get home at nine. Have you had that problem before? Like you get a probation and you get yourself into something. I've had that problem before. Usually like I fix it with creatine. So creatine is a great supplement when you're tired. It really, there's been studies that show that creatine supplementation, especially like 10 to 8 grams. It actually alleviates all of the problems that happen with sleep deprivation in terms of cognitive function. But I've been, I just was doing some blood work. So when I was new that I was going to do my blood work, I didn't take any creatine for a month because I want to, because I've read something about creatine possibly being bad for your kidneys. So I wanted to get a baseline, do it and then do it again when I saw. Oh yeah. It's like strategy. But the point is like, creatine. I went, yeah, my brain was foggy. And so for the people that like heard that and like, what is wrong with you? That's what I thought when I saw like somebody put a video on my line with rising lying about this and like, oh, I forgot. It wasn't why. It's just my brain sucks when I don't get sleep and I'm not going to do that anymore. Because it's like when I get home at night, it's the only time I'm alone. It's like my only alone time. And even though I knew I had to get up in the morning and take my kid to school, I was like, I don't fucking care. I'm staying up. The problem with that is like, when I have to do this the next day, I just don't function as good. I've done it, I've done it before, but I feel it the next day. Like I can't recall things. My words don't come out as smooth. I don't have as much of my vocabulary is limited. It's like there's too many problems with it. So I mean, two things. I'm going to do my mind. First of all, do guys with these arms? Do creatine? I mean, what the hell is it? It's great for everybody. Yeah, creatine is not just a supplement for muscles. Creatine is actually a really good cognitive function supplement. It's actually a cognitive enhancing supplement. Yeah, there's a lot of research on that. And the other thing that hit me is I was listening to you talk recently and you talked about smoking herb and how it enhanced the weightlifting process. Yeah. What's that about? I feel it in your tissues, man. It's like you feel it's really good for coordination exercise. There's a lot of jujitsu guys. There's a lot of weed. They smoke weed right before class. Like it ripped. So the grace you tried when I first started seeing it? Not those guys. Those guys don't do it, but a lot of guys do. I think one of the, I don't want to throw them under the bus, but one of the brothers was really into smoking weed and doing jujitsu and arguably the best one, definitely the best one. But a lot of jujitsu guys do it. And a lot of guys like to do it before kickboxing. It's like you just feel your muscles more. You feel like your coordination more. You're more sensitive. It's weird. It's like instead of you being like abstract with your movements and just kind of like doing it, it's like you feel all the tissues, all the connect. You lift weights. You're like, oh, I can feel all the fibers of all your shit moving. It's like it just makes you more sensitive. It's such an unmiss understood substance. Not for everybody. I really believe some people should not get high. I think for some people it throws them off and sends them down a dark road and it's just not. It's been procrastinating about their life and personal responsibility. There's a lot of that. There's a lot of people that just wake and bake and just live in the cloud all day and never get anything done. Then there's a lot of people that also get super paranoid and they get anxiety and they freak out. Then there's people that there's a lot of connections to marijuana and psychosis or schizophrenic states that some, but the problem with that is were they already have a propensity towards schizophrenia and marijuana pushed them over the edge. Were they going to get it anyway? It's hard to say. How do those guys on a diet coke would have problems? Yeah, right. There's a lot of guys just fucking red lights freak them out. There's people that just life is too hard for them and they don't need something else that fucks with it. If you have mental health struggles, probably shouldn't do mushrooms. If you already fucked up, if there's already some things that you're struggling to hang on to everyday life, you probably shouldn't do acid. You know what I mean? You should probably just try to keep your shit together. That's not everybody. It's like alcohol. Like alcohol's not for everybody, but some people can have a glass of wine at dinner and just start laughing. It's a nice social lubricant. Some people they have one drink and they're doing coke and they're getting hookers and they're fucking driving on the freeway and they're shooting at cops. They go crazy. Like some people just can't handle alcohol. Doesn't mean it should be illegal, but that's crazy. And this is the same thing I feel with pot. Pot is super beneficial to a lot of people. and it has been for millions of years. Yeah, for sure. For me. That's my, like in the old days you'd watch a television show and a guy would have a martini when he comes home. Yeah. I even talk about that in the book. When I come home, my girl has me a joint laid out on the counter, you know, and nice little raw papers. And that's my, that's daddy's cocktail. Yeah. It's a nice one too because it doesn't fuck with your body. The problem with alcohol is, you know, it feels good while you're doing it, but then the next day you're like, Oh, yeah, you're fucking head and you're fired. I hear swelling, you know, different kinds of things. And also I'm from a home where my favorite person, my cousin, because I didn't have brothers and sisters, biological brothers and sisters. So when my cousin came to live with me, a male, he's a teenager and he had a drinking problem. Like I would go inside my toy box and find Scotch. Oh, you know, hide. Yeah, he would hide it. He's parked in the garage when they were already two cars in the garage, you know, and I loved him and he was hilarious and he in part helped to make me who I am. But, but a bad experience like that in your youth can make you a little bit leery about liquor. Oh, yeah. And I was in high school and his cousin, so coke and I watched this guy fall apart and watched him do cocaine constantly in fall apart. His life just went down the toilet and I never touched cocaine because of that. I never did. I've still never done coke. And I think that's why because I watch his. So you've never tried a line? Never. That's heaven. I was, you know, because I had to try to see what it's meant. Like, you know, I mean, I'm sure I'd like it. friend Jimmy said, don't do this. You'd love it. But he's probably right. But you also have a certain kind of discipline where I think you could do a line and say, okay, I get it. But I love that you have the discipline to never try it. I don't have that kind of strength. I got to see what it's like once. Just the thing is like, I don't know anybody who's had like, cocaine was really good for me. Like, doing cocaine was really good when I started doing cocaine. My life just really changed. I really got clarity. I started folks. I was nice to people. I don't ever hear that story. I never, not once. I did a little cocaine. Then I was president of Yale and ran for, I do hear people say that about speed, which is weird. You hear people say that about infendomines, like especially at a raw, like how like, oh, my God, it makes me so productive. I got so much done. But it's generally it's like journalists and people that have to write a lot. Students. I'm very curious about at a raw because I'm hearing so much. I'm thinking like when I was doing the book, right? I'm like, would at a raw be good to focus me to do for me what it does for students that I hear talk about it? Probably, probably, but I don't. It's a pill, right? It scares me though because I know a lot of people with problems with it. It's a real catchy one. It gets you. And then you start leaning on it. So that's one of the downs is it's extremely addicting. Very addictive. But what's the other downside? Well, I would imagine when you get off of it, you're exhausted because I would imagine whenever there's there's always some sort of a biological, you know, there's whenever there's no free lunch, right? Anything that speeds you up is going to bring you down. Like this get if you're ramping your body up or you're focusing for fucking 16 hours or just sitting in front of the typewriter. That's what like my journal was like it. I would imagine the back end of it. You've done it Jamie. What's my twice? Because it kept me up for two days. See that's our dog. I was like, that's it. That's it. It's an amphetamine. So yeah, I went to try to go to bed and was like, well, this isn't happening. So let's get up and see how we're up all day. All right. Two days. Yeah, I just had to call off work. It wasn't good. And then you feel real dopey after it wears off, right? Yeah, it didn't. I didn't feel like I didn't see it done anything that day. Man, that is a fucking problem. For me, it's like the lack of sleep thing. After this whole Charlie Kirk thing with this, what I was just talking about, I'm really going to concentrate a lot more on sleep. You can't fuck with that because it's like, especially me, it's like I need my brain to be functioning at its highest potential most of the time. Like that's what you're doing, especially when I'm in here. I was talking at Theo Vaughn and didn't think that would be that big of a deal. Theo's a comic. We're just going to be silly. The most recent one. Yeah, the one I was just talking about. It's probably good to be loopy. You know? Because the writers on news radio, they would stay up all night on purpose just to get loopy because they didn't really do any drugs. They just would use sleep deprivation to be silly. It was hilarious. These guys would start writing at like two o'clock in the morning. They would stay up. They would play video games and they would start writing a script at like two o'clock in the morning. And they would stumble in to like when we have a table read. They would stumble into the table read like just finishing the script. They would lay it out to us. They just got done printing it. And these guys would be fucking just completely out of it. Hair all fucked up, barefoot. It was really funny the way they operated. But it was, there was a method to their madness. And that method was that more tired you get and more exhaust. So you get, you get into sleep deprivation. You get loopy and you get silly. And you start thinking silly things. Yeah. When those guys, that's how they would use it. They would use that weird state of mind that loopiness to write. Yeah. This episode is brought to you by Zippra Cruder. When you're picking out plants for your garden, there's a million options even after considering things like climate, season and setup. You still have a lot to choose from. Even figuring out which tomato plant to buy could be a headache because you need to look at the actual plant. Is it flowering? Does it have signs of new growth? Wiring managers, I know you run the same problem. With too many resumes to go through, how do you make sure you're talking to the right people? Well, the answer for you is easy. Zippra Cruder. Try it for free at zippercruder.com slash rogan. Zippra Cruder is making hiring simple and fast with its latest feature. It helps identify top talent who have the right skills and are interested in your role. They can even tell you why they're interested in their own words so you can get a sense of who they are. Cut through the standard and get to the stand out with zipper crooner. Four at five employers who post on zipper crooner get a quality candidate within the first day. And now you can try it for free at zippercooter.com slash rogan. That's zipper crooner.com slash rogan. Eat your match at zipper crooner. I need my sleep. If I have sleep, I can do anything. I feel like they could have got there with weed without the loopiness. You know, you want to get there with weed and you know, you don't have to stay up all night. You get it like right away. Yeah, but weed ain't for everybody. It's not for everybody. It ain't for everybody. Yeah, but yeah, I love having my sleep as a matter of fact, that's the drug that's most important to me. Having an ambient nearby. Do you like that? Yeah, a quarter. There's a little bite of ambient. Little bite. Yeah. Well, hook you up. I know a dude who would take that shit every day. He had to take it all the time and then he was taking two. And he told me like, dude, my house could be on fire and I would have no idea. I'm like, that can't be good, but he needed it. It was the only way he could go to sleep, but he was also taking out a roll. So he's taking out a roll in the day. And he was taking an ambient at night. Can't believe he's still alive. Yeah, that's too much. Yeah, the outer off fucked his life up, too. Woo. Yeah. It's not, you know, I don't think you should rely on anything for sleep. For me, I just, I've never had a sleep problem. Fortunately, I could go to sleep on a bag of rocks. I could just crash. It drives my wife nuts. Yeah. Because like if we're on a plane, the moment the plane takes off, I'm out cold. I could just go to sleep. The bad thing about me is I can sleep best in places I shouldn't sleep. Like church. Yeah. Oh, I was sitting talking about women's grandma and sleepy. Oh, why? Why is church making so sort of reading? Yeah. They're eating. There are some audible books that are worse than ambient. Right. You know, yeah. Something about physically reading puts me out. Yeah. Just sitting there looking at the pages. I just started on and on. Yeah. The alchemists. I have been on page 12 for like a year and a half, you know, sit down on a plane and just just read the alchemists at the top of the page and I'm out. Yeah. It's fiction for me that puts me out. Nonfiction doesn't really put me out. Nonfiction is more like I guess it's more stimulating because it's real. You know, because I'm reading about real things. Something about reading fiction is what puts me to sleep. For me, it's just reading. Just writing. I can take out my license. You know, it look. It looks like half way through my name. Mm. Out. This is cool. Not having sleep is got like a person that's got like legitimate insomnia. That's got to be the nuttiest fucking problem. Like that's that movie, the mechanic. No, the machinist, did you ever see that movie, the machinist? No, is that an action movie? Well, that's the movie with what's Christian B. Christian B.L. where he lost an insane amount of weight. Like Christian B.L. is a big guy. I think he got to like 130 something pounds. Yeah. And the idea was that this guy was going completely insane because he couldn't sleep and so he wasn't eating. And so he was just like up all the time, like out of it. And he like if you see what he looked like when he made that movie, it's like that's what he looked like in the movie. Oh shit. Yeah. That looks like he's about to make a whole different movie. Yeah. Like he was about to die. And then he went from that. And right afterwards he did Batman. So he got super jacked. He went from that. And by the way, the movie sucks. So this guy like wrecked his health for a movie that wasn't even good. And I mean, I wonder how good it could even be when your main guy is dying. Look at that image on the far right. The one that you just like. Look at that. Look at the difference between, that was like six months later. That can't be health. No, fucking terrible for you. It has to be terrible. Terrible. Do you like to act? No. I don't hate it. I don't like the process. I don't like waiting around all day. I don't like being on set. I don't like dealing with, some actors are great. Some actors are just like all kinds of people. Yeah. It cops. A lot of cops are awesome. Because I know you had a point in your life when you could probably do anything you want. And I never see you pursuing any acting roles. No, I avoid them. I've been offered some fun stuff. And I was like, mmm, I'm not going to bulk area for three months. Fuck that. I'm just, it's not my thing. And if it was my thing, I'd be like, feel very fortunate. And I dive on it. I'd be like, oh my God. So when you look at something you've done, and you're watching a role in Daley's or at the premiere, you don't love what you see so much that you do more of it. It doesn't bother me. It's just not what I enjoy doing. And again, it's the process. It's the problem. It's the 16 hour days. It's like, and it's being around actors. Because you're around people that need to think and need to talk in a very specific way. because they're always worried. They're going to be cast out of the kingdom. You know what I mean? So it's like this very disingenuous way of communicating that a lot of actors have. And it's just, and you always feel when you do something that this person's going to be your friend for life. I'll see you next month. And you never see that for the ever-in-game. It's such a disingenuous environment. Do you enjoy it? Do you enjoy it? I kind of like it. But at 70, I prefer to just be at home. You're 70. You look so good. Oh, thank you. That's kind of crazy. You're 70. And no creatine. Imagine I'm going to get it. 70, man. If you told me that you were 45, if I didn't know you, you told me you were 45, I'd believe you. That's nuts. That's a blessing. Isn't that crazy? Yeah. Yeah. And I'm happy. So that's unusual. Yeah, right. A lot of people in their 70, they're better and tired. Yeah. I talk a little bit in the book about Richard Pryor coming to my first condo. I bought a condo so I didn't have a car yet. And eventually, I got one. But when I first came to LA, I wanted to be between the comedy store and the improv. So I could get to both. Oh, right. So I bought me a condo and a total Richard Pryor that I got a condo. I don't know. It's one of those. I think I heard you in Shane talking about how you see your heroes now and then. And sometimes you just stayed the wrong shit. And I was expecting this to be the wrong shit. But it's all I could think of. And I said, Richard, I just bought a condo. And he said, oh wow, I like to see it. And I was like, oh, OK. And him and Rashance, his body man, came to see my condo. And that was the coolest thing in the world. But the one thing I remember, I had no furniture and Rashana told me, his guy had told me to get some kavasi. So I had some kavasi. And we sat on the floor and drank kavasi and listened to a boom box with jazz on it and talked. And he looked around at one point and he said, this reminds me of when I was happy. Whoa. And I don't even have to tell you what went through my head and what I thought that meant. And I didn't listen to him then. That's the thing is people dispersed knowledge to us from their experiences. And sometimes we're too young and dumb to listen. What did that mean to you at the time when he said, this reminds me when I was happy? You know, I was so excited that Richard Parker came to see my condo. I didn't process it. But years later, I start realizing that he bought things and philosophies that made his life more complex. And he was happy. This is what I think it means. He was happy with the simple shit. You know? And sometimes, I mean, it's nice to have, isn't it cool to have money, but still eat burgers if you want to? I mean, because I remember walking through supermarkets and pretending I was shopping and eating out of the child cart that little top part and then leaving the supermarket. You know, so it's nice to be able to buy anything we want. But at the same time, I get that thing of the simplicity. And, you know, no guard gate. No one's knocking down your door trying to get to you. Yeah, just to kind of tell it no furniture. And for a guy like that, for the greatest that I've ever known in our world, to say I was happy when I had a little place with no furniture. I didn't think about it enough then, but later I realized what he meant when I was in a house that was too big with guest houses. Yeah. That would, you know, you walk into a guest house and cobwebs get on your face, you know, because you ain't been in there in the while and you realize, okay, this is what Richard was talking about. I'm doing a lot of shit for other people that I don't need. Right. And too much complexity. Yeah. Yeah. Too much. Too much. So many said complications. My business manager says something about my. A lot of shit for other people that I don't need. Right. And too much complexity. Yeah, I have too much. Somebody said, oh, my business manager said something about my staff and it dawned on me. What the fuck do I have a staff for? You know, and I've simplified things a little bit in my life. And I'm really happy. It's just me and my woman and a scale down life. That's better. Yeah, there's a lot of people that just want a lot of people around them because it makes them feel important. They have a big staff. They have a lot of people working for them. A lot of things going on. A lot of different projects. Mm-hmm. Keep moving, keep moving. Yeah. But no peace. Yeah. Yeah. Not good. I always tell comedians like, oh, I got to get it in assistant. I go, no, you don't. Just do a shit. Don't get in assistant. You get in assistant. That person is going to want to kill you. I broke that person's. They're going to feel entitled. You're making all this money. They're not your famous. They're not. They see you for who you really are. They're following, like, fucking regular guy. Why is he got all this? Like David Spades assistant duct taped him and tazed him. Remember that? Yeah. Try to kill him. That's heavy, man. And I've heard that the people who work for us always hate us. I've always avoided somebody to always the case. You know your housekeeper hates you. And I'm like, no, she's been with me 22 years. It's like, it beats hate you. And I don't want to believe that. It's not always the case, but it is often the case that people that are around people that have so much, they feel like, why don't I have this? Like, I'm working for this person. What am I not doing? But why am I not rich? This person could just make me rich. It's weird. You know what I mean? Yeah. Like that's not what the job is. Your gardener. Garden doesn't make $5 million a year. Like this is kind of being crazy. And then you get people that take advantage of you where you get a bill. And you're like, why does it cost this much? Like this is kind of like I have a friend who's very wealthy. He's a businessman. And he goes over every fucking little thing that people charge him. And he's always looking for their fucking trying to overcharge me. He gets signed his own checks. Yeah. But he gets crazy when he thinks people are overcharged him. But I'm like, dude, you're almost 80. And you worth a billion dollars. Like why are you looking at like how much the car wash guy charges you? This is crazy. Maybe that's why he has a billion. Perhaps. I mean, he's a businessman. That's his thing. But what drives him nuts is this idea that people are overcharging him because he's wealthy. Oh, I hate that. I hate that. Joe. The craziest I ever went was I had a barber when I had hair. And you know, a black barber is a skilled scientist. You know, because back then I had a fried dad laid to the side with three Adidas stripes over on the left. And you know, my shit was intricate that year. And my business manager happened to be a business manager for two other entertainers. And he's also my friend. And one day he says, you know that guy charges the three of you different prices. And I'm like, get the fuck. So I found out that Johnny Gill was paying 100. I was paying 350. And that drives me crazy. Because basically, like you say, he was charging based on who I am. Right. Yeah. He was looking forward to it. Yeah. He had a friend who had more money than me. And he was trying to him a crazy amount. It was like the rental of a rose. Crazy money. Yeah. Well, that's what comes with the territory. People just think you're not going to notice they don't care. You know. Yeah. I guess. Yeah. Do you think you're happier now than you were when the Arsenio Hall show was at its peak? Yeah. I think I'm happier now because with that peak comes a lot of pressure and a lot of work. And I'd be a liar to say, I don't enjoy having the money without the other shit. You know, I did a good job of investing and making sure that when the lights went out, I was good. So I love my life right now. I'm a man more relaxed. Oh, and being OG and pretty much your responsibility is just to give an advice to a comic and hallway. Yeah. You know, a lot of the young guys don't understand what you did because what your show was like back in, I guess when was it when did it first come on the air? What year? Probably coming to America was like 86, 87. I left New York and went and started the show. So 87, 88 some time around and I'm bad with years. Yeah. And in the 90s it changed the whole landscape of late night television. Like completely changed it because late night television was stiff. You know, it was like, yeah, a fucking the desk. The desk made no sense to me. I talk about the desk and how I got rid of it. But it made no sense. But you would I was like, oh, finally he got rid of the desk. The fucking are we being lectured? Are you in the principal's office? What is was the fucking desk for? But when they first started doing that in the 1950s, if you went to work, you had a desk. Yeah, you had to wear a tie. You had a desk and they all smoked cigarettes, whether on the job. You know, you watch like the Johnny Carson show. During commercials, Johnny will go under his desk. Mm hmm. You're going to cigarette. Yeah. Well, they would often smoke on air. They would do it all the time. That's right. They all smoked. How about playing that? How about the fact that we could get on a plane to go to a gig? And there was a row behind us where smoking began. Right. I mean, there was no smoking row. And the bitch behind me got a cigar. Yeah. And it was just flooding the entire cabin. Yes. You know, dice used to have a joke about it. You're in a fucking tube. Where's the air going? Yeah. But it was a weird time. But the whole idea was what I was getting to was like, late night television was very stiff. It was, you know, it was like, that's a good one. And then your show came around. Paul anchor wrote that. Did he? Yeah. Oh, wow. Your show came around. And then all of a sudden it was fun and loose. And I remember when Clinton came on your show and played the saxophone. And I mean, everybody was like, what is happening? The fucking president of the, was he the president back then? Was he right? He was a governor. And that's right. He was trying to get the young vote. So he did me. And then the next day they decided to do MTV because I think what my show did that night was changed how you run for the highest office in the land. And look at that. Yeah. Look at that. The joke I just done was finally a Democrat blowing something other than the election. When you look, you remember jokes in the moment. And dude, so what's interesting is after this presidential candidates realized they had to come to Rogan and Sunday morning to meet the press. And I like that. They have to go everywhere now. Well they go where the people are paying attention. But it was different because if they did the tonight show with Johnny Carson, it would be a very competent interview, but it would be stiff. It was like very, I mean, not even stiff. It's not the right word. It was traditional. It was like, this was different. Like him playing the saxophone running for president playing the saxophone and they're like, what is happening here? And I tried to get, I told Jenna Bush this last week among this book's lingon tour. And I told her I said, I invited your grandpa because back then there was a mentality that you do equal both sides. You know, and I don't think it was a rule. But first of all, my dad was a Republican. My mother was a Democrat. So I was used to hearing both sides and learning both sides. And I thought the best thing I could do for young people is show them both sides and that would be fair of me as a host. And we got a call from a man named Marlon Fitzwater who said, no fucking way we're coming there. I wonder why. It's almost like what you talk about with the desk. Society at a certain point is stiff and it takes certain people to loosen it up and make a change. And I think it was just, they're not used to it. It's like, why are they barking? And what is it? Yeah. Yeah. You know, it's right. Things that make you go, hmm. Oh, yeah, yeah. Yeah. There was a lot going on. I had a couple of hooks going. Things that make you go home. Everybody used that all day long. Like when if something weird was going on in the office, people are things that make you go hmm. And it was so cool then they wrote a song about it. And I turned on TV and I would see. Is that CNC music factory? Yes. That's right. Yeah. And I would turn on TV and like Nordstroms would have a sale that makes you go hmm. And I was like, that's very cool. Yeah. And it came about sitting with the writers. And I had done it at the comedy store and he says, you know, we could use that and just throw any joke in there like randos that we don't know where to put. Right. And so it really was a cheating technique for me. Yeah, perfect non sequitur. Yeah. The transition. Every now and then you hey, why don't black women breastfeed chocolate milk? And you have no place else to put that thought. Right. So it's a stream of things that make you go hmm. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it was just finally there was a different kind of talk show. It was like finally there was a talk show that was more fun. Hey, the desk thing, my partner and executive producer Marla Kelbroun. We were sitting around one day and she said, after coming to America, I had done the Joan Rivers thing. I'd filled in for her for 11 weeks and I think she her husband committed suicide and she was going through all that period, right. Conan's creating the Wilton North report in the room that I leave and I go to Paramount and she says, I'm asking you one thing. She said, I watch you do stand up the other night at the comedy store. And there is a freedom that you have that I would like you to have on the talk show. and I don't think we can have it with that desk between you and the guest. So I want you to just try without the desk and I tried it without the desk and never went back. Yeah. You changed it. I mean, like, and then George Lopez did no desk when he did his show. A few people have tried the no desk thing. But for us, I think it's great. And you know what? I was able like somebody like Rosie Perez who would be nervous. and hold her hand and you can't reach across the desk and hold somebody. Also, the desk was always elevated. Oh, yeah. You want to be as always above the game must be higher, which is weird. Well, that's that's a bizarre. I don't know if that's the ego of the entertainer or whether that's some ass kissing prop set designer move because we always want it to be higher and I remember they put some under my seat. So make your seat on her. Yeah. So I'm sitting even with Kareem, which is bullshit. Yeah. Yeah. It's a weird thing. It's like, why would the host be above movie stars and rock stars? Yeah. Why? That doesn't make any sense at all. Yeah. Unless your host is David Bowie. Yeah, right. Right. Let's see. Just as you do a talk show. Even then, it doesn't make any sense. It's like, if you want to have a conversation, the way you did it was the best way to do it. Just be sitting there. Yeah. Sitting with each other. You know? And now you can lean in. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You could touch the person. Yeah. Now we have a different era where everyone can do talk. I saw Mike Epps talking on his back from his bed the other day. Hold it his phone above him. And that's when it hit me. It's like, now we have a hard time finding a guest that doesn't have a show. Right. Anyone can have a show now. Yeah. That's kind of cool. It is kind of cool. And it's just like, and you find your, as long as you do it long enough and you put the right attention to it and do it honestly, you'll find your own lane. You'll find your own way of doing things. I have friends who have children who have shows. Make up tutorials and successful things going on in their bedroom. One of the biggest shows on YouTube for a long time was a kid that was like unboxing toys. Oh, that's cool. And it was sort of. But then they started monetizing it and I think, you know, as soon as your parents start making all that money off of you opening toy boxes, shit gets weird. It's weird for kids to get famous period. But it was just like, no one had thought that out. Like that there would be a lot of people that were interested in you watching toys. Yeah. But there's a lot of shows that I watch on YouTube that it's just people cooking. Oh, yeah. I love watching people. I watch a lady cook with big titties and just an apron. You know, and you know, side boobage. That's a trick. That's a trick. She's joking. I like watching people cook with no talking. It's just ASMR. You know, just they're like chopping up the food and you hear the sizzle and the pan and like, I don't know why I like it. I love, I love watching people do things. Isn't it amazing that you're younger than I am? But when I was growing up in Cleveland, we had three channels. Right? I remember those days. Yeah. And the shit signed off at two. Right. Yeah. You're done. You're done. And you fall asleep with watching TV and that would wake you up. Yeah. Because it would be just crackling. Oh, jeez, I watched. State up too late. Yeah. You got to shut her off after the American flag. Because the American flag would wave on the TV. Yeah. Yeah. There would be a match fade from a soul. And then the soldier to the American flag. Yeah. And then it would just go static at two in the morning. And then I remember when Fox came out and everybody's like, this channel is crazy. Yeah. Foxes, they have the Simpsons and Marvel. It changed my life, man. Those Tracy Almond. And then of course, they discovered that they could get numbers with me and living color. And Fox was really important to us. Fox was important to America. I mean, it was a looser, wilder network. It was like a network that was a little crazier. They were doing things they were getting nuts. And they had to. They had to take some chances and roll the rice in a different way. Right. Yeah. And then cable came along. It was like the slow descent into madness. And then also you have 150 channels. And now you have literally an infinite number of channels. Because of streaming in YouTube, it's like you can never run out of things to look at. Which is crazy because I turn a lot. And I'm like, yo motherfucker, they got two million stations. And you channel chaser? You can't find something. But I'm a big YouTube guy. Because I don't like commercials. I want what I want. And I want it in small increments. I actually, as a 70 year old, fit more into this culture than I did the culture I was born into. I like things for three minutes. It's fucked me up too. I don't want long shit. I want quick shit. And I'm jumping around. Well, when I'm watching TV, I'm generally trying to check out. Or I'm trying to be educated. So either I'm watching some particle physicist talk about the way they find new particles by using particle colliders and large hadron colliders. And the amount of energy required to duplicate the conditions that happened right after the big bang. I'm like, I watch a lot of that shit. And then I just watch people play pool. I watch people play pool. And I watch people make furniture and people cook. I'm just trying to unwind. Yeah. And it's trying to like rely on that. But that's so heavy. I heard you and Kat talking about the pyramids. Mm-hmm. And as a matter of fact, it was part of the reason I was afraid to come here. Wow. I've heard you talk about the re-explosion of it's just when you hear that kind of shit. And you're like, I don't want to be his pussy crazy. Huh? I don't want to be that guy. So it's intimidating to watch intelligent people have an exchange. And say, I got to go there. Is it? Oh, yeah. I don't want you to want to be the first idiot in the room. Nobody. You definitely want to be the first idiot on the show. And you're not an idiot anyway. But if there's been plenty of really fucking dumb people on the show that were great. But do you know somebody that is really intelligent and conversational with them is intimidating? Oh, sure. So I was afraid of this room. I mean, I know people like Bill Clinton. The first time I sat and talked to Bill Clinton not on the air. Mm-hmm. I guess I should say it was kind of daunting because he, no matter what your politics is, he's a really smart guy. Yeah. Cat Williams is the same way. That motherfucker read a lot more books than I read. Well, God's brilliant. I mean, you can't be that funny and not be very intelligent. It's the reason Bill Cosby was so funny. He was a bright man. Oh, I know. He's just a problematic subject. Also, Bill Clinton, I wish Bill Clinton didn't have so many problems because I would like to talk to him. I would love to have to sit down with him on a podcast. You know, the problem is like how do you sit down and not talk about all the chaos and all the nutty shit and Epstein files and all the other shit, like you kind of almost have to talk about it. So it's too bad because I think he's a fascinating person. And I think he's one of the greatest presidents of all time for sure. If you go back and look at what he accomplished during his administration, they balanced the budget. There was like one of the first times in the history of this fucking country that we didn't have a gigantic debt. Now our debt's like 39 trillion. It's crazy. Everybody's so bad at balancing the budget and you go back and listen to him talk when he was running for president. He's like super sensible. Like everything he said made sense. It didn't even move a little to the right. I mean, it wasn't to the right. It was just sensible. Like what is to the right and what is to the left? Well, it's an easy thing to say. It's accepting that a lot of things are valuable that are not a part of your party's philosophy. I think we have to be willing to compromise and move a little bit. And that goes for all politicians. We have to be able to move a little bit to be logical and serve all of America for sure. But I think the problem is parties all have to agree and then they form ideologies that you cannot stray from. So if you're one of those people that says like, hey, maybe an open borders of bad idea because terrorists can come through. No, there's no one's illegal. I'm stolen land. You know, everybody gets crazy because there's a party line that you have to stick with. This is today. Today things are incredibly polarizing. But if you go back and listen to some of the things that Clinton was saying when he was running for president and when he was president, boy, these are like almost right wing talking points in a lot of way. But they do not. But it's not really right wing. That's not really right wing. It's just sensible. What is right and what is left? Left used to be, first of all, freedom of speech was a paramount importance. It used to be that there were very open minded. It used to be like the education was of crucial importance and that discourse was crucially important and that you have to look out for citizens in a sense of like having social safety nets and having welfare programs and food stamps and all those things are which are really important for society because not everybody is in the same position in life. And if we're community of people, which is what country is supposed to be, you're supposed to look out for everyone. That's sensible. That's what the left used to be. And then it became trans women or women, men can get pregnant. And by the way, when you deal with left and right, you have to almost attach a year because we've seen parties change. I'm always reminded that the Democratic Party was the party of the Klan if you go far enough back. So I'm a republic rat. I have to look at it all. Well, wasn't Lincoln a Republican? Oh, I believe Lincoln was a Republican. I think the Republicans were the ones who were trying to abolish slavery. There was a lot of, there's a lot of weird things that shift back and forth and that you think of right wing and left wing and today's standards. Like we were playing a clip of Hillary Clinton the other day when she was running for president. I think it was was it 2008 or 2012? 2008. She was she was running for president. She's like, if you're here illegal from another country, you should have to pay a stiff penalty. You should have to learn English. And if you have any criminal history whatsoever, no questions asked, you get out of the country never was cheering like yeah, but it is magga. That sounds completely magga. That's why I say when you deal with Democrat Republican, you have to attach a year. Yes, it's evolved and changed many times. It's all you're just being manipulated and you've been manipulated by these two teams and you have to pick a team. You have to decide which team you want. I hate that. It's so stupid. I'm politically homeless. I've always been politically homeless for a long fucking time. It's not neither one of them make any sense to me. We need like a logical centrist government. They're like just says, look, there's a lot of things that we should do to make this country a better place. We can do these things and we don't have to attach them to left or right and anything that the left says that's logical to people on the right, they are immediately dismissive because it's coming from the left. That happens the same where the left does it to people on the right. It's dumb. It's a team thing. It's like the dolphins versus the Raiders. It's just you pick a fucking team and you lay out a team and hold the game by the way. You pick a team when your team rules and the other team sucks. There's a lot of people out there that are not open minded and they love a good rigid ideology that they could adhere to. Now I don't have to think for myself. I have a predetermined pattern of opinions that I could just adopt and I'll just accept those and that's how I think and that's what I'm going to argue with. When I was young, I used to in some jokes say my heart is democratic but my wallet is republic. Yeah. Not even that simple anymore. It's got much more complicated. Yeah. Much much more complicated. It's like everyone should be anti-fraud whether you're on the left or on the right. Or should you be... I'm like you're committing fraud. Right. Then I'm pro me. Yeah. Well, I think a lot of people that are certainly benefiting from fraud would like to dismiss it. Whether it's the left or the right. We have a problem in this country where we have a two party system. Two party systems are inherently flawed because there's no fucking way that one side is going to represent you entirely. It's much more likely if you have like five, ten, fifteen different parties that are all legitimate because we don't have another legitimate party. If you vote for libertarian and I voted libertarian before you're basically saying fuck these people. Fuck these people. Fuck these people. Fuck these people. Fuck these people. I'm voting you're jacking up a dolphin-raighter game. Yeah. Yeah. I'm voting for rugby. Yeah. Because that's what you're basically saying. You're like I can't get behind either one of these motherfuckers. So I'm going to vote for this guy who has no chance. You know, I've done that before. I did that with Joe Jorgensen. I did that with Gary Johnson. I voted for both of them. But why do you think we've not been able to come up with legitimate third, fourth, and fifth parties? Well, they got it locked down. They've got it locked down. With donations and money? Yeah. It's money. Money and politics. They allowed corporations to just essentially give as much as they feel like it. Like when corporations- And not just corporations, but other countries. This episode is brought to you by BetterHelp. A lot of people hit stretches where money gets tight. And it's not just the bills. It's the constant pressure, the mental load, the second guessing of every decision. And honestly, one of the biggest difference makers isn't some perfect budget. It's having a solid support system when things feel heavy. And if that support system includes therapy, even better. Because while it can't solve your money problems, it can change your relationship with finances. It can help you manage the stress, anxiety, and maybe even any shame you feel around money. A good place to find a quality therapist is BetterHelp. Plus they do a lot of the work for you. What they all you need to do is answer a few questions and BetterHelp will match you with a fully qualified therapist online. They have an industry-leading match fulfillment rate, which is a fancy way of saying that they typically get it right the first time. But even if they don't, it's super simple to switch to another therapist. When life feels overwhelming, therapy can help. Sign up and get 10% off at betterhelp.com-jre. That's better. H-E-L-P.com-j-R-E. Oh yeah. Yeah. It's not good. It's not good. Money in politics is the real problem. It should, you know, the whole thing, it's a mess. And then you find out how much money politicians make. Well, TSA guys have nothing. Yeah. And politicians are still getting the motherfucking check. Yes. Exactly. Well, I felt that way also about the lockdowns in California. I was like, all these people that are saying that you should have no outdoor dining. Your paycheck should be entirely dependent on the GDP of your city. And if your city starts suffering, you should fucking suffer. And I guarantee you want those businesses to open right the fuck back up, because it didn't make any sense. They were doing things for optics only. And they were doing things because they like control. People love control. They love it. And once you give them power over people, they're in the control business. They like to keep that control. And it just gets gross. They don't have any, there's no repercussions. They don't get in trouble. If all these like California law. Somebody should be in trouble for the Epstein Fouts. Somebody at least one person, please. Yes. It's crazy that we're sitting around looking at that. It's crazy. And we know it and we say it, but ain't a motherfucking thing we can do about it. It's like right now, there's some talk about journalists getting in trouble for leaking information about the down pilot. And that they want to prosecute these journalists. At the same time, no one's being prosecuted for the Epstein Fouts. Yeah. That's, so nuts. That's a sick society. As a kid, I did magic, right? And there's a thing in magic. I take a coin and put in this hand. There's a thing called misdirection. That's what I just did to you. You looked at that. And I'm doing some shit right here. That's the story of American politics. Oh yeah. Whenever something weird's going to look when Monica Lewinsky, when Trump went to and when Bill Clinton got caught with Monica Lewinsky, they mean some of the bomb and some other countries. I'm like, we've got to distract these people. This is just too complicated. Yeah. Look, the Epstein Files comes out. We go to war with Iran. It's a good way to get people to stop talking about certain things. You give them a new problem to think about. Hey, this morning I wake up in a very nice hotel thanks to you. Breakfast was paid for it. The tip was done. All that shit. It was kind of cool. And I was nervous and I'm thinking I'm nervous to go see my guy and talk, which is insane. But then, you know, sometimes you try to focus on why you're really nervous. Why am I so nervous? And I realized it wasn't just coming here. I had watched about a half hour of news and it was making my stomach hurt. Yeah. Because I feel so sad on a lot of levels. And anxiety. Yes. Yes. But I got to as a comic, I got to watch because I got to know everything. It on a lot of levels. And anxiety. Yes, yes. And news just gives me anxiety. But I got to, as a comic, I got to watch because I got to know everything. I got to have that mental role of sex loaded. Yes. For a crowd work or whatever. We have to know what's going on in the world, unfortunately. If I was in a comic, I would have no social media. I would never consume the news. I would just hide. I would just go to a peaceful place. I'd probably have a place in a mountain somewhere and just fucking chill. I would not want to have anything to do with any of this bullshit that's going on in the world. And I know people, a lot of people say, oh, you have to participate. And that's not like, man, yeah, I guess. But I don't think your participation is having the kind of effect that you'd like it to have. I think it's having an effect on the way you think and feel much more, like a disproportionate effect on your mental health and your anxiety levels. And all these different things that you cannot control by paying attention to it, you can't control with these fucking people you're doing. And it just drives you nuts. And it's frustrating because we realize, I mean, you and I are both millionaires. You a lot more than me. But at the same time, we realize we don't have enough money to really affect it. I mean, you can affect some things. I guess. Not that I think about it. I want to. I don't want to affect it. If I can affect things in a positive way, I can. Yeah. I mean, there's some things that are like things by dispersing information of candidates and for helping to inform people. But that kind of money that you have to have, to have a dinner in Malibu and later gets some shit done that you want to get done because the president is your guy now. Yeah. Or girl. Very complicated. Yeah. And that kind of complication comes with a lot of scrutiny, a lot of weirdness. And also, you don't really know these people. You support people for running for president or governor or mayor or whatever. How do much do you know them? Are you really sure? Is there no good options? So you go with the least evil option? Well, a lot of it. Let's do that. And that's really painful. You think that the lesser of two evils is a horrible thing as a philosophy for a place we raise our children. Right. Yeah. There's no one person that really comes along. and we're like, oh, like a peaceful, god-loving person who's looking out for everybody's best interest. You're really only wants to do this because they think they can affect change. And then once they do try to affect change, they get fucking shot. Because nobody really wants that because they're all making money. When we were coming up, remember to say I'm kennison bit? Which bit? I think it was very similar to that people who have an idea we killed him. Oh, those Bill Hicks. Oh, it was Hicks. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Hicks had a great bit about that. Yeah. And it's totally true. I mean, anybody that really wants to rock the apple cart, like that person's a problem. You know, and all these people that are making, well, this sociopaths that are making fucking billions of dollars just being cut. They do not want you coming along and waking people up to that and saying, hey, we should put a stop to all this. We should stop these people from me. Like that's why people cheered when that guy got shot. The United Health Care guy, he got shot. People were happy. Like finally. At first I thought it was, I thought homie who shot him. I thought it was his eyebrows, you know, because women were going crazy. You know, it was a hot guy. Yeah. He's a good looking guy too. He was like, perfect guy to be like a martyr, like an assassin. But by the way, have you noticed throughout history, good looking people get treated differently when it comes to the justice system. They've done experimental trials where the hot guy gets off on for murder, easy. Because 11 women were cool with it. You know, well, women are weird with killers. You know, when guys are even serial killers, when they go to jail, women, they get great letters, proposals, weird. Mary me. Yeah, even like Richard Ramirez was getting all these proposals while he was in jail. But the ultimate game for a woman is to be married, but not have to live with that motherfucker. Yeah. So that might be kind of cool. Yeah. Kind of. I don't know what it is. I heard someone talk about that saying that there's women that like men that are capable of killing. Ooh, because back in the day, it was if someone was, if you needed someone to protect you, you didn't want someone that would hesitate if they were going to kill someone. You wanted someone who has experienced killing people. So it's almost like an attractive trait that someone's willing to cross that terrible line and just has no problem murdering people. And if they like you, they won't murder you, but they'll murder other people. Like anybody that's a problem. I knew a girl who went out with a couple friends of mine. And her M.O. was to do something publicly that would make the man whip somebody's ass to defend her honor or something. And she's like, because that made her feel better. That's a crazy bitch. I've been around with you. People like that before. I always got rid of them real quick. I've had a few ladies like that when I was like, You gonna go to him say that to me? You know that? Why'd you say that to him? The fuck don't get me involved in this stupid shit. But it's hard. I was on a club as a young man on Sunset left. The comedy store went down the street to a place called Carlos and Charlie's. And back then they had this garment called a tube top. Oh, it was just an elastic. About elastic piece about eight inches. Oh, depending on your breasts. And I watched a dude take his finger and just pull the girls two top down titties fell out. And I'm watching her man. He didn't know what to do. You know, because you don't wanna fight these guys. You almost wanna just say, baby, just put up your top. Let's go home. You know, but he had to fight. Yeah. And in that situation, I think you have to fight. You just definitely shouldn't be there in the first place. That's the problem with going to clubs. You're running into the potential psychopath. It's just two, like that's where they go. Where people act like cons. That's where they go. When is the last time you went to a club? I never go to clubs. No, it's been a long time for me. I mean, there is no club for 70 years. No, no, no. That's called ARP. Well, if you do go, it's sad. Yeah, you don't wanna be the old of AR. Yeah. Hey, ladies. You know what the fucking grandpa doing here. But our kids dance now. That's a good question. My son has, like I remember a time when you say, I'm doing the cabbage pets now. You know, it's like you knew what the latest dance was. My son never dances. I've taken him to New Year's Eve parties. He never during a slow record says to a girl, you want to dance, you know, you go out and slow dance. What happened to that? That's true, right? Well, because clubs got associated with violence, like clubs get associated with people getting drunk. They're doing drugs and chaos and people getting shot, you know? Yeah. There's just too much of that going on. You hear about that at concerts too. But yeah, you're right. You don't, there's no new dances. There's no things that like you have to learn. You know, but you know what's replaced it? Maybe the entire family on TikTok. Right. TikTok has definitely got dances that you got to learn. Over all it is. Oh, really? Yeah. I mean, for people that are waiting for them. Right. That's where the dances are. That's where the dances are. They're not going to clubs or just doing them. Yeah. They're not going to clubs or just doing them. Just got viral again, because they're dancing the freak on a leash. It's a 25 year old song that has got to dance to it. What's the dance? Yeah. Couldn't even begin to start it. I guess you're doing it. You're doing it in the video. You do it. You've been practicing. I still show me the video. What's the what's the corn dance? Am I ahead? You're like, get up and do it. Do we have to not play the music? Yeah, probably not. Yeah. So this is this is the dance. It's a new day. Yeah. You don't go to a club. You do it with your girl. I think they made it back on Billboard because, you know, like the song is. Oh, that's hilarious. That's how many plays on it. That's a layer. 1998. That's old. Wow. That's crazy. So I go, I don't know. And then to contrast to this is the club in Austin where everybody goes. They're not necessarily doing those dances. What club is this? This is called the Concourse. Oh, see, I I can't go to a club with no shirt on. And what do they do here? Like DJs. Oh, do you just like watch it. So they just bounce around. Punch the lasers. Yeah, this is like a jazz and jazz. Yeah, this is like jazz and jazz. Yeah. Yeah. They just bounce around. They're all on ecstasy. Everybody stares at the DJ stage like they're performing. How weird. And yeah, this is a sign of a sick culture. Not the same. Different culture. But it is like, but that there's no the other thing. There's no like people dancing, you know, yeah, on the old days. Like if you go back and you watch like nightclubs from like the 1960s and 70s, what it was ever to like the disco days, right? Yeah, that's perfect. And then we're saying burnt burn this mother down. Right. Yeah. Yeah. People just go in. Well, I remember when I was a kid, a siren, a lot of kid or siren and a fever rather came out. Oh, and that's when everybody wanted to learn how to dance because John Trafolta, he could fucking dance. And they would have dance offs. And black people were saying, we got to step up the game. If this boy can do that, you know, so we had to get better. Right. And then you had soul train. Right. But you're more dancing on TV. Yes. Yeah. Saturday morning was that was life for me. There's no shows where there's like a bunch of people performing music on TV anymore. Well, that's the, that's that gap between me and you as talkers. One of the problems I had and I talk in the book about this, I love music and I grew up wanting to do that show. So when they start telling me, you know, you can get better numbers with how you man, Dell just talking. Then you can with this, because I put boys to men and the temptations together once. I had to fly boys to men from Philly. I had, you know, and they wanted it less black. And now I got 14 brothers doing quite audibly. You know, and it's like, no, that's not what we wanted it less black. Well, they would say shit like that to you. Oh, yeah, they wanted. Um, this is the carrot. They said, we know Johnny's going to leave one day. You know, you always think it's going to be two years. So you can inherit his audience if you do the right show. But I Joe, I used to do the talk show on my basement man. And we put on a temptations record. And my friend Junior would be my guest and he would sing, get ready. And also train a lip sync. We knew the microphones wasn't plugged in. And so he would sing. And then I'd interview him. I wanted to do that show. But you were doing that when you were young. Oh, yeah. How old were you when you're doing that? Uh, 11. Really? Yeah. My mother would have rent parties. And so she'd rent these card tables and chairs. And the people like in LA, we call it town and country, right? You can rent stuff for your party. So the next day they come and pick up to stuff in a truck. But before they'd pick it up, I would do a talk show with that stuff. And I dreamed of everything that I did eventually in my life. Wow. And it was the show I wanted to do. So at a certain point when they say, um, does Prince need a purple piano? You know, he wanted a purple piano. And the show I was doing was just too expensive. And you and I talked once at the ice house when I tried to do the reboot show. Yeah. I was telling you how complicated it was. They wanted my Twitter site. They took it. I was telling people they took over your fucking social media and they wouldn't give it back. Yeah, it was hard to get back. That's crazy. I remember you telling me that we were standing outside the outside area of the ice house. And you're like, I can't get my fucking social media back. I'm like, that's crazy. They took your social media. Yeah. And they were used at the promote other show. Absolutely. And the end of that reboot experience, um, didn't go down exactly the way I wanted to like, like I got picked up first. And J Leno came out and read a letter from Les Moonvres that I was picked up for a second season. And then we start talking about the second season. And here's the great thing. They wanted you, you really got to stop doing the music. As a matter of fact, how about no house band? And it's interesting. Well, what, but, but economically speaking, Joe, when I look at it, they wanted me to do Joe Rogan before there was a Joe Rogan. They just want you to talk to people and stuff. I'd watch Fallon with Will Smith one night and Will Smith rode in on a horse. And I'm like, that's expensive. You know, they wanted me to do what we're doing right now because this is cheaper to do. I would love for us to have a hip hop star here right now following me. But this is economically sound. It's a new day. Right. So that's all it was. It was just a money thing. They just, uh, well, that was the reboot show. The first show, um, you know, if they want me to be in the position to inherit Johnny's audience, because that's, they, they wanted me and themselves to make more money, a lot of money, keep making money. And I was kind of kicking the bag because I had wanted to do this show since I was a kid. I couldn't imagine. But when you all, the thing is your show was so popular. And by the way, they got numbers one night when Whitney didn't sing. she just came on and that was the kiss of death in my morning meetings because they were like, look, Whitney saying nothing and look at the numbers. You know, so they were shooting for the Joe Rogan experience before there was an experience. I fucking people concentrate on the numbers. It's like you're missing the tree. I do. Sometimes I, you know, it's really important for me to look back and say, I love that that show that I did. And I don't regret a moment of it, but I get a corporate organization saying we can make more, more money and we can get more people in. Yeah. If I was a court, I would be a terrible corporate executive by the way, because you would leave your heart. Yeah, I would say just be you just how fun. And whatever ads we get, we get whatever money we get, we get. And that's good. You get plenty. It'll be fine. I mean, you can't, you got to let up. It has to, I feel like every show has to be a unique expression of the person that's hosting it and what they're trying to do. Like let that person be free. Like he mentioned Quentin Tarantino had to sit down with a group of people that were executives before he wrote a script. You would never get any of these fucking chaotic crazy movies. They were like, no, no, no, no, no, you can't bash a woman's head on a mantelpiece. That's nuts. Like don't do that. No, you can't, you know, like in Jackie Brown, no, you can't fucking shoot that girl on the parking lot. That's nuts. You can't do that. You can't do any of these things. You've got to let someone just be free. And then it finds its audience. Yeah. I remember when Ist came on to explain cop killer and his way of extension. I'm so. Yeah. Yeah. And it was a metal band. Yeah. People don't realize that. People forgot body count was a metal band. Yeah. You got it. Search that, yo. Right. A lot of people don't even know that he did that. You think of iced tea. You think of six in the morning. You think of, you know, hustler. You think of all those classic songs, colors. You think of that. You don't think of body count, which is like iced tea reinvented himself. And he was like, I always love this kind of music. You can't tell me what the fuck I do. I like this kind of music too. Amazing career. I know. And now he plays a cop for like 25 years. How about that variety? I knew when he was a pimp. And now that's crazy. It's a tough. Well, remember when he was in pimps up, hose down? Yeah. He was in that too. Yeah. I mean, he was talking about the pimp game. It was hilarious. He came on, by the way, they didn't want me to do that, you know, book him. But I thought it was, I thought it was cool to expose America to some conversations things they might not hear normally. And the more power I got, the more I tried to push that envelope and do those things. He compared it to Schwarzenegger. He says, you don't think he's really determinated, right? Yeah. And he said, I'm not a cop killer. But there's a message through this character. And I'm paraphrasing, but it was nice to hear people who I know. I would talk to Tupac. And I would say, say that on the air. You got to talk about that on the air. That was, we didn't have Twitter. We didn't have the bluebird. I was kind of the black bird. And I was able to have these like Tupac call me once and he says, man, they want me to take a AIDS test before I do this movie. And unless I'm really going to fuck you in it, I don't think I should have to take a AIDS test. And I'm like, please don't say anymore. Just come on the show and this fit into both categories. Come on the show. Don't do any music. Just sit and talk. And those nights would do really good. Of course. Of course. Because people want to hear people really talk, especially in those weird settings where most of the time when people were coming on talk shows, they would just have this like very canned sort of like pre program thing that they would talk about. They would talk about their character. We even have people who don't know. We have pre interviews, which you don't have in a show like this. But I get a card. Yeah. That morning, it's like, okay, here's what Jackie Collins would like to talk about. Right. Or Nicole Kidman has requested that you don't mention Tom Cruise. And I'm like, what 10 to the cold only reason that bitch is here is because I think Tom Cruise is going to walk out. You know, oh, it was that crazy. That's crazy. Yeah. Well, it was all PR people. And it's again, you're dealing with too many different people that are peripheral people. Where all their money is dependent on this one person performing. So they just want to make sure they make the maximum amount of money possible. Like don't make any ripples, don't cause any waves, don't cause any problems. Just go out there and smile and we'll sell more. We'll sell more records, we'll sell more movies. TV show will get better ratings. Don't mess it up. Yeah. Guys like Prince used to be frustrated with the fact that if something's a hit, can you give us something like that again? How many beats per second is that? Give us that again or any big artist. Like we want more of waterfall. Yeah. Yeah. No, Prince was one of the most revolutionary artists ever. And people that don't know the early stuff, they don't know how crazy it was that this guy was the house song called Head. Yeah. Just sing it about getting head. First time I saw him, he was opening for the Rolling Stones. Wow. And the audience didn't dig him because it was different back then and he was singing soft and wet. Right. Right. Well, Prince was just, he was so unique man. And he predicted a lot of the things that we're dealing with now. And going through, I remember the first time he talked about what became Napster and he talked about owning your own property and what was going to happen. Slave on his jaw and we thought that was silly, but it meant something. Well, he was dealing with these crazy contracts where these record companies, these predatory record companies would lock you into these contracts and they fucking owned you. So his response to that was like, okay, I won't perform as Prince anymore. Now I'm fucking this year. Yeah. I'm the symbol. I'm a symbol. We had a slave. Yeah. Insignee on what we're going to do now. I'm a symbol. I'm not even selling myself as Prince. And he would just, I mean, how revolutionary is that? This guy said, okay, I know the work around. I won't use my name anymore. I'll just be a symbol. He was bad. He was such a bad motherfucker. The people like, I know who that is. I don't care what that fucking symbol is. That's Prince. Let him sing. Let him do things. Did you ever meet him? No. I had one opportunity to fucking see him live. And I blew it at the great Western Forum. No, it was at one of the hotels in Vegas, but it was a really late show. And I had a show earlier that night and there said, and Prince was doing small shows back then. It was like this small, intimate audience, but it was like, after midnight, I'm fucking tired. I'm going to go sleep. And this is like, dude, ah, I fucked up, man. I fucked up. It's like, when his career was in a weird place, because he wasn't doing big shows anymore. And he was doing this late night show. And people were saying it was really good, but I was like, I'm tired. I'm not going to see this. And then years later when he was dead, I was like, God, did I fuck up? I always thought Prince was going to be around. Yeah. You'd lost Prince to fentanyl. Yeah. I would be going in an elevator. God damn. I remember the music callig the album where he toured and he attached the album to the ticket so that when you bought a ticket, you were buying an album and it instantly became a million dollar seller with that philosophy. He had a genius that was way ahead of the pimps. Yeah. Well, he just knew that he was being fucked. And he knew that all their selling is his brilliance. They don't have anything. What does a record company selling? They're only selling the art. That's it. They don't make it. And they're just selling a penny a copy. Yeah, exactly. The record company was getting most of it. Now it makes even less sense, because nobody even buys albums anymore. It's like, well, how the fuck are these record companies even surviving? It's so crazy that they still figure out a way that latch their tentacles onto these young artists. And for young artists, they feel like they've made it when they're a part of a record deal. Like, I got a deal. And I almost want to tell them like, this is a deal. That ain't a deal. You got to deal with the devil. Like, if you just put your shit on YouTube or on SoundCloud or anywhere where people hear it and they start sharing it, you'll be huge. Yeah. We're getting smarter and learning how to deal with the pimps. Yeah. You know, I talk in the book about prints also had a great sense of humor. You would have loved him as a person beyond the musician. And there was a time when I was hosting the MTV Awards and he had no ass in his pants. And so when he's coming past me down the hall, I realized, oh shit. Because as he did this motherfucking guy in the ass in his pants, we'll be talking about this tomorrow. So obviously, when I get back to the show, my first monologue is about that night. Look at this. Yes. Yes. 1991. That was nuts. 1991. So I do jokes about that in the monocores. And like a week or two after the jokes, I get a box in the mail at Paramount and it's from Prince. And I open it. I figure it's maybe a hoodie. I opened it and it's a beautiful black and white suit with all the prints symbols on it. Maybe look like I was the drummer for new power generation. It's cool. Cool suit. And I'm looking at it. And my assistant said, turn it around. I turned it around. There was no ass. Did you wear a wig? Hell no. Not even at the crib. I never put it on. I could never bring myself to putting on that suit. That's hilarious. That's hilarious. That's hilarious. That's hilarious. That's so funny. I took him to an after hours joint once. I talked about that in the book. Because he was very interested in what people listen to and what moves people in clubs. And I talked about it after hours joint down the way South of Wilshire that was in a ladies house. And you have put pit bulls and a fence. And they let you in. You have to chain back, bring you to the back. And you know, you put money on the counter and they put your liquor in a solo cup. You know, not a legal place. And I told him about the place and he said, I want to go. And I took him down the way to the spot. He had an acrylic cane and a suit where the shoes match the suit exact same material. And he sat with me in this after hours joint and listened to the music. And it was where the strip was. Oh, God, this was maybe two years after I left the talk show. And so did he need the cane back then? Was that when he was having hit problems? I think so. Now we understand that maybe he had a replacement, a hip replacement or something. I thought it was fashion, but it probably was a little necessary that year. And he said he was all his dancing and oh, he should jump off speakers. And land with heels. So that's what fucked him up. Yeah. Yeah. I think that was a cano for time now. That's well, he probably was struggling even back then because there's a lot of guys that blew their their hips out. Yeah. He probably needed it because he was an athlete person. Oh, for sure. I mean, his dancing was insane. He was a good basketball player. Hey, I have one of those. He, um, the hat with the police hat with the change. He sent me that one day. So I'm sure there are a few of them, but just to have one of those from him. And he sent me what looks like a Smith and Wesson 38 long, but it was fixed up. So the microphone was where the barrel is. So he could hold the gun and sing into it like that. Oh, wow. Cool. Very cool. I became good friends with Charlie Murphy and Charlie had. Oh, look at that. Yes. Wow. Wow. I have one of those. I don't know how many they were, but I have one from that. That's crazy. Wow. But Charlie Murphy. Well, Charlie had all those great stories about Prince and he did on Chappelle show. Yeah. You know, I mean, that was like that whole segment of like how good Prince was as a basketball. And that people didn't believe it because you know, he's so short. But meanwhile, he could fucking play like a motherfucker. He had he had a crossover mood. That was crazy. And he could run escape. And I mean, amazing with a lollipop back on the sixth point one foot. You know, so he was he was an athlete. Yeah. And really, I mean, you can't dance like that and not have incredible body control. Yeah. But the problem is when you're doing show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after show after you're tearing your fucking joints apart. And that's probably what blue is hips out. That's one thing about us with the exception of the shit you used to do on a stool that balancing act. Oh, the Kardashian joke. Yeah. Our life of jokes isn't very fit. We know. All we have to do is take care of from the neck up. Take care of your mind. Yeah. Our body. No comedian has a bad hip. Well, you generally don't get it from performing on stage, that's for sure. But when you're dancing and jumping around and doing a lot of shit like Ted New Jim Blue is his knees out jumping off of speakers. Mm-hmm. Like a lot of people did that. And they just they went crazy. They were just putting on a show and you don't realize you're doing it. Maynard from tool, he blew his hip out, stopping on the ground all the time. Wow. Just stopping while he's singing. You had to get a hip replacement. Yeah. I like being a stand up. Well, it's definitely easier on the body. That's true. You know? You still get up on stage ever? Oh, yeah. All the time. I'm going on your own club. Yeah. I'm going to go up. Usually Tuesday, Wednesday, I do it, but I do it, you know, off nights to different nights. But Tuesday and Wednesday, almost every week, I do a show there. I promised my woman I wouldn't go to the mothership. Well, I told her, she's like, when you go, I want to go. It's a big deal if you're a comic. You know, I mean, it's a huge deal. But I want to come one night flying and just, just let me have 10. Dude, you can go up any time. You can go up tonight if you want. I got a show tonight. Yeah, I got a fly home and I'm still slinging in the pool. I hear you, brother. But anytime, anytime you want to come by and do a set, you're more than welcome. I love it coming in. Hang out. Everybody's been so friendly. The green rooms and amazing hang to that's what I hear. But I've heard both sides of that. I've heard don't be in that motherfucker if you're not supposed to. Well, the problem is you don't want anybody coming in and fucking up the conversation. You know, so you know, you got to be kind of bedded. But it's only like during shows when you're not on. You know, if like, if it's a show and you're on the show, everyone's allowed to be in the green room. It's just like we don't allow people to just come in out of nowhere. It's like you're from out of town. You want to come in and hang out in the green room. There's too many people in the green. allowed to be in the green room. It's just like we don't allow people to just come in out of nowhere. There's like you're from out of town. You want to come in and hang out in the green room. Let me just tell you too many people in the green room. And then people have to prepare. They're going over their notes. The green room is supposed to be a hang with the comics on the show that are getting ready to go on stage. And the problem is that's the cool spot. That's where Shane Gillis is and Ron White is. Tony Hinchcliff is everybody wants to come in. And you know it gets it gets to be a little bit of a problem. So you can't go in the green room if you're not on the show. Unless we know who you are when you know you're in town. You want to come hang. But it's like you know, it's like you're having a party. You can't let everybody in. Promise everybody wants to be there. I mean, look at the level I'm at and how long I've been doing it. And I know about the green room. And want to get in there. You can get it. You can get it anytime. When you were in living in Hollywood still, that your kids ever want to act? No, no, they're not interested in it. Yeah. Never want to thank God. No, they wouldn't let first of all, rich kids are not going to be good stand ups. You have to be able to deal with the torture of bombing. You know, and they don't have to. And they don't have pain. You know, their pain is so minor in comparison to the pain of poverty, the pain of struggle, the pain of, you know, not getting enough attention when you're young and moving around a lot, all the different shit that most comics go through. I've never met a good comic with a great childhood. As you're talking, I'm thinking, I'm like, do we know any comics who are good who are from wealth? None. I don't know any. I'm sure they can exist. I'm sure it's possible. But it takes a very exceptional person to want to be a great comic that's grew up wealthy. It's just not a thing that they seek to do. So much comedy comes from our pain. I think the only exception to that would be the Wayne's brothers because the sons of the Wayne's brothers all went on to be great comics. They all went on to big careers and movies and films and television. But I think that's it's like a family thing over there. Like I remember Damon telling me that he set up a stage in his house. Mm hmm. That's absolutely true. Well, they're just, I mean, they love stand ups so much that we fucking do stand up for each other. Just fuck around. I used to see, first of all, I think to this day, Damon is one of the most underappreciated great comics of all time. And he's back out there. Now I noticed in my room, Damon is at the improv. But he's always been out there. No, no, no, he never quit. He was always doing stand up, but he's low key about it. He makes his money off of television. You know, and even like he wanted to do, what we talked years ago about him coming on my podcast news like, I'd like to put out say some crazy shit that I'll get in trouble because he was in that what I call the velvet prison, the TV velvet prison. You do it. TV shows. You're playing a dad on a TV show. You know, you can't come out of podcasts. Talk about getting your dick sucked. It's just how he Mandel goes through that. I work with him a lot. And how he is on America's Got Talent. Exactly. It's real commercial television vehicle. But nobody is more real and edgy than how he Mandel when he's on stage and in the green room hanging out like he's done sets of the mothership. He's coming hung out with us. He did my podcast and he came to the clubs like, fuck, I want to be like, I want to do what you guys are doing. I'm like, you can. You can do it. But he's worried that he would lose that velvet prison. Hey, when we're working and they have the phones and bags, that's when he's amazing. Yes. Because he'll drop the sea bomb in a minute. He was saying it. He was saying on stage. I'm just so happy I could say cunt. Yeah. I was saying it. But he was funny. It was like he was having a good time. He was loose. And you could tell was like, because how he was a great comic, like how he had some hilarious fucking special. I hated following him at the westward comedy store. Oh, mitzi used to send us there to get better meeting him and Polly. That's the point thing I loved about her. You know how we have nepo babies. She didn't have no nepo babies. She was like, Polly, you're not ready. Yeah. Oh, she was amazing. Where's the westward? Oh, she made Polly work. Yeah. I mean, Polly's a rare dude in that regard. Like, he became a really funny comedian while he was, you know, living with a woman who's the great as in terms of like, people in comedy that are like, some of the most critical and important people. She's the most important person in the history of comedy that's not a comic. Absolutely. There is no argument. No argument. There's no one even close to her. And her son, you know, I mean, went on to have huge success. I took Missy, remember when we had the universal amphitheater? I got tickets and took mitzi to see Polly open for Sam Keniston. Wow. And it just blew her away because she had never seen him in that large environment. And it was really cool to watch her watch her son. Well, she let, she let him grow the right way, you know, she didn't, she didn't give him a silver spoon. By the way, Mrs. Shore started the comedy store and she's the mother of Polly show because I say mitzi to you. Right. That gets a cousin. Right. Well, we talk about her so much. I think a lot of people listening. No, but she's the most important person in comedy that wasn't a comic. And more important than most comedians, like she would tell you how to do it right. And if she liked you, man, it was like, she tell you how to do it in her opinion. I've seen her tell some people some crazy shit. Oh, yeah, she was done right a lot of time. Yeah, she had some wild ideas that she had a girl put on a green wig. I'm not sure, you know, but she was trying to find some kind of hook. Girl, you know, like if you don't want to have to wear the green wig, go home and figure out a hook. Yeah, she, she made Joey Diaz calm self fat baby. She she when you would look at the lineup, like I bet you could find it online. If you look, there's lineups from the comedy store, be a bunch of comedians, Bill Burr, blah, blah, and then you'd see fat baby. And that was Joey Diaz. She would call him fat baby. She would, even let him use his fucking name in the lineup. It would be fat baby. I remember having a conversation with her in Paul and Paul was exacerbating the problem because she was like, Rodriguez, Paul Mooney. Oh, Mooney. Oh, man. Yeah, so we're like, so we're seeing talking and mitzi's about to start the belly room because she thinks women need a place to perform and to get better. She was with the belly room originally was little college up there for ladies. And she was trying to think of a name for it. And she says, I'm also thinking about having one night of just black comics. You know, because there was only George Wallace, Dave Tyree and Mooney at one time when I arrived. And what year was I? I came in 1980 New Year's Eve. Wow. I drove out from Chicago because I'm from Cleveland and there were no comedy clubs in Cleveland back then. So I had to go to New York, LA or Chicago. And my mother was living in Chicago at that time. So I went there because rent was free for a while. And that was a lot of fun. But mitzi for the black night, she said, Paul, what do you think I should call him? And she says, I was thinking cotton comedy. And I'm not, no, mitzi, no, you can't. And I was trying to explain what Paul was like, oh, that's wonderful. That's exactly what she called. Oh, hold me. Oh, he was cool. Oh man, Paul, that guy would write. And there'd be something that would happen in the news like the day before and Mooney would go on stage and have like 15 minutes on it and just crush. And he did something that I know I hate it. He requested the last spot. Oh, he loved that one is to go on late, want to stay on as long as he wanted. And what fuck would you if you try to get up? Oh, you don't like a smart nigga. But don't leave too early. My friends at your house, robin that. He would have so many things like that, so many hooks. And he was just so good at working those small crowds. He just liked the freedom of just being able to fuck around, you know, with a bottle of champagne, you want to straw a little tiny bottle of champagne. Yeah, and he would sit on it during punch. Oh, nigga, please. We always just sitting in the back and watch him. It's like if you thought you were good at comedy, watch Mooney and go, God, I got so much to learn. Yeah, I got so much to learn. All the great comics that we know now at one time would sit in the back of the OR and come late to watch Paul. Absolutely. I used to on a landline. I used to call Keenan and say, yo, I'll meet you there. We were going to see Mooney and 115. I would always love to see Mooney when something fucked up happening in the news. Like if there's something fucked up happening in the news, my one's poggling up. Yeah. You know, it's just like you had to go see him because he always had a take. And you know, that take was always like, Oh, shit, you know, it was like he would get you. He would like fine and angle where you'd be like, Oh my God. Oh my God. He was he was so clever. The coolest conversations at the comedy show when Richard would come up every night and Richard would go from five minutes to an hour and then it would become a great special that you go to at the theater to see when I would watch Paul Mooney before we had cell phones. After it was over Richard would go and have a cigarette in the main room like on a Monday or Sunday, I think it would be closed. And that's where he would call it holding court. He would go in there first and just want to dry off for a minute, smoke a cigarette and Paul would come in with a napkin with stuff written on it. And he would just, you know, oh, and how about this? And he would give him tags and he Richard on the back of an album that that joke, you go to you go to prison, you get justice, just us nigga. And he gave that to Richard and it was on a prior album. But uh, those it. Joe, that was a time Richard would work out every night. He'd worked the original room going the main room and entertain his guest and it would be like Bert Reynolds, Moses, Charlton Heston, Bernie Casey, you would see like, oh, Bert Reynolds would have Sally feel with him. Wow. It was amazing. They would all come and bow to the King dog. Yeah. Well, he was so different. And I always say that the Godfather of Common who started everything was Lenny Bruce, but then Richard figured out a way to take that and make it way funnier. But he figured out how to take that kind of honesty and social commentary and figure out how to talk about life because people don't know that before before Lenny Bruce came around, it was just jokes. It was just like two Jews walking to a bar. They buy it. It was jokes. It was like it was danger feels rhythm. Yeah. But you know, what danger for him was a, he was a special guy too. He was a beast man. And he didn't, he took like 10 years off and never stopped writing and was selling aluminum siding. Yeah. And then came back and made it in his 40s. Yeah. Wow. Look at this. Willie Nelson, that's the main that's crazy. Bert Reynolds, Sally Fields. Now you see that picture one night. I'm in that room. And Stevie Wonder is over on the panel. Remember how the panel used to be. Yeah. Yeah. The left of the day. Stevie's playing. And there are a few people snorting I think to this day, Stevie still thinks a few of those people have allergies because, you know, because he's just sitting playing and people Wow. Wow. Look at that. Bernal's on stage. Robin Williams. I saw Bert Reynolds give the parking attendant $100. And I thought I was on another planet. I'm like, get the fuck out of here. They should be parking cars. Fuck stand up. Yeah. That was that. And for people who are looking at this picture, that's Richard holding court after his set. Wow. What an amazing photo. But Jamie, we should get some of these photos. And yeah, get some of these photos and let's print them up and put them in the green room at the mothership. I saw it. That's it. He's got the zero signs in the back. Oh yeah. Still. Yeah. I tell you a lot about the history. Search that's selling. That sign used to be Mitzi had this warehouse room. Like was just not a warehouse, but you know, it was a storage room where she had all the old zero stuff. And I remember seeing that sign there and they eventually hung it up in the back bar area. And you just look like, wow, this was this was a mob club in like the fucking 50s. Yeah. That's crazy. I saw a picture you have in the entry of Richard Pryor's mug shot. Yeah. I had never seen that. What did he do? I don't remember. Yeah. I don't remember. He was very young. The mug shot was, I think he was like 18. Yeah. I don't remember what was. I have mug shots from everybody who got arrested. Yeah. I saw Larry King. Larry King was like, bad checks. He was writing bad checks. He had a gambling problem. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Willie Nelson's up there. Yeah. I got everybody up there. There is a book that I have in my garage. And it's the first addition to tell you how much of this kind of stuff existed, but it's all celebrities and their mug shots. So it's a coffee table book of just the mug shots. Oh, I should probably get that book. I bet there's a few in there that I don't have. And I bet there is a second one that they could do. Because the book is only like a half-inch thick. We got a lot of good ones out there, but so many people got arrested. We got David Bowie out there. Of course Morrison, you know, it's like Hendrix. You gotta have that mug shot. That's a classic. Yeah. There was a lot of mug shots. Have you ever taken a mug shot? No, I've never been arrested. You have never been a good boy, believe it or not. Yeah. You know, I mean, we've done things, but not enough to have to take those pictures. Yeah, luckily. But also we live in a different time. You know, in the 1960s and 70s, and those guys are getting arrested, they're getting arrested for like having a joint or something like that. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Richard, I or excuse me, Jimmy, I think he got arrested in Toronto for having heroin on him. I think that's what he got arrested for. I got pulled over and had a joint in my ashtray in 1989. And I was scared to death. And the cop was real nice to me, but he did the corniest thing. He says, get out of the car. And he made me rip up the joint and drop it in the sewer at the curb there. And he says, get your life together. Like, bitch, this is helping me get my life together. It makes me funnier. That's funny. That's hilarious. Good old days, man. I remember you talk about Rodney earlier. Rodney Dangerfield, you know how we love comedy? Comedy will never stop doing it. We'll do it until the wheels follow. And I remember him on stage at the laugh factory near the end of his life. And his wife was in the balcony, giving him lines through a wireless earwig. And if you went up top, you would hear her say, I don't get nervous. I don't get a respect. You know, and first of all, two things, and first of all, it warmed my heart that the woman who loves you is going to help you do what you love. So that made me feel so good. And it was like, I want a woman with that kind of heart, because I know I'm going to want to do it when I'm older. She gave us his notes from one of his tonight show appearances in the framed, uh, in the, on the wall in the green room. It's his handwritten notes and bold. He would like write it in bold with a punchline. It's like sitting there right above the couch. That's cool. Yeah. It was one of the first things, uh, Whitney comics hooked it up. She got it for us from her. She wanted us to have it. Whitney, coming day. I saw Rodney live when I was a security card. I was security guard at Great Woods. Great Woods Center for the performing arts, which was in Mansfield, Massachusetts. Oh, I lived in Boston. Yeah. Me and a bunch of the black belts from this type one, no team that was on got jobs as security guards. And I was 19 and I was backstage and Rodney was walking around with a bathroom on with nothing underneath it. That was when he was going on stage with a bathrobe. He got to such a fuck it point in his life, where he would literally go on stage with nothing but a bathrobe. He would walk out there with a bathrobe and slippers and just fucking murder. I remember being in the, and I wasn't even thinking about doing stand up back then back then I was just fighting and I was a fan of comedy. I was love comedy. Your fighting friends talked to you in the doing stand up, right? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. One of the guys that I trained with my friend Steve. But when I, when I went there, I remember like, like, you want to talk about not giving a fuck. Like this guy really didn't give a fuck. Like he had gotten to a point where he had so much success and so much money. And this is after back to school and all those big movies. And he was still just going out there doing stand up, you smoking weed back there. And he would just would go on stage with a bathrobe on. And I remember thinking that is a wildest shit I've ever seen in my life. I remember as a young man, because I was always, you know, you're fucking 19. You're scared of everything. You're worried about the future. You don't know what, you know, you have no security in your life at all. And here's this guy with, you know, millions of dollars, massive amounts of fame. And he had got to that, I don't give a fuck stage. But he really did. It wasn't faking it. Nobody told me as to go on stage in a bathrobe. I was like, I'll tell you what I want to do. What do you go on stage on a bathroom? You just want to stage the fucking bathrobe. See, you can find some photos of him on stage with a bathrobe on. I know he did it for years. I got in trouble because EZE came on my show in his bathrobe. He was like, you gave it to me. You know, because we give out bathlobes. And so he said, well, fuck it, I'll wear it out there. And he wore it out and had a, he was picking his teeth with a knife. And Paramount was like, oh, man, this is not what we asked him for. Really not what we asked him for. He'll never replace Johnny. Oh, fuck off. But I knew, I knew ridiculous. Hey, I was where I was because I snuck in through syndication, did a first run syndication. I know network wasn't for me. And when Letterman got CBS, I knew I was really in trouble. So I had to figure out an exit plan. But the bottom line is for six years. I did it the way I wanted to do it. And I wouldn't change a thing. Man, to do it for 26 years, I wouldn't trade those the thing about it is man, everybody wanted to be Johnny back then. It was so pretty. Even Letterman. I joked at the end of these, I said, I had a dream. I wanted to be an old white man with a desk. You know, and that was my, I went to the point, Joe, that when I made it, I hired Johnny's architect that built his house to build me a house. I was deep into the shit like that. Well, he was the guy. People don't realize like that was the carrot. That was the thing that they mean Jay Leno and like that famous scene in that movie that talked about it where Jay Leno would hide in the closet to listen to them talk about it because he wanted that spot when Johnny retired. But they wanted Letterman. And it was like this battle between like, but made no sense to me. Like Letterman has the Letterman show. It's fucking you. It's amazing. Why would you want to do anything else? But everybody wanted that tonight, Joe. Absolutely. And when I was a kid, I was a magician. That's how I started. And I read an article that said that Johnny did slide a fan. It was a magician. So to me, that was God speaking to me. You are a magician and you do a talk show and a basement. One day, yeah, one day. Isn't it crazy though that it had to be the tonight show for everybody? It wasn't get your own talk show. Joe, doing stand up, getting that five minutes, having Jim McCallie come see you. I got on. Dina Shore. No, no, my Douglas. And I got on Merv Griffin. Didn't didn't do it for me. I hated Jim McCallie say that tonight show is yours. Yeah. And that crazy. Did you did you work too young? Yes, too young. And it's also like, for me, I didn't understand it. Like I used to like watching when comics were on the tonight show, but it didn't like you remember the night Roseanne came on. Yeah. The best at goddess. Yeah. I was like, oh shit, she's funny. Oh, she was so. She can write. She was so funny. Roseanne was like way ahead of her time. She was so wild. There was no one like her when she came out. Yeah. She's still wild. She comes to the mothership all the time. And as wild as she is, Joe, the night I called her and said, I need to rearrange the show tonight. Her and Tom were coming. And it was I'm Arnold. Yes. And it was the morning that I'd gotten a call from Ervin Magic Johnson that he was HIV positive. So I needed the whole show. And this is how cool she was. She says, give me another date, but I'm still coming because we love Ervin. And they came and stood on the side that night when Ervin came and talked about it. She's cool. She's cool. She's crazy as fuck. Yeah. It's cool. Aren't we all and don't we have to be? You have to be. Yeah. A little bit. We got to be the different kid in the neighborhood. Yeah. If you want to be as good as she was, his people, they don't, you got to go back and watch some of her specials. She was killing in a way that no woman killed like that. It was different. It was like aggressive. It was aggressive and angry. It was, it was, it was, which intense dress. She didn't sell us any sexuality at all. It was just great writing. Just great writing and great performing and a lot of I don't give a fuck. And it was just, oh, do you find any photos of Rodney with a bathrobe on? I mean, yes, but not on stage. No. There's only, yeah, I don't even know if they exist. Well, that, that was, that was a pretty show right there. You think he's not ready, but he's dressed. Yeah. Yeah. Right. But I didn't write it. Look at the phone. Look at the landline. Isn't that crazy? I showed my son one of those. He couldn't believe that to drop dollar nine, it was, and if you missed one of them and fucked it up, you'd have to start from scratch. It was crazy. Yeah. Back in the day. I remember when the, the iPhone first came out and it didn't have actual buttons like a star tag. And I was freaking. It's like, how will I know where the L is? Yeah. I can't feel it. I remember I had a blackberry back then. You couldn't convince me that I needed to get an iPhone. I was like, this is ridiculous. Yeah. I'm not typing on that stupid thing. I don't even know where the buttons are. It's great. You don't, it makes a click sound. That's stupid. Before you know it, we were doing it. We turned off the click and it says a lot about progress. Don't, don't be afraid of change. Well, now I talk to it. Now I hardly ever text. I just say text arsenio, like say, Hey, man, looking forward to seeing you tonight. Bob, Boba. Yeah. And just send it. Yeah. I make most of my text messages. I just talked to my phone. Yeah, pretty much me and Siri. And you can't say the N word to Siri the other now I was right. Oh, she won't fuck with the N word. Because Siri was like Google. She's like, I'm not getting canceled. And Lexa have the whole business. I'm not to get, you know, but I I'm writing a joke. And I said the N word. Of course, I didn't say N word. I said, nag it. And Siri would not write it. And then when I kept saying it, she started writing other things, you know, that started with an N, you know, but they weren't even words. And I'm like, so they got Siri trained. That's a word. She's not getting canceled. Is weird that it took, it wasn't even 10 years. And then everybody just got accustomed to have it a phone with them, all the time. Like there was, think about like the difference between like it was probably like, what is like 97, 98 when everybody had those motor rollers? Right. It was around then, right? Yeah. It was around then like 96, 97. My friends laughed at me. My first phone was in a Halliburton briefcase. And you opened the silver Halliburton briefcase, take the phone out. And the phone was maybe 10 inches, you know, and I had an antenna that screwed on the outside of the briefcase because you had this big possum tail. Yeah. I had one on the roof of my car. Oh, yeah, in 1989. Yeah. Wow. Back then, I couldn't imagine that kids would be watching movies on the phone, right? Playing games, watching movies. And that would be most of their social life was communicating through that thing. Yeah. Remember, there was a time when dude said to each other, yo, he got a strong rap man. His pen pan is crazy. He can get a bit in a second. You know, and you know, and now young men don't know what to fuck to say to a woman leaning against the wall of the club. Now they have dating apps now. Yeah. It was sweeping. Yeah. Crazy. But what I was going to get out like how quickly the culture changed from, let's just say 98 when most a lot of people had a phone, at least half the people had a phone on them. 2008, everybody had a phone. 2018, you'd be crazy to not have a phone. Yeah. 20 years like that. Okay. Now, now hold your thought. Okay. I remember a time when you and I were the only parents that didn't allow cell phones in the hands of our kids. Because I remember my son said, uh, dad, you gotta let me have a phone, you know, and I'm like, I'm not doing it. I'm, until you were a certain age, I set it up and, and I said, does everyone in your class have a phone? And he said, no, two of us don't. Yeah. And I realized you were the other parent that was saying, we're not fucking sure. I gave her a phone that has two numbers on it. It was, there was a weird little cell phone that you get for kids, where she could dial like my phone number or my wife's phone number. It was like, that's it. Those are like, it was like, I forget what it was called. It's like the frog or something like that. Some little cell phone with just for kids. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But you didn't have to worry about the things that kids have to worry about now. Like I was watching this thing about roadblocks. You know, that game that kids like to play that they're getting like predators or on roadblocks and they're trying to pick up kids like child predators. So you have to worry about the games they play. You have to worry about them getting DMed by creeps. You have to worry about so much more access. I went just a phone to call people. That was a time when my kid used to play games with a headset on. And he would play with people you don't know. Just somebody in the world. They would gather. Yeah. And I remember feeling like, this can't be good. Right. You know, because these probably aren't all kids he's playing with. 100%. Yeah. Yeah. Well, when I first started playing video games, you'd have to chat by pulling down a window and you'd have to type in the things that you wanted to say. Yeah. You couldn't talk to people. And then when people started talking to people in video games, I'm like, Oh, well, this is crazy. But then the problem is whenever there's anything the kids are doing, you're going to have some creeps that are targeting kids. And they find where the kids are hanging out with the kids are doing. And then they try to get those kids to meet them somewhere. That's what scary about cell phones and the internet and all that shit is that it's not just a phone. It's a way that you can connect with people. And there's always creeps that are trying to connect with kids. Yeah. I was lucky as a kid because I talk about being a magician and I worked at a magic shop when I was 12 to cash because I couldn't actually have a job. And I remember meeting older magicians. I remember going to people's house to see a new guillotine trick. And my mother and my mother worked two jobs. I was a latchkey kid. I never had any problems. And I never was warned about it. You know, but I was a I could have been a target because yeah, you got lucky. Yeah, I really got lucky because I, you know, when I was writing a book, I'm looking at them saying there was a guy I met who worked until he died for pen and teller. Like, you know, when I was writing a book, I'm looking and I'm saying, there was a guy I met who worked until he died for pen and teller. And this dude, I met him at a magic show in every year when he would come to Cleveland. I would go sit with him. My mother never knew I had this 40 year old friend. You know, weird, right? But he was cool and I got lucky. Yeah. That's the thing about Latchke Kids. I mean, the thing is though, I was watching this, um, this YouTube video where they were talking about kids of our age, you know, our generation, Latchke Kids. They grew up like that are so much more resilient because no problems were solved for you. You had to figure it out on your own. You went out on your own. You were outside with no cell phone communication, no way to call anybody. Right. When you were 10, 11, you're wandering around with your friends. It's like, it was a different world. You had to figure life out in a way that like helicopter parenting and parents that are like tracking their kids. You know, like a lot of parents, like they're tracking their kids on their phone. You know, whether you said you were a Debbie's house, you're not a Debbie's house. Where are you right now? Like everyone is like looking out for their kids. Maybe a little too much. It's like you want your children to be safe, but you also want them to have like a little bit of freedom to figure out who the fuck they are. Yeah. Hi. Guys, as a kid, when I would tell my mother, I'm spending the night at Kenny's house. I was never at Kenny's house. You know, my girl when I was 14, had a mom who was a nurse that worked the 11 to 7 ship. So we kind of lived together like a couple. You know, I would tell my mother I'm going one place. I'd go to Robin's house. I would stay at her house till morning when I went home to get ready for school. You know, I was like a grown ass man. Well, that's wild. Until one day her parents had the grandparents come to town and surprise her. And so it's the moms that work. There's a knock at the door. And she said, it's my grandmother. We had little peep holes. So my grandmother, my grandfather, and I had to jump with my clothes off their balcony. That was my action advantage to these periods. Yeah, it's a different world. I don't know if it's better or worse, but I think it definitely made you more resilient. And that was this argument that they were making in this YouTube video, that that generation is the most emotionally resilient. And that this generation coming up is like the least emotionally resilient. That's why they're always looking for things that are, you know, problems. They're always looking for things that bother them, things that cause them anxiety. They're always looking for things that, you know, they can't tolerate. Where's my bike helmet? You know, I always have a car. It was a station wagon and the back seat you sit facing the opposite way. No seat belts. They had to be dangerous. It's all dangerous. Those cars were dangerous. They could barely stop. They had drum breaks. You ever drive like an old, I have old cars, but I have what they call restomods. Where they take an old car, but they put like modern suspension, modern breaks, modern steering handles like a new car. But they have all the outside of an old car. And then the dashboard of an old car and all this stuff. That's what I like. If you drive a real, like if you just try to drive a 1968 Camaro, you're like, what is this piece of shit? Like they can't break. You can't go around a corner. There's no traction. What was your first car? At a 1973 Chabelle. I had a cutlass. Oh, it was mad. A cutlass once. Yeah, at a 70, a 70 cutlass. Those are great cars. God, they knew how to make a beautiful car back then. You like muscle car. Yeah. I love that well, when I was in high school, like those were the, so I was in high school in the 1980s. I went to, I was a freshman in 1981. I had four kids in the 1980s. I'm my old. And in those days, those cars were the cars that we all like looked at. Like you couldn't believe when someone had it. I remember I have a 1970 Chabelle that I got to this day. I have it because when I was like 17, my friend picked me up in a 1970 Chabelle with his buddy and it was perfect. It was a perfect car. I couldn't believe this guy had it. Like how do you have this? And when you say perfect to non car people like me, what does that mean? Oh, first of all, it was what you would call cherry, meaning there was no dense, no scratches, perfect paint. It was beautiful. The sound it made when he pulled up, I couldn't, but I think I was 16, because I don't think I had a license yet. And I remember getting in the backseat of the car going, how does this guy have this car? This is crazy. It's just, you know what a 1970 Chabelle looks like? Absolutely. With the white stripes black, with the white stripes, that was it. I have that exact car right now. I love it. Whenever I get in, I think about when I was 16, I think about all those years ago when Bert Reynolds drove up. Those pictures we just looked at when he drove up. He had what was called a transam. Yes. And it had a big eagle on the. Yes. Smoking the bandicard. Almost lost my mind. Oh my God. That was the smoking in the bandicard. There was the car that he had in those movies with Sally Fields, $100 tip. And you've been to, you've ever been to J Leno Spot? With the cars? Yeah. I did his show once. I brought my Corvette on. I have a 1965 Corvette. And I brought it to his show. It's a resto mod too. And J drove it around. He's the only person that's ever driven it other than me. And in a hundred. But you go to his place. It's like he has warehouses, not a warehouse. Where there's there's never sells one. He he swears to me. He's never sold a car. So anything he's in the car, he keeps keeps and he recently told me. What? It's someone turn it gold. Fraser Clipper. He's thumbnail. Someone YouTube video. No, go to the other one. The other picture with the real picture. Obviously, click on her. But go to the real picture so you can see what it looks like. Is it? You know what he has now? This kind of cool. He has two tanks. Two army tanks. That's us right there. That's my car. Look at that. See, but that, like you see that modern suspension, modern wheels? Those are exhaust pipes on the side. Yeah. That that car is so fun. Do those things get hot? Yeah. Yeah. You'll fuck your leg up. If you got shorts on, your leg touches it. You're in trouble. The outside part won't because like the outside is like to protect you from the actual exhaust pipes, but underneath it is exhaust pipes. But where Jay's leg is, if he backed up right there, if it was hot, he'd sing to the back of his calves. Joe, he has tanks. Yeah, he has everything. Yes, the king of Jordan gave him a tank. And this motherfucker was riding through Sarah Knokes with the tank. He drives everything he has too. That's the thing about Jay. Yeah. It's kind of nuts. That's a lot of rotation. Well, he crashed one of his motorcycles just a few years ago. Yeah. Fucked himself up. He does a bit about that. He's fucked himself up without a motorcycle. Oh, that was the one time he was climbing up a hill. Yeah. We've done a lot of dates together. We have the same agent, right? And he called us one day and he says, how about you, Jay and Craig killborn? And we call it Kings of Late Night. And so we went out and did like five dates and it was a lot of fun. And me and Jay enjoyed it. So we added 20 more dates to it. And other, that'd be great. He was a great comic in the seven. Yeah, people don't know when I was in college. We would go in the TV lounge and watch Jay Leno. To this day, I remember him saying I was a philosophy major. And so I just got out of college and opened up a little philosophy shop. You know, just to explain what bullshit majors were actually being peddled to. Well, he was the edgy comic in the 1970s. And when he would go on Letterman's show, he was like the edgy guy that was sitting on the couch and be whatever would say, what's your beef? Yeah. And he would always be mad at something. He was like, people don't realize that you'd see him as, but it's again, that carrot, the carrot for him was the tonight show. That was more important to him than anything. And once he got that tonight show, everything else was like, took a backseat, did you do Letterman as a stand up? No. That was my first. That's a classic. That was a great place for comedy. Because Letterman, like, he really loved comics. And he really loved like solid stand up. I'd never like to do and stand up on those talk shows. That was the five minutes? Yeah. So to me, I was a different kind of comedy. My comedy needs some time. I need to cook. You know, I need time to open up ideas. What's like, I got a lettermanship. What? I didn't like TV comedy. It's not my, I was a nightclub comic. That's all I ever wanted to be. I wanted to be a nightclub comic. I like doing comedy for drunk people. Yeah. But when I first saw you, it all wasn't dirty. Some of it was TV stuff. Well, it wasn't necessarily dirty, but it was free. It was like, I was being free. I was doing, think whatever I wanted to talk about. I didn't like the idea of being constrained by any sorts of standards and practices. And like, I'm not interested. I've been not interested in that. I worked on my tonight show set to try to get on the tonight show with Johnny. And the guy would come see me a lot. He would change my jokes that I hate. I hate when they say, yeah, try to try saying vacation instead of gift shop. And I'm like, let me just do my thing. But after a year of him trying to get my set right, he says, you're not a Johnny comic. Oh, God. What a Johnny guy. What does that even mean? But then I got on on a Monday night with Joan, because I guess I was a Joan guy. And then I got to sit with Johnny just as a guest to promote coming to America. So finally full circle from my basement. That's amazing. I watch a lot of his old clips like with Don Rickles and all these. Oh, Don Rickles talking about Snookie, the brother in the band. You know, and he would do a noise of a blow gun. It's like Snookie, you're liking this stuff? You know, and you okay, fuck with that now. No, this so much. It's funny how we've come forward into a new era, but we've gone backwards in certain ways. Yeah. Yeah, you can't joke about certain things anymore. Like I'm scared of death right now, and I must say something that I shouldn't say. And I'm going to be in two. I see vision. I see you. You can't do shit. You can just be mad. I guess. Yeah, let him be mad. Just don't pay attention. That's what I do. I just don't pay attention. Really? Yeah. I just don't read anything about me. You stay away. That's the best way. Are you a comic who when you're on stage, it can be 200 people laughing. But that one person who's not laughing and knows the fuck, how do you know, you can't even enjoy the others. You don't even look at that person. No, those, those people have their own problems. Yeah. And so, but by the way, sometimes they're just not laughers. If that person was sometimes going up to you and say, love what you're doing. Love the new stuff. Some people just like to smile. They don't want to laugh. They just want to sit there and watch or they just want to take it in, taking the performance. Doesn't mean they don't like it. And then some people just are upset by everything. You can't control that. Just control what, what I would, the only thing that bothers me is if I'm off. That's it. If I'm off, if something's right, if I stumble on a word or if I fuck something up, that's the only thing that bothers me. And the audience is like, you can't control that. Why, why I could be upset at things. You can't control because who knows what their trip is? Who knows what their carrying around with them? As a famous star now, do you ever bomb? I have jokes at bomb for sure. New ones. We try out a new one, especially like we do this show called Bottom of the Barrel. And bottom of the barrel at the mothership is there's a whiskey barrel and you reach into the whiskey barrel and you pull out premises. Just ideas. And you just run with it. That's the tonight actually. And so you pull out a piece of paper and you know, have a subject, you know, ice cream, Sunday, whatever, whatever the fuck it is. That takes in test and effort. Oh, a lot of those fucking go nowhere. But some of them don't. Every now and then you get a great premise out of those. And it's like a little premise factory. But the audience knows it though. So it's different than like when they go to see you and they paid money and they're expecting a polish show. And you have a new joke. And the new joke is just not right. It's not ready. Something's missing. You're not finding it. You're trying to work through it. Yeah. So he's going to happen. And if it doesn't happen, you're not taking enough chances. Yeah. See, I'm not as chance to driven issue. I'd be afraid to do that because my feelings get hurt too. Yeah. Well, it's part of the process. Yeah, you're right. You're right. We should do the things we fear. You definitely have to if you want to write new shit, you're going to have to. There's that moment where you're like, do I trot this new one out? Fuck it. Let's go. And you know, a lot of the new ones, the way they come out for me at least first is just a frame. It doesn't have sides. It doesn't have windows. It doesn't have doors. It's just a frame. And I have to figure out how to make a house out of that frame. That's what I loved about going to the original room back in the day when we were young, watching Richard take out a pack of cigarettes, take a cigarette and Mitzi had those smoke things that popped. You could get got smoke and everything. And Richard would have two minutes and then he'd have five. It was just build. Yeah. And it was like a like when grandma used to make a quilt, yeah. It's bigger and bigger. Yeah. You've got an hour. I used to love watching him develop it. I would heard that Richard would go in on a Monday and have a joke that bombed. And then it would be murder and by Saturday. And then that's what he would do. It would just go and figure it out on stage. Damon used to do that a lot. Damon used to go and sit on stage and just sit with a premise. Just sit with it. And he would try it out for like 10 minutes and try to figure and then finally he'd find something and everybody would be dying. We got away from that earlier, but I totally got to point. Damon is one of the great ones. And I hope he continues to do stand up and pop out to the clubs because he's one of the great ones that a lot of people don't realize. They don't realize how great he was when he did the last stand that one HBO special that he did way back in the day is a phenomenal special. It's phenomenal. He was so good. But he wanted to be a movie star. You know, and like Richard, he had an ability to also be vulnerable and tell the truth about something that most of us wouldn't tell. Like he talked about having a club foot as a kid. Yeah. And he he was special and I'm glad he's back out there. Yeah. Well, I think he never really, you know, one of the other things that he did is very unique. Damon brings a camera to all of his shows and he films all of his shows and he archives them. Every set he ever does. Really? Yep. And he goes over it. That's work. It's work because one of the things that he does, like I said, is like he'll take a premise and just try to find for I try to find it on stage. Try to figure out what about it works. What about it pops? Like what is it? And, you know, I guess like doing that with a camera and then you can go home, sit and watch it on the computer and just go, why is in this motherfucker? There's something here. I got to find it and just look at it from every angle. Look at it over here. Look at it over there. Try to do it backwards. Try to figure out what the fuck makes it work. Yeah. And he would just he had no fear of silence. See, that's that's the sentence right there. When it's quiet in the comedy club, I lose my mind. Chris rocked his tattoo. Chris rocked it a lot of that at the comedy store. He would come in and just he would have a material that he was working on. Like one time I remember I bought him up on stage and everyone's going crazy. Chris rocks here. They're cheering, cheering, cheering. And he goes, relax, relax. And then he's going to be that funny. Just let people know I'm working on some new shit. The thing will be that funny. Yeah. But with confidence, like everybody already knew he's funny. They already saw a binger and blacker. They already saw his specials. It was it was bring the pain. Everybody already knew. It was like the one where he shot with three different outfits and three different places. I hated that one. You didn't like that one? No. And then not that I didn't like the material. I didn't like the idea of swapping outfits. The problem with that is you realize he's saying the same thing in all these different places. Don't take away from the, but it takes away from the magic of a performer. I want to see you and I don't want anything to distract me from these. I don't want to say, oh, he just performs this the same way everywhere. I want you to just be saying it. The magic like the trick is you are in the moment with whatever you're talking about. If you're changing outfits and you all of a sudden you're in Johannesburg and now you're in Cleveland, like, uh, don't do that to me. Why are you going to let the jacket on in the beginning? And in the punch line, you got a fucking silk shirt. Uh-uh. Don't do that. See, I saw it as a guy creatively trying to find new horizons, or different things. Summarize and suck. Okay. It's not with the jokes. We're great. It's like he's a great comic. It's not that. It's like I just didn't like the idea of changing outfits. If I was friends with him back then, I would say don't, I don't like it at all. And I would, that would explain. The problem is you're taking people out of the premise and then there's a new additional thing that they have to think of. Oh, there's a different set. Oh, he's wearing different clothes. It's a new thing to distract you from the most, the primary thing. The primary thing is what are you talking about? Yeah. Like what is this thing you're talking about? Let me get inside your head while you explain this thing that's so hilarious. But if you're doing that and changing outfits and changing stages, like, I know you perform in different places. I know you wear different clothes. Don't show me right now. In retrospect, I wonder how he looks at that special. If he, I don't know. I mean, he never did it again. Yeah. It's not like, well, you don't want to do it again. Right. You know, I mean, he did it once you tried it. Different people like to do different things in trial. I just didn't like that for that reason. I felt like it was an added element that took me away from the premise itself. And by the way, something that's come out of this conversation in my head is the guys who are the best seem to go deeper and work the hardest. And we can talk about archiving your practices. Yeah. All of them. Damon has all of them. And he told me this years ago, because I saw him at the improv. He was in the lab. We were in the big room and he was in the lab. This was not that long ago. When I say years ago, like 10, nine years ago, something like that. And I go, you record all of them. He's like, every set since like 1990 something. He goes, I record them all. I got this camera. I take them all. I pull them on my computer. I'm like, whoa, it may be think, fuck, I'm lazy. Yeah. That's exactly what I'm thinking. And I'm also thinking what an amazing documentary. If we could go through the history of Damon's personal archives, that would be a great, I think there's a special there probably. Yeah, probably. But I mean, I think that's just part of his creative process. And again, I just think people don't realize. Especially in the 90s, the early 90s. What a monster he was on stage. Yeah. He was a monster. He was one of the first guys that was like a really famous guy that I saw at the store. I came to the store in 94 and he was one of the first guys were like, Oh, shit, dude, my way is like, it was weird. It was like weird when people would show up like you'd see him in movies and shit. And also in the day in real life, you know, I was just coming from New York. I didn't know anybody. And I was like, this is so strange. I can't believe I'm around these people. So you went from Boston to New York, Boston in New York, catch a rise and start where'd you work out in New York in those days? Well, I did the Boston comedy club that, you know, the little place the Barry cats had. I did the seller. That's a J Moore's manager, right? Yes. I did catch rising star back when that was there. I did. Well, there's a comic strip. Yeah, I did the strip. Yeah. I did the clubs in town. I did danger fields a lot. But honestly, when I lived in New York, I really like doing the road more because when I did the road, I could make money. So like I came up in Boston and in Boston, you made a lot of your money, not in the clubs in town, but you made a lot of your money in like the bar shows, you know, outside of town and the suburbs. And the thing about that is like you could headline. And so you could do 45 minutes or an hour and that that allowed me to grow and like to really become a headliner. Whereas like I found like a lot of the New York comics that I would go on the road with when I would work with them. Even when I was a middle act, they were a headliner. They had like these 10 and 15 minutes sets that stayed stitched together to put to make an hour. Whereas the guys that I work with in Boston, like the big headliners in Boston, they had a real hour. Like that fucking, that was an hour of thunder. You know, they had a beginning, a middle and an end and it was like tight. It was tight. And I felt like I could do sets in New York, but I don't think it's really helping my career. Right. There's no one there to see me. I felt like I'm going to make money. Like I could do a set in New York and I make 25 bucks more. I could do a set in Connecticut and make $250. I was like, I'll go to Connecticut. Plus like the people are more fun. They're more loose. They're a bunch of fucking crazy drunks. I love doing long Island. I love doing New Jersey. I like doing the road more. That's what I liked. I think I'm a product of my childhood environment. I discovered stand up because I was a drummer, had a band. I was a magician, had doves, boxes and shit, and then my house burned down. So I lost, yeah, lost everything. But I had gone to an L green concert and L green had a comic come out. House lights are on. People are still making their way to the seats. And this guy slowly gets him. And then the lights go down. And by the time he gets to 30 minutes, he's killing. And all he had was a glass of juice, something on the stool. And this is a kid who just lost his house and his symbols and his Tom Toms and his doves and his boxes. And I'm like, that's me. Johnny was a stand up. So I'm still dreaming. Wow. And to this day, or even when I start making a lot of money after seeing that guy, I loved opening for people. I went on the road with everybody from Lou Rawls to Patti LaBelle. Still did a stay in the comfortable doing 30 minutes because that's what I did. But I had money. Like I would come to the comedy store and I would have a really nice car. Because I'd spend most of my time on the road with Patrice Russian and Johnny and you get Tom Watson. Oh, wow. That's a different world. Opening from musicians is a different kind of comedy because like they're not there to see you. And that's what I found to be the challenge. It's like I'm going to make you motherfucker who don't know me. And I'm mad because a lot of people look at you like they wanted to temptations. Right. You know, right. Right. I got to get them. And I liked that challenge. It is a real challenge because there's a lot of people like boo. Yeah. Bring on Metallica. Yeah. They they don't want to see you. They want to see the music act. I opened for blood sweat and tears once. Wow. And they really did not want to see me. You think the Johnny guitar Watson audience didn't want to see me. Do my focus for blood sweat and tears. Not fucking with me. Well, it's definitely running with weights on though. If you can make those people laugh, boy, you take those weights off and go to a comedy club with it there to see you. Yeah. It's like, oh, just there to see comedy made it easier. Yeah. I just don't want to perform for people that aren't there to see comedy. But there's a value in it. I think. But that's when you're you're young. Yeah. And I had nice kind of condo. Because I just come off the road with Aritha. Yeah. I did a few of those. I opened up for Bon Jovi once. I opened up for Bon Jovi for VH1. They had a theater in the round show like a performance in the round. My job was to open up for Bon Jovi and then get the pretty girls and move them to the front so that they could be on camera. That's what they told me to do. Yeah. So I did, did some stand up and then I had to get people that come up here, come closer. Yeah. I remember those times being on the road. And if there were six girls in the green room and you're opening for the temptations, number six is yours. Now, the five go first to the temps. Yeah. The, that's a different world opening for musicians. That's a hard world. And I know a lot of people like me to live in just traveling with bands. And that's all they did. They would just open up for bands. Yeah. I would open up for R&B X. And, um, as a matter of fact, I got discovered by a jazz singer, Nancy Wilson, and I used to love jazz audiences because that was the perfect type of music for coming. Because they were mellow. Jazz audience don't scream, get to fuck off. Right. Right. Right. Right. They just, uh, they, they, a lot so Bowden, he does jazz tours still like he'll do like, he'll do like a, a jazz cruise ship. Yeah. You know, like, and he'll do stand up with the jazz audiences. Hey, every year, but he loves jazz. I love jazz too. And I remember going to see the Playboy jazz festival in Bill Cosby was the host at the Hollywood Bowl. I host that every year now. I still love jazz. And I, that's the coolest two days of my summer. What is it about jazz? Like, um, what do you love about the actual, by the way, the coolest experience was sitting on the beach in Malibu with Miles Davis. After he came on the show once, he says, well, did you go to the house? Hang up. And he was a painter. And he was sitting with his trumpet. It was a red trumpet. I had never seen a red trumpet like a crimson trumpet. And it was sitting beside him. And he wouldn't use an easel. He had the canvas on a table that he'd roll a new piece out. And he would paint. You ever thought about paint? No, I'm not a good artist. But being a jazz fan, that was the coolest moment ever. And, um, what do I like about it? I, I almost equate my comedy to jazz because I love to say I'm going in D. You guys and just play, you know, as a stand up, you know, I used to love to equate how I work to jazz. But it takes a very specific type of person to be like a jazz fan that really enjoys listening to jazz. I'm also a musician. And I know that some of the most respected musicians in my mind are jazz musicians, you know, the intricacy, spending time with, I talk about this in the book, spending time with Quincy Jones, who was from the world of jazz and a former trumpet player. And all that stuff, then he ends up the year I meet him. He plays for me these tracks. And I don't know what I'm about to listen to. And he says, you hear that? He takes out slides all the slides, and he says, listen to this. And he plays this thing. I'm like, what is that? He says, you ever heard of Sheila Eman? And I said, yeah, the Escavito family, and I know the family. And he says, she put different amounts of water in little pop bottles. And that's her tinging on those bottles. Then he starts bringing up the pots and you hear the bass and the drums. And you realize you're listening to stuff from off the wall. And it's just this incredible moment when I realize, yo, he get a break, Michael back. In a crazy way, I'm listening to, you know, you got me working, working, being like, you know, and he just take out everything and just have Michael's voice. And I'd never been in a recording studio. And he's at the board, 18 channel tracks studio. And then he says, you're from Ohio, right? And he'd see me do stand up at the rocksie and invited me to a studio. And he says, you're from Ohio, right? And I said, yeah. And so he says, let me play this man. And you have to take big giant reels and put them on this machine. And he put the reels on and the song starts. And he says, this is scratch tracking. I'm like, what's that? He says, that's a demo. And he says, they want me to find a singer for this. And he plays me James Ingram find 100 ways and James Ingram just wants. Brilliant, beautiful songs. And I'm like, what's wrong with that guy? He's like, yeah, I'm thinking about him. And he pretty good. He pretty good. And it ends up being the James Ingram from Ohio. And that was an incredible day. But I tell that story to say this great jazz musician had this talent that other producers didn't have because of his music genius. It's great jazz musician had this talent that other producers didn't have because of his music genius and he was able to bring us the off the wall album and put Michael back into mix. Yeah, layers and layers to the sound. Yeah, that's the thing when you hear a song, you don't realize how much shit is going on in the back. Yeah, Sheila E would pop out. It's easy. I love that day. That's a that's a favorite time because Michael had been missing, you know, and I bought the moving violation album. So I knew he needed Quincy. Wow. Yeah, there's some geniuses of music, man. I had Rick, Rick Rubin on podcast and he's explaining like his creative process and just like that guy's out there. Yeah, I had to go his way when I started the talk show that I took over for Joan Rivers. When I first had the idea that I want to try to find my own friends of this show, I want to find my show and I put on L.O. Cool J doing a song called I'm Bad. And that night I found what I was going to do when I lose. Next I booked the freaks come out at night Houdini. Oh, I remember that. And that was so I found my home. When you did the Joan Rivers thing, did you think that that was going to lead to you doing your own show? Absolutely. You did. I was like, I am because Joan leaves goes through all the stuff she's going through and they give me this show for 11 weeks and it starts to get numbers. And I know that she left because of a lack of numbers. And I'm like, oh, this shit is mine. So when I come back from doing coming to America, I'm going to come back to Fox and do this show. And one day I walk into the cafeteria and I realized they had hired Conan O'Brien to create a show. And I think the show was called The Wilton North Report or something like that. But I realized I wasn't in their future. So paramount, they were popping over to say hi, sending me flowers. And when I finished coming to America, actually halfway through, when you finish, you can do that talk show here in first run syndication. And they had to explain that to me. And at the same time, I was being pitched by the King brothers who created Oprah. So I kind of understood that first run syndication could work except Oprah had ABC networks behind her, which is good. I had some CBS affiliates and it all worked out. Right now with the exception of Byron Allen, I don't think anybody gets rich in first run syndication. Well, he's a very unusual case. You know, yeah, I mean, he's figured out a cheat code like Byron Allen, you know, I heard when they cheat him, he sues them and wins. I think Byron Allen's show comics on Leash is going to replace Colbert. Absolutely. That was just announced this week. Yeah, laid show will be replaced by Byron Allen's comics on Leash. That's crazy. That's how in a weird like late shows just don't work anymore. They just don't have the same thing anymore. Like that standard model show where people like I don't think they do well in their expensive Joe. I could imagine they were saying the Colbert show was costing them like $50 million a year to keep it on the air. That's I don't understand it. Like how? How's it cost you so much money? Oh, guys. Well, but you know what I'm saying? Like you have asked when there were three channels though and only one had a talk show. Everybody was there. Of course. And it made sense. Yeah. It made dollars and cents. There's also the problem that when you compare it to things that are on the internet is that you have to stop conversations every seven minutes for a commercial. That's an issue. It's an issue with depth. You don't get to go like you and I've been talking for two hours and 40 minutes. Wow. Yeah. So like when you're doing this kind of thing, you just flow everything flows. You just have a conversation. It's no good time. It's so different when you're stuck in this format where you only have an hour. Everything is like you got to cut to the commercial in five, four. They'll be right back. Like we'll be right back. Where you going? Stay here. Like no, you have to sell tide. You know, it's like that format is so limited. It's so restrictive that people knowing that that that there's other things out there now where you could just go and watch it anytime you want. You don't have to tune in at 11 p.m. We just have to watch it. We would all gather as a nation to watch the finale of cheers. Yep. And now we don't do anything together. Nope. No, except sports. It's like super bowl. There's only sports live boxing events. You have to see that kind of shit where it's live. That is the only thing that people all watch together. Yeah. That's it. Did you watch Chris Rock live selective outrage? I didn't watch his live special. I watched it after, but I didn't watch it when it was live. So you knew it was available. I was busy. And we grew up. It wasn't a shit was available the second time. But I did a live special on Netflix for that very reason just because I thought it was scary. Just because my last one I did live and I only did live because the first time the asked me I said, no, fuck that. And then I was like, why are you paying such a pussy? And I remember driving home. I had a conversation with my manager and I called her right back. I got let me decide tomorrow. I'm thinking about this. Hold on. Because I was driving home feeling like I was a pussy for not wanting to do it live. And now in retrospect, what did you get out of agreeing to do it live? Fear. You wanted to feel that. Yeah. I wanted to be nervous. I was legitimately nervous. I've never get nervous for shows anymore. When you have a while, I heard you talk about killing a wild hog. When you go hunting like that is the same kind of fear. That's a primal thing. That's very different. That's a very different thing. That's like that's a life or death. That's a weird, that's a weird primal connection with nature where you're going to eat this thing. You're sneaking up on this thing that has these survival instincts and senses. My own ears pop up. And you have, you know, you don't want to fuck it up either. You have one moment to take a shot. That's even more intense. Honestly, like, L. Contenting with a bow and arrow is even more intense than doing a live comedy special. If you could believe it. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. I believe it. I like things that scare me. I like things that are scary to do because I think it's good for you. Except cocaine. I don't want to ruin my life. That's the problem. I just like I said, I don't want to hear any success stories from cocaine. You know, nobody's like, nobody's got like a math story. Yeah. It's like now I start doing math and I start seeing the world for what it really is. Start being more at peace. I was living in the moment. Nobody says right before I invented the hard drive, I did Coke for three days. Right. No. No. I'm not interested in anything. It's going to ruin my life. But I'm interested in things that are going to help me grow and help me expand my capacity to do things that are scary. Would you do stand up live again? 100%. Okay. Yeah. I'm thinking about doing my next one live again too. I liked it. Did you did you make any mistakes that? No. I didn't make any mistakes, but I prepared more than I ever prepared before. One of the things I did, I listened to by recordings every night and I wrote out my act over and over and over and over again. I wrote it out, I wrote it out both on paper, like hand to paper and I wrote it out with keys, like typing it on a laptop. I did it over and over again. I listened to recordings, I watched recordings. I way more preparation than I had ever done before for any other show. The night that you did it, did you change anything or do anything new? No. No. But I was free. I felt very loose. Once the show started, I felt like a regular show. I didn't because I was prepared, but it's like just like a fight. Like if you go into a fight and you're like, oh, shit, I'm more road work. Oh, I should have spard more. Oh, I should hit the paths more. You know, that's not a good place to be to hope that you could pull it off. You have to be 100% prepared. And that's the thing about doing a live show as opposed to usually when I would film a special, I would have four shows. So I'd film all four of them and I'd be like, oh, fine. One of them's going to be great. I'll just use that one. Yeah. But when it's just one and the whole world like millions of people are watching simultaneously, it's very scary. Makes you prepare. Yeah. It makes you prepare. It makes you prepare and it also, it's like it's fucking fun to do something that scares a shit out of you. Like let's go. Where did you shoot? Oh, San Antonio. Okay. Yeah. That's cool. Yeah. You have only done one net. I barely leave Texas this. He's this. I love it here. I love it. I love it. Yeah. It was amazing when you made the move, man, because that's what I asked you when we first started talking. It's like, were you thinking about this in LA? But way back, like 20 years ago, I was thinking 20 years ago about getting out. I moved to Colorado for a little while in 2009. But for me to lead. No, no, no, no, no. I just wanted to get out. I just wanted to try. I, but I went too crazy. I got a house in the mountains that was 8,500 feet above sea level. It was like, it was too much. But when I came back to LA, I always had this thing like, eventually I got to get out of here. First of all, I always thought LA is 100% going to have a massive earthquake one day. Yeah. Like a massive earthquake where everything fucks up and falls apart. You lived through the North Road earthquake. I didn't Oh, I came to California right after it happened. Okay. And when I got there, like parts of like one of the freeways was collapsed on the other one. I was like, this is nuts. The freeways fall down here. This is crazy. So I feel like I've always been thinking that there's going to come a time where that place just breaks off and sinks into the ocean. And it's just not well run. Like the whole thing is like just waiting for one little catastrophe. There's very little coordination. Very little people don't. They don't. There's not like a sense of community in the greater Los Angeles area like you get in a smaller place like Austin. Yeah. Austin like feels like a small town that has everything you want. Whereas LA just feels like a poorly run bureaucracy driven chaotic shill game. It's like just a shell game of bullshit and money and people just grifting and fucking the homeless situations nuts. Like everything's nuts in LA. It's just a beyond fixing, I think. Here in Austin. A lot of homeless? Not nearly as many. I mean, it's a very small problem. You're always going to have homeless people because you're always going to have mental illness. It was going to have drug addiction. You're always going to have some people that have problems. But in comparison, like Skid Row is 50 blocks. Yeah. 50 blocks. Five zero blocks of homeless people just outside just camped out. I left the Laker game recently and went through that area. It's not broke my heart, man. It broke my heart in 2005. I was filming Fear Factor downtown in like 2005. Shout out to David Hurwitz. You know, Dave. Yeah. He was my intern. I set him up for you. I told him something coming. That's crazy. That's crazy. Yeah. We were filming downtown and I went for I was driving home and I took a wrong turn and also nonsense. Skid Row was like, this is crazy. And this was back then and no one was talking about it back then. I was like, that's so many homeless people. It's like a zombie movie. I remember I came to the set the next day. I was like, you guys are for cool. Go this way and take a left. It's fucking nuts. There's so many homeless people. Again, they figured out a way to keep them there. They just pushed people there. Like they started doing it decades ago where they would take all the problem people out of Los Angeles and Beverly Hills and they would just bring it to downtown and go, you got to stay here. And that's what created Skid Row. When we were kids, I used to hear about mental institutions. We don't have that Oh, they shut them down during the Reagan administration. That was one of the giant errors of society when they shut down all the mental health institutions and they just let all these people just exist in the street with schizophrenia and just let them do drugs. And then some places give them drugs and give them needles and encourage them to come there and give them money so they could stay on the street. Austin loves you, but do you ever think about back in the day not leaving California and running for governor? Fuck that. I don't want to get politicians. Why would I want that job? You want to help? You want the problem you see? You want to help? Yeah, you ain't helping nothing man. You're going to get killed. If I my help would be exposed all the fraud and lock everybody up and then they want to kill me, then you'd lose the big money from the rich. And they're not going to give us any anyway. I'm not going to be good at it. I wouldn't be good at the job. I'd be good advisor to tell people what the people want, but no one's going to listen. I think politics we're talking about with money being involved in it. It's almost inexorably unfixable. It's almost impossible to untangle that fucking beive of chaos. This is so much dirty money involved. And if I'm a politician, I'm not going to stop taking this money. I'm not going to be first. If we all go to do some, not going to be first. Exactly. Look at all these congressmen that make you know, $170,000 a year and they're worth 80 million. How the fuck did that happen? What did you do? And how did you, how do you have time to invest? Aren't you busy being a congressperson? How the fuck do you have all that money? You got all that money because you're a grifter. They're all grifting and they're all just like doing it sneaky. It's red and blue. If you look at, we pulled up the numbers of people, whether it's a Democrat or Republican, how many of them inside are trading? It's across the board. They all have just unexplainable amounts of money. It's a dirty fucking business. It's not like one of the parties loves money more than the other. No, they're all, no. See, I get in trouble for that because usually my humor is written around not liking any of them. Yeah. And people want me to take a side. Yeah, that's a problem. I had a joke in my Netflix special about the Democrat versus the Republican that was running at that time. And it was like, that's like asking me who my favorite Menendez brother is. Motherfuckers did not. That's a great joke. Yeah. Like, oh, I'm like, wow. He made it in prison with a two phase. What? Or are they trying to get them out recently? Oh, yeah. That documentary on them was nuts. The docu drama series where they recreated it. Like, oh my God. I love documentaries. Well, that was a docu drama. Like the like the re-career actor. So you don't know how much of it is true. But boy, did they come off like fucking complete psycho. I remember before the OJ Simpson scripted doc, they wanted me to come read for OJ. What? And I'm like, yo, how the fuck are you going to be? I'm just too recognized. Boy is me. Exactly. That wouldn't work at all. That's crazy. They chose kubagurin, Jr. That's right. That's right. He actually did a great job. But that story was nuts. He was the first famous. There it is. Yes. Wow. And that's Kim's dad. Wow. That's Mr. Kardashian. I'm a true voltage in there. Do I forgot your fault? Yeah. It's a thousand fucking so weird. That's the dream team. Famous people pretending to be other famous. Yeah. So I do a story in my book about OJ coming to stage 29 at Paramount to whip my ass one time. But he was angry. And would you say joke on what you're saying? I booked. Um, is when naked gun was out and I booked Leslie Nielsen. And we got a call from OJ's people because he wanted to come on obviously. He was in that movie. But the second one, it had legs. So I booked Priscilla Presley, who was a great guest and a lot of history. And after that, I get a call from the Gators. There were OJ's Simpson here at the great. He wants to talk to you. And he didn't park. He didn't want a space. He parked outside the elephant door stage 29 and wanted me to come out. Uh oh. Yeah. And by the way, this is this is out of time. And we didn't know he cut him off. He had also at a time we didn't know about CTE. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Which is probably a lot of what OJ was going through a lot of that violent behavior. Yes. Probably a lot of CTE. Yeah. I mean, when you think about it, those days in San Francisco, when he couldn't quite cut the way he used to, he was getting hit. He was taking hit on shots. Oh, yeah. And then I fell back. That was nuts. Yeah. I feel bad for him and junior say how. And some of those guys, junior say I was trying to scream to us what was going on. Right. You know, he committed suicide left. No, he didn't damage his brain with the bullet. Right. So they can check it out. But, but OJ stopped by it. And we had a talk. And so he was mad that you didn't have him on the show. Yeah. He was a little man. And but was it your call? Oh, yeah. I mean, I mean, but by the way, it was my call to just do things that would get numbers. Right. You know, well, the, the Leslie Nielsen one, I liked him because I saw him someplace with a little thing in his hand to make fart noises. So I saw that. Yeah. Yeah. So I, so I knew that I would say to him, so you got a big hit here to him. He would do it, squeeze the thing. And yeah, I was just trying to find the funniest guest. And OJ, you know, he told me, he said, so shit about, you know, I thought having a black host days would be different. You know, and I'm like, don't you play the race car. Yeah, settle down. Yeah. Not you, juice. But I, I ran into him in a club one night. I was hanging out with a couple of members of new edition. And we're in this club. And he comes over and he gets drunk with us. And after we're pretty tanked, Nicole and this gorgeous girl named Faye Resnick, I'll never forget her name. She was beautiful. And these two women come over and I realized, Oh, so because OJ is alone, I realized he was going to places, find in her. And so so she comes over and she says, choose, you know, and he's this, hang out with these guys. And he's, you know, when you drunk spit, be flying, I wasn't drunk enough that I didn't see the spit. And so she said, well, I'm going to be over here with Faye and blah, blah, blah, say something before you leave. And so we sit there and talk, but he said something at night that blew me away. We talked about her and he said, I still love her. I've tried to give her up. And I can't Wow. And that's crazy. Too much later. She was dead. That's what that's. That's around the time. Two, I remember missing the show because one thing that's addictive about the talk show is anything in the news, you get to handle it. Right. And I remember watching a basketball game and seeing the freeway chase with the Bronco. And I was like, I want a monologue tomorrow. You know, I could believe I didn't have a show that night. That's the only time I've ever really missed it because most of the time you just go to the store. Right. Right. Right. That's right. I wanted to talk to the nation that night. Well, listen, brother, you had a gigantic impact on culture. You really did. Your show was amazing. You know, you have been an incredible life. And I'm really happy to hear that you're happy now and just enjoying life. You know, and you look fucking fantastic for 70. That's amazing. Thank you, man. I appreciate you inviting me. This is one of those shows. Next time you kind of come to the club. Next time you're into the club. You should let me know the show is a few months. But I came to the club. I look at the mothership behind you, the neon mothership. That was actually before the mothership was made. Oh, yeah, this this was six years old. This sign. This is we got this sign. My friend Brigham got me this when I first moved to Austin. So what did this spaceship mean before there was a club? I'm just UFO fanatic. Okay. I've always been obsessed because that looks like some shit. I went to a parliament funkadilly concept where they landed in some shit like that. And George couldn't you came out and saying one nation under a group? Yeah. I've just always been obsessed. That's all it is. But next time you're in town, you're coming. I promise. Absolutely. All right. I'll come. I won't be in town. I'll figure out a way to hit you and say, Siri, Joe, I'm coming. Let's go now be here. Thanks for doing this, man. Because you're demographic reads. And I know I sold some books today. Yeah, tell everybody to name your book. Oh, we had a long ass meeting about that. Do we call it things and make you go, a life to make you go, do we call it? We didn't know what. And then finally one day we named it our scenario. Perfect. That's it. That's perfect. Yeah. And there's a book on tape for those who don't like to read or you need to book. And you know what? If you open it and you don't want to read it, they're really cool pictures inside. There you go. All right. The art department threw some AI on me. I'm 35. I'm 35 right now. All right. Appreciate your brother. Thank you. Bye, everybody.