Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Podcast by night. All day. Well, what's happening, man? Joe, bro. He is great to meet you as well, Joe. I really, really appreciate you taking me out here. Oh, my pleasure. I've enjoyed your content for quite a while now. So I'll be interested to know when was it that you first started getting interested in what I was doing? What kind of subject was happening? I wish I remembered. So now you followed me for a couple of years. So before the cat for pyramid scans and stuff, like, yeah, I'm into the UFO subject and things like that. But I wasn't sure. Well, it's all the silly shit that I love. Silly and serious at the same time. Ancient civilizations, mysteries, and obviously aliens. Oh, yeah. And it's all cotangent. It all connects together. I think so too. We actually played a clip. We had to the podcast yesterday with Dr. Michael Masters. Love him. Yeah. He was very fun. Very smart guy. Very interesting guy. But we played, we were talking about the, he has a theory that aliens are human beings in the future. Yeah. Very strange theory based on like kind of the anthropological view and the physiology and how that might have happened over time. And there's also what was the model? There's the many worlds theory. And then what was his model? There's a different one that the concept is you could, if you lived in the future, you could go back in time. And it would not affect the future. Because everything that's supposed to happen has already happened. And you were supposed to go back anyway. Interesting. Okay. I was, I try to get my head. But anyway, during that time, I asked him about the trideactal mummies. And then we played your group. Oh, okay. Yeah. We played the clip to show it all the scans. We talked about Jesse Michaels and how he went down to Peru and actually touched those things. And was there with them? It helps to real it was. Yeah. I was in Peru recently not to go and see the Nascar mummies. I wish I could have seen them. I was out there to look all the megalithics studies and the excavations going on at Saxo-Wamann, which is an incredible megalithic site in Cusco. But the Nascar mummies, I mean, what's interesting about it is that obviously you're going to have a big knee-jug reaction to something that's so incredibly profound as the idea of these being non-human intelligences that are mummified. But when you actually look at the CT scans and the X-rays, you start to realize that this can't be fake. You can't fake bone cartilage. You can't fake capillaries and heart valves and a fetus inside the body. So it's so nice. Dude, it's crazy. Some of them have eggs inside them. Some of them have fetuses. Like it looks like eggs are big. They're like eggs inside them. That means you're a small beast. These ones are meant to be like the little 60 centimeter beings with like three eggs inside. And then you've got the big one, Montserrat, which has an actual fetus, like a baby, not in an egg. So it's like, if these are all real, it does feel like there was some sort of genetic experimentation going on with it is churning out prototypes or some form. Do you think that's it or do you think that there used to be another type of lack of a better word to try to make? Well, the thing is was that a primate? I mean, what is that? I mean, some of them, their leaning more towards like reptilian anthropod kind of lineage. So like the bigger ones seem to be more mammalian, whereas the smaller ones with the eggs are sharing reptilian traits. So it's like there are all these different variations with these different bodies, different kind of like physiological characteristics, which is why it's like, OK, well, is this one lineage or is this just someone kind of like tweaking or well, that one failed? That one's not working. This one grew wings or I fucked that one off. Like, you know, it's just we as that. So your thought is that these are the products of experiments. I mean, if you look at Jesse, when Jesse Michaels did his documentary, one thing he mentioned, I can't remember where he got this from, but he was saying that the original translation of the area of Nazca from the original language was like the area of experiments and genetic cloning. It was like a really strange definition for the actual area that kind of says experimentation and genetic modification. I can't remember the exact quote, but this was something that he brought up in the documentary. I was like, OK, then you have all of these various different examples. I asked you. Yeah, who said that? Who called it that? So Jesse, when Jesse Michaels put out his documentary, there was just a scene in it. Now my memory is failing me a little bit, but there's a scene anywhere he was talking about the Nazca region. And he said that the original in the original language, this translates roughly to the area of experimentation and genetics of some form. But how do they know what the real terms I agree? I agree. But it's just a weird little caveat that he brought up in the documentary. I'm not quite, he'd probably be rolling his eyes me now. I do. I actually fucking know exactly what this is. Make you look like an idiot butcher in it. Yeah, I'm butchering it, but I do that all the time for sure. But just the fact that these things exist and they exist in an area of the world, which is full of mystery. The megalithic sides around there, like I said, that's what I was out there for, to see these different megalithic sides and the Nazca lines and you know, Saxe-Womann and in the sacred valley, you just have like incredibly complex architecture. You know, Rose Court, Granite, Diorite, and the site, these incredibly hard stones like in Egypt. But honestly, I find Peru even more baffling than Egypt with the architecture, because of just the level of interlocking precision that you see and the fact that it looks like they've softened the stone in Saxe-Womann, it looks like marshmallows that will squish together. And it just invokes a lot of different theories from people about how they were actually manipulating the stone. Yeah, because it doesn't seem like it was just carved. No. Like it does seem like there's some areas where chunks have been removed from the quarries. But when they're all pieced together, when you see those weird curvatures to it, it's like, well, we guys do it in perfect precision. Perfect precision. Sometimes you'll see like these corners where just a tiny bit of stone is jotting up and then the other two are connecting into it. So this is such a ridiculous level of complexity for an apparent 600 year ago Bronze Age, bronze chisels and stone hammer tool wielding civilization. And also in Peru is what I find very interesting is you've got a brilliant visual contrast to use when you look at what is the Inca work, which is the rough cut stone, the mortar brick using walls. This is all present in Peru next to the megalithic sites. And the mainstream will attribute all of this to the Inca of 600 years ago. But you'll see that the stone walls at a rough cut and use cement and more to they're still standing there pretty pristine. They're looking good. Next to megalithic multi-ton slabs of granite that are broken to pieces and strewn across the hillside. So it just looks like there was a lot of desolation potentially geological trauma in this area. And then these people, the Inca discovered these sites, built around them. You can see in like the cracks and corners of all these megalithic, so there's like stone walls that they've tried to kind of, you know, reinforce. It's very visually obvious actually when you go out to these places. Isn't it fascinating that people aren't willing to consider the possibility that this is from an older time? Like that it's heresy. It's just such a knee jerk reaction, man. Like I think at the end of the day, we're still using models from like 1800s explorers, right? Like we've moved forward. There's a lot of contradicting evidence and data in a lot of these countries, whether it be, you know, go back to Tech Bay and Turkey or the potential infrastructure below the Giza Plateau. And then the incredible megalithic in Peru, like Saxa Woman, it just feels like what we're doing is rehashing the same status quo or the doxy, and it's coming up against ever piling higher mounts in a evidence. And one of the cool things that I got to do out in Peru was go to Saxa Woman where they've got current archaeological digs going on through the Chincana project, which is an archaeological team out there and they're doing digs. And they have actually discovered below like 10 meters down into the ground, precision carved blocks of stone that are coming out of the earth. And this is where in this region in Cusco, the Andean legends are that there is a vast labyrinth below ground connecting Cusco to Saxa Woman, connecting Saxa Woman to the sacred valley, all spreading out across the Andean Mountains range. And this is like an old legend. This is what the shamans and the sacred keepers of knowledge would say in Peru. We're finding evidence for it. We're literally going on the ground now and seeing that there are actually really precise elements of infrastructure below Saxa Woman. And they're just beginning to uncover this. I was one of the first to go down there and actually see these blocks myself. And it's just like, this is happening now. We're actually getting to a place where we can start to validate some of these forgotten myths and folklore or if you want to call them conspiracies or pseudoscience from the archaeological side of things. It's being evidence now. That's mad. So these tunnels and cattle, what is exactly the structure that's supposed to be down there and what have they discovered? So it's supposed to be called the Chincana, the labyrinth. And there's a few different Chincana entrances around the region. How big is it supposed to be? Vast multiple kilometers. It's stretching from down Saxa Woman down into Cusco and then off into the Andean Mountains range to the sacred valley. So it's very similar to some of the stuff that they found in Egypt. Yes. Yes. Yes. And then what's interesting is you have the same hallmarks and signatures that you see in Egypt. So you see the stone knobs, you know these little protrusions again? I'm addicted to those man because they are all over the world. Do you have any theories? I mean, I've listened to a lot of theories. I certainly think that the we should show an image of it. Yeah. Stone what we're talking about. Stone knobs. All of these incredible massive stones that have been somehow or another moved from a quarry, sometimes that were hundreds of miles away. They all these weird knobs on them. And no one knows what they are. There's a bunch of theories like maybe they help them move. Yeah, there we go. You see them all over the place. And no one quite knows. You see them in India. You see them in Egypt. You see them in Peru. This is in Ollington Tambo in the Sacred Valley. This is one of the things that's so infuriating about people that are arrogant about gatekeeping information and being the only ones that are allowed to distribute the truth. Right. They're quotes. Right. We're missing so much. There's no way you really know. Huge gaps of knowledge. We're missing so much. And more time goes on is Grand Hock. Grand Hancock always says, shit just keeps getting older. And now they just push back the use of fire by 300,000 plus years. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. It just keeps going. It's not going forward. No. It's going backwards or but an anatomically modern humans. I think have got much further back now in time. We're looking at 800,000 years. Plus. Plus. Plus. Yeah. Possibly even a million. Right. This is what weirds me about these creatures. Like human beings have gotten to the point multiple times where we're almost extinct. The Toba volcano. I think we got down to God. Was it 7,000 people? Does that like the low estimate? Yeah. Yeah. It's a crazy story. Like Super volcanoes are unbelievably devastating to just all life. You know, because it just changes the temperature of the earth, the entire surface, whatever doesn't get blasted out of the ground actual volcano itself. All the other stuff on the other side of the world gets fucked. Like it's just ruins everything. We got down to like a few thousand people. And then there was another time where one of these guys can't kind of forget who that was as well. We were talking about the reality of glaciation and about what happens during ice ages and how devastating you can be. And they were saying that we had gotten at least multiple times in the history of the earth to the point where it was incapable of sustaining life. Well, within a few, you know, like whatever parts per million of carbon dioxide or necessary to support plant life, we literally got to the part where there was almost impossible to support life. And then every bounded and everything's fine. So there's so much we don't know. Absolutely. So crazy to try to pretend you know that people 600 years ago make this because we know people 600 years ago live there. We have a lot of archaeological evidence and we have, but you have weird structures on top of obviously much more intricate and complex structures. Yeah. And again, they share the same signatures as places like in Egypt. If you think you're a cook. Yeah, they do. It's just a knee-jerk reaction. It's again, it's adherence to a status quo. And you know, you get channeled through a very kind of fine wall in academia. And I think that it can be a real detriment actually to opening up your ideas and being a little bit more expansive with what could be possible. Because you do get put into a very restrictive format in the traditional academic sense. And then obviously you have, you know, the pressures of funding and things like this. And it's not going to get the funding if you're talking about this crazy shit. And it's just like a self fulfilling censoring, you know, but it's really the rise of alternative media. We're changing the game a bit because you can actually put a voice out there. You can put an idea out there. It's not completely stonewalled by the academic circle. They can't actually prevent people from discussing these ideas in an open media format like this. Right. And if you put a video like you did on X on YouTube, people can like, like the video that you did on the aliens, whatever they are, whatever they are. People can see the CTs exactly. You see the CT scans and you automatically go, wait a minute, this is 1200 years old. Yeah, you're telling me someone fake this 1200 years ago. Like I don't think they can fake that now. You don't like it. I don't think they can Hollywood special effects guys. But then the composition of the actual, the bones like, like, calculating what's the tissue and how would you fake that circling back? I had to just see to ask him for his some insight on what you asked. Yeah. Yeah. So what he sent me was a screenshot of a book where he got it from. Thanks for this. Translate. Translation here shows science of insemination. Yeah, Jimana. I guess the local word. It's a little forward for what that area is called right. Right. Right. Right. This is a book he found from that area I think in that says, yeah, laboratory of insemination and cloning. What I'm saying, look at all these terms. Yeah. They use, you ma is semen. You may be able to verb to disseminate. You image the science of insemination. You mopage wise inseminator. You ma, sion or clone. This is what I'm saying, bro. You may to clone. You ma, the science of cloning. And you mopage wise cloner. So basically, that like man, you know, it's there. It's, um, it's interesting. And then obviously, go back to that, please. You get alongside this kind of description. You have these bodies. You have this. Provisis. Look at that. Yeah. Like this would do, this was like one little 10 second clip in his documentary. It just made me perk up like, wait a minute. What the name of the place is like a laboratory of insemination and cloning and then getting a smorgasbord of different beings coming out of this area, right? Like, Jesse does add, I think he's speculating somewhat on the etymology, not definitive, but of course, right. Right. Right. But yeah, I mean, it's there. And it's just he's better at this than me. I'm like, please, it's done. It's subtle. It's there. Wow, but it is interesting. Not it is interesting. And I think it does, you know, leads into what was happening on his planet a long time ago. It doesn't, it leads, like my point was when I was getting to the whole super volcano thing. Yeah, yeah. What if something happened that wiped that species out? Right. Like clearly there's no more Neanderthals, right? We, whatever happened, whether it was us or disease or whatever killed them off, they don't exist anymore. We only have evidence of people that are bred with them. What is that thing? Is that thing maybe one of us like another kind of human look, look, another kind of primate, you know, look how different we are than reasus monkeys, right? Like they were all primates, were so fucking different. Why would we assume that the ones that we found so far, including like, would they find Denisovans like 15 years ago? Right, right. And then homo, Julianne, what was that one? That was just a few years ago? Like they keep finding these new versions of people, not new, obviously, but long extinct versions of people. I think it's possible. And I also think that there's a, you know, potential, what if, what if a particular sub route species of homo and it decided to opt in for subterranean living and they escaped a lot of the surface world traumas and we're actually able to kind of maintain their society. I mean, look at all of the weird evidence we have for these vast underground cities that are in cool. You would love to go there. My god, what a much more steady just released a video on it. It's bananas. Much in renovating your house and fucking finding that renovating your house and finding there's a room for 20,000 people under your house. Would you say anything? I don't know. I don't think about where I live. That's not where I live. You live in a place where the government just come and take your house. I would say if I was in America, but if you was in America, what if I really like my house and now my house is connected to this. Well, it's hard to say. But in our, we all just want to come like get out of my yard. Exactly. Exactly. But like, yeah, I think about this. And I think about all of these different good, good. No, I'm happy to hear that. I'm happy to hear that. Fuck it around. I'm happy to hear that. But it's some, it's interesting. And then you have, you know, the strange stories, like from the Hopi tribe, about the hands people that came during a time of cataclysm and they brought them underground and then they brought them back up. And there's a few like that. There was a really interesting podcast. It was years ago. I remember seeing this where they'd brought these two Amazonian shamans on the podcast, like full headdress. They spoke their own tribal language. They needed an interpreter in the room. And the guy asked them what they thought about aliens. And they didn't understand the question, didn't know what he meant by alien. He was like thumping through this book and he put up a picture of a gray. And the tribes went, oh, that's Makunwabu. That's Makunwabu. And they had a whole story about how this was a human that became an ant that lives underground. And it can appear in the divine light. But you should be very careful with this being because it will take your soul underground. And you need a very good shaman to bring your soul back. And they were taking it real seriously. Like, yeah, yeah, do you? These tribal cultures, they know, man. They fucking know. Well, I think there's an ancient memory in people. I think it's one of the reasons why these post-apocalypse movies are so popular. There's a lot of post-apocalypse movies where, you know, people, they figure out how to make houses out of wood again. They're surviving. They make little encampments and they fight off the intruders from the outside. You know, real like walking dead type shit with no zombies. Yeah, yeah. I think there's a memory in us of the surviving humans. I think there's a memory. And I think we probably have been through some terrible moments in the Earth's history where there was an enormous disaster. And we are the ancestors of survivors. And I don't think there was a lot of survivors. No. In fact, I heard you talking about that the other day were you were saying about like the, and it's something I agree with, the necessity for post-cataclysm, post-apocalypse, the strong men would inherit the Earth, you know, monsters would inherit the Earth, right? And so if you, if we really were a hyper advanced at landean type civilization prior to this, maybe even more matriarchal than patriarchal, it would make sense that when things fall apart, obviously, and now you need to survive in the wild, the strong men and the, you know, savage guys would inherit the Earth because they would be the ones who would be able to, you know, push through that type of environment. And then if that is the case and you fast forward to where we are now, look at our incredibly competitive hyper kind of aggressive culture that we have, it would make sense that this was formed through the seeds of trauma and through the seeds of having to fight for survival and, you know, recovering what was lost. Yes. Which also makes sense why the past, the further you go back, the more barbaric these people are. You're dealing, and you're like, well, it took a while for people to learn maybe, but maybe, you know, you're dealing with people that had to, they probably had to cannibalize. I mean, they probably had to eat everything they could. There was only a few thousand of them left. And if we really got hit by asteroids, like the younger drives is correct, it makes sense that it would take like 5,000 years for civilization to emerge again. Yeah. Yeah. Because that seems to be what happened. It seems to be like you have literally the scragliest survivors and then eventually the Earth gets back to normal, but even then it takes thousands of years for people to just have a semblance of what we're experiencing today in terms of civilization. And that's why prehistory is so fascinating and the neolithic in the Stone Age because, okay, so this is a time when we were just the ASIC hunter-gatherers. We had no, you know, intelligence, no language, no real understanding of the world. According to the mainstream, but this is where you have multi-ton geodetically aligned solar equinoxine and, what's the lunar alignment? I'm completely just blind just because I'm a little bit nervous of being on the Earth. Like, you know, like equinox alignment and like alignments to the sun and the moon, mathematically geodetically aligned to what look like toleric currents, like electromagnetic flows beneath the ground. A lot of these stone hinges and dolphins are placed on places where you have strong electromagnetic concentrations. And just the the package of mathematics and engineering and stone crafting and the knowledge of the sun and the stars and your placement on the planet to create things like, you know, stone hinge and these other areas in the world, how can you do that if you just want to gather as coming out of, you know, animalistic behavior? It doesn't make any sense. And then we kind of regress as we go into history and, you know, the stone work becomes less impressive that things become less accurate. And I find that very interesting. How is it at the beginnings of our history? Some of the most impressive structures exist? Exactly. It doesn't make any sense. No. It just eats up along with the conventional timeline of 2500 BC for the Great Pyramid. It doesn't make any sense. No, it doesn't. I think that they most likely settled around those pyramids. Most likely settled around them. And you know, the scans, if these can be validated fully and empirically with digs and confirmation physically, then that changes everything. It changes everything you're seeing a lot of people spazz out online. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Wonderful. It's been wonderful to watch because when people aren't at pressure, the real character gets right. Right. Right. Right. They're under a lot of pressure right now because those scans that radio tomography or whatever the fuck it is. In thothic aperture radar. It's super accurate with stuff that we know exists. Yes. That's what's a real problem for these people. You want to believe it exists when it can map out all these chambers in the pyramid. You want to believe it exists when it can map out things that we know that exist 50 feet underground. You want to map your cool with that? Yeah. But one kilometer of a subterranean. Oh, no, no, no, no, multiple scans from like over 200. Yes. It's all the same message. They're getting the same message. They're pillars enormous pillars. They have coils around them. What pillars with coils? All of them have coils. Yeah, do you? And the whole structure is like almost two kilometers deep into the earth. It's obscene. It's obscene. Like laterally as well like two kilometers of infrastructure. It's like the whole underground. Explain. Help me out. Exactly. Copper tools help me out. And that was my frustration when it first came out because when it came out, obviously, I did some research into the people involved in the Caffra pyramid team. I found Felipe beyond day. I found his harmonic SAR website where it has listed the things like the Mosul Dam in Iraq and the Grand Sasso Laboratory in Italy places that they'd actually done scans prior to even the Great Pyramid, which was peer reviewed. A 2020 scan of the Great Pyramid was a peer reviewed paper. And then you fast forward to now where they've got these ones and you have people like, you know, flint devil on peers more than going, it's bullshit. It's pseudo science. It's never been done before. It's never been tested. It's like, it has been done. It has been tested. It's actually got a pattern. It's been peer reviewed in a paper. Military applications and Felipe beyond day, he works for Italian government. Like he's not some idiot. He's a very, very intelligent man. And he can speak on the science of this like, you know, articulately. So it works on top secret projects. Yes, you know, I don't know if you call it like that little scene in Jesse's way. He didn't even say a fucking word. He was not. Can you talk about that? It just looks at him. Not a word. Okay. We'll just figure that out. That's when you know, man. That's what you know. But I mean, whatever this is, everyone should be fascinated. You should be dismissing this. If that's not even your field of expertise, it just shows what kind of a fucking weirdo you are. Like what you should be doing is going, okay, how many scans do you have? Yeah. You have 200 scans of this? Show me more. Show me more. Tell me what's going on. We should probably figure out what that is. If imagine if the pyramids didn't exist or imagine if it's like, you know, the Sphinx at one point in time was mostly covered with sand. Let's just imagine some crazy scenario where the entire pyramid structure is covered in sand and nobody knows it exists. And then someone comes along and does a scan of the surface, the ground. It says, you're not going to fucking believe this. But this is a shit under that. Now, what if everybody says that's ridiculous. That's preposterous. And they don't look exactly. And they don't look. We never find the thing that we all agree exists because you can go there. You could visit right. It's there. Right. If that didn't exist, you'd never fucking believe in a million years. There's a structure with 2 million, 300,000 stones that's perfectly aligned to true north, south, east and west. And you're dating it to somewhere around 4,000. I mean, that sounds like some pseudo science conspiracy talk to major sounds like. Why is it more cookie to say these people not only were this advanced, they were even more advanced. Way more. They were down into the ground, two kilometers. It might have been a power station. Well, you know, Felipeau thinks that he seems to think that the spirals might have actually been tied to hydrology and using mechanical stress and the pyzoelectric materials used in the Great Pyramid and the plateau itself because what you have is a very interesting coupling between limestone and rose granite. So limestone is a very good amplifier of acoustics. And rose granite becomes electrical, pyzoelectric under mechanical stress and acoustics are a form of mechanical stress. So there's like certainly something to be said about the fact that the pyramids are acoustically tuned, like they're incredible inside the acoustics. And they've done lots of measurements and experiments on validating that that it almost seems to go up in a perfect scale up to the Kings Chamber. And then the Kings Chamber itself, I believe, is focused around 110 to 115 Hertz, which is interesting for neurological reasons in terms of influencing the brain. But on top of that, you have, again, this incredible coupling between limestone and rose quartz granite where under the right conditions, you absolutely could get energetic responses from that. But as well as this, you have the hydrological knowledge, which is really quite impressive. And when you look at places like the Assyrian in Abidos, which is a kind of sunken down temple, we call everything a temple or a sacred site, but we really don't know, do we? We could be functional sites could be a power plant or some form that you said. And the Assyrian in Abidos, next week you have the Seti the First Temple, which is incredible. It's beautiful and full of calligraphy and hieroglyphics. And then you have this bare faceless megalithic place called the Abid, the Assyrian, which is sunken down into the ground perpetually filled with water. So they've tried to pump it out and it just fills back up again because it's connected down into the water table. And there's all these different shafts and hydrological kind of components in this site that they don't understand the full function of. And then you look at places like the Great Pyramid where you go down to the bottom of the Great Pyramid you have like the kind of core. And this whole area looks like it's been water eroded as if it was flooded out repeatedly and uses some sort of like a pump or some sort of like sequencing area where you push water in and then let it out, push water in and let it out. And so Felipe thinks that maybe these spirals bringing water up. And if you're 1000 meters down, you're tapping into like ancient aquifers. So you could be drawing up a really impressive amount of like ancient ancient water. And I just wonder if saying with Peru, it's something incredibly important about accessing this kind of water at the real depths of the earth and they seem to have a real interest in doing that. So perhaps the pyramids are in some way like I mean if these spirals are real it's like a plug isn't it? It's like plugged into the earth connected down into these aquifers. Perhaps it was utilizing water as an energetic medium through the materials. I would recommend to anybody to check out Christopher Duns. Oh fantastic. I had him on the podcast and he explained to us his theory. He's an engineer. Yeah. And he started studying the structure of the pyramid and his conclusion was the entire thing was probably used to generate energy. And it's like what? But when he breaks it down in terms of I'll butcher the math if I even try but in terms of the dimensions it's made. And the fact that you could have something that was down in the basement that was somehow another creating a resonance. Right. Right. That would have this effect, the shafts that go out straight out into space and the fact that there's evidence that they would possibly use these shafts to pour chemicals in and it would create gases and They go out straight out into space and the fact that there's evidence that they would possibly use these shafts to pour chemicals in and it would create gases and Well, this is pretty nice. It is nuts But you know, I was when I was not the last time I was on Egypt But the time before then I was out there with a guy called Jeffrey Drum He's got a YouTube channel called the Land of Chem and he's all about this in terms of the chemical mass manufacturing that he believes was going on in the pyramids and these other areas and and We filmed all of the all of the coverage of that if anyone wants to go and see it on our YouTube channel Taking us through areas in the Giza Plateau where you have an incredible concentration on the Giza Plateau of iron veins and They all seem to be emanating from the pyramids So if you go around the pyramids you'll see these iron vein networks sort of flowing out from the central point and these iron veins are heading down Into what are called these boat pits when you say iron veins like iron ore iron ore Yeah, it's it it's on the surface It's deep in the ground. I mean there's some on the surface So you can actually see the snaking kind of veins of iron that's kind of rusted out and oxidized and you can you can make it out But surely it must be deeper as well But it seems to be stretching out from the pyramids down into these emanating from the pyramids So his theory is that they built the pyramid Yeah, yeah his theory is that they built the pyramids on top of these iron veins particularly because this place was getting lightning strikes Frequently, oh you see you. Yeah. No. I know. I know. It's a giant lightning rod dude I mean these things are built in a way and they were gold capped at one point right and gold is a really good conductor Doctor of electricity Electronics and the Giza Plateau is covered in these conductive iron vein networks Which the pyramids do seem to be built upon now. This is you know his personal theory But you know he's an American he's been living out in Cairo now for about six or seven years I believe he's been just decided to up and move out there and dedicate his life to exploring these places and So he took us across a you know all of these amazing areas and showed us things I'd never seen before in Egypt But his theory on the on the pyramid is similar to Christopher Dunne in terms of some form of chemical manufacturing taking place and if you know The original name for Egypt was chemet That's why this guy's got his YouTube channel the land of chem chemet is the beginning of chemistry and alchemy So this is one of the root words where we then got chemistry and alchemy from so it is the land of chemistry and alchemy and that's But there you go Is this oh? This is one of his videos. This is the iron ore so these are the yeah I believe he's probably highlighting the iron veins and these iron veins head out into what are called a boat pit Which they believed in the mainstream? Interpretation we're freaking me out with the land of chem that that is crazy But when did they name that I don't know when it was named that but it was originally referenced as chemet in some of the ancient Greek and You know there's there's there's reference to it being called chemet kh emet And it really means the same thing. It's what people believe is Continuation of alchemy and chemistry because you get so much alchemy from Egypt and obviously this is the place where you get her Me's Trismadjustice and hermeticism and the Philosopher stone kind of leaks out from these types of areas So I think that there is a lot to suggest this plus we actually know in the mainstream that they were incredible chemists like regardless of you know Exotic forms of chemistry that we know they were using acids and nature on barfs and things like this like the Egyptians knew what they were doing Even from the perspective that we understand regardless of getting a little bit deeper into it Right and you're talking about Egyptians like Cleopatra time right so like we know that they were doing it Historically exactly yeah, that's that's why it's so strange like if this structure is proved to be real if they start an excavation and they They have irrefutable proof like without a doubt. There's some manmade structures that are beyond description underneath the ground What happens now like what does everybody do like what do all these dorks that think that that's a tomb? What do you do to all those dorks that think like it makes sense that they built that it was a national pastime It's a national project Come on bro. Yeah, you settle the fucking out. I think at that point you have you have to why I think the pyramids uniquely stand as a can intelligence test because They are so crazy when you have stones that are so large that are taken from quarries hundreds of miles away a lot of these people Supposedly didn't even have the wheel So what is this? What you don't think this is crazy like this isn't this isn't like oh We know they use the wood from these trees to build these homes. This is bananas Hold up a level this is something that would take us hundreds of years today to build and One of the things that is said so much But I guess it's kind of shrugged off just because it said so much But it's actually a really important important point to highlight There are no fucking hieroglyphs in the pyramids not one there's not a single symbol not a single element of what we would understand to be dynastic Egypt and and so like you have this incredible Contradiction when you go to places like the Valley of the Kings and the Valley of the Queens Gold and you know it's adorned in patterns you can't see a square inch of stone where there isn't something filled to Venerate these people and yet the pyramids are bare Bear and you know when you go inside of you can go to Egypt. You're gonna go eventually Yeah, yeah, when you when you go inside them it just feels mechanical it feels functional. It's you know big Porte Coluses of rose granite in these shaft going off perfectly vertical off into that you can't even see There's nothing about it that feels Spiritual or funerary at all. I will tell just looking at it. It looks to me like an Advancement of what we are that's almost like indescribable like a thousand year advancement of where we are currently to build something like that Right it seems so nuts and there's obviously stuff that doesn't seem as nuts. It's just beautiful and impressive Right, you know just like the Colosseum and Rome exactly or like you know The cropless You know all those things are fascinating and incredible Craftsmanship and engineering and architecture amazing. Yeah, but then there's Egypt. You go shut the fuck up like what is that? That's nuts. Yeah, and I resent the idea that we're like taking it away from them It's like let's just be logical about this and actually assess the toolkit and assess the capabilities and then look at the evidence of what We're seeing also we're not you there. It's people that live in the same place So it's literally just the older versions of them right It's not like you're saying, you know Chinese people came and they did it all and then they flew back exactly No, that's not what anybody's saying which is saying it's your own Your ancestors not we just the timelines off the timeline seems funky clearly there were some amazing things that the Egyptians did during The accepted timeline. I mean they were a fast amazing culture amazing all through till the end yeah, right? But the when you go really far back whatever that is is nuts Mm-hmm and when you're saying that you know exactly when it was dated when there's so much evidence of just today modern doing these Reconstruction and fixing and yeah all the the the the feet of the sphinx and they're covering it with new fucking rocks like They've always been doing renovations. They always do so all this stuff that you're saying like you We got a piece of wood from inside one of the cracks like bitch. That doesn't mean anything You can't date those rocks no Unless you get under those motherfuckers to the bottom and take a chunk of organic material from deep underneath that thing So you can know when the first stones are placed you don't know you're guessing and that I think that that's why we're coming to a point Now with as such resistance from the mainstream when you see scans like this because they've built themselves into a wall It would you basically have to admit yeah, we've just fucking wrong You're also such like you know them confronted by real evidence Yeah, like real evidence and like just when someone takes you for a walk inside the Kings chamber and you look up Of those stones that somehow they got like how high are they in the sky? How high are they in the ceiling how high are they do you remember oh god? No, I don't sorry Well 80 ton stones. Yeah, 80 tons in the Kings chamber 80 ton how tall let's look and that's what the Is near the apex? Jamie, please put this into perplexity how tall is the ceiling inside the Kings chamber in the great pyramid? Because these things are perfectly placed in there like even if you drag those Somehow or another across the mountains for 500 miles and got it to the pyramid how the fuck did you get it up there? Exactly. How'd you get them all line up? How many people got squished? Chamber itself spans 10.5 meters long by 5.2 meters wide how tall is the ceiling? 19 feet nothing but it's also but it's also near the top of the pyramid is incredibly high up in the pyramid as well They had to lift it to that point you have to get these 80 ton blocks 19 feet and then place them perfectly and and there's absolutely again There's nothing kingly about the Kings chamber at all It's just completely a bare room of rose granite with this Sargavagus coming our pounds of the out of the floor with a huge chunk Missing and actually if you look at where that huge chunk is missing and you turn around and you look at the wall There's actually a massive impact on the wall. There's like a big part of the wall has been broken off So it makes you wonder if maybe that was jettisoned off at some point from power or you know What do you think is in that the what they call the sarcophagus? Do you have a theory? I mean I've been inside is nothing inside of it. It's got in it Yeah, I've laid I laid down inside of it kind of creep with a grand master of the 10-plow order chanting over me. Oh Fun. Yeah First trip to you to take a video of that and put it up on text and no one's ever going to take you seriously Yeah, all right, right? Well this guy's all fucking Duke I am I am a coo. You have to go to you know. Yeah, you have to coo to really you do enjoy this And you have to be on the fringe and also I think some of the you know most impressive Scientists and creators have been people on the fringe who are left out by all that is well especially now because the way The way universities work essentially there's a person that is the most important person in that field Right at that university and there's a bunch of people that want grants and there's a bunch of people that want to play nice I want the career they want tenure And you got to be careful who's toes you step on and if this one guy is the gatekeeper of it or a Group of guys like him at various universities or the gatekeepers to this information You're gonna come up with the current bottleneck problem that we see where people are not just unwilling But aggressively attacking people the question. Yeah, which is why they called Graham Hancock show the most dangerous show on television Like that is so crazy. You have so many shows where people get murdered That's the best way to make a show go viral, though, isn't it? That's way to make a show go viral Don't fucking watch this show Great job on the big great job But it does bring up a disturbing and worrying element of it just how quickly the mainstream Media in various outlets all aligned at once to call him Everything from a racist to a pseudo scientist. Yeah, conspiracy theorist and you know it is an alarming kickback that he's taken in his stride Foundly profoundly. He's a wonderful guy. I can't wait to speed to him I literally missed him by like three days when I went out to Peru. I was gutted. He was my first real guest. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah He was yeah Oh my god, that must have been so many every once I'm England. We Got him to drive to my house. Yeah, and then once he got to my house. We ordered pizza Y'all hate pizza dude. I couldn't believe I'm hanging out with Graham Hancock. I was so giddy I've said it was like one of the first actual Giddy moments like yeah, you just like I can't believe I'm actually sitting with his dude Yeah, because the guest before that had mostly been comics right or some person that I thought was interesting You know some guy that I met at the comedy store. What do you do or a therapist and what do you give people? Come on over come and talk to me. Yeah, yeah I did a lot of those, but he was I think the first real guest Was there like a choice like a conscious decision for you to kind of like evolve it from just you know Comedians talking sharp to actually getting different guests on from a variety of subjects I know you're a curious person You've probably been researching these things even at the point before you were doing that kind of podcast because you were clearly you were But yeah, like what was the natural evolution of that for you? Well, I was always into books about ancient history and whether it's you know Like modern leaks, you know commonly accepted right narrative or Graham Hancock stuff But I got into Graham Hancock stuff. I think in the 90s fingerprints of the gods Can you know right and I fucking loved it? I was so fascinated by I couldn't shut the fuck up about it I'll tell people like you got to see this like yeah, I think this guy's right I think we're we are a history with amnesia or a race with a I mean yeah, yeah, and then of course I watched chairts of the gods that film which I thought was very kooky and fun It's very camping and fun and here's the thing about that I dismissed it for a long time and I said it's nonsense and I was I actually had lunch once Eric Weinstein took me to lunch at Peter Thiel's house where we talked to Vondanakin and right fun fun conversation Talking of he's a full-on true believer for a Vondanakin yeah, yeah, fully of the alien theory the ancient aliens theory and back see I've gone in like multiple stages in my cognitive dissonance And for a while I was all in with the aliens. I hear you all the same though And then for a while I was like no no no there was an advanced civilization And we're just a rebuilding of that civilization and that's probably why we're so barbaric and now I'm like Why am I why are they mutually exclusive right? It could be a mix. Yeah, I don't think they are mutually exclusive at when in the gods woke amongst us You know right and that's when I see the things like the tridiactal mummies and I'm like, okay, okay Okay, what is that what are we talking? Why is why is Peru so weird? Why do they have artwork that you can only see from the sky? Like there's a lot of weird shit going on here. Yeah, don't don't be so quick to jump exactly So my point is like I have always been Fascinating by stories first of all Any subject that makes you ridiculous for considering it. I'm always like what's that amount? Yeah, why why why is it that it's a little bit Yeah, yeah, cookie ones like ghosts. Yeah, bigfoot all the cookie ones Like why what's the what's the resistance? I don't watch an astronaut tell me a bigfoot story Yeah, I mean pinch assault, but he claimed that he'd been told this by a military guy out in a and Russia that a They were in the rec room of this like air force base and Apparently it's just according to this Russian astronaut trainer at the Yuri Gagarin space center in Moscow and he said that this Yeti Sasquatch type being apparently just waltzed in like just walked into their rec room helped itself to some water from the water thing Waived and then vanished Was this guy what was his job? He was a trainer of astronauts at the Yuri Gagarin space center in Star City, Moscow They probably does to him up with some And they did and K ultra drugs. Yeah, I mean You hold onto that kind of information interesting still probably experiment on you Yeah, you probably gave that guy some effort. I never given the Sasquatch thing. It's it's due course in Researchering it to be honest. I've been very dismissive of that, but maybe I mean like the I have the demographic years with I used to have a Sasquatch bigfoot footprint like a cast Oh, yeah, like a plaster cast on the desk Rest in peace doctor Jeffrey meldrum. He just recently died. I had him on the as a guest on the show wants to he's a He's so crazy. I told them. I asked him if he was so crazy But in a wonderful way I said if if you could cut a finger off To know that Sasquatch was real. Would you do it? He was like yes No, yes The information just comes out. You know, I'm the loser finger. Dammit Just sitting there with off of him. Yeah, I think Bigfoot was a real thing. Yeah I think that's why there's something like do you think it's just like some sort of like branch of creature Because so many people think it's like an interdimensional being or it could be that too, but I think it's gigantic Epithecus yeah, yeah, yeah, jaganta bithigus was an absolute real thing that we didn't even know existed until the I believe it was the 20s yeah around then In a pot the carry shop in China and then they started researching it and finding where the dig sites were and You know, they found jaw bones that indicate that it was bipedal So this is a bipedal hominid that's eight to ten feet tall. Yeah. What is that? That's Bigfoot nice Bigfoot and that's probably and also this thing 100% lived around modern human beings like what we are today It lived around us so Imagine you see one of those things well first of all you're gonna fucking run like hell you're gonna have stories This thing lives in the in the woods are in the jungle stay out of this spot That's where this thing lives and that's gonna be passed on from generation to generation generation until even after they're gone Now it's just a whisper now. It's just a thing. It's now. It's a mystery man. It lives in the woods Are they like are they like antiquated Bigfoot stories like outside of just modern? Yes Yeah, oh without doubt especially native American cultures. That's what's interesting is like native American tribes There's multiple obviously many different tribes many different languages, right? They all have a word for this thing I like let's put this into perplexity. Yeah, how many Different native American names are there for for Bigfoot because I believe Sasquatch is a native American I don't know which tribe had that but there's multiple different names for this Harry creature that lives in the woods, but they don't have names for like a giraffe that lives in the woods They don't have like other mystical Animal mythical creatures. Just have this one. Yeah, and this one is a fucking weird one Well, that's what I mean with the interdimensional aspect is pretty differently than just an animal even right like that might be real too This is part of the problem. Yeah, it's like We might be dealing with multiple different things. It might not even be gigantic Sweats scoo cum that's right. I've heard that. Oh, ma. That's right. There was a movie called oma The guy who did the American world for long. That's just the last words you say when you see Bigfoot. Oh, my yes I Tanka big elder brother 70 to 18 name wicked cannibal oh boy When when do I go wicked can't win to go for that window. Yeah, and yet to show how to say that yet to So big god in the Navajo neighborhood. There's a bunch of you there's a bunch underneath that too Yeah, like says it about 70 to 18 names when accounting for the fairies across 50 tribes Okay, so what is that and it's the same with the alien grace like the young people? Yes Well, and then it brings the same thing like brings us to the same subject of What if there is a way to traverse dimensions? What if this is not some as simple as something gets in a spaceship and it comes here from another planet? What if it's coming from another place and what if that doorway is open to other things and What if some of those things are a sesquatch like and under the right conditions? This pathway is open and you maybe it's not even something that it actually exists But you can see exist in our tangible timeline, but you can see under heavy stress Under like anxiety and imagine what gives you more stressed out than being in the woods at night Mm-hmm Right the woods at night creates a lot of anxiety for people because there's all these sounds and you're looking around It's dark your vulnerable Especially if you live in real woods like woods that have predators and it's sketchy and I bet There's different states of mind that you would if there are if there's some sort of a possibility some sort of a way That a intelligent creature can get to a point where it has the technology to access other dimensions It can go into other spaces Would you even be able to see it all the time? Would you only be able to see it if you were like under a highly anxious state In the woods you're kind of a little freaked out you're more open to weird things And then it senses that and communicates with you Well, we are South Kookie It would dominate by our perception and we have such a narrow bandwidth of visual perception You know you get up the whole light spectrum and look at visible light Just a tiny corridor of visible light that we're able to see obviously we've developed IR and you know different and if you Film the night sky with infrared you get weird shit you get these orbs and things that seem to fly by and I think that it is a perceptual thing because The reason I even started my YouTube channel is because I've had my own experiences with a UFO type phenomena that were entirely initiated by me Like I asked for them to come and and They did see that sounds Kookie. I'll take that clip. I dismissed you immediately That's kind of a quiet way for it But this is one of the things that people have been saying for a long time is that there's there's actual groups of people and there was even some guy was like Somehow another connected to the government That was saying that they lead these people out they go out into the desert and they have a like some sort of a secret frequency He didn't want to discuss it that they can push out they can send out the secret frequency and It'll call them in and that other people have done it simply by willing them in Yes, what I do so sitting there and putting out this message that you're trying to communicate with them and then eventually they show up Yeah, I can't speak to technologically assisted psionics and all that kind of stuff, but Do you want to hear my your first story? I can't answer well Where did you come up with this idea on your own or did you hear about people doing this? No, I? I heard of it from someone who's a quite polarizing figure in the UFO community. I know you spoken to him Dr. Stephen Greer But I'm polarizing people are right sometimes. He's right on this. Yeah, they could be right on a lot He's right on this and you know, I Know that a lot of people have issues with with Greer, but I he was actually my intro into the UFO subject So I'll tell you the story Sorry about my throat. Let me just take a sip of water. So This was how did he find out about it? It's a good question He had a near-death experience belief and from that was actually apparently communicated to and showing things that one he came out of that Experience he became some muddy type, you know teacher of course, you know, but got profoundly interested in great origin story brilliant origin story My origin story was I was really bored during COVID No, so like honestly though It was actually in 2019 that I had these experiences and I do think that it's very important to lay a bit of foundational groundwork because I think a lot of people will recognize this as well And it's something you mentioned with Bigfoot being in a high stress environment in the forest maybe that changes your perception and I think that there's a degree of trauma and a degree of intense emotional Moments that can bring about paranormal experiences. I don't know why but it does seem to be something that a lot of people relate to Yes, I was in a very dark time. Yes. I was having a very traumatic time Well, yes, I was going through something and then this happened and so for me I was in my third year of university and struggling Just had a whole mix of personal issues going on so I ended up kind of dropping out before I finished and Was just in a really bad rot and my dad was worried about me and he said look I'm out in This is a bit of a long story, but it's important to lay this foundation I think before I talk about what I actually experienced because it plays in My dad was worried he was out in France at the time and he said look I want to come out and stay at this place with me and just you know kind of relax and bring yourself back to normal Yeah, okay, so I came out and he was like I've got these books. I've been reading I think they'd be really beneficial for you You should read them. I was like, okay, like you know, I don't see how a book's gonna change the art thing recommend books Not massively. No in fact. No. No. This was the only time you recommended books, which is interesting And they were a series of books called conversations with God by Neil Donald Welsh. Have you ever heard of them? No, okay So it's interesting Kind of ties into I suppose that the channeled works things that people believe they receive Oh wait a minute. I have heard of this. He's quite well known. He's quite well known He you know was he was a radio DJ broke his neck in a car accident became homeless Finally managed to get back on his feet But was still struggling wrote an angry letter to God and then apparently woke up at three o'clock in the morning And was having like voices literally telling him to write things down as he wrote all of his down and this became Conversations with God it's literally a dialogue of him asking questions and him receiving answers which he interpreted as from God Now that is intense and I'm definitely not here to say this is a Bible in never want you to read it However, it was incredibly impactful for me at that time the things that I was reading about it was a very different idea of God Universal consciousness leaning towards more than some weird patriarchal cloud-living figure that just never made sense to me So it got me in and I was reading it and it helped tremendously Weirdly enough Which I didn't expect and that put me on a path towards researching metaphysics and philosophy and science and consciousness And and that's where it really started for me, but then a couple years down the line I found myself in another depression in a sense because I felt like I'd accumulated a lot of information about various different topics So I thought with like these big questions and big answers and big esoteric things and I just got to a point None of this is actually helping me in my life in fact. I'm actually feeling like fucking worse for looking into all this thing I don't know how this is gonna benefit me so I was sitting on my bed one night and I just guess you could call it a prayer. I just sat on my bed and said out loud to the universe like I I need something that Validate all of this like if I'm meant to be looking into these big picture questions about the universe and consciousness If there's something tangible here like I I need to know and I want evidence I'm ready for it. So give me I want that and then I got a week later My best friend of the time he was like a Hey, I was watching this documentary. You've got to check it out It's called an acknowledged by this guy called Dr. Stephen Greer and this is my first introduction to the UFO subject I was like, okay cool sit down watch that very good documentary all of these different you know high-level officers and Missile launch guys talking about UFOs it got me in and then Near the end of that is when he brings up this concept of CE 5 You know initiating contact with these you can actually have your own experiences by getting into a particular meditative state If I hadn't been making that request on my bed the week prior I probably just would have watched that documentary and gone about my life But it felt like a very strong message to me personally because I've been asking for something to validate these ideas around Consciousness now there's a guy saying yeah, you can actually have an experience by going out and attempting to you know Ask for one so talk me through the process of actually doing that So he has did you get it on the first try no? He has how many times to try It's it was a weird gradual thing where things were happening in the sky that were enough to keep me going out But not enough for me to be like, okay, this is legit so that how many times did you go out before it worked? Before I saw what I really really saw Probably about a month of going out damn that's commitment But I was seeing things but they weren't it was kind of just enough to make me like okay What are you seeing? lots of what the contact community called flash bulbs flashes of light in the night sky in a void of space Repeatedly without any discernible object attached to it just one flash and then Send a thought another flash another flash and this happened multiple times I've been somebody watches the night sky all my life. I'm used to seeing satellites I know how long would you slayers are maybe an hour or two hours, you know and so you sit down OCD no I think you'd be standing with my neck cream to the sky, but I would be why don't I get allowed to I don't know I don't think about things properly sometimes when I don't let it lay down on the ground just lay on the girl So you get a better view the sky. Yeah, it's cold in England and it was mild to you on the floor It's not good to our yeah, yeah, but but I was um I was essentially because of again Being asking asking the universe for something the universe seemed to be giving me some sort of response It kind of lit a fire up under me and I started going outside and honestly a lot of people like even Greer has this incredibly You know complicated method using some are the and you know doing various things I didn't do any of that I just Breathed in through the nose and out through the mouth until I felt very calm and then began to very clearly Modeled my thoughts around the concept of I want something to respond to me and then I would essentially visualize that that was emanating from me that these thoughts were emanating from me and it didn't take very long before I'd have flashes of light in the sky That just seemed weird because I've never seen anything like that or an incredible influx of what look and behave like satellites But just at an incredibly high level forward have flashes of light in the sky that just seemed weird because I've never seen anything like that or an incredible influx of what look and behave like satellites, but just at an incredibly high level, which is like, what what what's going on here? And it just felt like a kind of step by step progression until in August of 2019, I had four incredibly vivid and real experiences with orange orbs of light. Really profound. What was that? What happened? So I was outside at this point. It become my routine. It was in the summer of August and it was relatively warm. So I was out doing this quite a lot, seeing little flashes, seeing things in the sky, trying to figure out what exactly it was that I was seeing. And I was standing at the back of my garden looking towards my house, night sky crystal clear. And I saw at the beginning a flash of light in the corner of the sky. So I looked over and I saw this flash, another flash, another flash, and it was just blinking, but it was static in space. And then it started moving down every time it blinked, it would move further down. And I was observing this. And then it settled above two stars and kind of created the apex of a triangle. And it was just flashing above these two stars. And I was watching this for a while and it happened for long enough where I just decided, all right, just thank you. Whatever you are, I'm just going to keep panning around the sky here and looking around. and as I pan my head, I saw that there was a cloud, but I didn't really look at it. Turn around here, come back and I see this cloud again. And this time I really look at it. And this cloud, Joe, heard so strange. It's like a dark cloud, but when you stared at it, it had a staticy appearance. It's very hard to describe over the imagine a light overlay of TV static. There was particles, it was agitated, it was shimmering, some, some, not a cloud. Like certainly not anything I've ever seen in my life. And if we pretend this microphone is my house and it's cloud is here, it's drifting this way. So eventually it's going to drift past my house and go this way, at least according to its natural trajectory. It gets to my house and it does a right angle tone and it starts coming towards me. So eventually it's going to be above my head. This cloud like formation, a cloud does a right angle turn in the sky, abrupt as in 90 degrees. It's going like this and now it's going like this towards you. High up in the sky, but it's now in my path, complete 90 degree shift from its trajectory. And I saw it like a jarring, but now it's going this way. Okay. So at this point, I'm rooted in place, not really scared, but I'm shocked. At the fact that this thing did what it just did and I'm watching as it's coming closer and closer, you know, towards where I'm going to be eventually, it's directly above my head. It sounds so crazy. And you know, Terrence McKenna said something like this. He was like, you know, if you tell the unvarnish truth about a UFO experience, you'll be taken for a fool. It's like it's true. You know, if you just tell people what really happened, but this is what really happens. So this cloud comes above my head as it's directly above my head, this cloud like sucked into itself is if there was a central vacuum, central point where you just got sucked into itself. And it revealed a triangle formation of about 25, maybe 30 orange orbs of light in a triangle. And this triangle, basically the cloud went, triangle was revealed. It kept moving. I had to turn around and watch as it went off in this direction. And as I was watching it, I could see that some of these orbs were actually swapping formations, swapping position in this formation. And that was the first time I saw them. I saw them with three other occasions all within the space of a month after this. Weirdly enough, I woke up the next day. And this is the only element of the story as crazy as the whole thing sounds. If the only element that makes me personally uncomfortable, um, I was getting out of the shower and as I was drawing myself off, immediately, immediately noticed where this tattoo is now. There was a triangle mark of three red, three red marks. One here, one here, one here, very vivid, like, like, the moment covered it up with the tattoo. Well, it faded. If they did it, I have taken pictures of it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's a clear. Yes. Can I see it? I can try and find them. Yeah. I haven't got my internet on right now. Um, Jamie, if you go onto my X account and just type in, uh, J Anderson marks on arm. Maybe that will come up. I'm sorry. I should have really sent that ahead of time, but I do have images online. People are seeing them. And I've discussed it many times. Did it look like a womb? This is the thing. So two. So three red marks. No bump. No scab. No itching. No feeling of discomfort. There was a slight shine to them as if it was almost like a heeled over burn. And this was very vivid. It didn't dissipate for over a year. It was on mom for about a year before it faded away and eventually faded away. And then I got home. His charisma just has tattooed on my mouth. But, uh, um, weirdly enough, I got this tattoo and then got invited to Egypt. Um, but yeah, I had these experiences. Um, I had another experience where they came down and hovered above my house. Yeah. I asked you this. So these orbs. Yeah. There's there you go. There you go. Thanks, Jamie. Thanks for that. That is. Yeah. It looks like you burned three cigarettes and you're asked what some arsehole online definitely claimed. But I did. That's what I would say too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, this is crazy. Yeah. This this I noticed it immediately. I, I, I'm not particularly comfortable with it. I don't know what it really means. I really, you know, I'm a bit of, I'm a bit of an idiot joke. Cause like, you know, I should have gone to a dermatologist. I should have like actually had things. Someone look at it. They ended, but like cattle, son. Well, that's kind of what I think at the same time. Can I just keep an eye on this one? Can I even be mad at them? I was like, show me, show me, give me evidence. I want to sign a fucking fine. That's right. There you go, dude. I would say whatever that is on your arm, who knows, maybe a dermatologist could explain it. It's just a coincidence. But the, the actual thing itself is far more interesting to me. And like, cause one of the things that people always say is if they were out there, what wouldn't we see them? But God, if they could come here from another dimension or if they can come here from another planet or another solar system, don't you think they could probably hide? Like we're pretty good at hiding. Like, do you think like we have, we have technology right now, like stealth bomber stuff that diminishes the radar signal. Exactly. You can't, you can't pick them up on radar. So why would it be impossible to somehow know the manipulate your visual field, project what looks like clouds on the outside? We know that we can do stuff like that with plasma, like they can, they have these plasma things that get spit in the sky. Absolutely. It's weird. They can make objects out of them. I wonder if that was plasma. I actually do wonder if this was a form of self organizing plasma. Cause that's definitely something that people have looked into quite a bit. That means that maybe plasma has intelligence. Yes. This some. Yeah. Yes. And, and the, you know, perhaps these are a form of individualated plasma intelligence that can interact. And one thing that's very interesting about that, there was a brilliant paper. Actually, I did a, I did a video on it. Um, it's like 11 different scientific institutes looking at the idea of self organizing plasma and intelligent plasma. And they were using some references like, you know, the STS 75 NASA missions, where the tether broke and you had all these strange things going around the tether. Yes. So that's dismissed as ice particles and things like that. Have you ever seen the motion tracking version of that where someone actually attached the flight paths of each object? So you can see the flight path? No. That's crazy. Because we see it. Yeah, I'm sure if Jamie looks up, um, that is a weird one. Yes. Yeah. It seems like light path lights are going towards that thing and checking it out. Yeah. So this is, um, you know, this is a gigantic tether. I think it's like two kilometers long or something is absolutely insane. It broke away from the ship. And as it broke away, you had these, um, well, what some people believe to be UFOs or plasma intelligences or if you were, uh, on the mainstream side, you'd see these ice particles. There you go. If you go slightly further back, slightly further back. There you go. So just as that green one's starting up, this is the flight path. So if you just take it back to the beginning of that, um, and this is where they've attached the flight paths and you will see complete 90 degree turns. You'll see absolute stops and reversals of change. And it's incredible. I wonder if it's just a kind of life that we. I truly don't. That's the case. I'm absolutely just really just lives in space. I think so. I really do. Like the things they find at these volcanic vents at the bottom of the ocean, like, oh, we didn't even know that something could survive down here. Right. It could be a type of life that survives in the void of space. And it just, it wouldn't be a biological thing. It would be some form of energy or life. This is apparently what all the spooks were telling Tom the long when he went to the Pentagon that there's a meebas in space, the size of whales and like, you know, that these things were essentially told him. Yeah. I remember when he was on, uh, he was on fate to black and he was talking about, you know, that there are these meebas in space that are like, you know, but why would they tell him and then he goes on, no shows and tells like, I, I feel like that's a kind of a guy that you tell some things that you want to get out. Yeah. And it doesn't necessarily have to be true. No, no. Matter of fact, it's more fun if it's not true. And make them say as much cookie shit as possible. So that the stuff that he's going to say that it's true looks ridiculous. And now all of those guys that gave him that information are on the age of disclosure. Exactly. Yeah. Which trust them right? Which trust all of these government speaks. It's fun. If you're playing, it's like the world is a gigantic escape room. You're playing. Yeah, dude. You're playing a bunch of weird puzzles and you're trying to figure it out. But nothing is what it seems. I think nothing's nothing's as it seems. I think we've, um, we've toned along and the UFO subject and two to stars Academy and all of the things that have happened since like 2017, New York Times. It's, um, I have, I have opinions on it because I think I might be the first guest that you've had on that wasn't already quite established. So I've had to work my way up through social media, through the interactions in the community to, you know, personal relations with people that aren't big names or anything like that. Um, you know, I've had to work my way up it. So I've seen and been exposed to things that perhaps people like Jeremy Corbell and others who were already quite big names haven't seen because they're too big. They don't need to be on social media looking at fucking comments or like, you know, what's going on in the X space. But if you are like that, you start to notice things. And so what's interesting to me, despite what anyone wants to say about Stephen Greer and I've gone my own issues with Stephen Greer. What's interesting to me is that the only person really who was making noise prior to your TTSA was Stephen Greer. He was the one that was putting out Netflix documentaries that were getting seen by millions of people all over the world. And he was saying, you know, these are black, budget, illegal programs. This is a anti congressional crime against humanity. We need to be busting down the doors. This is not not exactly what they would want to hear if they were inside the national security state. And there's this guy out there saying this. What do you do about that? Well, you know how Tom Delong got linked up at the very beginning to all of this? No. So he's always been a UFO guy. And because of his background and, you know, the money, he was able to secure connections. And he was very friendly with Greer. He was best buds with Greer at one point. In fact, there's a video of him when he's quite young. And he's pointing out all of the witness UFO witness tapes that he's got on his, on his, in his library. And he's like, you know, these are all, I'm holding on to these for a guy. He's got like 50 whistle blowers. He's bringing this all out. And this is before Greer, you know, kind of made the announcement. So it's obviously Greer. And Tom Delong's on fade to black. And I want to say 2015, talking about this, where he tells a story of how a friend of his at Lockheed Martin calls him up. And says, Hey, we're having a family and friends meet and greet over at Lockheed Martin. Would you want to introduce the bosses to the stage? And he said, yeah, but I want 10 minutes with your bosses afterwards. And they were like, OK. And so he went and he introduced them on stage. And then he tells a story of being taken through, you know, these white noise corridors and down into this place where eventually he was chilling with the guys at skunk works and, you know, these big directors are all sitting in this room. OK, what is that you want to talk about? This is where he pitches to the stars academy of arts and science and this framework. And what's interesting is on the radio when he's talking about this, he's saying, you have to approach these guys like you want to be of service. You know, I was saying I'm being of service. I want to help. I want to help. So you've got a disruptive rogue person out there, Stephen Greer, saying all this stuff calls in commotion. What do we do about that? I have no idea. Suddenly in walks a rock star. Use me because that's basically what he said. Use me. I'm happy to do whatever I am. Your conjure into the public. Now, I know disrespect to Tom of me. And he's a lovely guy and I'm very passionate about the subject. But I do think he was used. And what you get from there is the two to stars academy platform. Suddenly you have this official kind of green lit disclosure, very soft disclosure. There's nothing like Stephen Greer's disclosure. And we're all being encouraged to partake in support in this very, what, what, which we say curated method of soft disclosure for the people. I think that they were very worried about what type of disruptive truths might come out before it was time to talk about them. And then suddenly Tom DeLong was a very useful medium for communicating this. And when you see things like the wicky leeks emails between him and Jon Podesta where he's literally saying, this is about bolstering PR for the military industrial complex from a disenfranchised youth. And the, you know, the generations of youth today don't trust the government. We want to change that one change the perception of the military in the government. He's literally emailing John Podesta about this. So it's very clear that at the very least he was willing to be the messenger of whatever message they wanted to give him. And it just so happens that message completely counteracts what Greer is talking about in terms of classified black budget programs that've already cracked reverse engineering. We cracked anti gravity and October 1954. You know, this kind of stuff is like complete reversal of that narrative. Interesting. Yeah. Interesting. Well, makes sense. That's what the term useful idiot is. He's fluid. Yeah. They love doing that. Yeah. You know, I've said it before. I'll say it again. I know I've had people on this podcast who are doing that with me. And I know they were coming on same a bunch of nonsense. But you have to let them talk because for sure it all the truth comes out in the wash for sure. And I think what's interesting about the age of disclosure is this narrative of the reality of what happened. If it did happen, there's long Congress, there's misappropriation of funds. You're going to need amnesty. And so this is the narrative. This narrative is we need amnesty. So it's kind of smart way to do it. Right. Do it in a documentary. Have all these people that are probably implicated in some way. We need amnesty. All these people that say that they know about these programs with amnesty is important because, you know, I'm saying. But what they've been doing really if they have been doing what we assume they've been doing, we assume they've retrieved crash UFOs and they've back engineered them. We assume they've used that technology. We assume they're aware that there's nonhuman intelligences that are far beyond our technological capabilities and that we interact with them. You've committed a crime against humanity by not telling people that because we we all operate under the assumption that we have an understanding of what our role is in this ecosystem of life. And if our role is not even remotely at the apex, if we are being visited and manipulated and if we're actually a product of experiments, you should fucking tell us you can't you guys can't be hanging out at Raytheon in the fucking conference room. You believe this shit? Like, yeah, would you go Rolex or something? You motherfuckers. Right. Tell us we can't handle the truth. But they're right. They are right with the amnesty thing. I think that's the pathway. I mean, this guy's not going to what they stole. Yeah. Okay. What they did they did with the line of Congress, the lies have been told, let's fucking find out what the truth is. These guys, whatever they did, they did. Okay. You didn't stop it then. Let it go. The more important thing is let's find out if this is real. That's more important than everything for the race, for the human race, the entire human race. And the science and technology to have to have all this stuff locked down like that and not allow the great young minds that are coming up right now to have access to this is crazy. You're you're wasting one of the most valuable resources that we have with secrecy. I think there's so many different reasons why they might want to keep this a secret in terms of breakthrough energy and propulsion systems. Like there's so many different implications to that. Massively disrupted massively disruptive. And you know, could you imagine some like whacked out fucking dude with a zero point energy device? Like, or you imagine some guy who's running an oil company who finds out that they're about to do something like that. Like the fuck you are. Right. The guy with this guy at MIT that just got, got assassinated in his home. Dude. This is the, the wet works in the corporate world is very real. This is very real. This guy was, he, one of the more disturbing theories he had was that not only is the shift of the, the magnetic poles that here, I'll send it to you, James. But his, his, his take on it was that the shift of the magnetic poles is necessary in order to maintain, uh, I don't want to fuck it up. Well, like a natural earth cycle that has to happen. I'm sorry. I'm trying to think and look it up at the same time. You're good. Here it is. I'll send it to you, Jimmy. Sorry for the dead air folks. Okay. So it says, um, the assassinated MIT plasma scientist warned that earth requires periodic magnetic reversals to sustain its field. Interesting. No reversal equals no dynamo equals the magnetic field dissipates. The last time this happened and this, in the tweet, it says, no, it's flood. So somewhere the man, oh, I know both these guys. This guy who has a whistle blowing. Yeah. Is that not loading the clip? That's my physics 101 fluid description. It seems like the clip's not okay. Let's hear what he has to say. It's really interesting. Yeah. Man. Uh, the earth, the earth's magnetic field was, uh, uh, constant in the last, uh, in years. So yeah. Um, is it right that the, uh, the earth has lost 10% of its magnetic field in the last 150 years and outcome. So excellent question. Alex, thank you. Uh, so when I say the deerths make it, if you let's remain roughly constant, what I mean is if you look over longish timescales, it's, it's magnitude is roughly constant. Of course it varies. Right. And it reverses sometimes. Right. And those reversals of the earth is magnetic field. So you know, reversal meaning the north pole becomes the south pole and vice versa. So those happen. And there's even interesting, interesting stories you can tell about how those reversals of the earth's magnetic field correlate with many ice sages and things like this. Okay. But the, the, sort of the idea is that if you average over these periodic reversals, right, or fluctuations, the amplitude of the field has remained roughly constant. Okay. And the idea is that if there was no induction, if there was no dynamo working, you would, you and I wouldn't be talking, right? The magnetic field would have diffused very quickly, right? In within 10 to the five years, the earth would be left without a magnetic field and the earth's magnetic field protected from cosmic radiation. Right. And if you were open to that radiation, we, well, you wouldn't be here like I said, nor would I. Yeah. Thank you very much. Wow. And they just put bullets into that, dude. Well, I like, you know, it could, listen, it could have been a robbery. We don't know. I mean, Massachusetts says a lot of robberies. Fish, we've got a lot of. I'll show it's one of them East Coast Liberal Run cities. It's got a crime problem completely fucked. And I'm sure, you know, as a MIT professor, it's probably lived nice. Yeah. I mean, it's possible. It's impossible. But it also is possible that somebody killed him and imagine if they killed him because he's telling us, hey, it's about to reverse its magnetic poles and we might be fucked. A cataclysm might be coming. Well, this is, this is what I think there was a knowledge of in deep antiquity. There was a knowledge of cycles of earth cycles. And they were preparing for it. You know, why are these structures built in a way that's anti-science-making? That's resistant to incredible force. Right. You know, the amount of people who are among them, that's... The fact that women's such a good example of that is really an incredible example. I mean, the level of ingenuity and also the fact that they're finding that these walls go way deeper, right? Because not just the excavation where they're going deep down and finding new blocks of stone, but just the walls, there's key excavations going on around the walls. They just keep going now. So as I did, this place was buried, maybe a lot of earth push up and, you know, submerged into the ground. Clearly this place experienced some form of global upheaval and was really weird about a place like Peru, for example, is that prior to the, well, at the end of the last glacial maximum around 19,000 years ago when the earth started to warm up again, there were certain climatologically stable corridors. And Peru was one of those areas, which was actually quite climatologically stable. So at the end of the LGM, the last glacial maximum, to the younger dryers, it's about 6,000 plus, which is 6,000 in change. We've taken ourselves from horse and cart to supercomputers in less than 150 years. So the idea, the areas of the world that had stability for about 6,000 years couldn't create something incredible. And then the younger dryers comes and it takes it all away for the most part. It's very provocative in Peru because of, again, the existence of the infrastructures that are very quite pristine actually and still standing, very simple. And yet they are surrounded by broken mega-listen, you know, multi-ton structures that have gone through incredible damage. And what I was getting at when I was saying about that area is the way the stones are interlocked would protect it against earthquakes. Yeah, it dissipates the force for all these different areas. It allows for the force, for the kinetic force, to dissipate through the structure, instead of it being focused and blowing apart one area of it. So it's clearly done for the purposes of trying to prevent massive amounts of force. Where would they get that type of a concept from? Right. It makes me wonder, it makes me wonder if they did have a knowledge of great cycles, you know, like the Adam and Eve story, you know, the whole thing that was like classified by the CIA for a minute, the Adam and Eve story. It was classified by the CIA. Wasn't listed on their freedom of information at LGM. Right. What was that again? It was a deep research into cycles, great cycles of cataclysmic destruction on Earth by a guy called, what his name was Chantomas, but I think I was a pseudonym for a fake, not a real name. And he actually had at the beginning of it like a series of people he had listed who, without whom this book would not be possible. And it was like, you know, top five star generals and like, it's like, okay. So, you know, this guy had the, you know, Chantomas, the Adam and Eve story, it's all about this great cyclical cataclysm that does take place every, was it like 12,000 years or something or that? And the ancient had a knowledge of this. And I think that this is something that we will probably begin to realize is that somewhere in deep antiquity, there was a level of knowledge that is very contradictory to what we understand now. And I think places like Peru, places like Egypt and others, Malta, go backly, tap, a of course, it's becoming very palpable that there was something before this. Also, when you see the spikes of the earth temperature, when you see those ups and downs, those glaciers and those warming periods, like, what is there or uniform time in between those spikes? In terms of, is it like predictable? I don't know. I like every 12,000 years, it gets a little bit on the key. Imagine it's probably 12,000 years, comes back. Right. But this is it, but this is again, this is one of the things that people in like, you know, the conspiracy world would say they're keeping from us. They're keeping this knowledge. Yes, there are 12,000 year cycles and we are just not being allowed to know that knowledge. But that seems true. I don't know. Well, they have models of the past. Exactly. We course samples and things along those lines. But we do know that it's never static and we do know that there have been these periods. And they do look like, like, you know, a strange graph. It's not a flat line. Like, so look, it's all getting warmer. No, it's always crazy. So like, what is causing these dips and these rises and these, these weird periods that seem to be rhythmic? You know what I'm saying? I like there's an immense time of heating in a small time of all. Right. And then no, it's up and down and up and down. But it's always like the heartbeat of the planet. And then I look at the planet as a, as a form of conscious entity. Yeah. Certainly capable of producing conscious beings on top of it. So I wonder about that and the mycelial network. You know, these kind of elements to the planet that almost seem like neurological architecture. Well, even if you could look from, from afar, if you could like have the concept of the earth, like the waters moving, the clouds are moving. Yeah. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. It's like the live thing almost. Yeah. Obviously, it's not moving because it's tissue, but that doesn't mean that there's not a force that's all connected and working in harmony. Exactly. Yeah. I mean, that's why I think plasma intelligence is very interesting because it's this idea that a self organizing plasma structure could in some way create consciousness inside of it. And where consciousness comes from, we still don't. So it's very open to the idea of possibility. You know, you know, spoken some pretty interesting scientists like Dr. Salvatore Pays, he's the guy that was responsible for the UFO, the UFO, the US Navy UFO patents that got put out a few years back under water under see plasma generators and things like this. He was a US space force engineer. And he is very much of the opinion that plasma itself is capable of becoming conscious, not conscious on its own, but 99% of the observable universe is made out of plasma, 99% okay. Isn't it weird how we get taught about solids, gases and liquids, but not plasma, the fourth state of matter that's 99% of the universe? Why aren't we talk about that in school? That's weird, right? Do you ever remember being taught plasma in school? When did they start learning that? Well, I mean, I don't know, but it's certainly before my time in school, I didn't get taught it. So why would they, are you saying that they perhaps are hiding this? I think that there's things within plasma physics that are so novel and exotic, like these self-organizing EVO's exotic vacuum objects and the science that they're studying and have you ever heard of the Sapphire project? No. It's kind of gone quiet now. How put off got involved in it for a minute, where they're, you know, claiming to bottle the stars and creating these plasma, you know, self-organizing plasmas inside these chambers, that they were claiming could transform metals from one metal into gold or, you know, transmutation of elements and complete revolution of propulsion and energy. Then you just fizzles out. I always wondered about that. There's some power coming. Why were people really trying to make gold? That seems so crazy that you think you could make something like that. And I always wonder, did maybe somebody used to make it and they have like this story of how people used to make gold? If there was, like imagine the caps of the Great Pyramids are in gold. Right. What if they're made that gold? Right. Right. What if they'd gotten to, it's not impossible to assume, like if the earth creates gold, it's not impossible to think that we could take the elements of the earth in gold as well. It's got to be a way to do it. It's going to be a way to do it. Is there a way to create gold currently? Oh, no. That's a good question. Let's put that in towards sponsor for plastic. How do you make gold? What changed the? Well, let me show you what I asked first. The outcome history of gold and all the mag can brought up, ancient Egypt, metallurgy, landing for classic oil events. Whoa. So there is some sort of... Earth here, fire and water and you make gold. Spread the tobacco and Roman texts via the Islamic world in the 8th century where they made experimental methods. So for, I mean, gold plating is maybe what they're getting at. I don't know if that's... Unless they were trying to create gold. A lot of alchemy is also kind of personal alchemy. Alchemy of the soul. And so it's not always necessarily meant as a physical thing. Trying to create gold. A lot of alchemy is also kind of personal alchemy, alchemy of the soul. And so it's not always necessarily meant as a physical thing, turning base metals into gold. It's more about turning you, base human into a golden person. Like a lot of the times in alchemy, it's more about the personal development of your spirit and your soul. Maybe because of the science. They're clearly talking about metallurgy. Oh yeah, I mean like right here. But I mean if gold was a valuable, it was about valuable part of technology, which it is. And it had conducting aspects to it. It's very conducive or it's very, it's good at conducting conductive. And you can make it. Modern methods. Particle accelerators like CERN's large, hard-drawn, collider achieved this by slamming lead nuclei together in near-miss collisions, generating intense electromagnetic fields that eject three protons from the lead, 82 protons to form gold, 79 protons. The Alice experiment detected up to 89,000 gold nuclei per second during lead lead runs, totaling or lead lead runs, I'm not sure what you're saying. Yeah. Total link, 29 picograms over years, trillions of times less than needed for visible amounts. Whoa, that's crazy. Trillions of times less than needed for bees, total amounts. Really 1980, Glensheever transmitted bismuth into gold isotope using carbon and neon beams at Lawrence Berkeley lab. Maybe these are the pyramids for lightning strikes, great gold, right? Iron ore streams and next thing, you know, you get gold. That's why that's so much gold. I mean, who knows? Who knows what they figured out? But we should be able to ask these questions and not be... Well, you can certainly just fascinating. It's certainly fascinating that people have been obsessed with the possibility of making gold. Obviously, it's because gold is rare and very valuable, but here's the question, why is gold very valuable? You can't make a weapon out of it. Like, how did it rise to prominence? Isn't there like some like translations that are, you know, from like the old Sumerian Babylonian texts where it's kind of like we were made to mine gold? That's all zacharized. It's like zacharized. Yeah, zacharized, but it's very controversial. I'm too stupid to know who's right. But I do know that I always, when I were talking about zacharized, I was talking about the websites. Sichin is wrong, doc. Yeah, yeah. So there's a website where it seems like he was the only one that was buying into that. And, you know, when I talked to Wes Huff, he doesn't even think that zacharized, sichin could actually read Sumerian. Just fucking guessing. He bought... It might be, you know, I don't want to disparage the great man because he's not with us anymore, but he might not have been totally honest or he might have been convinced, you know, some people just become true believers. Yeah. No, for sure. What he's saying essentially is that he tried to learn Sumerian and West knows many different ancient languages. Like he's brilliant, brilliant guy. He's like, I couldn't figure out. I couldn't figure it out. I couldn't do it. Now, obviously, there have been translations of Sumerian. There are people that can do it. It's incredibly difficult. And it's also apparently not related to any other languages. It's so ancient, it's weird. And then the CUNY form, and all that stuff. It's like good luck. Right. Good luck figuring out what they were saying. I know I always wanted to highlight actually kind of come to those positions on it. It is incredibly complex. And the only people that really know are the people that are that deep into it that they can read it as well. And they don't seem to agree with them. But at the end of the day, like whatever, whatever was going on over in that part of the world, they had a lot of discussions of things that came from the sky. They had a detailed map of the solar system, which is very weird. A 5,000 plus year old detailed map of the solar system with all the planets, Jupiter, Mars, Earth. It's like, what's that? What's that? What's that? What are you achieving this? What are these giant people with monkeys on their laps? And like, you know, Gilgamesh holding a lion like it's a little cat. Yeah. And loads of statues. And all these dudes have wings. Very, very typically dismissed as kind of like, you know, oh, it was just a, you know, an intellectual giant, you know, giant of power or regality and it's like, okay, but there's a lot of them. There's a lot of references all across the world to these giants. So, you know, I find that very interesting. And, you know, like, there was the reality of fossils. This is the reality of fossils. There is a tiny, tiny amount of all the things that die that leave a fossil. Right. Most things don't leave a fossil when they die. They get absorbed by the earth eaten by scavengers, bacteria, you're right away. The sun bleaches your bones. And it's over within a few hundred years, there's nothing left. Occasionally you get lucky and someone or a dinosaur gets falls into a bog and you get evidence. But if you don't get that evidence, it doesn't mean it didn't exist. You know, and exactly. The giant one is a weird, it is a weird one because there's so many depictions in ancient literature of giants, giant beings. And you got to wonder, okay, are we talking about like men from Iceland? Are we talking about giants that are just enormous human beings? Like those big chads. But those dudes that do those strong men competition, they all like the mountain. Those guys all live in Iceland. They're all Iceland. All right. What the fuck is that about? Exactly. Well, yeah, what is that about? Vikings? Right. They were the Vikings. And that's what's left. But is it that? Are we talking about that? Or are we talking about another race of human that's even larger? And if they found it, do they tell us? Like they tell us about certain, they tell us about Denisovans similar to us, they tell us about Homo, Julianne similar to us, just a little bit bigger. They've had a fucking four foot skull. Do they tell us? What is like this like snippets? Isn't there from the black and white days, 1920s, where the Smithsonian kind of quickly covered things up. And like, this is very much the main giant bones from a giant human. Yeah, there seems to be there's all these Native American stories about giant right headed humans. And you know, yeah, in the burial mountains, yeah, supposedly. But here's the thing is like this is the real question. Would if archaeologists stumbled upon a four foot head and they were under the, you know, the guides of the university, would they shut it down? That's what you get. What they release it. I am fascinated by the fact that I have to ask that question. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I would assume that if archaeologists found right, of course, they would release it. Yeah, we have found evidence of a giant, like a giant human being in this might be one. The first one we find, it might have been a whole race of them that existed 20,000 years ago. Yeah, I, what they tell us, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. It is we don't know if they would tell us. They might not. The government might step in and say you are not allowed. Well, that's the thing is it might supersede just academic circles, archaeology. It might get a little bit more serious. Why? The implications of our ancient history and, you know, what exactly was taking place? I am fascinated by some areas that seem to have a level of kind of like theologic reference to them. So, you know, the, you know, the book of Enoch and the watches, you need to send down on Mount Herman in Baal Beck. Right. So that's Baal Beck, which is Baal Beck, the Lord of the Becca Valley and Baal the Storm God, like the one that everyone, you know, talks about the sacrifices to Baal. That's also the place that has these insane trillion stones. That's just about to mention them. Yeah. That's it. The trilithins, the trilithins, 800 to 1,000 tons, 800 to 1,000 tons apiece. And they're not even laying on the ground. No, they've been lifted up. They've been lifted up quite significantly. And this is the thing, man. You know, somewhere like this, so you've got this weird story about this is basically 30 miles away from there is Mount Herman where the, where the watches apparently came down from the sky. And then it comes in possible blocks in this, and the quarry there as well. The quarry there, you have like the stone of the pregnant woman, which is like 1,250 tons. And there's another one there. It's like 1,500 tons. Like these were never fully excavated, but they're there getting ready. And they've just been documented in situ. But then yeah, 300 meters up the road, or less, is the temple of Jupiter, which again, mainstream academics will attribute to first century Romans. But the first century Romans had like wooden pulleys and like little wooden cranes. Like this is insane. This is an 800 to 1,000 ton block. Three of them that were lifted up. I think it's like, at least like 20 meters or something. You know, yeah. Jamie, can you please show us a photo of it? I always love looking at it. Especially if you can find one with a human being standing in it like corsets. If he's like, yeah, this is a good one. Like it's phenomenal how big these are. It's so crazy. It freaks me out. It's so crazy to think that they would we believe they use some sort of stone tools or copper tools and like and pulleys. It's get this in place. And you got it out of the quarry. How? Well, then yeah, that's a really place. That's Ollie and Tambourine Peru. Yeah, which I'll be showing in my next episode of ancient technology. It's the Trillium stone. Trillithin. Trillithin. Trillithin. The Trillithin stones. Yeah, Baal back. And one of the interesting things that Corsetty was saying is like, that's not even a place where they take a lot of tourists to. Okay. So there it is. So you see the person and then look above how big those stones are. This is not sensible to attribute to first century Rome. Now go back to just 11 onwards. That's it. They're so big. That one. And then there's a good black and white one. We see with the yellow. Yeah, they go. There's two little dudes sitting on top of them. Creeeee. Absolutely phenomenal. And then, you know, the smaller blocks on top. That is first century Romans. Absolutely without a doubt. There is obvious evidence that they tell to the Jupiter. Yeah, they built it on top of an ancient ancient foundation, which they were not capable of doing. Probably a landing pad. That's what so many people say that. You know, whatever I post like any, it's like there's a landing pad for the spaceships. Landing pad for the ships. But what's crazy about that as well? Just a real quick aside. We're not even an aside. Isn't it addition to that? Is that okay? So the mainstream attributes says the first century Romans. But then the Romans liked to brag about all the things they did. And third century Romans bragged about the lateral obelisk that's now sitting in Rome. And the lateral obelisk is about 350 to 400 tons. That's the heaviest recorded lift in Roman history. These are 800 to 1000 tons. They never even mentioned them. So it's weird that we attribute it to Romans. But it's because we within our model for history, we can't not. If we're going to listen to academics, right? So you have to then invoke fringe theories. I had a rep lunar on the podcast. Oh, yeah. Yeah. One really got me to read the book of Enoch. She's taking in. Oh, yeah. She's taking in. She's all in on the UFOs. I know she is. I heard that. Yeah. I mean, are she useful to them? You know, it's all the things maybe maybe it's hot. But when I started reading it, no, if that was included in the Bible, if they had because it really was rabbis that it didn't jive with the tour, right? Right. Right. And so they said, no, no, this was crazy. Yeah. If that was in the Bible, that's what we were talking things to be different. Do you have you think they just brought your skin down? But meanwhile, that is in the same area of kumaron written down as the book of Isaiah. So all these things that are included in the Bible, that's that's there. That's all the same. Why we ignoring some of it? Like that's really crazy. Why ignoring the stuff that seems the most cookie? I again, I think that there's probably maybe disagreements because I mean, you know, there's so much change for the biblical canon from all of these different, you know, councils at the council of Nicaea, all these different sense, sense rings and changing of the Bible. It's probably personal issue. It could be something as simple as just someone who personally did not believe that. As a bullshit, remove that. That's not real. There's no way they would giant. But I love how at the beginning of the Bible. It's like, there were giants in those times and the times before anyway, all over. Moving on, never mentioned it again, like in any sort of real context of, and like, you know, David and Goliath in a few situations. But no, I really am starting to wonder if there was a giant race that was like this. I think there was a really day. The Native American depictions alone. Yeah, there's too much story, too many stories of enormous men that they had to kill. Yeah. Yeah. And they're history, that oral tradition goes so far back. Yeah. I mean, imagine we're talking 10,000. But now that we know that human beings lived in North America 22,000 plus years ago. Right. So the the fossilized footprints that they found in New Mexico. So that's 22,000 years. So imagine 22,000 years ago, these things were a real thing. How many of you have found? You haven't found any bones of humans from 22,000 years ago in North America. Have you? No. Right. So why exactly does the Smithsonian have them? These motherfuckers. If they really do have a giant down there, I think they probably did. Yeah. There's like a, there's a tomb that you have to go into. It's like a vault that cranks open the vault. It's like the history version of Area 51. You see a fucking head the size of this table. You're like, what? That's what we're dealing with. That's what we're dealing with. Yeah. Yeah. We had to kill them off. Maybe. Which totally makes sense. Why would you let that motherfucker live? Right. You got a 10 foot tall, 12 foot tall. That's a problem. Yeah, 2000 pound human. Yeah. It's people. That is a problem. I wonder, you know, was it always get this because like the watches themselves are never described as giant beings. Right. I wonder where the giant came into the equation. Well, isn't it just compared to them? Maybe because like, there were slight aliens like alien grays or something. And you know, well, look at the discord description of the Nephilim. Are they destroyed everything? Yeah. Like they created this, this thing that consumed everything and destroyed everything, including mankind. Like, what does that sound like? It sounds like a, it sounds like a, it sounds like a, right. And also like you're saying mankind, like mankind, what are you saying? Are you saying aliens? Like what, who wrote this? Yeah. Like what does mankind, for sure. What does that term mean? I bet you're not saying man, I bet you're probably using an ancient language to describe whatever the dominant force was at the time that's writing all this down. What were we talking about? Yeah. What is these watchers? They made it with humans? So what are they? And they created something to destroy everything? What? So okay, what is that? What are you talking about? And doesn't that sound exactly humans? Like what do we do? We fucking destroy everything. Yeah. We destroy everything. We light things on fire. We suck all the fish out of the ocean. We throw a garbage in it. We are so destructive. Yeah. We're so consuming. We consume. You know, we're one of the only animals that dies because we eat too much. Yeah. Right. Right. What are you all the only? Yeah. Well, we're, and we're one of the, we are the only example on this planet of the level of intelligence that we have. I mean, it's just phenomenal. I mean, really quite phenomenal when you consider all of the various avenues of evolution that have been given the opportunity. We have a massive leap. Yeah. Phenomenally, but a leap that has to, in some way, have been intervened with. Yeah. My opinion. I mean, it's such a quantum leap in our ability of cognition and the brain size. I mean, I do find the stone deep theory very interesting and, and you know, the concept of using psychedelics and I think there's a role to play in that for sure. But I, I just think that when you, when you have such a novel trajectory change from every other creature, every other animal on this planet, that tells me that there is something fundamentally accelerated in humans and whether that can just be put down to shamanic use of psychedelics, I don't know. I think that when you invoke again, all of these various theologics stories, it becomes clear that something was interfacing with us. And perhaps at one point, we were interfacing with them. And there was a communication and a relation that has since long degraded after, you know, cataclysmic outreach is in, you know, I think the evolution that came out of psychedelics and and primitive man was the escape from the barbaric nature of our roots. Right. Right. Right. Right. I don't think it's necessarily the development of the human brain. I think it's probably in a way to also ways to use the human brain with its primate background, but soften the ego. Right. Right. Yeah. Yeah. And in, endorse a feeling of community, like in promote the feeling of community and love and the connectedness that you get from psychedelics. So it will allow you to traverse the timelines between incredibly barbaric hunter-gatherers, which stone-tip tools to agrarian societies, where people are all living together and cooperating and it makes sense. But what doesn't make sense is the giant leap to being a human in the first place. No, it's kooky. It is. And it's in the Bible. At least in the book of Enoch, it's the crazy part about it is that they literally describe what we're and not just us, like many people of theorize, like have we been a product, are we a product of genetic manipulation? Are we a product of accelerated evolution? Well, again, my, my own experiences, I just feel like there is, there is quite obviously a vast intelligence spectrum out there, in my opinion. And I think it goes beyond our own perception of space and time. And I think that there are likely things that can come in from, realms that we just don't really believe a real like the astral and, and you know, even the realm of the imagination is an interesting thing. What is this place inside of our heads that we can instantaneously create anything we want and all things, including everything on this table once came from inside someone's mind? Like we are excretors of ideas into reality. We kind of render reality into something that nothing else does. And I think that there is a spark within us that speaks to what people would call a divine spark for sure. And maybe that is a divine spark. Maybe it's a highly intelligent race that intervened and gave us that spark. But we are entirely different. And I do think that as we begin to get deeper and deeper into kind of like the, the physics of our reality and our fundamental connection to it, we start realizing that our physiology, our body is like an antenna. It's like a technology. It's an instrument for picking up on signals and perhaps even consciousness itself. I don't know if you're familiar with microtubules and the orchestrated objective reduction theory by Stuart Hamroff and Sir Roger Penrose. How many times do you bring that up to people and they go, oh yeah, I know you do. Oh, I know exactly what I was saying. Well, I hang out with some weird fucking people, but I just thought it might have come. I definitely have heard Don Controssle say to you, microtubules, man. Yes. Microtubules. No, so I did an interview with an anesthesiologist called Stuart Hamroff and him and Sir Roger Penrose developed a model called the orchestrated objective reduction theory or OAR looking at microtubules, which are these tiny helical structures inside our neurons. And I forget the exact metric, but it's something ridiculous like 10,000 microtubules per neuron. So it's just, you know, this incredible architecture of these tiny little helical structures that apparently are so small that they interact with quantum vibrations in fields. That's how fine and tiny they are. And the reason I bring this up is because I think that we're getting deeper now with things like the OAR theory into looking at the structures within humanity that actually seem to be receiving nodes or receptive nodes for energy that could then be translated into consciousness. The whole idea of are we generating consciousness from our brain or are we receiving consciousness and we're just a conduit for it? Yes. And I think the evidence is getting a little bit more clear that we're a conduit. And I just wonder if that's evolution naturally or if that's, you know, interaction from these others that have come and meddled with our genealogy. It's a good question that we'll have to ponder when I come back from peeing. You do that. Let's yeah. We'll pause. No worries. All right. Well, Jamie brought something up, which is a really interesting video that I took when I was out in Sakara in Egypt. Again, with Jeffrey Drum, he was taking me through. And yeah, this is an awesome place. So just for context before we play it, yeah, take your back to the beginning. This is inside the pyramid of Yunas in Sakara. And this is deep down inside of it inside what they call the burial chamber. Now you see all of these, you know, amazing Arabic artwork that's been quite relatively crudely scratched in. Now you see that glow? That's actually calcite crystal. And that's limestone. Now the entire back of this chamber, like this wall, the back wall, the other wall and the ceiling and the floor is made out of a slab of calcite crystal. But what's really interesting about this is that when you take a flashlight and you put it in a certain angle on this wall, something very interesting appears. Boom. Ha. And otherwise invisible etching of an individual. You can see the navel, the belly button and the arms. And this is completely invisible until you get that flashlight. Now these have been actually smoothed, I'm going to go promo for my episode, but these have actually been smoothed into the calcite crystal itself. And then obviously these Aramaic writings and pictographs have been scratched on afterwards. So clearly this is the original artwork of this chamber. But it's not perceptible without a very specific angle of light that creates the shadows. And these are on the other side of the wall as well. I think in this clip, maybe he doesn't show it. But very, very strange. Now this entire pyramid is a coostically profound. I mean, the the acoustics inside of this are unbelievable. The amount of echo that you get. And the entire sakura site, we went around it. And now me my god, it's a weird site man. You've got again, just incredibly huge slabs of rose quartz granite. And there's one area that's like on the other side of the pyramid, not even near the entrance, which is just this huge port callus made of granite with interlocking pieces where clearly another piece of stone was slipped between them. But this is nowhere even connected to the pyramid infrastructure. And they don't say anything about it. Strew and across this entire place. You've got huge blocks of granite with drill holes in them. You can see the striation marks going all the way through them. And his opinion, Jeffries. And I think there's merit to it because in Cairo, museum, there's a little cabinet of laboratory equipment like jogs and apothecary bottles that were recovered from sakura, including a little plate. There's like a little plaque. This wasn't included. This would put into the actual exhibition, but it's tucked into the corner of Cairo museum. You have to find it. And you have to really look for it. There's a little plaque saying that the the area of sakura was a laboratory. And again, like this completely contradicts all of the things that they say about ancient Egypt, but it's in the Cairo museum. It's literally written as the ancient laboratory of sakura. And so, you know, what's going on there? Why why is there a contradiction like that? That's being acknowledged. And it's it's it's truly just an incredible place with the shadow figures and the acoustic resonance of the site, the rose granite. So why do you think that it was originally these carvings were in the wall and then they rode on it afterwards? Well, I think it's just another case of a later civilization coming across an incredibly amazing place and carving on it. Maybe they didn't even see these figures because you have to have a very specific type of light to actually be able to see them. You have to get it at that angle. It's possible to detect by looking at it. There's some variation. I mean, you can see when you actually know what you're looking for. But barely anything. It's like really hard to perceive. So maybe they didn't even know that these things were down there when they went. There's another part of this when you're going through the chambers where it's rose granite, rose granite, and then plaster where you've got hieroglyphics put on the top and you can actually see the plaster is kind of bleeding off into the rose granite. So it feels like they found it. They slapped some hieroglyphs on it. They, you know, put their own veneration around it. But it was not an original structure of the Egyptians once again, a place that they found and settled around. But it's just weird that in the Cairo Museum you have like this tiny little shelf full of beakers and measuring jug type things. And it says that the lab complex of saccara is just doesn't make any sense in comparison to what they're trying to tell us is the reality this place. So that's, yeah, that's weird. It's all weird. It's all weird. That's why the the bottleneck of talking about the stuff is so infuriating. It's the same place by the way we have the Serapea, you know, the 80 ton boxes that are precision marble top the ones that Christopher Don went down into was like these have been machined. Yeah, let's change pull up photo of those please. They're strange. It's like, what do you think they were doing with those things? Like, what are those? What was the purpose? Well, you know what's interesting is they were, um, so these things are absolutely incredible. And there's a few questions with this. One, if you go onto that image, zoom out, just go to that image on the right where you've got the entrance, just the entrance into the, yeah, this one here. So this is, you know, this is the entrance into the Serapea, or the Serapea, however you want to pronounce it. It's a subterranean labyrinth and these corridors are extremely small. There's actually a half finished, um, a half finished one sitting in the middle of a corridor and you can kind of really get a scope for the size. But these are 70 ton, 70 to 80 ton granite sarcopha guy. They attribute it to the apis bulls. They say that there was a, you know, a cult around his region that venerated the apis bulls and that these were burial chambers for the apis bulls. But you know, the, the, the, the, you know, it's funny about that is the only, the only thing that they have to evidence this is no, no bones of bulls or anything like that. What they have is a single hieroglyph on one of these, um, one of these boxes of a bull. That's it. They have a hieroglyph with a bull on it. And that's why they attribute it to the apis bulls. Regardless of the fact that these are precision carved 80 to, you know, 70 to 80 ton granite marble top smooth boxes with even more precision inside. They're even more precise on the inside, which is strange. You wouldn't necessarily need them to be that precise if they're just, uh, funerary boxes. But the precision is actually more impressive internally than it is externally. And, um, how long would it take to make one of those? My question, make it move it, put it in place. That bull's long dead. Let it go. Let it go. Do you know that? It's not that you're quite the time you finish that thing. That's crazy. Not, man. Absolutely not. And there's so much as one of the big things that Christopher Don Sorem was just like, no, no, there's just no way. Look at the people standing next to those stones. I've been inside one of these. Did someone move it there and then put that other one on top of it? Unbelievable. When? Who? How? Yeah. And again, like, you know, to say that's not a mystery is nuts. It is nuts. And also if you go on that image where they're shining a light and someone's leaning on it on like, uh, the right hand side. Yeah, that one there. So so many of these, um, the boxes themselves are so precise. But the actual writing is extremely crude. It's been scratched up. It's basically just been scratched up. A lot of them, it kind of feels like as the, a lot of these pharaohs did, they just went and slapped a cartoon shot it. I own this. This is mine. Right. And so, you know, the, the exterior work contradicts the advancement of the actual box itself. It doesn't make sense. There's only one in here that's actually got 3D actual carved in artwork. And that one actually does make sense. But these ones will chicken scratch. It's just been scratched on. Of course. Which is what people do, which is what people do. I mean, a lot of history of human beings doing that to ancient things. Yeah. If you go on a third image, actually, that's an interesting image, because you've got these, uh, such low quality, that's a shame. But you can actually see these dimples where they've smoothed out the stone. And what's weird about this is that, so if these were funerary boxes, you would expect the external to be the most impressive, because that's what people are going to see. Right. But instead, you actually have a lot of, uh, malformation on the boxes. And one of the theories about this, and this is something that there, there was a good example of this. One of the theories about this is one that Jeffrey Drombaut for me is that whatever was going on inside of these cases, the exterior had to have absolutely zero critical imperfections. So any cracks, anything that was problematic would have been dissolved out, smoothed away. And you have this, this weird kind of dimpling on a lot of these. And some where you can actually see a crack where the cracks been removed and it's been kind of smoothed and then inside it's like 90 degree, just perfect. And so it just kind of contradicts the idea of it being further, you know, a funerary purpose. You'd expect the outside to be absolutely perfect and beautiful. But it's not. It's all kind of malshaped. And as if they were trying to remove any sort of cracks, anything that could cause a structural problem. And then inside there, perfect. So it it does make me wonder about the real purpose behind why you're assuming that it would be cracks. Why wouldn't it just be that they didn't have a need to finish the top of it? Because some of the much carpentry, well, some of them are finished quite profoundly. And then you have others that have got these big dimples in them where it just looks like they were trying to remove anything that might have been a critical like damage to the structure. Obviously this is guess what? We would be the purpose that would be to keep it from cracking all the way through. I just find it very interesting that the inside is more impressive than the outside for something that's meant to be viewed as a funerary box for an enormous funerary box. It has, does anybody have a wacky far out theory of what they were actually for? I mean, there's always some, I mean, one of them, I find interesting is the idea that it could be like some form of like a sound bath, like an ice-literary chamber where they'll go into and have like some form of experiences. You're going to count on someone to move that fucking thing? Like, you know what? There's such... nice literary chamber where they'll go into and have some form of experiences. You're going to count on someone to move that fucking thing? You know what? They're such a strong, they're such a strong, evidential trail of acoustic sciences in the ancient past, especially archaea were cue sticks in terms of the actual architecture itself, like the pyramids, they're designed to resonate. Like one of the most, sorry. One of the most interesting places that I've been to in terms of looking at the acoustics of places as well as Malta, the island of Malta. And the island of Malta is very interesting because when the Bronze Age settlers from Sicily and other areas of Italy came over to Malta for the first time, they discovered an island that was absolutely littered with megalithic sites and Malta has got the highest concentration of megalithic sites in the world. But there were no people. They all gone. No one knows who they were. It was just a land full of these incredible megalithic temples. And one in particular called the hypergium of Halcefliani. Now the hypergium is fascinating, dude. It's a subterranean huge, huge temple temple that was discovered by road workers. And they would literally just ship in a way at the road and then it collapsed in and they find this huge, what they call an acropolis because they found hundreds of skeletons down here. This thing is incredible. This is all carved out of the limestone and it is an overlapping geometric series of chambers that is so obviously acoustically tuned that if you actually, if you wanted to search hypergium acoustics, it will come up with studies where they've noticed that this is absolutely deliberately acoustically tuned complex. Go on the actual website, not images. That's an interesting one. Whether or not it's entirely accurate, someone's comparing the hypergium to the human ear. Specifically because of the fact that this place absolutely is acoustically tuned to resonate between 110 and 115 hertz, which is the bandwidth to activate certain brain states like alpha and theta brain where you can get into more meditative states of consciousness. And only 20% of this site is accessible to the public, 70% of it's locked off, and they treat it like a skiff. They take your phone, they take your camera, you can't bring any audio recording devices into it. Nothing. Very curated tour for like, you know, 30 minutes and then out. Why is 70% of it locked off? That's a great question. They say it's for preservation of the site because it's such a delicate, neolithic. It's prehistoric, I believe it's prehistoric. And again, this speaks to what was going on in prehistory because this is a acoustically profound series of chambers that have been carved out of the limestone bedrock by people that we attribute bone antler tools to, you know, chipping away at it with bone antler tools and they made something as profound. So it's prehistoric. Well, they dated to about, I think about 5,000 years ago, about five. Yeah. But it's mainstream, mainstream. What? Mainstream. Yeah. Yeah. Carved. Carved. It's, it's carved out of the bedrock. Out of the bedrock, out of the bedrock, it's huge, huge thing. And what's even weirder about it? Is that they found all these elongated skulls at the bottom of it. And one, I've seen one personally. I went to the museum of Valletta in Malta and saw one of these elongated skulls. What's very interesting about these skulls is that they actually lack the sagittal suture that we have going down the back of the head. So, you know, we have this sagittal suture, which pushes the growth plates together as you come through the birth canal. Not that one. The third one, sorry, the fourth one, that one. And then there's other images, which are actually the one below it, where you've got skulls recovered from the hypergium. Yeah. So this is their elongated skull. This only got the horizontal, horizontal suture. No vertical suture, which is what all humans have, a vertical suture. Now, apparently hundreds of elongated skulls were discovered in the hypergium, but only a couple of them were on display in Valletta. And I've got a couple of friends who are in, have you heard of the Knights of Malta? No. It's a kind of a secret order, a bit like Freemasonry. It's spawned from the Vatican. The Vatican basically threw these people into Malta and said, fuck off and go do your wish stuff over there. But now it's a very connected, you know, kind of like with the Vatican order, the Knights of Malta. A very powerful group. Very much in the geopolitical world stage. And friend of mine who's within that was like, yeah, they bring out this book once a year in the Valletta Museum. And it's detailing the skulls of the hypergium. And apparently tell the story of how the locals would throw bodies down there. Because there are beings down there that they wanted to prevent from coming up to the surface. And this is the strange thing is the hypergium is full of normal human bodies, hundreds, not buried with respect, but just piled down there. And then also elongated skulls. And the story is, according to this very ancient book that they bring out and put out once a year, you have to be lucky to catch it. It apparently describes that they were using this as a place to discard bodies, to prevent these creatures from coming up to the surface. So they were feeding them? Feeding them. Feeding them. So when people would die, they would just throw them down that hole. Or when people were bad people. Maybe. Yeah. Yeah. Throw them down that hole to it. So these elongated skull things were eating people? Well, that's, that's, you know, the connections we might make from that kind of connotation from these books. But that's certainly something that is rolled out in the Valletta Museum once a year, if you get to go there and see it. So the, you know, that like an ancient version of Scientology, somebody make all this up? Dude, I don't know. But the, well, I mean, in terms of... Very strange that there's the hyper-jamming cell for humans, skeletons down there. Oh, yeah. I mean, they did find a profound amount of them, which is why the mainstream labels it as a necropolis. But there's no burial respect being done. It was just piles of bodies, like piles and bodies did. And again, it's just so profound. This is called the Oracle Room. Yes, the Oracle Room. Yeah. This is where the sound concentrates. Read the conversation. I found here, these two paragraphs, I guess. It's going to be a little long, but it's not that long. During testing, a deep male voice tuned to these frequencies, stimulated a resonance phenomenon throughout the hyper-jam, creating bone-chilling effects. It was reported that the sounds echoed for up to eight seconds. Archaeologists Fernando Combria, or Combria, Quimbra, Quimbra, said that he felt the strong, the sound crossing his body at high speed, leaving a sensation of relaxation. When it was repeated, the sensation returned. And he also had the illusion that the sound was reflected from his body to the ancient red ochre paintings on the walls. One can only imagine the experience in antiquity, standing in what must, excuse me, in what must have been somewhat odorous, dark, and listening to ritual chant while low-light flickered over the bones of one's departed loved ones. Holy shit. Yeah, dude. I'm not going to say it. Might have felt like what drugs do to us. Yeah. So they made a drug house. He goes on the state, yeah. Under right circumstances, ancient populations were able to obtain different states of consciousness without the use of drugs or chemical subs. Or maybe in... Yeah, yeah. This is the one where this is the Monroe Institute of Applied Sciences and Binaural Beats. Way, way before we were around. This is the original psychoacoustic architecture. The idea that ancient architecture is designed in a way to propagate acoustics that affect the human brain. Now imagine this is 5,000 years ago. And where did you learn that from? Right. How did you do that? Did you fail? Right. Did you learn? Where's the science? And another interesting... How do you know? There are a lot of temple sites in Malta that look weirdly similar to New Grange in Ireland and New Grange is another psychoacoustic temple. If you want to call it a temple, it's a huge mound if you look it up. But within it, they've done, again, acoustic studies and it propagates in for sound. Sound below the threshold of human hearing. And that's the stuff that reverberates for your chest cavity, for your bone structure. That's what that guy is describing. It's in for sonic sound. You know when you're like, yeah, yeah, yeah. And then there's a... Oh, wow. Oh, is it again Neolithic? I don't know the exact date, but it's Neolithic. And these spiral patterns are in the hypergim. Those spiral patterns are in the hypergim in red ochre. This is island. The same structure. That's very famous Irish. This, by the way, is incredible because it's completely singular. There's no break in the line. That's a very hard piece of geometry to actually create at the time as well. It's extremely complex because all of this feeds into itself. There's no break in that line. It's a very complex geometry. But that same type of geometry is also found in the hypergim and it's found in red ochre on the painting. These swirling, these swirling kind of motifs. So it's very interesting. You have these weird correlations between places that were separated by entire oceans in Neolithic time. Do you think they represent sound waves? Yes. Yeah, I think it's about the flow of acoustics, the flow of movement and sound. That was perhaps their interpretation or perhaps out of visual hallucination that gave them the idea of it being this swirling pattern. But yeah, I find this island. This is island. And there's just some striking similarities between places like this and places in Malta. Again, it just leads into the idea that there was perhaps a globally maritime connected civilization that was using these psycho acoustic attributions in sites to produce novel effects of consciousness, inducing brain hemisphere synchronization. What they're trying to do in my ass with the CIA. And here's the real question. How did they learn how to do that? How long did it take before you figured out how to carve that out of a mountain? Yeah, exactly. You know, these are the questions that are absolutely not being answered by our understanding of history. These are the red ochre, the more rough ones are the ones in the hypergim incredibly old. Also a very good everywhere. Yeah. Like it's not. Other cultures have that as well. Right. The spirals. That's what I mean. So that right there is also in New Grange in Ireland, like pretty much the same. But not just those two places. There's some other places. The swirling motif is one of the oldest. I mean, it is one of the oldest. You know, it's everywhere. But the implication of it being about sound is very interesting when you find it represented in places that are absolutely acoustically tuned from prehistory. Yeah, dude. Like, you know, it's weird. There's another one in Peru called shavender hunter, which is a, there's a temple built above it. This is another thing that you find. I mean, this one in Malta, they haven't done this, but you do definitely seem to find layering like GONUN PADAGIN Indonesia, where you have like the original structure below and people just piling up on top of it over time. So in shavender hunter in Peru, you have this amazing temple site. But below ground is a labyrinth of corridors that also propagate acoustics to the point where it brings up infrasound. So below this is an infrasonic laboratory essentially of labyrinth, the impassages that were used for ritual acoustics. And they actually found inside of this, CONCH shells that had been purposefully re-engineered to produce a new harmonic when blown into them. Like they had actually changed them into a different site. Oh, so they go in the acoustic chambers and blow the CONCH shells and someone would obviously be walking through this perhaps as a form of right of passage. Could you imagine going back in time now, man? I really want to be in a fly on the wild. I wish we could. Yes, it's not incredibly profound stone masonry, but it does produce infrasonic reverberation. They have proven that and looked it up. And yeah, the CONCH shells were found there that have got all of these designs on them and have been purposefully changed to produce a different sound. So there is a clear lineage of acoustic science way before acoustic science was acoustic science, at least to our terms. So brings up big questions. And the fact that it was influencing consciousness, I think that we just had an incredibly intelligent but shamanically orientated society at one point. We were using our human ingenuity, but we were using it to create effects more spiritually aligned than anything else. And these are all chambers for inducing expanded states of consciousness. The real question though is what technology were the utilizing for the construction? That's the real question, especially when you get to the megalithic stuff. Yeah. Like, what is this? Because this is not what we're saying. It is there's no way this is stone tools, there's no way this is copper. This is something nutty. Well, that's why the knobs are interesting because it almost seems like the stone was being softened and perhaps like, you know, if you were pulling a spoon out of hot toffee, you'd get that pullback, right? You'd get like a kind of protrusion. When you want to smooth that down though? They do. And then they don't. That's what's really weird about it, especially in Peru. Peru has so many stone knobs. But it is a place in Peru called the kori kancho, which is like the kind of main temple in Cusco, the sun temple. And you know, these precision, there's various layers of architecture in Peru. I'll be it's all being attributed to the anchor, which is weird. Rough cutstone work. Then the weird megalithic kind of smushed together stones. Then you have what's called ashlar stone work, which is where it's like a bunker. If you look at the, it's it's it's spelled with a Q Q O R I K A N C H A kori kancho. If you look it up like and looking. Yeah, so you have to go inside it really to really get this. The bunkers inside of it. These print look at the wall on the outside. Actually real quick before you do that. If you click on one of these images and just enlarge it. The first one's probably the best one. Yes, that's ashlar stone work. That bottom bit that is original. This was built by the conquistadors, right? The rest of it's been built up by the conquistadors from Spain. But this original stone work is also represented inside with these incredible bunkers. So if you type in like bunker, it's got it. Yeah, like this image here, like the level of precision on these is absolutely phenomenal. I mean, we're talking just complete precise fitting stones, not globular, like sacsail woman, like marshmallows, but just precise blocks. Like these bunkers here, yeah, like down here. This is all original work and then they built a, you know, Spanish inspired temple over the top of it. So what you're asserting is that this was your first. Yes, yeah, this stuff it was here first. Like this stuff was absolutely here first. And if you look up, there's a little nub, not stone nub right at the top there. But some of these walls have like 10 nubs on them, like one here, one here, one here, and then there's none. So it's like they were smoothing out some of them, leaving others. Some have speculated that it's a form of language because in Peru, the Inca, you know, the Inca language was there like written language. It was called Kipu and it wasn't written. It was pieces of string with knots on them in different colors. That was that was the historical language. So it was literally like a line of different strings, different lengths, different colors with little knots in them, which corresponded to data. And most of this was lost by the Spanish conquistadors because they went over there and it was like burn this shit, burn this pagan nonsense. Yeah, this was their language. Oh my. This was their language. And it just made me wonder that obviously this is a complete guess. But it just made me wonder if like the stone nubs are stone kipu. Is it a stone version with all these different knobs on different places and different areas? Because it just feels like especially in the karikansha, which is a temple, it's a regal temple. Why would you leave the nubs on? Like you said, why wouldn't they smooth these down? So it's almost like it's meant to tell us something and they're left in very specific areas. Then in Peru, you get stone nubs protruding straight out of bedrock. That's what weirds me out is that it's not just on the crafted stones, but like a sheer rock face that's been obviously kind of quarry down by some unknown technique without any chisel marks, just straight. And then you have like a group of nubs coming out of the stone. So Peru is just full of contradictory architecture. And I think that the Spanish went over there and they saw places like Saxo Aman and they attributed it to the Inca. They attributed the Inca, the Andean shamans say it's not the Inca. The Inca themselves to the Spanish conquistador said we found these places. But we take the words of the Spanish conquistadors and we apply it to our knowledge set and we teach that. And it's just like I was saying to you before, we're basing so much of our history off of like the word of people from like the 1800s. And clearly we're seeing contradictions of that even in as Graham Hancock would certainly say the oral traditions of the local region. The people are saying differently, but we're listening to the foreigners who went over there and destroyed things and burnt things and burnt the keeper and went back and taught us what their civilisation is all about. It doesn't make any sense. Wow. But yeah, Peru is fascinating to it. Peru is one of the most interesting places I've ever been. And has it had the same level of discovery of not like Egypt? No. No. I mean, like there are areas in Peru. In fact, Shoutout to my friend, Raul Bilecki from Pillars of the Past. He's a guy who's out there in Peru literally just going out into the middle of nowhere. He's found pyramid sites in the middle of nowhere that have absolutely zero recording, no excavation, no study, no name. Just they don't exist in the record, but they're out there in the middle of nowhere in Peru. And so like Peru has... How many? He's found a pretty impressive complex, actually. He found a pretty impressive complex. He's got videos of it, like drone footage. It's like in the places where you could actually still be a real explorer. Yeah. Yeah. If you want to go off into the Andean mountains, like he's finding stuff in the Andean, the high up in the mountains that nobody's documented. Like nobody's seeing it. He's a real adventure, but it just proves that yeah, like you said, there are still places like this where you can do discovery. That's... Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Peru. That is really cool. The Amazon rainforest. Like, you know, all of the things that could be in there through Lidar or already seeing so much geometry, so much evidence that there was a massive amount of civilization going on in that jungle. So, you know, this is getting very interesting to me. And again, this weird climatological stability through the last glacial maximums, the younger dryest, this period of about 6,000 years where they had access to development without being disturbed. So, you know, you have these incredible anti-sisemic, anti-earthquake, megalithic structures in Peru using materials that they shouldn't have been able to use using multi-ton stones. That's an interesting area, although I will say that it's made out of tough, which is volcanic rock, very easy to cut because it's actually compressed ash. So that's a really cool place, but it's not as mind-blowing in terms of how they cut the rock because it's extremely soft rock, but so this is doable. This is doable. This is doable. But there are other things. In fact, could you go on my YouTube channel real quick? This is an area in Saxa Woman, which has got, there's a diarite outcrop, which is an incredibly hard stone. There's a measurement of hardness scale that goes up to 10 with diamond being the hardest and diarites. It's at about 6.5 to 7 out of 10, whereas bronze sits at 3 to 3.5 out of 10. So, you know, there's a discrepancy with the hardness of the material to start with. But yeah. So, if you go back to the beginning of it, sorry, Ma, I wish I could see the screen. It's going to be difficult, I think. Keep it playing. I'll talk about this and they will come up in a moment. I'm sure. But all across Peru, you have these incredibly precise cuts into bedrock with very little evidence of any sort of chisel marks and no real understanding of how they were able to excavate it. These incredible just voids into the rock. But there's one area in particular. This is just the beginning of my video. But there's one area in particular in Saxa Woman, which is this gigantic... If you could probably just type it in, if you typed in Saxa Woman, diarite steps or something like that. I know. SAQ, SAQ, SAY, Saxa, Waman, WAMAN. Yeah, Saxa Woman, diarite, steps. Sorry, Ma, diarite, dio, RIT, E. Sorry, brother. I think we're actually getting... I just... I'm trying to listen while I'm typing and... No, I don't know. Sorry, I do. But yes, yes, that's the one. So this is diarite. This is incredibly hard stone. To give some context, the stones at Saxa Woman are extremely impressive, but the I made of limestone, a little bit softer, a bit more workable. This is impossible. If you can find a HD, I've got a 4K video of this. Like, I just wanted to see it in that video. If you can find a HD image, it's shined like a marble top. Like, these are just precision cut into this huge outcrop of diarite, which they actually believe was a magma burst. So a huge blob of magma came bursting out of the ground and formed into this huge stone mound that's adjacent to Saxa Woman. And you've got cuts like this where it's just insanely perfect. And this is not possible with a Bronze Age toolkit. This to me is actually more interesting in some ways than Saxa Woman itself, because it's just a complete contradiction of the Bronze Age tools. You shouldn't be able to do that on diarite. Yeah, it's wild. I mean, how long did that take? And it's smooth down to a point where it's like shiny. Like, what did they do? And what's the purpose of it? And there's always a weird, weird concept like that. Yeah, there's all these weird little cuts into the stone like that. And across Peru, you just find like, you know, these voids where it's just like a 90 degree cut into stone with perfect finish and no sign of chiseling. And the thing is the back is smooth too. And the back is also smooth. I've just got it out of it. This is the thing, man. I just find that so fascinating. This is what's really sweet. It clearly seems like there's a lost technology. Yeah. That these ancient people had figured something out. They probably existed for thousands of years. They were probably really advanced. Just in a different pipeline. Yeah. But they went in a different highway. I will say this, and I'm sure you'll be happy to bring it up. There is one guy out there who's trying his best to prove how they were liquefying stone and then bringing it back. And I only know his X handle, which is faux marron, like FOMA, HUN. I can't remember his actual name, but I've been talking to him. I'm thinking of actually going out to visit him and film him doing this. But he's been demonstrating making teddy bear casts of rose granite and things like this. And for a long time, he wasn't revealing how he was doing it. So I kind of just was like, whatever, dude, like I don't think that you're actually doing this. But he's now actually revealed his secret ingredient, which is slaked lime, like this slaked lime, which is very easy to make for them. And water glass, which again is something that they could have made. I don't know the science behind this to be fair. So I'm just going to briefly say that I think he's got some provocative ideas here, because he's actually adding this water glass and slaked lime to mix up compounds of granite or limestone, crushed up granite, crushed up limestone, adding the slaked lime, adding the water glass, and then it's solidifying into solid granite within six hours. Like what? Yeah. And he's got like little like teddy bear casts, like different cookie-cutter casts of solid granite. And so there's a potential that it's really simple, but totally been overlooked. You know, it's just using the right compounds, the right components and the right stone mixture. Again, how do they learn this? But it's not definitive, but he's one of the only people I've seen is actually presented actual evidence that could explain how they were doing this. And it's relatively simple ingredients. That would account for some things. Some things. Yes, but probably. The enormous, okay. So this guy? Yeah. I think so. If you go up and make sure he's actually the right person. Yes. Yes, they would go Marcel. Brilliant. I did to create artificial granite with nothing as an additive to water glass, the ladder being, the glue between original granite grains. Why? Because I realized we need full transparency in order to clearly see the original granite grains like quartz. We need a fake quartz as a binder. Well, nothing did not work because the outside layer prevented the thing to get hard inside. Oh, well, nothing did not work. I guess. I don't know what we've seen that. Yeah. What we're seeing is made with a secret additive. It's called almost nothing that did not change transparency of the water glass, but forced it to set from the inside. So remember, this is the wannabe binder only of artificial granite, not granite itself. It's very interesting. And he's revealed that it's slaked lime, this secret ingredient for a while. He wasn't saying what it is. Now he said it's slaked lime. She's going to go out. He lives in Budapest. He's looking at the Budapest and actually film him doing this to see if he's right about this. He's actually, I think one of the originators of the whole nature on theory, which I haven't dive too deep into, but it's one of the explanations behind melting the stone. So I started paying more attention to him once I was in Peru. And he was messaging me saying, you know, this is what I think is going on here, is they were using these ingredients to melt the stone well to solidify crushed up stone and create moulds. My issue. Yeah, one issue would do. The wash of the stones. That seems like it'd be harder than moving. Maybe using hard rocks, like, you know, just like smash, smash, but yeah, exactly. You need to, I mean, how much stone is smashing, would you need to do to create saxa or mar? Yeah, all these areas. 80 tons of smasps. Plus, every single block is different. You'd be talking about millions of moulds. Like if we were talking about moulds here, then every single block is completely different. So you need an individual mould for each one. So yeah, compelling idea, does it answer it? No. Nothing ever seems to fully answer it. But it's compelling that he's trying to actually find a way to solidify the stone. And it seems to be working whether it explains all of it. I don't know, but there's certainly a lot of people that will say that, you know, this is the definitive explanation behind it. I don't think that. But the thing that these, it's compelling. Amazing sights, having common is that they are so spectacular, no one really has a logical explanation. It's one of the coolest things about the most ancient of sites is that it forces you to go, we were even the best people don't. Defies probability. Yeah. It defies probability. It's truly, truly fascinating, man. It was a national project. So simple. I get it now. Yeah, I know, man. That's the thing is like, it is outdated kind of dismissal of everyone on the outside of the academic. Yeah, gatekeeping. I want to say he's not a gatekeeper. Clearly is. It's not yours, buddy. Did you know he came through the Edkakese Foundation? Wonderful. He did. Zahio asked the originated in the Edkakese Foundation. Wow. So he got funded. And weirdly enough, he was actually quite pro these ideas until about the mid 90s. So there's like a 1993 quote from him at a university in Cairo where he was saying something along the lines of there are tunnels underneath the Sphinx that lead down into greater structures. And when we truly understand this, we will understand the real builders of the pyramids. That was the last time he said anything close to that post 1993, about night, night, three and nine, three and nine, six. But after that complete polar opposite, 90 degree change, I wonder what happened to Zahio? Oh, who knows? I don't understand why. If you really want that place to get more money, more tourism, more people interested in it. It's an advanced getting structured search, right? Well, I mean, just be open to all of these people that are like yourself and like Graham Hancock, why wouldn't you not be open to these people and their ideas? Like they're clearly very well versed. Like Ben van Kirkwick. Yes, he's brilliant. He's incredible. Fantastic. He's an encyclopedia of information about Egypt. And why would you not want that guy exploring publicly and also reaching millions of people, by the way? Yes. Why wouldn't you want that? That doesn't make any sense. I think there's like a, maybe like a bit of a cultural arrogance. Like who do you think you are? Westerner coming over here and teaching us about our history. I think there's a level of that, like, you know, at least on a surface layer before you get into the deeper implications of, you know, free mason secret societies, keeping things from us. My true fear is that it's people just have this desire to be the one in charge of stuff. Right. And the desire to be right. The one to be brought. Why do you want to be brought? They never want to be proven wrong. And who's this guy? Who's this podcast? Who's coming on and telling me what my country is heritage is. But the problem with that is like even mainstream archaeologists are angry about it. Right. Right. Well, everyone gangs together, you know, they all gang together. It's group think. Well, it's also a lot of bitches in archeology. Yeah. I've noticed that bitchy people. I've noticed that. Yeah. It's such a bad look for the proportion. It really is because immature, like snarky, shitty comments. Yeah. I know. Yeah. It's a really gross field. I think some of the humans are. I came through the toxicity of the UFO community, which is like so bad. And, you know, I thought it would be a lot of cukes, but also just a lot of bad actors and hackers and people that want to, you know, one thing on the UFO subject actually, which I do think is worth noting. Because like I said to you, I think I'm one of the first people that you've had on that had to actually make their way through the social media interactions. And one of the things that a lot of us noticed and have to give credit to a couple of people, like Red Panda, Koala, and Tupacabra on Twitter to very good researchers that have been highlighting this is that when the whole kind of 2017 narrative. Twitter to very good researchers that have been highlighting this is that when the whole kind of 2017 narrative and luola zondo and chris melon, all these guys that are coming out, obviously we're all extremely excited about it. Over time, there were some issues like some contradictions, luola zondo, especially as contradicted himself quite a lot. And some of us started to get a little bit suspicious of these people and just started asking questions. It didn't take long for us to be targeted by a pretty significant network online of people that were trying to hack and dock source and people like he hasn't put his actual name out there, but people at red panda koala was docked online, had his family house put out online, had photos of his underage sister put out online by a group of individuals who are all very closely connected to luola zondo. And this is something that you would not notice outside of being in the minutiae of ex because you would see these troll accounts, these really nasty troll accounts that were all being followed by lu. And when they were having their accounts shut down and reinstated, lu was one of the first people following them. Some people have actually come out about this group now and revealed screenshots of dms where they're in private conversations with people like lu and gari and some of these other guys who I got connected to early on very early on. I got some of the first interviews with these people and was very pro it until I started realizing that they were very much trying to control the narrative and there were things you couldn't speak about, can't talk about, you know, reverse engineering or consciousness initiated contact, anything to do with greeres completely poisonous. luola zondo was actually called greere in a couple of other people terrorists. He said, I wouldn't negotiate with terrorists when asked about lu, Stephen Greer. But what people have dubbed this as is the UFO hate group. It's a very well known online, the UFO hate group and it's a group of people that are so savagely in favor of people like lu and this kind of modernized narrative that if you even go half an inch like I really gained my accolades in the UFO community. People really praising me for the interviews I was getting until I started asking a a few questions about people like lu and suddenly I get an absolute mail strum of hatred from people that were once really, you know, enjoying my content. And I'm quite lucky. I haven't been targeted so heavily. Some people have had their lives ruined by these people who were all connected to individuals like lu. And lu actually said that he came to burn UFO to the ground. Like he actually said that in an article. He was like, I want to burn UFO to you. I want to destroy it. When did you say that? Oh, it's like in like a few years back now. You can get it. Well, it was the context. I think it was just about the way in which the UFO community has been misrepresenting the phenomena and like the confusing spaghetti junction of narratives and he just kind of I want to put a heart reset. And that kind of actually makes sense to say that was he does you know things? You don't think he knows things? What does he know? I don't know. Exactly. Right? They all know something, but none of them can tell us and they all knew it from someone else and someone else told them and they knew it and they know this. And like, dude, I was so in love with all of this. You have to understand that I was truly, I was a believer. I was like, this is amazing. I have my all-b experiences or I had a bias already. I was like, I'm ready to believe in whatever you're saying. It took me a while to start actually realizing that this is not going in the direction I think it should be going in that there's a heavily curated narrative. And if you try and question the narrative, you will be punished by group thing. It felt like honestly I started to feel like I was in a COVID cult for ufology, where you just can't talk about lures on doing a bad light regardless of the fact that this man has gone on stage and presented literal fake ufo photos to the public, which have been debunked in less than 24 hours. And he had to admit that they were fake because of the debunks, but people are just happy to forget these things happened. Like he went up in a congressional setting and held up a ufo photo that was proven to just be fields like agricultural fields. Yes, this is a fake. That's not a shadow. That's a darker field next to the lighter field. These are two circles. And this was proven. He had to admit it. This is in a congressional setting. This man apparently ran the advance aerospace threat identification program. Aquable shit. I don't believe he did because he seems like more of a government's doge. And he feels like someone that would be sent out to do what he admits he was doing counter intelligence. He's a counter intelligence counter terrorism counter espionage guy. Not a ufo guy. I'm a counter terrorism counter espionage guy. He's also one of the guys calling for amnesty, right? Oh, how surprising. Yeah, exactly. It's in the economy shocked. Yeah, no, he is like, you know, economy shock. Does he say that in the because a lot of them do say it. I want to make sure that he actually said that. I don't know. I'll be perfect. I'll be perfect. I honestly don't have an even fucking watch that because I'm just not interested in that element of the ufo subject anymore. I've been burned by these guys. I've had Gary Nolodie mailing me like, why aren't you on the team anymore? Why don't you like, put be a team player? Is that because you're literally telling me that I can't tell my own fucking truth. You're censoring me and saying that I'm not being a team player just because I have my sense. I'm wondering you about when in particular. Well, I were attempting to get you to stop talking about primarily there seems to have been a bit of an issue with the way that I've been talking about Lou and here's a association with A tip because I think that A tip was actually a cutout. It wasn't a real program and it was a cutout that was actually created for to the start's academy and Orsap, which was more of a kind of, you know, precursor program wasn't being run by luola zondo. That's the advanced weapon application space for programmer. I forgot the actual acronym now. Orsap. A tip is meant to be loose and I just think that well, I have to be careful, but a very prominent journalist in the ufo community, told me that Lou told him that this is this was all created for to the start's academy is like a way to, you know, generate an understandable structure. Here's this guy. He's, you know, running A tip. I have an issue with the idea that someone like Lou Elizondo can go to the New York Times and say that the secretary of defense wasn't being briefed on ufo's and I'm the one that was running a program when people are jouling in a sarge and Edward Snowden are being thrown to the wolves for just revealing standard national security issues. This is meant to be even deeper. Right? It's a black, black budget. This guy can just roll out to New York Times. Seems a little bit planned. Seems a little bit curated and forced. So I started asking those questions and especially when things like this were happening where there were discrepancies where he's bringing up images that are being debunked. He's like, who is this guy? You know, who is this guy really? And then his book comes out and he's talking about being the torture czar in Guantanamo Bay and, you know, the people they're called in the Darth Vader of the United States. He's in his book. You know, he met at the court and the tortjesar of Guantanamo Bay because, you know, he ran Camp Platinum at Guantanamo Bay, black site. See, I have black site. Yeah. So, you know, he actually had in his book that he was known as the the Darth Vader of the United States by certain people and the tortjesar of Guantanamo Bay. I don't really trust people like this who, you know, water-bored people for are living and now trying to tell me what's going on in the UFO subject. What's let's ask this question? What what purpose would there be to muddy the narrative? If you wanted to have a government agent come out and have what your claiming is like a fake disclosure, like government-narrated disclosure, what would be the purpose of that? What are they all asking for, Joe? Money? I'm a ministee. I'm a ministee. And what was happening before that is you had someone like Stephen Greer just saying these people need to go to jail. And that was the only big voice in the UFO community. Maybe they're offering a window to possible disclosure, though. Maybe we give them this fucking amnesty. If we don't, what happens? Nothing. It keeps going the same way. It's been going. There's no actual disclosure. We keep talking about it. It gets nuts. It gets to the point we're driving you crazy. Like, I don't even want to hear about any fucking UFOs. Please show me one. But if it's a real subject and the only thing that's keeping us from learning this real subject is that. And so they're trying to push out this narrative of amnesty. I'll bite. What are we talking about? I think for me, again, coming up through it and just seeing how these people actually act when you challenge them. And the fact that there were absolutely organized groups of quite frankly, quite mentally unstable people that were very easily misled into believing they're important. Who were getting brought into these signal chats. He's private group chats. And I'm in touch with a little us on. I'm going to be brought in. And they tried to do that for useful idiot. And there's a few people out there that were extremely dark individuals. I were talking connected to all sorts of weird Satanism groups. And Luke's just there. I have selfies hanging out with these guys. He's a dodgy dude. I don't care. I'm freaked out even saying this on the jururrogative. He's going to remote view my brain or something. But at the same time, he is a dodgy guy. But you do believe in the existence of these things. Dude, I've had orbs offer of my house. I'm so thinking of it. I think is that there is a clear decision somewhere in our government to muddy the water and to put out this narrative that these whistleblowers are trying to tell everybody. So to slowly trickle this stuff out there and then float out amnesty, which is a big part of the age disclosure document. Really the first time I've ever heard anybody might where everyone uniformly talks about that one particular subject. Yeah. Like I think that that's the that's the goal is to create a curated soft disclosure that does the very best to paint the government in the best possible light and allows them to actually kind of not face too much punishment for what's been going on in the legacy programs. Again, if you only had someone like Stephen Greer out there, he was offering a completely different thing. We need to punish these people. They are crores. They've ruined humanity for a hundred years of stagnating technological progress. So tasty. Got a little testy with that. Should have taken a little softer tone. No, I'm saying with him. Oh, if he did that, maybe they would have uh, right. That's a defensive like a fucked and one of lock us up. Yeah. But that's it. That's why you're going to say you're going to lock someone up for what they did. They're going to say, I didn't do anything. Yeah. And they're going to keep saying that. But that's why they got rid of him. That's why they got rid of him. That's why Gary Nolan, who was originally with Greer, then changed over to two stars academy and they poked quite a few people from his team and brought him over to TTSA and he became a pariah. You know, again, he's, you know, he says a lot of things that quite frankly, I don't agree with. But I just think that basically they tried to overtake the narrative and they needed government representatives to run this. And just again, how they do everything, would be be shocked that they do it about something this important. Well, especially if there is line to Congress, the misappropriation of funds and for sure some fraud, for sure. You're talking about a shit ton of money. One thing, um, one thing that does interest me though is the ARV, the alien reproduction vehicle, the flux liner. Have you heard of this? Oh, you know, about Mark McAndlish and the alien reproduction vehicle. Oh, that's a mission. If you type in ARV flux liner, you'll get this image right away. Um, this is one of the avenues that I would actually pay attention to and think, okay, I think something's going on here. Um, Mark McAndlish was an aerospace illustrator for the US Air Force. That's the, yep, so the actual, oh, I have seen this. Yeah, of course you have. It's very classic. And that one that's blue with the writing all over it. That's what was held up at the 2001 national press conference organized by Dr. Stephen Greer. Again, like, you know, this isn't you like to be fair to Dr. Greer, he brought like over 50 witnesses on live television during the national press conference. And one of them was Mark McAndlish, uh, military illustrator who drew this sketch. A friend of mine has a version of this framed in his house. So do I. I need to get one. We need to get one for the studio. You can literally get one on Etsy for like 100 bucks. Let's go. Go. That's one on Etsy. Um, but so this is important. Mark McAndlish, um, he actually ended up taking his own life. Go that back to that again. I want to read the heading. It says, according to this documentary, we had this, the technology for faster than light travel and zero point energy for a very long time. Let's pretend this is true. How do we know the UAPs we sent aren't ours in more modern build? The person who made this documentary died of an aggressive form of cancer, not long after making it. It was quite a young man as well. Documentary filmmaker who made this. But, um, Mark McAndlish, military illustrator, he had a friend called Brad Sorenson. Brad Sorenson was a government guy, uh, aerospace, uh, engineer, Lockheed Martin had quite an extensive portfolio. And Brad Sorenson goes to his body one day, Mark McAndlish. And he says, I was trying something and I want you to draw it. I'm going to describe it to you in great detail. And I want you to create the illustration. Brad Sorenson says that I think he was in like the 70s or like early late 60s or early 70s that he was, um, invited to a private air show at Lockheed Martin by an individual who was a good friend of his in the military who was higher up than him. And apparently this, you know, he didn't have the, what they call the tickets, the right classifications to actually get access to this, um, private air show, but his friend brought him, um, because he had the tickets. And essentially they bring him into a hangar in Lockheed Martin where three large sources of varying size were hovering a few feet off of the ground. They were described as instantaneous nuclear payload delivery systems. That's the way that they were actually classifying them had a nickname for a month. Instant, instantaneous nuclear payload delivery systems. Right. The idea that you could just instantaneously deliver a nuclear payload to anywhere in the world. Oh my God. Yeah. Um, which is again one of the reasons why they might keep this stuff secret. Um, the, the ships were nicknamed mama bear baby bear and papa bear. Yeah. Um, what's really interesting about this is that Brad Sorenson has never gone public, but I was in the room when he was found. And I've heard him say things that have never been on the record before. Um, no one's ever contacted Brad Sorenson. Mark Mchandlish took his own life number of years ago. His closest friends would say that that was not anything untoward. It's hard to know. I didn't know the man. All I know is this is the man that producing incredibly profound illustration and then eventually took his own life. Um, but his friend, Brad Sorenson has never gone public ever. Never. I've got quite a few contacts now because of my research and, you know, affiliations that I've managed to gain with people in like the US Navy and, you know, Intel and a good friend of mine who was able to actually find his number and get in touch with Brad Sorenson. I was present when he was phoned and, you know, my friend introduces himself to him and he'd never spoken to him before. And they were just talking shop first of all. He said that he wanted to reach out to him because he'd heard about him through various stories online. But in any way to cut the long story short, he asked him, my friend asked him about Mark Mchandlish in this alien reproduction vehicle on Brad Sorenson. When off on quite a diatribe actually, uh, very angry about Mark and how he said that I gave this man the keys to the kingdom and he went out and told the whole fucking world. And I will never do that because my employers will fry me. He said they will fucking fry me if I speak out about this. But I am capable of building and designing an aircraft that can go 210 times the speed of light. Yeah, reiterate that multiple times. What? Yeah, I am. But here was this. I've sat on this for a couple of years. It's about two years ago that my friend found him. Yeah, I was instantaneous. Just in the nuclear payload delivery. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you can imagine that's how the national security system would actually look at this. No, it doesn't explore a tree vessel. But let's be honest, what is this? It's a payload delivery system. It's instantaneous. Let's be honest, that's what they would look at as, right? Another reason to keep it secret product probably. But that was, you know, I would love to get him on record. I don't know if he ever will. Brad, if you're listening to this, I would like to get you on record. But he, yeah, he, he said that. He said that he can design a craft that goes 210 times the speed of light. And this is the guy that gave mom a candlest illustrations to create that ARV. So it's his weird. I mean, it's weird. This is the real question. What would civilization be like? Had this stuff not been kept secret? Right. What if we had access that kind of energy, whatever that thing is operating on? Could you imagine if you had access that energy and you're watching all these idiots burn coal? I know. What are you doing? What are you doing? But you can't say anything. Yeah. I know. I know. I know. instantaneous. I would. I would. I would do a delivery system. I'd hate to be people. I'd hate to be people. I'd hate to be people. I'd hate to be people. Imagine sitting there knowing that we have access to these kind of technologies. Also like this desire to tell people. Yeah. It's really important. Oh man. They can't all be complete sociopaths or maybe they do like they screened them for that reason. You know what I mean? Like they have to be a certain person. I'll let you type and give a fuck about humanity. I think, honestly, I think at the highest levels of these, especially these military corporations, I think you just have to become that anyway. Yeah. Yeah. By forces nature. Yeah. We're going to kill 100,000 people today. Yeah. Exactly. I mean, how emotionally attached can you possibly be in this kind of big task orientation? So, you know, the, yeah, the ARV is a provocative one for me. And I'd be honest, but I think a lot of this, I mean, it's called the ARV, the alien reproduction vehicle. And maybe we have had alien crashed vehicles, but I'm more tempted to believe that Nikola Tesla's work was taken by the US government. John G Trump, Trump's uncle from MIT was the one that actually oversaw all of that. You know that? Yeah. Yeah. He actually looked at all that. You know, he found a correspondence between Nikola Tesla and British and Russian royalty, like the high top levels of Britain Russian royalty, about them acquiring a superweapon of incredible power. There's a video I actually posted it on X of John G Trump, a vintage video of him talking about coming across these correspondents letters that he'd never found the true method of the secret weapon or what it was, but there was correspondence between the king and Russian Azaz about acquiring it from Nikola Tesla. So I think that they took things from Tesla. His electromagnetism studies, I think people at T towns and brown, you know, these original ideas of being able to use field induction to create positive lift. This is something that was being looked at by humans. You don't need to invoke flying sources crashing from Alpha Centauri for that. Maybe it happened, but I would be more on the line that we've done it ourselves. We've done it ourselves. The cold, yeah, some of it, the cold war happened, cold war paranoia, and we've never got rid of it. All the iron walls came up around that. And it's a case of how do we kind of get rid of all this legacy program, you know, stove, being in stove piping because of cold war paranoia is too late now, because we're in 2025. And you've got to try and tell us that you've got zero point energy. You know, we've been flying around in fucking right brothers planes for 100 years. Is it shit? Like you kidding me? It's not going to go down well. So amnesty, right? Yeah. Amnesty. It might be the only way. It might be the only way. And if it is the only way, that's fine. But like I said, I do have it sucks that they're not going to get punished for crimes, but so what? So at least we are not being punished by being with health. Exactly. Information being withheld that I think would change the course of humanity in probably a fantastic way. But I do feel I feel like the world would have to become a more heavily controlled place for these types of technologies to come out. Do you know what I mean? Like I was trying to wrap this up on a high note. Like, well, this is all I'm saying. Like, you know, the control structures around something like free energy would have to be quite profound because of the things we're saying about some psycho with a ZPE device. Exactly. So like, look, what just happened in Bondi Beach, Australia. Imagine if you have access to that, if everybody has access to that, especially off the internet, you figure out how design one's not that hard. The world will have to become a more restrictive place for these things to come. Oh, public benefit. Now people are going to think you're a fed people for saying that. This is a man. I really enjoy this conversation. It was a lot of fun. It's been really good. And your content is excellent. So please tell everybody how they can watch more your stuff. Yeah, I've got a terrible business acumen. So I just have two channels, project unity on YouTube and the project unity on X. And if you want to follow me and subscribe. I think that's a good model. Quality stuff and it's building and following just literally based on being good for real. Thank you brother. I appreciate you so much Dave. All right. We'll do it again. Yes. Goodbye everybody. Bye bye.