Go, Roman, find him! The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast, by night! All day! So, uh, Salut. Pleasure to meet you, man. Pleasure to meet you, too. I just start doing this, uh, YouTube channel. Um, I've always, uh, enjoyed doing, talking about those things, because who doesn't? Right. And I was always kind of surprised at how shitty they were usually, uh, talked about. I just saw the shooting star. There it goes, man. It'll trick you. Like, so often you see this type of content as, like, is there a monster in the woods. Right. And it's like, that's not the question. The question is more complex than that. And I often don't see it brought up that way. There's something about these, like, today I listen to the creepiest big foot story one. That one, the ad, the one with the guy wrote in a story about the very, stuff in the backyard. Yeah, that one. And there's something about those that, like, even if you don't believe in big foot, because I don't necessarily believe in big foot. There's something about it's so compelling. There's something about things that you don't know out there in the woods that know, because you don't have an accurate, uh, a real good account of everything's in the forest. Of course. You know, you look out there. It's dark. And the mind is always looking for some weirdness. The mind is always looking for something that, and other people don't know about or perhaps there's like a secret that the sheriff's know about. They don't share with everybody else. Like, why is that so, why does that resonate so much with people? It's Stephen King movies, like, or Stephen King books. It's like that kind of a thing. There's something about it that's like exciting. Right. I'm more of a Dean Coons fan than Stephen King. Oh, okay. Yeah, he's great too. Yeah. You don't like Stephen King? Are you trying to throw shade? Yes. His politics rewinded for me. That's the problem, right? Right. His problem is his Twitter feed. His Twitter feed's fucking brutal. It's like, dude, stop. Right. That's not, these are like the goofiest low test dosterone boomer takes I've ever heard on anything. Like stop. It's very true. But he's such a brilliant writer. I also think, uh, he's a different guy. Because the car accident, I think that was a big one. You know, when you get hit by a van, that'll do it. Yeah. Shit. He was really, really fucked up from that. And I also think it's getting off Coke. Getting off Coke and booze. Yeah. That was the real Stephen King. I mean, I hate to advocate alcoholism and cocaine use. Because I don't think either one of them is good for you. But God damn, they're good for writing books. Good for artistry. That's for sure. There's something about his early stuff when he was off the rails. Like he said, he doesn't even remember writing Coon Joe. Doesn't even remember. It's my favorite book of his. It's fucking great. No. It's a fucking great book. So is the shining. You know, it's another one where he was like deep in the throes of addiction. And just writing this fucking captivating book. It's just what he captured is there's this part of our mind that maybe we don't talk about too much where we always wonder if everybody really knows what's going on and maybe something could happen that people didn't expect couldn't imagine is real and yet you're confronted by it. And that's like a lot of his stories. And you do a really good job of finding that. Also you have a creepy voice. No disrespect. No. I mean in a good way. Like the way you tell the stories. You know, like it's just something about it. It's like you're doing radio man. You're doing radio with illustrations. But you're doing it on YouTube. Right. Well, that's actually why I chose the name Bob Gimlin. Because Bob Gimlin's obviously the guy who was there when the Patterson footage was shot. Right. And it has. So my Google account for my YouTube account name way before I started the channel was Bob Gimlin. And my real name is Brian Ganyo. And all I used YouTube for was a big-foot content and like watching Bob Dylan rips. I'm a huge fan of Bob Dylan. Oh, cool. So I thought Bob Gimlin was a cool name. And it kind of evokes back to like just kind of rod-sirling and just like slower pace. Because so much of the content that was just like top 10 creepiest sightings. Yeah. It's like I like to be a little more immersed. Yes. You do it like radio. You do it like old school radio like creepy radio. Yeah. Like when these tell stories unlike you know people would sit, you know, before there was a television people would sit around the radio and they would listen like that's where we're the world. That famous thing with HG Wells where you had a bunch of people believing that we're actually being invaded by Martians. Fully your state. Yeah. Yeah. So that when did you start this channel? I think like nine years ago, 2016 maybe. And was it the beginning? Was it Bigfoot? Yeah. Have you ever had an encounter or is it just something that's been fastening to you? Just always been interesting. So I think my talent and I'm not even saying I'm talented, but my what I have going for me is I am so ready to believe that everything we know is BS. Like people don't know anything. They just don't. I mean, people know stuff but so much of what has been in history books is already wrong. You know, so like have you ever seen a chimpanzee? Yeah. Like would it surprise you to learn that like oh there's a smarter one. There's a faster one. There's a bigger one. Someone if a Bigfoot got hit by a boss tomorrow, like I wouldn't be surprised. You wouldn't be? No, I will. I mean, I would be terribly surprised. Really? Yes. Yeah, I don't know if they're real, but I think they might be real. This is what I think. I have a very strange take on this and I know it's going to sound super stupid to anybody who's like cynical, pragmatist, but just bear with me for a moment. I think the boundaries between this dimension and other ones are permeable. And I have a feeling things can cross through them. And I have a feeling we are like if an ant is what, like I have a leaf cutter answer my yard, pretty wild. So cool to watch them. Sucks as they kill all your trees, but so cool to watch this long train of these incredible little beings carrying around these giant pieces of leaf that they cut off. And they're all going into the little house, but you wave your hand over them. They have no fucking idea here there. Like whatever senses they have, it does not seem to detect threats from things above. They don't seem to be worried. They don't perceive us. Well, they're mission oriented. And we are too. So if something is happening that's beyond our mission, I think it's hard to perceive it. I think there's things that exist that are not perceivable. Oh, I'm 1 million presenting that camp too. And I think there's heightened states of consciousness that people achieve under duress, extreme stress, fear. I think that's one of the reasons why a lot of them happen at nighttime. I think nighttime, it automatically fills people with a certain sense of anxiety and fear because you don't know what's out there when you're, especially in the woods at nighttime. And I think in those times when your mind reaches this unusual chemical state, you occasionally can access these, these other realities. And I think that's where Bigfoot is real. I know it sounds goofy. No, I mean, that's, and I don't think you can go find it. I started drinking AG1 about four years ago and I love the way it makes it feel. AG1 is a research backed daily health supplement that combines a high quality multivitamin and probiotic and more into one powerful scoop. It's simple, effective, and comprehensive. It's just one scoop, mixed in water, get my day off to the right start. Taste great with hints of pineapple and vanilla. I think about it as like the future of the multivitamin, the nutritional foundation that I need to help my body build itself, renew itself, and prosper properly. It's a convenient way to cover my nutritional bases and with a product that's made at the highest quality levels. One has been focused on just this one product for 14 years and counting. It's trusted, it's tested, it's simple, it tastes good. It's the simplest thing to do for your body and your health in less than 60 seconds. Trust me, you're going to love the way you feel when you take AG1. So if you want to take ownership of your health, it starts with AG1. Try AG1 to get a free one year supply of vitamin D3 and K2 and 5 free AG1 travel packs with your first subscription. Go to drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. That's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. Check it out. That's why finding Bigfoot is on like season 80 and they haven't found shit. Yeah, well, but see even if it was real that I wouldn't expect them to find it either. No, that shows just goof. Even if it was flesh and blood. It's funny, you would say what you said because when I first started my channel, I was very flesh and blood type. I thought it was a very real thing like just a bear or anything else in the woods. But a lot of common commenters said, though I appreciate Bob's take on that, he will get to the woo zide or the spiritual side. And I was like, I am not. And I'm like halfway there already. But I don't think that the spiritualism can be separated from anything. Also, what do you mean by that? I mean, we're I think our spiritual beings and I think that we're interacting with kind of like the force from Star Wars. Like I believe reality is permeable to an extent. Yeah, I mean, the things that we see with our eyes and feel with our that we touch it. There's more than that. It's a fraction. It's a fraction of what's going on. I think so too. I think that's probably the source of whatever psychic phenomenon that is real. That's not bullshit. And just a bunch of people, a bunch of hucksters, robbing people. I think there's some sort of telepathic connection that people share occasionally. And I think it's an emerging aspect of human consciousness that will probably one day be as normal as hearing. I think we're just emerging from the primal. And I think also in the primal, they probably have it. They probably have it in a different way. Like animals are tuned in in a very bizarre way. They just know things sometimes. And you don't know why they know things. It's not you're not even saying like my dog sometimes knows one. We're going to go for a run. Right. I just knows it. I've always been fascinated by how animals so many animals seem to innately know that we can help them. Yes. And they shouldn't think that. Right. Historically, we are not the helper of animals. Right. And like, you know, be it dolphins or seals or whatever. Or deer, deer, yeah, there's what I've heard help. And it's like shouldn't they be afraid of the predator? Deer have a cont- tried to contact people to get one of their friends free from barbed water. Yeah. Yeah. There's something weird. There's something weird going on that is not just as simple as we're the dominant species. We have language. We figured out consciousness. We write books. No, I think there's there's there's another thing that we just don't it's not there yet. You know, it's just like the original caveman had some grunts and those grunts became words and now those words become huge libraries filled with books that people have written. And I think that's what's going on with human consciousness. And I think there's just got to be some reason why this Bigfoot thing has been going on for so goddamn long. I think it's an interdimensional existence. I think whatever that thing is, I think it comes back and forth. And that's why I don't find anything. Yeah. I mean, that's as I said, I'm getting there. You're getting there. Yeah. Because as I said earlier, like to me, the flesh and blood apophesis is not as impractical as everyone says. Well, it used to be a real thing for sure. The problem is the size of it. You know, you can't really hide at 10 foot gorilla. Why? Why? Because too many trail cams, too many campers, hikers, especially, especially, well, it's not like people don't see it. People say, oh, hunters don't see them. No, but my friends, I have a lot of friends that are like long range backpack hunters. These guys would go 26, 27 miles into the forest with no access roads. They just hike out. But do hunters not see them or do hunters not say they saw it? No, I don't know anybody who's seen them. They'll tell you all kinds of other wild shit. But they would tell you if they saw it. None of them are, none of them believe that I know. But they are wary about animals. You know, there's real threats out there. There's grizzlies, there's wolves, there's mountain lions. Those are the things they're really worried about. And those are the things that they see. And I've had friends that have had encounters with them. And those encounters seem in some sort of weird way, spiritual. There's a weird connection with these predators and prey. I think opens up a part of us that we don't ever experience. You don't ever experience a thing that wants to eat you. And when you do, I think your biology is like, oh, you remember this? And like a switch gets turned on and these genes that we've had inside of our body for hundreds of thousands of years of us running away from predators. They get ignited. And there's this bizarre connection. Have you ever looked in the eyes of a predator? I sure have. What have you seen? I worked at a zoo, Brookfield Zoo in Chicago for quite a few years. And so just this Christmas, we went there. And the lion was roaring going nuts. And I have footage of this, I can actually show you later. But it was very close. And it was roaring. And it looked like it was going to pounds. And I had no faith that that little barrier was enough. And I've literally worked at the place. And I know their failsafes and stuff that they can't get out. But I was just like, nope, this is nuts. Because I love cats. Big cats too. And do you have a cat? I don't anymore, but I've had cats. I was just watching them. And now imagining that they are bigger than you. Oh, it is. So horrifying. I saw my first large mountain lion two years ago. Oh, yeah. It was big, like about 170 plus pounds. And my friend Colton saw it under a tree. We were driving, luckily, we were inside the truck. Because it was only about 30 yards away. I would shit my pants. If I saw this thing without a barrier between us, it was so big. It was so big and so teary. It looked like a demon. Like when you lock eyes with that thing. And again, I'm looking at it through a windshield and also binoculars. So I had a 10-power binoculars. And I'm zoomed into its face. And I'm seeing it just looking right at me with this pumpkin head, the big, mandible muscles that go over the top of the skull. It's like, oh, Christ. And again, I'm looking at it through a windshield and binoculars. Some removed slightly from the actual force of the experience of its eyeballs on me. But if I was standing there just looking at it, I probably would have had a psychedelic experience. I probably would have tripped out. I probably would have gotten it in shock. I saw it with grizzly bear once in Alberta. I saw one of those. Not even a big one about six foot grizzly bear. But it looks at you. I've seen black bears before. Those are the first grizzly I saw in the wild. And they look right through you. Yeah. To me, I've always seen footage of grizzly bears. But every once in a while they have this crackhead look where it's like they're doing that thing where they're looking to see what you got. Yeah. Like they're just like, what can I take from this? And then you can't do anything to stop them unless you have a gun. Yeah, we had guns luck, luckily. We had shotguns. But when we were looking at it, it looked like it's going to eat you. It looks like, am I going to eat you? Like it looked like it couldn't care less if you live or die. Right. Like just all it's doing all day long is searching for something slow. Something will limp. Something that fucks up, something that leaves behind a kid, something that dogs chained up to a tree. Whoops, got one. Right. And that's all it's doing all day long. And it's just a big monster. And if it didn't exist, if a grizzly bear didn't exist and there was reports of this enormous dog-like creature that eats everything and can kill a moose and lives in the woods, it would be way scarier than Bigfoot. Yeah, for sure. Well, maybe not. A Kodiak? Yeah, but Kodiak bear would be scarier than Bigfoot. Worst things can happen than be eaten. Oh, like the come from a Bigfoot book? You know what it looks? No. Oh, I've, yeah, obviously I've heard of them. There's a whole genre. Well, erotica written about Bigfoot. Yeah, that's not my thing. Well, you're a man. It seems to be ladies like the, they like their stuff in writing. That's what they like. They like reading their pornography. Yeah, they also like monsters. Yes. Yeah. Where wolves and vampires. They like vampires. The phone love with them. Right. He's gonna eat everybody else with not me. But you can change them. Yeah, you can change them. That's also why some crazy ladies like serial killers. Yeah, even serial killers that kill a bunch of women, they write to them. Like Richard Ramirez, the night stalker, like tons of women were writing to him in jail. Ted Bundy too. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Strange. I'm a big fan of true crime. So I, you know, I don't, I'm not sexually aroused by. Well, congratulations. That's a good thing. That is a very good thing. Yeah. But there, the thing about predators versus like Bigfoot, or any of these things, like there, there seems to be the unknown animals for whatever reason, are the ones that are most perplexing to us. The ones that were most fascinated by like an orca, I think is more fascinating than Bigfoot. Like if Bigfoot was just gigantic, apithicous, it was just an enormous, a rang of time looking creature that lived in the woods and was omnivorous and ate a bunch of stuff and tried to hide from people. It'd be kind of cool. But it wouldn't really be as cool as this insanely intelligent super dolphin that lives in the ocean and, you know, has this strong family bond and, you know, teach their different styles of dispatching prey. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Teach them how to knock over eye shelves to get a seal to slide off. That seal footage is so tragic where it's waving it down. Yeah. It sucks for the seal. You're rooting for the seal, but you're rooting for them, but you know he's doomed. I keep wondering, because you know, or cause they're going after boats now. Yeah. None of them have, of the people that I'm aware of have successfully gotten in the water. So I keep wondering what they would do to the people. I don't think there's any record of them killing human beings other than human beings in like sea world. Yeah. Stuff like that, but that's just, would there be a record? It's a good question. There would if there were survivors and there's a lot of record of shark attacks, obviously. Well, those are don't give any mind to those, the records of shark attacks. You know, well, it is so hard to report a shark attack. So like if I go swimming, right, and I leave my stuff on the beach and I, someone calls the police, they don't, I didn't come home or whatever. And they find me mangled on the beach the next day. I had a cardiac event and then was scavenged by sharks. Do you think so? That's how the ISAF International Shark Attack file, it's very difficult for a shark attack victim to be reported. That's interesting. Do you think they do that so that they discourage people becoming vigilantes and going out and killing sharks? They're trying to make it seem like, I think it's legit. I got jaws thing. They want, they don't want to make it seem dangerous. Right. But they don't want us to make it seem like it's a bad place for tourists. I would not go into the ocean where they're sharks. And I know that sounds nuts, but I wouldn't. It's not worth it. My buddy Duncan was in Hawaii, either just after I can't remember or just before a guy got killed by a shark at the same resort that he was at. Now some guy was swimming at Tiger Shark, just took him out. That's the, I'm actually working on a shark attack video now. I was just, there's a lot of untruths. People talk about with sharks, I think. Or maybe misunderstandings. They just got a bull shark in Texas in a river. Yeah. They're real recently. And those are scary ones. They are. But those fuckers are super aggressive and they go in a freshwater all the way up to Illinois. They found them in Illinois. Alton, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's your deepness. So you think it's a jaws thing. So they're just trying to not. What do you think ever happened with that Egyptian one? The Egyptian one's the craziest one. Did you ever see that footage with the guys like screaming over his father? Yeah. Oh, that's brutal. So again, did you know that the shark that did that like paraded the head around? Yeah. So that's one of the things that I said is misinformation. I hate that I'm using that word. Yeah, that words were tainted. Yeah, that words maintained it. But so they say it's like mistaken identity or sharks attack as their pissed. That's why they attack. Yeah, it's just hungry. Correct. I, that would, I can't be certain, but that would be my opinion. Because do you remember like when we were, or I remember when I was a kid, I saw all these shark documentaries that they would show like the surfer and then a tarsi turtle or a seal side by side from the bottom. These are, they don't look the same at all. No. And sharks are one big sensory organ. They know in like, you know, where they hang out, they hang out at the bottom. They can, and then they're silhouetted by light from the top. They can see perfectly. They're in the water, all their lives. They're one big sensory organ. They know what they're attacking. And I think they want people out of their water because that wasn't even a consumption with that guy, with the guy who was yelling Papa. Yeah, whatever his name was. While Stan by me was playing in the background and that woman, oh my God. Oh my God. It seems like a movie. Yeah. It does. And then, yeah, because you know what the part where it turns them under water and his legs go up. Yeah. He took off his jaw because after that, it's, he's, he's gargling. Oh. Oh. Yeah. And, uh, Papa's body was reportedly examined by forensic experts at a morgue in her gauda, who claimed he was disfigured. And with many parts missing, the shark said to have torn his head off. Disfigured his face and separated body parts that were retrieved from the sea. It's also reported the beast ripped apart his chest and eight parts of his abdomen and hands. See, that's not an attempt to predate in my opinion. Interesting. So you think that people get in the way of fish and seals. And that's probably what the sharks actually want to eat. Yeah. Like these assholes are flopping around, farting in the water. And, uh, or, or she just had pops nearby. There's anything like that. There was also the story that I read about that particular attack where they were saying that some ranchers had dumped cheap carcasses. Mm hmm. Did you hear about that? Yeah. I still don't think that that sharks know what they're biting. Seeks, because if a shark bites something hard, it really damages them. They know what they bite before they bite it. Mm hmm. And I agree that sharks don't see us as food. They weave, sometimes they do if they're desperate. But I do not, I think we're far from ideal. Because if they did eat us, they would eat us all the time. Right. All the time. Yeah. So I think, because like, you know how great whites in California don't eat people? Right. They only attack people. Because we're literally in the surf where seals like to be. So we're in the way. Right. And they know that seals probably don't like to play around where surfers are. So they're like, oh, these things are here. And I'm hungry if these things are gone. And they know that if they come up and mangle someone, the rest of people are going to be gone. Right. It'll clear the area for a while. Right. Is this your own personal theory? Oh, no. There's an amazing channel called Sharks Happen. And it's so funny too. Because the guy, he's not a marine biologist or anything. His name is just Hal. He's a machinist in Michigan. And it's so funny. Because I fundamentally think he knows more about sharks than anyone that I've listened to. And I think it's funny how some guy in Michigan is the expert. That is funny. No. Yeah. Like, how are you getting your information, bro? He's good at, he goes back on newspapers. Because, you know, to him, all the marine biologists are just so full of it. And there is some of that. There really is. Because they will skew something so far to not blame the sharks. Really? Yeah. Like, this kid probably like 20 years ago now had his leg ripped off by a bull shark, which is terrifying to think. Because it like clamped onto his calf. And then it and shallow water and his leg came off, not where it was bitten. Oh. So it like ripped it off. Oh. And I can't recall his name. But that was not in the shark stats. In the shark stats as it's provoked. Because the kid was fishing earlier. Oh. So it's like that's a provoked attack. It's like, so fishing is a provoked attack? Being in being like a seven-year-old in needy water after someone was fishing is a provoked attack. And that's crazy. And that's not in the stats the same way. So like, that's not in a shark attack. Interesting. So there's shark attacks where there's no possible evidence of provocation. And then there's provoked shark attacks. Like, oh, you were asking for it? Correct. Wow. Yeah. And that's the video I'm working on. I go through all the attacks in 2015. And I say, like, these are, I think it was like, no, I hope I'm not wrong about this. But like, 11 or 12 attacks that they say are legit attacks because they were unprovoked. They were like random attacks. But then I talk about the other like 20 that were provoked attacks. And so when you see shark attack statistics, they only say unprovoked attacks. Correct. So they're trying to downplay the shark attack for them. And as I said, there are so many people who like just get found bitten up and like all they drowned. And they got scavenged because sharks are scavengers and sharks don't eat people. That's so crazy now. That's interesting. I never really thought about that. The attacks are very skewed. It's very fascinating to me how our attitude about sharks changed with the whole shark fin soup thing. Like all of a sudden, everybody wanted to protect sharks. Like you shouldn't fish for sharks. Like you shouldn't eat sharks because you know, make-o-shark has always been served in restaurants. I've had make-o-shark a bunch of times in restaurants. It's very good. It tastes like swordfish. But suddenly sharks were supposed to be protected. Like, Jesus, shouldn't we protect the fucking tuna? Tuna are delicious. They don't kill you. They're majestic, amazing creatures. And we've killed like 90% of them in the ocean. Now, I mean, fuck sharks. That's what I think. I mean, I love sharks. I just fuck them. Yeah, I mean, they're assholes. Yeah, they can go fuck off. There's an area in Key West where people fish off the piers, where you have to pull in your fish so fast because the waters are infested with sharks. Well, that's a whole problem that with sharks because they're learning it's easier to pull it off our hooks. Mm-hmm. Yeah. Which makes sense. Sure. So they hang around piers for people to fish. And then when someone catches a big one, and it takes a while to get in, like, oh, here we go. Dun dun dun dun dun dun. It's a, there's an incredible video of this guy is pulling in a tuna. And as he's pulling in a tuna, this great white cuts the tuna in half. Have you seen that? I have seen that. No. Have you ever been people swallow the life by great sharks? No. Look, they're real. And if they weren't, they'd be the craziest monster ever. We have this very bizarre thing with the human mind where we become accustomed to things. Human or accustomed to cell phones show a cell phone to a guy in 1400s who thinks you're a wizard. And when it tests, it's like, oh, that one sucks. You got a small phone. But there's something bizarre where we get a custom to these insane creatures like sharks. I often think that because the other so many creatures right now that I would give anything to be able to see that are extinct. And but there are probably so many alive right now that if they were extinct, I would wish I could see them. But I take them for granted that they're not extinct. Oh, yeah, for sure. The giraffe, I think, is one of them. Right. If I saw giraffe, I'd be, or like the fossil or skeleton of one, I'd be like, I wonder what that thing looked like. Well, I found out about your page because I saw the video about the 50-foot crocodile in the Congo. And as a person who's, I've always been obsessed with crocodiles. OK. I think they're, you know, one of the coolest animals that ever has existed. And the fact that they're with us right now. And you get to see this insane creature that can go without eating for a year. Lay is completely still in six inches of water and then explodes and pulls a zebra into the water. Right. They're just amazing. They're amazing. And they're so fucking big, man. Yes. You're still like that alligator that we have out there that you saw in the lobby. That's 14 feet. Yeah, that's not even a big alligator, but it's not. A big alligator, but it's not a big crocodile. It's a little baby crocodile. It's not a huge alligator. No. No, like what is the biggest alligator there? I think it's 20 feet. 19 feet, 19 feet, nine inches. Oh, OK. Is that a Florida alligator? I want to say it was Alabama. Really? No shit. Alabama, that's interesting. Yeah, like it's all up in that whole area. Like Louisiana has a bunch of them. Texas has a bunch of Northern Texas. It started a show, alligators. There was a sighting yesterday, actually. There was a video that these guys took of these two alligators swimming in a lake in Northern Texas. People were like, what the fuck are they doing up here? They're expanding. When I was a kid, I lived in Gainesville, Florida from when I was 11 till I was 13. And Gainesville had a lot of alligators. It's like where the University of Florida is. And there's a place called Lake Alice, I think it is. And that's where the alligators just to be. And I remember when I was there, this lady she got her little dog got eaten. She's walking her little dog by the water and just jumped out of the water and snatched her dog. Everybody was freaked out. Like, what the fuck? It ate her dog. If you've seen that footage of the alligator that grabs that woman's dog and then she tries to go in after it and it gives up the dog and takes her. Yeah. Yeah, that's pretty brutal. Very brutal. Yeah. They target people. Yeah, they don't target people as much as crocodiles do. What they definitely do. They eat people. And they're everywhere. No, there's so many of them in Florida. They're just infested. And they were protected when I was a kid. I know. There's this great clip I found a long time ago online about it's like from the 70s. And it's this woman talking about like how this might be the last alligator we ever see. Because like they're trying to make it seem so endangered. And it's like, I don't think so. They thought they were. And I wonder why. I wonder why they thought they were. And I wonder what kind of an accurate accounting of the animals in the Everglades they had. I don't think we could. I mean, with poison, we probably could. But I don't think there's any feasible way to exterminate alligators even if we tried, which we weren't. Well, certainly not now. I wonder if maybe the ecosystem was better in check before people came along. Like, you know, when you think about Florida, it's right. Florida, I think was the first ever city in the country. Is that correct? I believe it's St. Augustine, maybe. Yeah, I think you're right. So that's where, you know, that's where La Baca, a cabassa de Vaca landed. He landed in Florida, right? Was when he made his truck across the country. And so it's a long, I mean, there's hundreds of years of people living there. But cities don't really emerge. Like that kind of Florida life. When is that? Like when is Miami emerge? You know, when is, when do you start seeing cities? Like the early 1900s? My hat. I mean, no, it's got to be early in that. Yeah. Well, it's a pain. I mean, why does it look like, you know what I'm saying? Like when does it start fucking with the habitat of the alligators? Because a lot of Miami, they actually filled in. Yeah, a lot. They got to drain the swamps. Right. Yeah. The thing legitimately. And they had to, I don't know how the fuck they even did it. But that's the real concern about if the ocean level rises, like a lot of stuff, super porous is just going to flood all that area. Yeah. But I wonder like how much of an impact human beings had? Like maybe there was the Florida panther. There was a lot of, and then also back then there was no snakes. Right. So right now, not no snakes, but no python. Oh, Burmese pythrons. Yeah. Which are invasive species that apparently there's two sources. One of them is pets. And the other one was there was a research center that got hit by a storm. And they lost a bunch of pythons, which is kind of hilarious. And also Nile crocodiles, there's Nile crocodiles in the Everglades. Really? I didn't know that. Yeah. There's a breeding population, they think. Wow. They think they've already found several, and they have shoot on site orders for Nile crocodiles. I've seen reports online, but unreliable. Guy saying, very late, took our cattle, our stealing cows. Yeah. I don't know if that's true. Like a 16 foot Nile crocodile stealing cattle. I'm sure they could. It could certainly could. But I don't know if they ever got to be that big. And I do know that too that they captured shared the same genetics. So they were from very close genetic line. So they think they were related. This is the first number I could find about extinction. Serious threats. Oh, come on, 100,000. Endocrine disrupting pesticides like DDT. Hmm. Does that make sense? The other thing I read with more about hunting for leather. Okay. I mean, yeah. It's up to 5 million now. Oh, that's so crazy. 5 million. They say if there is a pond in Florida, there's likely an alligator. Sure. Likely, more likely than not. There's a giant reptile that's swimming around at the bottom of that thing. And that occasionally poking its eyeballs up and then dropping back down. No. There is now because of the pythons. 90 plus percent of all mammals in the Everglades are missing. Really? Yeah. Well, final what the actual number is. I think it's higher than 90%. I think it might be 99%. Like the sightings and the accounts of animals and the record of animals. And when the wildlife biologist go do a count, and they try to get an accurate assessment of what the population numbers are, it's down in some preposterous number. And then snakes are everywhere. It's the number one place for Burmese pythons on Earth. Yeah. Well, in the Everglades. Invasive species of such an advantage. Because no one knows how to deal with them. Yeah. And these fuckers are huge. Now, and you see how they're eating alligators now too? Yes. I mean, that would make sense. But I'm sure the plenty of them are getting eaten too. 90% decline of animals in the area due to pythons. Wow. Nuts. Yeah. They're eating alligators. It's like a famous photograph of an alligator that's inside a pythons body. And it burst. Yeah. So it burst out. Yeah. Isn't that a cayman, though? Do you not know? Are there caymans in Everglades? No, I think just the picture I'm thinking of. No, there aren't. But there's a picture I'm thinking. There might be actually caymans in the Everglades even though they're South American. Yeah. I should have asked home. I might have let them go. I should have said that to me. No. But the picture I was thinking of isn't a cayman that busted out of an anaconda. Oh, OK. Yeah, I'm sure that happens too. I think this one is different. This is in the Everglades. And it's a python and a smaller alligator. I think it's like, yeah. Yeah, there it is. Oh, no. That's the one I was thinking of. There's a couple of different ones. Unless they're all the same. Oh, yeah, I'm sure there's a bunch. There's one up top to zet and one. Look at that one. The one, the image. Oh, that's a alligator, eat the python. So they eat each other. That's pretty good for bigger life. Circle of life. Yeah, depending on whose bigger, Jesus Christ, just the idea that that thing could swallow a fucking alligator. So it was just so bizarre. Yeah, that's another animal that if it didn't exist. Like a crocodile, if it didn't exist, you'd be like, what are you talking about? Like that's there's a 50 foot giant reptile that's hiding in the water. And if you go out there at each of them. So on also a dinosaur nerd. And are you familiar with the updated Ketsakwattle? No. So they found this trackway of now we know that they were competent quadropeds, but this trackway abruptly. So Ketsakwattle was a real thing. The giant terosaurs? Ketsakwattle is the Aztec god. You know, it's the wing serpent. I think that that's where they named the flying reptile. Oh, OK. I didn't even know that there was an actual dinosaur named Ketsakwattle. Well, now you're making me nervous. Well, we don't. Well, the good thing is we have Jamie. I'm no expert. But I remember Ketsakwattle was the insane Aztec serpent. OK, here it is. Yeah. Look at that thing. So it's a winged reptile like bird. But they found this trackway that suddenly became much longer stride, which means it started sprinting. Well, if you look up Ketsakwattle compared to a giraffe, they were like sprinting around. So they thought forever that they had to jump off something to make flight. But now we know that they were able to go fast enough to make their own flight. So this thing is there are as big as giraffes. There's biggest giraffes that can fly in their predatory. And it's believed that they're probably the only thing around that would have given Tyrannosaurus rex paws. Whoa. In a fight, T-rex could obviously win. But imagine being able to sprint. Because that spear would do some damage. Wow. I didn't know that they called them Ketsakwattle. Man. Wingspan at 40 feet. Yeah. Ketsakwattle call it tests. The largest known animal to take this guy. Few fossilized, but known from only a few fossilized bones from West Texas. Just how such a massive animal got airborne has been mostly a matter of speculation. Something at Rockford on its wingtips, like a vampire bat, or that it built up speed by running and flapping like an albatross. Or that it didn't fly at all. But according to new research, the mammoth creature probably leaped jumping at least eight feet into the air before lifting off by sweeping its wings. Wow. Yeah. So imagine like you're driving at that thing in a car. It could take off before you hit it. I don't know. It's just nuts. Like I'm sure you know about terror birds. Of course. I guess. No. Those are here. Right. And didn't exist. Like what was the most recent? When did how long ago did terror birds exist? The existed with people. No. I don't think so. No. No. I don't believe so. I believe they were like five million. Yeah. Right. No. Yeah. It says did exist with people. Last sets of terror birds extinct over 10,000 years ago. Oh. Possible for that one. But this says there's no way humans could have ever met the terror birds. Why is that? Yeah. If it's 10,000 years ago, how could they say that? This is a research rigor and a possibility of humans living aside them says that they're in no way. So I don't know. Oh, I don't believe that. A researcher center. Yeah. You don't know it, bitch. There's no way you know what happened 10,000 years ago. If they lived 10,000 years ago and we live 10,000 years ago, it's open to speculation. For sure. Open. This one says between 53 million and 18,000 years ago. Oh, how weird. What a fucking window. Like they don't know. Hey, man, you guys need to do some more work. Don't be making me fucking look stupid from a Google search. That's crazy. That's such a wide stretch. 53 million to 18,000? Well, if it is 18,000 people were here. For sure. They found footprints that I think they're in the 22,000 years range. Yeah. I thought it went up even more recently than that. I think you're right. Yeah. I think you're right. And this is what's thrown that clovis first hypothesis into a sort of a tailspin. Yeah. I suspect that there was a lot more civilization than we know about going on in North America, particularly, but everywhere else too. I think you're right. I think you're definitely right. And I think a lot of Native American people take offense to the bearing straight hypothesis. That people all came over here from Asia into the North American land mass through the bearing land bridge. A lot of Native Americans say that's crock of shit. Really? Yeah. They think that people were always here. They think people would come from South America. They existed in South America before. They made it up through here. That people lived here. And that we really don't have an accurate account. Like to say that I think the idea behind it is Native Americans, if they really did come from Asia, well, they're just immigrants too. Right. And what they're saying is there's no real evidence of that. And in fact, the evidence of human beings being here is so far back before that, before even the Ice Age, that, and this is pretty clear with the footprints that they found, that there's other explanations so humans got here. And perhaps even though the problem is there's no other primates here. Like North America, the humans didn't, as far as I know, I didn't evolve here. I don't know. Because it wasn't at only the caucuses in Africa, I believe. And then also primates in South America, that gets weird. Because you have different monkeys. That's a big mystery. Yeah. I mean, right now, the best hypothesis is that primates came over on floating vegetation. What? Well, it made, so the distance was less, but not by a lot. Oh, so this is pangeatimes? No, I mean, there are still continents, but it was, but I mean, as it's like separating. Correct. And I don't know. That seems weird to me. How many monkeys are going to get on a raft? I mean, like if there's a hurricane, and it's a bunch of them. But how many? How? Yeah, that would be nuts. That's crazy. I think North America only has one primate that was not believed to be invasive, which was my laddecus, I think. So all the primates in South America are believed to be invasive? Well, I mean, it depends on how you define invasive. But from the old world is what they're called. Old world, the world is new world monkeys. Wow. There's so many mysteries, right? There's so many mysteries with human beings, like when they settled here. Are you aware of there's a guy who's done a lot of research on that wall in Montana? Do you know that wall in Montana? So there's an ancient wall in Montana that some people have tried to say is a natural rock formation. And almost anybody looks at it, it goes, you're out of your fucking mind. That's 100% placed in stack stones. But the problem is, this ancient wall, look at that, mean shut the fuck up. How is that? Oh, yeah. Shut, just shut the fuck up. Can I see the other original picture, Jamie? That one. Where, yeah. I mean, shut the fuck up. Someone stacked that for sure. It's in a straight line. They're stacked on top of each other. They form fit together. They're placed, you know, the same height or they're carved and transported. Yeah, something was going on, right? So some ancient, ancient civilization had this, and I think it's several football fields long. I think it's really long. Like, I think what they've discovered versus how much more of it could be because also a lot of it is covered in dirt. And if this thing is, you know, 25, 30,000 years old, who knows how long it has, how long it's been there? Like, who knows how deep it even goes? The sage wall, that's what it is. So what is that all about? Like, that was on private land. And apparently, originally it was covered in trees and they cleared the area. And so initially people were thinking that it was some sort of a natural formation, but that as they cleared the area, they're like, wait a minute. What is this? So no explanation, no civilization tied to that area, especially when it's capable of moving monolithic stones. But that 1996 they found it. While hiking around the property one day, we discovered the sage wall. The wall is 275 feet long and 24 feet high, a jaw dropping marvel in order to make these boulder areas more accessible. And highlight their beauty, we created a moderate two mile trail system. Additional features of the trail include 400 year old Douglas fir trees, the spectacular views of the Ruby Valley 20 miles away and the Highland Mountain range sitting at 10,000 feet in elevation. So this is it. This is like high elevation covered in trees on a piece of private land that these people just hadn't noticed that they had this thing on there. You know, it's probably some massive ranch in Montana. And then like, okay, what's this? No explanations. No one knows what it is. And I love how people try to write things like that off. Oh, that's just a natural formation. Well, fuck you, it is. You know, it's not. I know you don't have an explanation and this throws your whole understanding of human civilization in North America into the garbage pin. It really does throw it in the garbage pin because like what happened? What was going on there? Was this Vikings? Who fucking did this? Who did it and when? Well, I think a lot of people make them a stake of thinking of Native Americans as like one group. Like people, I'm sure different groups came over many times and probably a lot longer than 20,000 years ago there before 20,000 years ago. Well, we're not exactly sure when people started traveling across the oceans. Like when did the Polynesians make it to Hawaii? I don't know. We really don't know. It's just guessing. You know, it's kind of guessing. What is the, do they have any sort of carbon dating on any of the material that's related to that stone wall where they have a sort of a rough estimation of its construction time? But you know, just that, one of the things that's interesting about the Bigfoot thing is that for whatever reason, Native American tribes don't have a bunch of fake animals. They don't have a bunch of, you know, dove dragons and where wolves and shit, but they do have Bigfoot and not just one tribe, but many, many, many tribes has a story of this, this sort of man that lives in the woods. Right. Which makes you wonder. It sure does. Hmm. Like I said, there's, excuse me, there's way too much going on here that to me, because it's so easy to laugh at. I'm like, how long have we been here, Europeans, you know? Right. And how long have we had the equipment to even find it? And I do think that if it is real, which is a big if, I do think it's being suppressed. Really, I do. So the government's hot and Bigfoot? Yeah. Really? Would that surprise you? Yeah. It would? Yeah, I think there's too stupid to hide Bigfoot. There are too stupid to do it well, which is why so many people believe in Bigfoot. Why would the government hide Bigfoot? What would be the motivation? If you were the government and you found Bigfoot, you know, we got to keep this from people. I think there might be something about them that, well, I, for the same reason I think the wall is collapsing with UFO disclosure. I think they, people only recently are starting to believe that people can handle things or the government is only recently starting to believe that people can handle things. That's why you think UFO disclosure is going on? Well, that and they can't contain it anymore. I don't share that opinion. Really? Yeah, I think they're covering for some very sophisticated drone technology. That's what I think. I think. Oh, really? Maybe. But I think it doesn't exclude UFOs. No, this is my perspective. This is, and again, I'm not married to this at all. This is just something that I have in my head. But I believe that human beings right now are capable of propulsion. I think we have drones that operate on a completely different propulsion system than standard, you know, rocket fuel, push fire, pushes out the back and the thing goes forward very fast, like a jet engine. Bibles are ship. Yeah, bibles are ship. Exactly. I think they have that. And I think they figured out a way to engineer that. The question is where they get it. Right? And that's where I think UFOs come into play. So like you think that what was seen by the Nimitz is all ours? It could be. Because it's where it would be. But then why would they disclose themselves? Well, I think they found it and they reported it. And they did what they had to do. And they didn't really talk about it publicly for many years later. There wasn't a big news story. I mean, when they come at her David favor, when I spoke to him, and it was a first of all, the guy is as rock solid a military man as you're ever going to talk to. Sure. Just by the book, disciplined fighter pilot. Those guys are like detail oriented. They don't fuck around. This guy's not making up stories about other shit. And when he describes this thing and what they saw, and then there's multiple pilots that see it. And then there's a visual. They have video of this thing moving off at insane rate of speed. They have radar imagery that shows it goes from above 50,000 feet above sea level to like 50 in a second. They don't know how the fuck it did it. It goes to their cat point. So it leaves them once they see it. And it jets off to this point, this predetermined coordinate where they were supposed to meet up as part of their training run. So how the fuck does it know their cat point? And where it is. It's off the coast of San Diego. San Diego is big military area. And it's where they do testing. And it's where they were doing the training runs with those jets. That's why they saw it in the first place. If I was going to have a thing and I was going to test it, and I was going to test it, I would want to know, how much do our equipment show? What is our equipment show? Can we see these things? Ryan Graves, who is another very reputable fighter jet pilot, he had his encounters when they upgraded their technology in 2014. So they upgraded all the sensors that allowed them to detect things in the sky. And when they did that, he started seeing these things. There's dead still at 120 knots. Makes no sense. They started seeing these things. I always fuck this up. Is it a cube in a circle, right? Right. So it's a black cube inside some sort of a translucent circle that multiple fighter pilots have reported. And the idea of some sort of gravity distorting thing, one of the features of that they think would be it would look very strange. It would look very strange to you, like what you see. And if we have some sort of a gravity distorting drone that operates on a gravity propulsion system, somehow manipulates gravity so it can move it in sane rates of speed. I think that's where I would test it. I would test it. We're the military guys. I would test it in restricted airspace. I would test it in place. And I would say, OK, let's find out if these guys can see it now. Now we have new equipment, put the new equipment in their jets. Let's see if they can see these things. The concerning thing about that is if it was done by our own government, I worry that they're trying to set up for a false flag. Like a false UFO flag? Yeah. Like if an alien invasion to lock down our rights, tah tah tah. I mean, if they could stage it, sure. Because I mean, with what you're describing, no one would assume that that's human. Right. No one. And no one except for people that have followed the Bob Bazaar story. Yeah. Because if they were back engineering that thing in 1989, as Bob says, that's true. It's a long time ago. It's a long time ago. That is, that's a long time. And for them to have 35 plus years of working on that. So you got to go back to how long did they have it? He said they've had it for decades. So, but I think what he was saying back then was they really weren't making any progress. They were trying to figure it out. They kept bringing in new people to try to have fresh eyes. And that's why they brought him in. But they really don't fucking know. They said they didn't understand how it worked. And they were trying to get some sort of a working model of it. But they were able to operate it. And that's what he was able to observe. And that was one of the reasons why he got in trouble allegedly, where when he got fired, he brought people. And they said, listen, I'm not crazy. Let me show you. They have fucking UFOs. I'm going to show you this. He brought the people. Yeah. He brought people. And those people all said the same thing. They all saw them. People have filmed it too. They actually had to increase the restricted space around Area 51, because people were going to a very particular vantage point. And they were filming some of these things. So there's footage of these bizarre crafts that seem to be moving through the sky in a way that no conventional aircraft can do. We don't really know what they are. And we're assuming there's some kind of a drone or something. But I think if you go to 1989 and they have those things, and then if you have all the money in the world, which they essentially do, they get print money. You have black ops projects. You have things that we, because of national security interests, we have no idea what they're doing or how they're doing it. And then you get some of the best physicists in the world, some of the best propulsion experts in the world. And you throw an ungodly amount of money at this problem every year for 30 plus years. Then you develop these things. And I think that's one of the reasons why they would probably keep it secret, because I would imagine that money was moved around and probably an illegal way. I mean, there's without congressional oversight. There's no legal way to do it. Exactly. So if these guys were doing that, and they were funding this secret military project that they kept from Congress, they kept from, and who knows who's qualified to be able to see these things. But if I had something like that, I would, that's the best cover story in the world. We have observed crafts that are not from this world. Oh, that explains everything. That's insufficient to me. To me too. Yeah. But it's fun. It is fun. Both of them are fun. And I think both of them listen. The universe is fucking huge. We exist. We send things to other planets. There is a rover right now on Mars. We send James Webb telescope into space. We send rockets. We do that. We do that. We would assume an advanced civilization would do that as well. Of course. And we would assume that if an advanced civilization was interested in studying something, we are some of the most fascinating creatures that have ever existed in, at least, is our understanding on Earth. We're the most fascinating by far. Is weird as sharks are and all this other stuff is, we're the fucking weirdest. We're the weirdest and we're the craziest to study. And we're intelligent and also stupid. We're capable of great things and also terrible things. Like we're a very, very, very bizarre creature. And I think I would most certainly study us. Have you ever thought that maybe we were created by their specifications? All the time. Me too. Yeah, all the time. That's the big mystery of the human brain size, right? The human brain size doubled over a period of 2 million years. And there's a lot of cool, like my favorite story is Terrence McKenna's. He had this theory. It's called the Stone-Ape Theory. And it's about still-sabbing. And that these chimpanzees and lower primates started experimenting with still-sabbing. And then over the course of a couple of million years, they develop language, they develop disability to hunt better fashion tools, more creativity, glossa-lea, attaching sounds to objects. And that makes sense. Some sort of telepathy, increased visual acuity that does come from low-dose, so-aside, and news. That seems to me like that makes a lot of sense. Because it coincides with climate change. When McKenna did this whole theory about it, one of the things he talked about is that the exact time that the rainforest recede into grasslands, because of this change in the climate, is the time where these animals emerge, start walking on two legs, and then start eating mushrooms, he thinks, and then 2 million years later become people. OK. Yeah. That's an interesting one. But the most interesting one is they came here. They saw us. We were like, Australia, Pithicus, with some hairy creature. Those kind of primate. Maybe we even started using tools. And they said, let's flunk with that DNA. Let's make a labradoodle. No. I don't think people think big enough in regards to that kind of thing. Because if we had the technology to do what allegedly the aliens, the alleged aliens do, we would be doing all sorts of crazy stuff all the time. 100%. And I don't know. If we could introduce intelligent life into a planet, if there was a life on a planet, then we could introduce our DNA into these lower primates and make them more like us. You don't think we would do it? Yes. 100% right? Yeah, for sure. Yeah. I mean, we monkey with all kinds of things all the time. We're always messing around with creatures DNA. I mean, there's a story that we talked about recently during World War I in Russia, where Russia was experimenting with hybridizing human beings and chimpanzees for soldiers. Orangutans, too. Yes. Didn't they got, they moved, they switched brains within a orangutan and a human. And I guess the human with the orangutan brain never regained consciousness, but evidently the human brain in the orangutan did regain consciousness. Really? Yeah. How did they do that? I don't know, but there's, I only know this from a monster quest. Is that real? Monster quests might be a little bullshit. Although monster quests did bust one of the dumbest things that I used to believe, the dumbest flying rods. I'm just a monster. Yeah. It's just a visual artifact of cameras where the video cameras, where they catch these things moving fast, close up, and it leaves a trail. And so there was this famous group of people that thought that there was these things that were flying around faster than we can see and that they were some sort of aliens that were amongst us. That's orbs and ghosts hunting to me. Ghost is an interesting one. What do you think about ghosts? I would be very, I don't know. It's a tough one. You know what I think? What do you think? You hear them from every culture. That's what gives me pause. This is not like something that's only with your opinions and Christians and people that have a specific religious ideology. This seems to be in almost every culture. There's this concept of dead people that return in some sort of mysterious form. I mean, it would be silly for a big foot person to say this, but that could be part of the human condition. Certainly. Just no one wants to think that this is the end. And I don't think this is the end. But I do think ghosts are. I mean, why wouldn't a ghost be like, hello? Because I think it's a memory. Sure. I think when extreme things happen, you know what we're talking about? The levels of reality being somewhat permeable. Under extreme situations. What is more extreme than like a murder or a massacre? And those are the places where people tend to see ghosts. These horrific, I think the earth has a memory. And I think occasionally under the right circumstances, with the right amount of anxiety, the right amount of distractions and the heightened sense that you get from being in the dark and being afraid, you can access these memories. That's what I believe. Now I see, but I mean, the opposite argument to that is pretty obvious. It's like just because your anxiety's up and because all those factors and because you know what's happened there, you're more jumpy. For sure. And you see things that aren't there. But if you see something that's not there, does it really mean it's not there? It doesn't necessarily. No, I've always thought that. Because if I say I saw a ghost and I actually didn't see it, but in my brain, I did. Isn't that seeing a ghost? Right. Right. That's the argument that a lot of people have in terms of psychedelics. Like psychedelics, you contact God and you have this extreme spiritual experience where you're in contact with this all-knowing entity. And people say, oh, that's an hallucination. OK. But it's the same experience as if you actually did contact God. Right. Like whatever that thing is that you encounter in the psychedelic realm, let's say that that is a figment of your imagination. I'm willing to say that. But whatever that figment of your imagination creates, it creates the exact same experience as if you encountered some other extremely potent life form that exists in some strange form that it's not tangible. It's not like it doesn't register with you as something that it's not a normal, it's not like a mug of water. It's a thing that doesn't exist in your reality. And it's communicating with you. It's exactly the same experience as if it's an imaginary thing or if it's a real thing. The experience is the same. I think that's what happens with people with the ghost thing. There's too many stories. There's too many stories of ghosts from rational people. And one of the places that has a crazy history of ghosts is the comedy store. I used to try to see ghosts at the comedy store. I would stay there late at night whenever everyone was gone. I'd like to sit in the main room and just hope that a ghost would show up. Nothing ever did. But maybe it was I was too needy. Maybe I was too tri-hard. But there's something about that club itself was Sero's nightclub. So that club was owned by Bugsy Seagull in the gangster era of Los Angeles. And for sure, people were murdered there. For fucking sure. Those guys were killing people left it. And if there's ever going to be a place where you're going to see the memory of some horrific experience that expresses itself in some sort of a spiritual form, some sort of ghost-like wraith-type form, that's the place. And you didn't see anything. I didn't, but many people I know have. Many people I know have seen people walk through doors and they go into it in an empty room. Like who's that fucking guy? And they'll see it at the end of a dark hallway. And then they open the door to the room. The room's completely empty. Now, there's been a bunch of stories. Bunch of stories at the comedy store from really like reputable people. People that I know that aren't drunk, normal folks, and they tell you, and they look fucking terrified. And no one wants to believe them. There's a guy named Carl Aboh. Carl Aboh was a great comic who used to tour around with Sam Kinison. And he got kicked out of his house. And I guess he was staying with his girlfriend. And he was trying to make it as a comic. And comics in the beginning, they make no money. Of course, a lot of them sleeping their cars. Like my friend Tony slept in his car. Like, they're just, they have a dream. It's not like you tubing. It is, except you tubing has a more direct path to success. With the YouTube, all you have to do is be, you have this platform that is like the biggest video platform on earth. And it's available to everybody. As much as people complain about YouTube, I think YouTube is fucking amazing. And I think the real problems with YouTube is advertise revenue and managing at scale. And then woke ideological crackheads that are running the helm, which is real too. People are banning people for specific content that's completely legal. But outside of that, you have a path. If you get a video and look at your video, you're here because I saw your crocodile video. And then bam, look at that. I won't talk to that guy. Why are you doing that? You know? I can't believe that's the video that you saw. Oh, yeah man. That's how you get me, folks. Get me with a giant reptile video. There was no 50 foot crocodile. You don't think so? No. Do you feel? Yeah. All around? Yeah, I do. Yeah. Head transplant has been successfully done in a monkey. Maverick neurosurge. Oh, this is a head transplant. Yeah, I've heard of that. So yeah, I wasn't a brain. I watched them. I went back to the monster quest episode. The one about the Soviet Union? Yeah, they were talking about supposedly a successful test where they transplanted ahead from a monkey onto another monkey and it according to the doctor regained consciousness. So they said it was six to six. Excuse me, a success. It wasn't. They didn't say you did. It died nine days later and it was paralyzed the whole time. Yeah, it has to be paralyzed, right? Because you can't reattach the spinal cord yet. That's cruel. They had this one. Oh, super cruel. This one, which is they're saying successful, happened somewhere else and they killed it 20 hours later, but they said it. Look at the pictures. Crazy. Oh. This guy also, I found another picture. He put a rat's or a mouse head on the back of a rat. And I think it was staying alive. He's trying to figure out how to do head transplants. And he's testing it on all sorts of other stuff. Yo. Crazy. Jurassic Park comes in mind. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Just because we can, should we? I mean, think about like, then there will be a black market for like body builders. Like if I was some rich guy, I would pay money to like have my head put on to a nice body. Right. To kidnap a body builder, snatch up his body. I mean, I wouldn't. But you know, so if you like Bill Gates, I'm tired of being a pregnant man. I want to get a body of some super jacked fitness influencer on Instagram. Or what if it was like a closet full of clothes, only bodies. And it's like, what do I want to do today? Right. Well, one day, that's probably going to be the reality when they have synthetic bodies. And the idea that we can't create a synthetic body to me seems kind of silly. Because we've already created bladders. They've used dem cells to recreate a woman's bladder. Oh. Yeah, they took her own stem cells from her skin and constructed a bladder for her and then installed it inside of her body. OK. I think she had bladder cancer or something like that. They had a remover bladder. So they built her a bladder. That's nice. Yeah. Pretty sweet. Yeah. Right. It's also your own stem cells. So your body's not going to reject it. And you know, they're looking at animals that regenerate. like there's certain reptiles that, you know, amphibians, they chop their legs off. They grow new legs, lobsters, a lot of animals do that. And so they're trying to figure out like, what is that gene? And how can we switch that on on people? It's like people that have had their legs amputated, grow their legs back, which fucking crazy. Yeah. I think that's coming. They were able to do it to a guy in Russia. When he backed out after he got married and had a kid. Oh. They apparently had done it to corpses successfully. They say corpses. And they were going to, this guy was down to do it. Well, makes sense. I mean, even though he's paralyzed, he has another option. You know, with, with neural link and a lot of these new technologies, they think that they're going to be able to send signals to your limbs and allow your limbs to bypass the severed spinal cord. Sure. Which is, that's amazing. Oh, it's crazy. Yeah. But when you talk about Jurassic Park, are you aware of the mammoth project? Yeah. Did they, did they manage to get the DNA? Yes. Okay. They're growing a mammoth. Like it's actually happening. And when it does happen, we're going to, oh, is this the job you have to figure out? I think we're going to wait a visit. No, these are American. Oh, okay. I believe so. I haven't met the guys yet. I don't know the nationality. I'm assuming. But they're out of Dallas, right? No. I think the thing was in New York? Oh, okay. Whatever. Whatever they're doing, they're going to bring back them out. That's cool. That's wild. Yeah. I love the CMM. But where do you, how far do you go with that? That's bring back a saber tooth cat. What about an American lion, which is big as a fucking horse? Yeah. North American lion, people, a lot of people don't know, was larger than the lions that are in Africa. Yeah, they're two thirds larger. Crazy. Yeah, that's, that was right here. Yeah, it was right here. I have a, I don't know if you know this, but my, I did a video on the lines of Savo. Oh, I haven't seen that. And then that's the big video that the first video of mine that ever got traction of any kind. That's the ghost in the dark. The ghost and the darkness. I thought it was ghosts in the darkness. But it's not. But then I did a second video where the lines were so badass that they died and went to hell and were really nasty and hell and got kicked out of hell and were plopped out in dinosaur times. Oh. And then the videos about the lines of Savo fighting a pack of Daanonicus. Yeah. And the lions lost. But in reality, I think lions would be to, would be to bunch of Daanonicus. Who knows? You know, but I mean, that sounds like something that Romans probably would have put together when they were doing those Colceum fights. No. But what the speaks to is what we were talking about earlier. Like that, what happened to create human beings and what would we do if we could do those things? Well, we were showing what we would do. We're taking people's heads off, put them in the bodies. We're taking monkeys heads off, putting them a rat set on the back of a mouse. Like we're doing all kinds of bizarre experiments. And if they knew how to do it, instead of like we're kind of at the rudimentary stages of this kind of stuff, if they knew how to successfully implant their genetic material and hyper advance a lower primate and make it in a short period of time much smarter than any other primate on Earth, which is what we are. We're so different than everything else that's remotely related to us. The idea that somehow or another, we exist in this form and our ancient ancestors exist in the same form. Like the really ancient ancestors, we've branched off of a, we're like a cousin of a chimpanzee. Yeah. And we share a lot of their traits. They never found our chimpanzee level ancestor. Right. Because it's on a fucking spaceship somewhere, bro. Would that be surprising? No. It would be sure. Yeah, it'd be crazy. I wouldn't be surprised by that at all. I wouldn't be like I can't believe this. I wouldn't say that. I would say wow. So that's what it was. So that's why we're so different. Well, I was having a conversation with a woman yesterday, Sarah, a Maury Walker, who is a scientist, a physicist. And she was talking about a thing called assembly theory. And what she was talking about, did I say our last name right? What she was talking about was like, what are the actual steps that are necessary in order for life to be created and evolved? And if you think about human beings, we're the one animal on this planet that seems to have the same sort of impact as invasive species do. Sure. We swarmed the whole planet. We're fucking up everything. And there's no answer to us. Ah, see. But do you think humanity is something that needs an answer? Well, there's no answer to us naturally. Right? Like there's nothing that keeps our population in check other than disease. You know, normal population control. Like so while the left is talking about, you know, humanity population going out of control, like our population's crashing. Sure. What is it? Asia crashed Europe and America are crashing now. India's next to crash and Africa is the only one left to boom. Right. In terms of like Japan, like the children that are alive today, how many of them will ever have grandchildren? Very small percentage. Yeah. That's true. That's true. Yeah. Because like you can look at more kids. You can look at the charts. Like it's very clear. You know, right. But don't you think, so this is nature's balancing act. Right. It has to happen. It's not, it's not a matter of like it's going to. It has to those are the rules. I think nature probably balanced us out when we develop cities. Right. Because what's the byproduct of cities? One of the byproducts of cities is expensive to live there. So a lot of times women get jobs and women don't want to give up their career to have a family. So they hold it off until much later. And if they have a child at all, they have less kids than people who start having kids when they're 18 or 20. And so this is sort of a function of having these extremely dense environments or people who are stacked up with each other. And then competition inside that city-like structure is intense. And financial competition is intense and women engage in it as well. And it lowers the population. That happens to almost all westernized societies, first world societies, they experience a drop in birth rate. Right. And it seems like that would be a natural feature of like high population areas. Because it doesn't even matter what it is. Like for a deer, it's just the availability of grass. Right. So I find it fascinating to think that humans are not very different from animals, but the rules still apply to us. Right. But we are animals for sure. But we also are invasive. If a wild pig is invasive, anywhere on earth, that's true. Then we're invasive because we weren't there and then we were there and then we took over. and we're so different than every other animal in how much different we look from each other. What the wide variety of sizes we have of people, it seems to me like I've thought about that before though. What if seven gorillas that look exactly the same to us are all like hyper like what if yeah, like they might all look really differentiated to themselves. I doubt it. They look like gorillas. I mean, just like look at what we see, but I see a gorilla, but when you look at human beings, we're like dogs. Now we vary like the like this Carl over there and then there's my dog Marshall. Marshall is a golden retriever. Marshall if Carl was a girl or if Marshall was a girl and they could have a baby, those two sort of like can he breed with someone? We can find out he tries to find out. He tries if Marshall was a girl. He tried to help him. Marshall just gives up sometimes and Carl is just biting on his face while he's lying on his back. No, he just gets tired of this little psychopath. But the point is like they're the same species. They're just a weird breed of that species, but they are the same thing. Like you could take a wolf and you could breed it with a dog. They all started off as wolves and we manipulated them to the point where we have this incredible variety of shapes and sizes through manipulation. That's what people look like. That manipulation could be environmental. The reason why people that move to Northern Europe develop very pale skin because their body has to act as sort of like a solar reflector to create vitamin D because you don't get it like the way you would get it in Africa where we originally started. We're kind of like a manipulated animal in that regard. At least our appearance. And what that would make sense if somebody fun with us, especially if they made a bunch of different kinds, you know, like initially. The thought is the fun stuff is the Anunnaki. That's the fun one. The Anunnaki came here and they manipulated with humans. Then you look at the Sumerian tablets and you see the images of the giant Anunnaki guy was the monkey person sitting on his lap with a tail. Have you ever seen that one? You never saw that? No. Dude. It's like a 5,000 year old tablet of this guy who is this enormous person with this beautiful like garban and he's got this person sitting on his lap, a small person with a tail. What? Yeah. Oh my goodness. Oh dude, if you've studied any of the ancient Sumerian tablets at all. Honestly, that stuff. I'm like saving that for a rainy day. Get into it. Get into it. Because the whole Zachariya sichon version of the Sumerian text is really, really interesting stuff. Is that like, no, that wouldn't be where the Nephilim come at? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's the version of the Nephilim is the Anunnaki. Oh. The Nephilim is those from heaven to earth came. Nephilim were supposed to be giants, right? This is the Anunnaki. They're much larger than human beings and they did something according to the Sumerian text as translated by Zachariya sichon. Okay. And this is why the symbol for medicine was always that, uh, Sir Conduceus. Yeah, the two serpents, right? That looks like a double helix DNA. Oh. It's exactly what it looks like. Yeah. And he, that's the connection that he makes with all this stuff. And a lot of people disagree with him. I should just point out if you're interested in this stuff, there's a whole website called sichon is wrong dot com. And I've read that too. And it's interesting. And I appreciate when people have varying opinions, right? But there's, um, there's something about sichon stuff that is very compelling to me. And one of the big reasons is there's a lot of mysteries about the understanding that, um, that the Sumerians had that sort of defies conventional logic. They had a detailed map of the solar system in, you know, 6,000 years ago in these clay tablets. So they have the sun in the center and then they have all of our planets in the proper order and the proper, not the exact size, but this one's bigger than that one. That one's bigger than this one. And it's depicted on a clay tablet. And you look at it. Okay. What the fuck is that? But what you, what do you really need as advanced? Well, yeah, you would. Oh, you would. Yeah. You need a telescope. There's no other way. Like there's no way with the human eye you're going to see Uranus. You don't see it. There's no way you see Pluto. You don't see them. I mean, they, okay, you're not going to see it. They saw it. You know, they, they had like show the, find the monkey one first. Did you find it? I was looking for, I'm not exactly sure what I was looking for for that one. Uh, Sumerian tablet Anunaki with monkey person on his lap. I wasn't getting one. I thought you wanted to. Well, I know you can find the solar system one to find that one quick. Just so I could show it to him. So this is a giant mystery to what, what this meant and how they knew this. So this is like in between two photos of these Anunaki or two images of these Anunaki's. So it has the sun and it has all of our planets and it has all of our planets in, not in the correct size, obviously, because Jupiter is so much larger than Earth. Right. But in this one's bigger than that one, that one's bigger than this one. It's like a visual representation, uh, as much as you can in a small area like that. But some of their tablets were just absolutely fascinating. No, but how cool is that though? I know. So these people were writing about the story of humanity. They're writing it down on these clay tablets. And it, it seems to be some bizarre story of visitors. A lot of them have wings like that one that shows the eagle. Sure. Like, what's that all about? What was that fucking guy? Raw, I think. Yeah. But also wouldn't that represent some sort of spaceship, like something that can actually fly. If you, the only thing that you saw that could fly were birds. Right. And it represents something that flies. You know, yeah, it didn't. In the Bible, the, the Jewish Bible, the Talmud, uh, cloud, get translated to, oh, no, what was it? The shield got translated to cloud with the pillar of fire. Hmm. I believe that, that, that led the Israelites out of the desert. Wasn't something like that. Oh, no, but that makes sense. I could have, I said I wasn't going to talk about anything that I wasn't sure about. Yeah, that's what this shows all about. Yeah, just being pulled out. I could have, it was like, there was a, in the Bible, it says the pillar of fire and a cloud. And that's what the Israelites followed out of the desert. Hmm. But I could be. I've read that the more pragmatic translation is actually shield and it wasn't cloud. Huh. Here it is. The pillar just said to God of the Israelites through the desert, during the Exodus, from Egypt, the pillar of cloud provided a visible God for the Israelites during the day while the pillar of fire lit their way by night. Yeah. So evidently it wasn't a cloud, but a shield and like what, what a shield looked like. Hmm. Like that we would call that a saucer. Right. Huh. Well, then there's the Ezekiel story in the Bible, which seems very much like some sort of a UFO encounter. Like what you, the way you would describe a UFO encounter if there's nothing that flew and didn't understand what advanced technology would be if you saw it. The Vimanas and the ancient Hindu texts, I mean, there's just so many. There's so much of it. Yeah, there's so much of that stuff. And again, if life is out there everywhere in the universe, it kind of makes sense that someone would visit us as we're emerging, as life is becoming more and more intelligent over the course of millions and millions of years. And they find this one particular animal that's very similar to what they used to be at one point in time. And they just say, let's be this long. Yeah. I think we would do that. I know we would. If we found a plant filled with monkeys, you know, think we'd take a few of them and shoot our stuff and do it. Like let's see. That's just, it'll be fun. It might also be a feature of the universe that that's what intelligent life ultimately does, which is why we want to monkey around with these monkeys in the first place and take their heads and put it on other bodies. Yeah. So I think that different planets in order to meet the requirements of life would actually be quite similar. That's just a theory I have. It's a common theory. Well, yeah. Yeah. So people say like why are aliens like carbon life forms like, well, that's what that's what works. Right. Right. It's like it could be anything. Right. Right. Like bursting stars create carbon. This is car based life exists here. Why wouldn't exist everywhere else where there's stars everywhere else? Right. But like the, we don't find solar systems that have something completely different than a planet. You know, everything that we found outside of our solar system seems to behave in a similar manner. We look at galaxies. They seem to behave in a similar manner. They seem to look similar. They're different sizes and the like, but they're pretty similar. They're these circular spiral things. It makes sense that if that exists everywhere, probably carbon based life exists everywhere, too. Probably a feature of these solar systems. Correct. That's what I would say too. Yeah. And then there's probably like if you are growing a garden in your backyard, you know, when you planted the tomatoes, you got like a little thing on it, 722 planted tomatoes, you know. So then you check on them. And then other tomatoes you planted like a couple of weeks later, like oh, those won't be doing time. So if you were planting humans on a planet, you'd go, wow, they need a couple million years where they get their shit together. But they've started to develop nuclear bombs. And that's why they hang out over nuclear bases. Yeah. Or they're foreign governments showing us that they have advanced technology and they can hover over our nuclear bases. I think there's some of that going on too. Yeah, but there's so many like that fellow who I can't recall his name, but he's like the most popular video on Greer's channel. Richard Greer or Stephen Greer. Yeah. He was like the guy who would discredit you if you saw UFO. He told a story about how Elle Hopkins, are you talking about? I believe so. From Project Blue Book? Yes. Yeah. Well, actually, I don't know. Well, Elle Hopkins was the guy who was hired to debunk UFO sites. No, it's not him. He was, and then he later became a believer. So he studied, he worked for Project Blue Book for a couple of decades and was sent out to like, oh, we saw this and he was like, ah, swamp cast. And then after his career is over, then he came public with everything. So saying, I think UFO is a real. I think we are really are being visited. Yeah. Well, jail and Hyneck, Hyneck, Hyneck. Yeah. What did I say? Hopkins. Oh, different. Jail and Hyneck. I was not thinking of Hyneck. He was like a self-admitted, deep state stooge. Like, he was the type of guy that would go out and discredit you if you saw something. Oh, he would discredit you personally. Yes. Okay. So he would turn you into a fool. Right. So if you went to Stephen Greer's channel and looked at the most popular video on it, you would find it. But he talks for like two hours about everything he knows and it's nuts. Absolutely bonkers. Fine, I got it. And I really, I believe. You believe him? I want to believe him, right? This stuff seems so much more likely than the alternative, which is nothing. Oh, there's no life out there? Yeah. Because we don't even know what they are. I mean, I'm not even saying their extraterrestrial, really. Not only that, but so much more likely that they would want to visit us. Oh, I mean, yes. Yeah. Yeah. So let's get back to the crocodile. How come you don't believe? Why would you believe? I mean, 50-foot crocodile? Sure. They just keep getting bigger. They don't, though. How big do they get? I don't know crocodiles. Right. But here's the thing. What we know about crocodiles now are crocodiles after guns. Okay. So guns change everything. So that alligator out there that you saw our lobby, that's 80 years old. Yeah. 80 years old and a gun killed that alligator. So guns get introduced in the 1800s and then explorers start going through the Congo in the 1800s and they start shooting crocodiles. They shoot a lot of crocodiles. In fact, a friend of mine actually got hired to go to the Congo. What's in the Congo? Where did Jim Shockey, what part did he go to? I forget. I forgot. But he went to Africa. He's a hunter and they hired him to shoot crocodiles. Because so many people in this village, he went to this village, so heartbreaking. This guy's missing an arm. This person's missing a leg. They have bites taken out of him. And while he was there, a woman got taken out. While he was there, a woman was washing clothes and a crocodile snatcher and dragged her into the water. And when human beings start bringing guns, the whole ecosystem changes. So these 50 foot things that have been apex predators just sunning themselves on the shore, now some guy lines up a shot from a boat rather and just takes it out. And they're shooting all these different crocodiles. They're doing this over the course of, you know, 50, 60 years, all the big ones are dead. And it takes fucking forever for a crocodile become a 50 foot crocodile. And they don't die. But they just stay alive. They only die when something happens to them. But there's one crocodile in a reserve in South Africa who was born in like 1890 or something. And he's only like 17 feet long. Right. So you think that's because this environment wasn't big enough? Well, I think it's because it's born in 1890, not 1790. Oh. So they don't die. So if a crocodile is living in the Congo, okay, the Congo is rich with life. There's life everywhere. And certain animals have to cross these rivers. And that's just a fucking meal train. You know, you've seen those animals trying to wild the bees trying to make it across the river. And then the crocs show up and just start snatching them. I mean, some of them may get through and some of them die. And that's just how it's always been. And so they've had enormous amounts of food forever. And if they've lived for hundreds and hundreds of years, those things are just continue to grow. It doesn't seem outside the realm of possibility for something to be twice as big as the biggest one that they've spotted. Yeah, but that's long. Because so like great white sharks, we're pretty sure that they get to 22 and a half feet. And then they get fatter. Right. So 50 feet is really big. Megalodons. Yeah. But that's a different thing. Right. But it was also a GI fucking shark. Yes. I think it's possible that there's certain subspecies of crocodiles. Yeah. Just like there is like came in, like there's different subspecies of came in or crocodiles rather even in the Amazon. There's big ones that get to be like 16 feet long and then they're small ones that get killed by Jaguars all the time. Mm hmm. Those are cool. I think that big foot is more likely to be real than a 50 foot crocodile. So you think these people that have these depictions of it being as big or bigger than their boat that just exaggerating? Yeah. Yeah. I do. But not in a malicious or even a lying way. Probably just freaked out as a size of the goddamn thing. I even freaked out just like it was giant. Right. And then they exaggerate over time. Like it was probably 20 or 30 feet maybe. Mm. But like twice as big, bigger, more than twice as big as the biggest ever is pretty nuts. It is nuts, but occasionally animals do have mutations that makes them much larger. And you see that with humans, like the biggest human ever was like nine feet tall. Yeah. But not 12. Right. Right. True. Right. Not double the size. Right. But he also was dealing with gravity. And like the real problems with being a gigantic human with all the bad bone problems. What is that? That's the world's oldest crocodile. Yeah. Henry. Jesus. How old's Henry? They caught him in 1903. Jesus. Jesus. Caught him in 1903. How crazy is that? They caught him over 100 years ago when I was working on the video. I don't know why this occurred to me, but he was born roughly the same time as Adolf Hitler. He's a man eating crock. Yeah. He killed a lot of people. So this guy's just hanging out with him with the fuck is wrong with this dude. He's just assuming that the thing's not hungry. How crazy are people that we want to sit right next to a goddamn giant monster like that? Look at the size of that thing. I just can't imagine why anybody would stand next to that. Can't you stand really far away and just film it? That's how I feel about surfing. 700 kilos. It puts in like 1500 pounds of shit. They're so cool too. Look at that face. The way all the teeth integrate with the gums. And when you know that this thing, so it's captured in 1903, when was it born? I think it was about 15 years old when they captured him. That is so crazy. So this thing's somewhere around 135 years old. Yeah. This guy's just grabbing its dick. Look at this. He's like, hey, bro. To compare that giant crock that's always pops up on a golf course in Florida is known to be about 10 to 12 feet and a thousand pounds. Yeah, that's an alligator. I know it's like 15 plus feet and 1500 pounds. Like I said, the one that's out there is 14 feet. Yeah, I was really surprised to learn how much smaller even when the size or when the length is similar, how much less heavy alligators are. Oh, yeah, their twice is heavy. Yeah, crocodiles rather or twice is heavy. They are so dense and they're so aggressive. Have you ever seen when they have, yeah, it turns towards them? That guy could just get taken out like that. But they drown. That's how crocodiles kill because they get too big, right? No, I'm saying, oh, how they kill people. Yeah. So like a crocodile like that would, if he couldn't drag you to water, isn't that nuts that like their actual method is drowning? Yeah. Well, they can hold their breath forever. Right. So just like, I know you can. Right. Because like their teeth are just meant for holding. Yeah. It's their teeth aren't meant for chopping or chomping or anything. Have you seen the one where the crocodile takes a pig and snaps in half with a shake of his legs and chokes down the leg? No. Have you seen the one where the crocodile just like rolls and rips its friends leg off for a reason? And the friend doesn't even flinch. It's just like, what the fuck, dude? Yeah. Yeah, the lady was feeding them, right? And he just, what do you got here, Jamie? Oh, yeah, here it is. Look at that. Oh my gosh. He just snaps that pig in half. No. With a quick little fling of its neck. Sure did. Oh, that's my own Instagram. Watch this. Snap. Look, there's nothing. Just wanted a bite-sized chunk. No big deal. Just the animal that's been around for how many millions of years? I know he's straight, but this is the guy you're talking about. Richard Dodie. Okay. Spread disinformation about UFOs on behalf of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations. So that's the guy. So his job was to make you look like an idiot if you believe in UFOs. Now why do you think they would do that? That discredit people. But why? Why would they want to discredit people? Man, you are, I don't know. I guess to keep their secrets. What secrets? All right, then keep your secrets. So you think that they know something about UFOs. They don't want people to believe these things are real. They want to discourage people coming forward. So they mock them. They turn them into fools. This guy's job is to discredit all the stories and make the person look like a crazy person, gaslight everybody. And it's because they don't want people to know what they know. I would imagine that the truth is worse. Well, yes, but because what they know is really, really bad. What do you think they think? What do you think they know? Do you subscribe to the Boba's are vessels of souls idea? I'm familiar with that. Oh, you didn't know that one? No, but I... So I know Kathy Turner, a doctor, Kathy Turner, who wrote, taken into the fringe and masquerade of angels. And she said the only thing that's consistent throughout all abduction reports is that the aliens are fascinated with the concept of the soul. So I assume that works into whatever you're talking about with Boba's are. Boba's are said one of the more bizarre things that he found out when he was working at Area S4 was that they had this very thick sort of document on all that they knew so far about aliens. And one of the things was it went back to religion. Saving a fine Boba's are talking about it. So I don't butcher this. But I believe what he was saying was that they think of us as containers for souls. Now let's imagine, before we show the Boba's are thing, let's imagine how that would happen. Now let's imagine that human beings, we are biological life. And so therefore we have what we call a soul and then we create digital life. And maybe this digital life, maybe artificial creations are what we're seeing in these gray aliens. Maybe they are some sort of hybrid or some sort of some sort of creation that's outside of evolution, is outside of natural adaptation. They look at us as the source, like they can't breed anymore. Maybe for them to exist, maybe they need an actual soul. And to think of us as a farm for souls. I really do think that we're a farm of some kind to them. Because it's funny because people always say like they hang out over nuke sites so that we don't bomb ourselves. And it's like sure, but not from a compassion standpoint. It's like if the farmer doesn't protect his cow because he wants it to find some sort of spiritual thing. And that's why I take issue with like Stephen Greer and all those people who are like, you just need to expand your consciousness. And then you see it's like, that's a pretty, I feel like that's what they want you to think. Hmm. Just find Boba's art. Here, listen to him talk about this. He's pretty crazy. Yeah, the only hardcore thing is that there is extremely classified document dealing with religion and it's about that sex. Period. Bob laser on humans and religion. They're going to use it. Yeah, the only hardcore thing is that there is extremely classified document dealing with religion and it's about that sex. Period. But why would there be any classified material dealing with religion? I want to go back to the religion thing. I want you to say. It's just so, it's so far out. It's a pure objection. It's been noted. Okay. What does it say? That we're containers. That's how, that's how supposedly the alien looks at it. And we are nothing but containers. Containers of containers. Maybe containers of souls. You can come up with whatever theory you want that we're containers. And that's how we're mentioned in the document. That religion was specifically created. So we have some rule and regulations for the soul purpose and not damaging the containers. Yeah. Yikes. Yeah. I didn't think of it that way that you can actually damage your soul. But it is almost like every holy text has that. Well, it does make sense too because if, if what is in religion, right, the idea is like to save your soul, you have to abide by certain rules. You have to be good to each other. You have to live a just life. All of these things are laid out so you don't damage the energy that is inside you and turn it evil. See, it could be more pragmatic than that though. If someone is going to inherit your soul, they don't want it bogged down with bad habits. Right. Yeah. Well, they don't want it to be evil. They want to have negative energy attached to it and the karma of killing a bunch of people. Right. Who wants Dick Cheney's soul? You know, the aliens like you would have that dude. Remember when he shot someone and then the guy apologized to him? Yeah. Isn't that nice? You know, gangster that is? You should have gotten a face and the dude's like, yeah, I like that. I look like a bird. Don't worry about it. I look like a deer. Can you, what is with, is there any way to you that we're not being gassed at like to hell by Kamala Harris? In what way? Like wasn't she like a joke even among Democrats? Uh huh. Like 10 seconds ago? Like literally. Like a day ago. Yep. And now it's like the country's rallying around. I know. Yeah. What? I don't know. I don't know. You're, we're so easily manipulated and they're all doing it and locked up. Yeah. No doubt about it. There's no doubt about it. She was, she pulled as the least popular vice president of all time. Yeah. Um, she is, you know, I didn't with the friend of mine recently who actually knows her. And he says she's very smart. But when she gets in front of a camera, she locks up and she's just not good at communicating. And she tries to go off script and she, you know, whenever you're talking in front of a large group of people, um, there's a bizarre stress and pressure. That really constricts your ability to communicate. I'm aware. Yeah. As of the last few minutes. Yeah. Yeah. It's weird. And this is just you and me, right? No. And now imagine you and me, but we're in front of 15,000 people that are hanging on our every word and you're kind of free-balling and maybe you really haven't even done the research. Like someone's asking how you're going to fix the economy. Mm hmm. Right. And then you have some not well, the problem is everybody needs money because the bills and we're working on that. Like what? And you can, that's so obvious when, you know, with the passage of time is significant and the significance of the passage of time is significant because of the passage of time. Exactly. So that's someone who is basically like a kid in the fifth grade who's writing a book or a poor for the hammer of the book. That's every time I see her on camera. That's all I can think is that she's the kid who didn't do her homework. Right. Because she just has that vibe. Did you see the clip of her talking about how, how dare we wish Merry Christmas to people? No. Yeah. This bizarre rant about how we shouldn't be wishing Merry Christmas to anyone. Is this when she was a senator? I don't know. It's recent. It's recent. Yeah. It's so strange that like that was her like that's the only time I've seen her passionate about anything on camera. Come on, really? Yeah. So I haven't seen that. I've seen the one she's telling people need to be woke. Everyone needs to be more woke. Oh, yeah. You're more woke. You should figure out who's the woke is. Try to be the woke is, but she's whatever, everyone needs to be more woke. She's like laughing. It's like, what the fuck? When we all sing happy tunes and sing Merry Christmas and wish each other Merry Christmas, these children are not going to have a Merry Christmas. How dare we speak Merry Christmas? How dare we? Merry Christmas, everyone. And she invoked Greta Thunberg a little bit there. Oh, that's so nutty. How dare we? How dare we? How dare you? Yeah. No, we're definitely being gasled. And not only that, here's the big one, right? She wasn't elected. She was appointed vice president and then they didn't do primaries. They had no primaries for Joe Biden and now all of a sudden she is the nominee because he's stepping away. And so then they bring in her and they bring in this other guy who's radical from Minnesota. That's the vice president who he believes a lot of wild things. One of them is transgender surgery for people who are under 13. Another one is abortion up until nine months. Oh, yeah. Obviously, there's reasons why people medically would, like if the woman's life is in danger of the child that has something wrong, it's not going to live. There's reasons why they choose to do things like that. But that stuff scares the fuck out of people. He changed the Minnesota state flag to make it look like a Somali flag. Yeah. Oh, you haven't seen that? No. Yeah. Show that video. So the video of him taking down the Minnesota flag and he replaced it with the new flag that looks a lot like the Somali flag. Wow. Minnesota is a huge population of Somalis in it. Well, isn't what's her face? Yes. Yeah. Omar. Yeah. Oh, but there's a video of him doing it. Man. Well, okay. But they did change the Minnesota state flag, correct? Sometimes the false. Yeah, that's the problem with like fact checkers. Some of these fact checkers are completely full of shit. Like you're just trying to debunk something, especially now when there's all this scrutiny being paid attention to what this guy's done. Yeah. What if you, what's the false stuff, Jamie? It's not the flag itself, correct? Yeah. I mean, I typed in, I was just trying to even get to it a whole bunch of stories were popping up. No, we didn't give him a Somali flag. No, he didn't change. No, he resembles Somali false Somali. But what does it look like now? I was trying to get to. OK, on the left is Somali flag. On the right is the Minnesota state flag. OK, same color as Somali flag, a white star, a different white star in it, like the Somali flag, very different than the original Minnesota flag. And there's the video down below that. That's when he changes it out. So he takes out the Minnesota state flag. Oh, hold on a second. Wait a minute. Turn the volume up, please. So you hear him say that? All right, ready. Whoa, wait a minute. So he gets the flag, picks it up, moves it out of the way, and replaces it. Look at this. There, that's better. Why is that better? I don't know. Why do you care what the flag looks like? First of all, and why do you get to change the flag? How crazy is that the governor gets to change the flag? Who else is involved in that decision to change the flag? It's not as good as that would happen. I don't know. Usually it's a big, it's a big event that let people pick, you know. Right. No, we have a bunch of people that's a high population of Somalis in your state. I would imagine they would want to try to get that flag a little closer home. The worst incident of fact checking was the quid pro quo, the cred quo Joe clip where Biden brags about that time that he withheld a billion dollars of aid to Ukraine. So the fire prosecutor. The fire prosecutor that we now know is sun worked for. And if you type that in Snopes or whatever, you would just like, oh, that didn't happen. Biden, there was no quid pro quo and Biden didn't want the prosecutor fired because he didn't know that his son worked for Bernie Smith at the time. And it's like, how can you just say that's fake? And it's scary to me that people will read that and be like, oh, it's fake. It's like, look at it, like you with your eyes. Yeah, fact checkers are fucking dangerous. And it's really, I mean, what you're seeing is kind of treason. That's kind of what it is. If you're seeing that kind of fact checking, you're lying. You're lying and you're intentionally misrepresenting facts. And you're doing so because you want a specific result politically. Right. And it should be illegal. Especially if people think of you as a fact checker. And what does that mean? What does it mean to be a fact checker? The problem with facts is a lot of them are very subjective. And you could find one small inconsistency or one, you could phrase a question in a certain way and have your answer false in a different way because you're just finding some nitpicky way to look at things. I've seen a lot of that. To the point where you're like, that's not fact checked at all. You guys just fucking, you're gaslighting. This is what it says who picked a new flag. State emblems redesigned commission tasked with choosing the new flag and seal made its final selections this week. And the new design will debut next year. It follows four months of meetings, many spirited debates and 2,500 submissions from the public sharing their ideas for the new symbols. This is why they changed it. He said it was problematic. Problematic. Oh, I love that term. The current flag is problematic. I think we all know that. We've evolved from a more diverse state, evolved into a more diverse state. And I think it's more reflective of that. Okay, what was the original flag? There's concern with the scene depicted on the old flag, which many found offensive. First adopted in 1957, the flag showed a white settler tilling land as an indigenous man rides horseback. And did his members of the state emblem redesigned commission said it was harmful to their communities and promoted the erasure of their people from the land. What? Well, can I see what it looks like? Show me the original, just get a photo of the original Minnesota flag. Okay, click on that. Let's see what it looked like. Okay. So there's a Native American on horseback. I see it though. And then there's a farmer tilling land and Native American on horseback. Is that problematic? Because Native Americans didn't really ride horses and people didn't really tell the land like I don't understand what this big controversy about that actually. Yeah. Whether or not horses, how long horses have been in North America? Well, horses originated in North America. What? Yeah, horses originated in North America, including zebras, all of them originated in North America, and they were wiped out and they had been introduced into Asia and Africa and all these other continents and then reintroduced back to America. Right. When people rode them to correct it, right. So a lot because a lot of people are saying that first nations people had horses for a lot longer than Europeans had been in America. Certainly possible. There's certainly different segments, different North American tribes that were much better, including right here where we are, the command sheet. The command sheet were notoriously good at raising horses and those part of how fierce they were. They had so many horses. They rode them so well and they could ride sideways and shoot arrows underneath the horses neck. But I don't know why that's so problematic to get a replacement with something that looks a whole lot of like a small flag. The idea that it doesn't look like a small flag is kind of crazy. I mean, that's it does. It certainly does. It's certainly the same color. Certainly also as a white star. It's just a different white star. Correct. Yeah. So it's like, you know, the flag doesn't bother me that much. If the people in Minnesota like it, like who cares? A star and some colors. The real problem is when you hear discussions of things that are like openly Marxist philosophies, when you hear talk about equal outcomes and you know, and not just equal opportunity, but that we all need to arrive at the same place, equal outcome talk. There's only one way they can do that and that it's by forcing you. Well, it's by everyone having nothing. Yeah. That's the only way to have things totally equal because you can't have everyone have everything that's impossible. Right. There's no way. There's not enough resources. And so for equal distribution, that has to be enforced by law. So that has to be enforced by the government and the government generally does not have equal. They have much more than you. And that's Fidel Castro and Cuba. That's North Korea. That's virtually every communist country that's ever existed. You have a military dictatorship that decides what you can and can't do with your time. And all under the guise of making it better for everyone. And that's exactly what they did to North Korea. When they took over people's farms, they said, we're going to take over the farms so that everybody has food. Yeah, good. Now everyone's starving and the government has all the food. If you kill a cow, they'll kill you. Yeah, it's nuts. It's nuts that people don't learn from history and it's nuts that people who subscribe to this leftist ideology have this very distorted version of humans and how capitalism works and what's the benefits of it. I think there's a lot of parts of progressive ideology and philosophy that could be applied to society to make things better. I think if we funded more things the same way we fund the fire department, the police force, these are kind of socialist things. Everybody gets access to the fire department. It's a part of being in the community. We all pay for it. Education is that way, but it should be much more funded. It should be much more prestigious, much better trained teachers, a more esteemed position. I feel the same way of law enforcement. They should be much more respected, much better trained. You should put much more resources into that and have them be integral and a part of the community and for the safety of the community, not the bad guys who come in to pull you over because you rolled through a fucking stoplight. That kind of shit. I think the problem is these people that have this idea of equal outcome, this is the worst version of all these leftist ideologies. The worst version is open borders. Everybody should have everything and then equal distribution of it. Then what always comes with that is they unarmed the citizens. If they don't unarmed the citizens, you can't get away with any of this stuff. As soon as you have no one has guns other than the police, everybody is forced to comply. If the army and the police are the only ones that get to tell you what to do and they take orders from the government and the government is a communist dictatorship. You're fucked. That has never been more evident than in all the versions of it that you can see in current world politics now where a government has been taken over by a communist regime. It's always bad. It never turns out good. Not a single fucking time. People starve. It gets horrible. There's just terrible government overreach. You're seeing it now in England where people are getting arrested for tweets. People talk about Soviet Russia, like how bad Russia is in terms of cracking down on thought police and cracking down on bad tweets and things like that. I think the statistics are, I think England in the lab. I think there's something like 4,000 people have been arrested in England for thought crimes where they've said things online that people find to be a hateful thing or a problematic thing. I think it's only 200 in Russia. Oh wow. Yeah. That says a lot. Yeah. Maybe in Russia they're too scared to do it at all. Could be. Yeah. But the fact that they're comfortable with finding people who've said something that they disagree with and putting them in a fucking cage in England in 2024 is really wild. Yeah. Especially they're saying you get arrested just for retweeting something. And who's to, here's the problem with that. Even if you say, yeah, well people shouldn't tweet hateful, hateful things. I agree. They shouldn't. But who's to decide what is a hateful thing? That's the problem. That's the problem. That's the problem. It's very subjective. And it still shouldn't be a crime. And in our lifetime we've seen that get moved, right? So it used to be if a guy thought he was a woman and his name was Doug and you grew up with Doug and also Doug wants to be called Debbie. If you call him Doug, it's no big deal. Like yeah, maybe you're being rude to call him Doug. But it's not a hate crime. Okay. Well now a lot of people think it's a hate crime and that that got you banned from Twitter for life. So if you dead name someone on the old Twitter, you are banned for life. Dead name, not even making up a name. You can call him an idiot. You can call someone an idiot. Okay. Forget about a man in a dress. Maybe that's a problem. But if you call a regular guy an idiot, you stupid fuck. Fine. No problem. But if you call Doug Doug, you will get banned for life. Okay. That's the new hate speech. That's crazy. Now if that keeps going, that didn't exist before. If that keeps going, maybe you can go to jail for calling him Doug. Maybe they think it's okay to put you in jail because you violated their hate speech laws. That's how nutty things can get. You've also seen during COVID, how ridiculous people get with cracking down and enforcing laws like that. You saw it in Australia, people getting arrested for being outside without a mask on. Which is like the opposite of what you should be doing. Exactly. I mean, you should be outside is what I'm saying. Right. You should be outside and you should have a mask on. It's nonsense. It doesn't work. There's no evidence whatsoever that it's effective. I thought it was funny how many people like the mask was never intended to be protection for you. It was to protect others around you. Like I saw so many people putting it on like a shield. It's like it doesn't, it's not a, not only that, you're using surgical masks. Those are designed to keep people from spitting into open wounds. Right. Dropping particles out of their mouth into people's surgeries. No. It's, we're so susceptible to manipulation. And that's what's really scary about the time that we're living in because we have so much access to information, but yet so many people are willing to put the blinders on and go full steam ahead with whatever their team wants. You know, like there was this ridiculous video, the other comics for Kamala. Oh, did you see that? No, what I saw white men for Kamala. Was that it? There's about that dude. White dudes. This is all organized by the way. And there was a Twitch streamer, like one of the big time Twitch streamers, one of the big guys who read out what they were offering him. They were offering him money to advocate for Kamala Harris online. He's like, I am not fucking doing this. And so he's like reading this thing where they're offering money. They're literally paying for astroturfing. Yeah. The most egregious thing I've seen recently, you know, after everything of the past eight years, nine years, it's hard to get pissed off genuinely anymore. But is now all the left people saying that Trump is afraid to debate Trump or that Trump is afraid to debate Kamala. And I saw this meme of Trump is like the cowardly lion. Everyone's like, he's never going to show up. And it's like you said the exact same thing about Biden, the exact same thing. And Trump went in there and was just like, yeah, it was, oh man, the guy who got shot in the face like two days ago and said fight, fight, fight is scared to debate Kamala. Yeah, it seems ridiculous. But you know, that's just what they do. That's politics. They do it on the left. They do it on the right. They gaslight you. They manipulate you. They promote narratives. And the only one who's not doing that is Robert F Kennedy Jr. You a fan? Yeah. Yeah, he's the only one that makes sense to me. He's the only one that he doesn't attack people. He attacks actions and ideas. But he's much more reasonable and intelligent. I mean, the guy was environmental attorney and cleaned up the East River. He's a legitimate guy. You know, before anybody started calling him an anti-vaxxer, which I thought he was. I thought he was just not this like conspiracy theorist nut until I read his book. I read the real Anthony Fauci. And I'm like, what is it? How much of this is real? Because if it's all real, this is fucking insane. And we live in a world where we're being manipulated by these health organizations that are being paid by the pharmaceutical drug interests. And these pharmaceutical drug companies are pumping these products out into the population and telling us that we need them and then making insane amounts of money. And then also the government is in on it. And also they share a patent with Moderna. And also they share profits. And there's $700 million. I mean, however much money was made, whatever the number is that these guys made off of these products. Like this is all of it is fucking crazy. There's the revolving door between the CDC and the FDA and then these pharmaceutical drug companies, so the people that make the regulations then go on to have these cushy jobs with the pharmaceutical drug corporations. It's like, oh, nothing is seen here. It's like it's open. It's right out in the open. And when he talks about all that stuff in his book, you're just like, what the fuck man? If this wasn't true, he would be sued. Yeah. So it seems to be true. Yeah. And it's scary thing because people don't want to talk about it because they don't want to be attacked. You know, they don't want to be called an anti-vax or that's a big one. Right. You know. It cracked me up how a lot of the people on the right started to despise the vaccine and then Trump at the same time was like, it's my bad. The vaccine you guys and then he got kind of confused. It's one of the rare times in politics that Trump like didn't seem sure of his course. Well, I think he was proud of getting it out there. Yeah. Warp speed. Yeah. And he was proud that they did it. We had the vaccine. It was a good vaccine. I don't think he knows. You know, I think he took it, which is crazy too because the guy survived COVID. He got COVID before the vaccine was developed and he still took the vaccine, which is like literally illogical. It flies in the face of science. We understand about their immune system now. But you know, there's a video of Anthony Fauci from many years ago on a talk show saying someone got the flu. Should they get a flu shot? No, because you if you survive the disease, if you recover from the disease, you have the best protection. He's like literally saying that. Right. And then of course that was throwing out the window when they wanted a vaccine in everybody. Well, plus it's not a vaccine. Right. A vaccine. It gets a flu shot. It's the equivalent of a flu shot because a vaccine means you can't get it. Well, it's even more weird because it's M RNA. Right. So it's like this messenger RNA. It's basically gene therapy. Like you're tricking your body into creating these antibodies. Right. And you're also doing a bunch of damage to some people. Now, which is also their gas lighting. Right. But how many people are vaccine injured? I fucking know a bunch of them. We all do. Yeah. We all know somebody who got fucked up by that stuff. That's all crazy. What's up and into the people arrested for tweets and England thing? Yeah. So a very confusing story. So it says 3,995 arrests been made by 29 UK police forces for section 27 or section 127 offenses, which is used for cases of online abuse. Of course, the article 1,696 people were subsequently charged section 127 offenses cover harassment that takes place via electronic communications network and is not limited to social media posts, harassment via email or other forms of online communication can also fall under this definition. So this video is going around recently of the lady arresting that guy. And this is going back to a discussion that Constantine Kisen was having on a YouTube video right from before COVID though. So this was all from like 2017. Yeah, but they've been doing it for a while. Yeah. I'm looking up and trying to find like I can't find any updated information that says that this is still continuing to happen except for three guys are recently arrested for like the leads riots because they were posting violent stuff on Twitter or something like hmm. I know there was one guy who's posting stickers. He got arrested for posting stickers that they said were offensive. It's just we take four granted the what we have with the First Amendment freedom speech. Yeah. Freedom speech is gigantic. There's only one way you find out what's right. You got to let people talk and you got to let people even like on X say the wrong things or say offensive things. You find those people. You don't like them. Block them. You don't like it. Don't listen. Don't read. Don't read what they're saying. It's disturbing. It's very to me. When I really became like hyper aware of it was post October 7th when you see so much anti semitism. It's just like blatant out in the open and often incorrect and ignorant anti semitism. Not just like, wow, look at all these Jewish people that are the head of these banks. Look at all these Jewish people that are running show business. But just ruthless nasty anti semitism out in the open and then people agreeing with it out in the open and like, this is crazy. Well, it's almost I it's because it's coming from one protected class to another. Is how I see that because I mean like, you know, obviously if that was a stance of the right, it would be immediately called out as as evil as it is. Right. Right. It's not right. It's a stance of the left, which is fascinating. That's why those when those heads of universities were getting grilled and they were talking about whether or not saying death to the Jews is harassment at MIT or at Harvard rather. And she was saying, well, if it's actionable. So actually you got to wait till they do it. You got to wait till they commit genocide before it's a problem. Yeah, that's pretty nuts. It's nuts. Yeah, it's nuts. But it's also it's like, you know, this is the consequences of having these rigid ideologies where you think that your side has to be correct and the other side is incorrect. And if you think, you know, free, free Palestine, this is what we're into. So like the people that the most radical that are pushing that to furthest, like the antifa of that organization are the death of the Jews people. They're the ones that are going to take like remember during the George Ford riots and the antifa riots, like people on the left sided with violent mobs and tried to gaslight you and what they did. Yeah. They said they're mostly peaceful demonstrations as the cameras panning around trying not to get something engulfed in flames. Yeah, that's crazy. That's gaslighting. And but the reason why is because those are the people that are going to crack heads and get things done for our side, that's the implication. The implication is we are on the left and the most violent and aggressive people on the left, they're going to push the envelope. They're going to get things done. So they're mostly doing good. They're mostly peaceful. Yeah, well, I think the shame of it is that like, I don't know, BLM, like now it's pretty well understood that they were legit a scam. Yeah. They made a lot of money. They bought a lot of real estate. They bought like six mansions and a bunch of cars. And then they disbanded. And it's sad. Like, have you seen the exterminator foot? There was this exterminator white guy literally got handcuffed and shot by the police on camera in a hotel for what? So he, oh, you mean the guy that's in Phoenix? I don't know. Arizona where he's crawling wrong the hallway and the guy tell his pants are dropping down and the cop shoots him. No, I don't think so. This is a guy who he had like, he was an exterminator and he had a pellet gun and he was putting in that, that's it. Yeah, it's in a hotel. Yeah. Yeah, it's in a hotel. I just, I remember that and like that's one of the most disturbing. Uh huh. What I'm trying to say is that if you're trying to solve the problem of police overstep, looking at it through a racial lens isn't going to solve it because that's not the problem. Right. Because it happens to white people. It happens to a lot of people. Right. Yeah. So you can't just blanket statement with it saying that it's about one particular group. Well, I think it was one of those moments in history where one thing sets off and there's a bunch of tension that's like at the surface, racial tension and then one thing sets it off and then there's this narrative and then there's through social media, you get all these examples that you see over and over and over again of white cops shooting black people. Yeah. Yeah. And so people have it in their mind that black people are unjustly harassed and are attacked more than anyone else. And that's why that professor at Harvard who released that study showing that there is not a difference. There's not a disparity, racial disparity in the way black people are assaulted or shot by cops versus white people and people attack him because they don't want their narratives destroyed. The problem is bad cops. Right. Of course. That's the problem and the problem is sociopaths that become police officers. The problem is cops with PTSD. The problem is just like you can have you can have bad anything in any walk of life. You can have a bad doctor. You can have a bad football coach. You can have a bad cop. And the bad cops are a real fucking problem. They wind up shooting people that shouldn't be shot. They're they're fucking crazy. They're lost they've lost their soul. You know, the aliens wouldn't want them them as a container. No, they wouldn't. No. No. Nothing is crazy if that's if what we're talking about when we talk about like save our souls. Like that we think about having like your essence is negative and evil and that that negative evil essence we're they're trying to minimize the amount of those like the like if your crop has like a disease and like some sort of a thing is some fungus is growing on your crop. And the joy most of the crop like what do we have to do to protect the crop when we give the crop religion. Let's keep these mind viruses from destroying us. Let's keep you know war at a minimum. Let's keep these people from from doing things that are unethical and immoral because they actually do damage the thing that we need the most that's inside of it. Right. Have you ever had any sort of an alien experience? Oh yeah actually. My roommate and this was at my college rip and college. We were on this place like that's basically just a balcony and we just saw was like 3am. We were a drink a lot that night and we're having our last cigarette of the night. And we just saw one triangle with red dots appear way in the distance and it was by a radio tower which I only mentioned because it's easy to say then you saw the radio tower. It's like no the radio tower was clear and then we watched it for like two minutes and then another one appeared right next to it and then they both disappeared. And it was it wasn't really a big deal of time like and it still isn't now but it was something man it was really something when you say it wasn't a big deal. You mean like we weren't like agitated like you know it wasn't like it was more just like that's not like it wasn't well you probably a little drunk still too right. Yeah. Oh yeah. Yeah. But you also saw the same thing. Oh yeah. How many guys? Just two of us and it was very far away. Did anybody else see it? Was there any other reports? Not that I know of. I never looked into it. And so it was very far away and how did it move? Didn't move. Which is Hubbard. We know I don't know if the first one appeared or not. Or if it was always there but like I think he saw it first then I looked and I was like what is that because it was dark but you couldn't see stars behind it. You know so like there was obviously something in between the three red lights and then the second one appeared overlapping it so like in front of it and then they both just disappeared. This is a period. Yeah. Just blinked out of existence. They didn't we didn't see him leave. So just you were staring at it and also it was gone. Correct. And did you both say oh shit it's gone? I don't even remember. Wow. It was something though. I have photos of it on an old blackberry. Really? Yeah. But the how blurry are they? Very blurry. They just look like nothing. What's the best photo of a UFO that's ever been taken? I mean there's a bunch of old ones from like the 1960s I think that think are straight horseshit. There's this one guy who kept encountering him and looks like hubcaps and stuff that he's thrown in the sky. No. Could have been that I don't know. I don't know specifics of photos. Did you ever see the Mexico City footage? Who? I don't even know why that made me think of signs. The movie. Yeah. It's my favorite movie of all time. It's a good movie. Mexico City UFO footage is interesting because it's in Mexico City and you see this thing flying and you see it like in the distance as it's going past these buildings and you're like what the fuck is that? It's seen by thousands and thousands of people. I would imagine that the best one is the Phoenix lights. That's kind of the... Clearest UFO photo ever taken was hidden from the public for three decades. The Calvin photograph taken by two hikers and a Scottish Highlands, a picture is handed over to the Ministry of Defense and was hidden from the public for more than three decades. The unbelievable images show a diamond shaped object hovering in the sky. It looks like a saucer. It looks like it's just pointing at the top. Doesn't it look like it would be circular? What do they think it's diamond shaped? Okay, that way it looks diamond shaped. Is that a suit? That's the photo? Holy crap. Yeah. Wild, huh? That is very wild. Yeah. It doesn't like it'd be circular. I mean, it's hard to say what the fuck that is. Go back to that other one with this, I think that the top one is like enhanced. Kind of a rate of there's some descriptions about it and I witness this that's all too. I'm trying to read what it said. This right here says there's something fishy here. Hmm. Maybe it's a salt that I was trying to get to it. Right. It says, hovered for 10 minutes, shot upwards, which is before or before, before disappearing. Negatives of the picture doubled dubbed the Calvin photograph originally handed over Scotland's daily record newspaper who in turn passed them to the Ministry of Defense. However, they were never shown to the public after decades of research, photos uncovered by academic and journalist, Dr. David Clark. Dr. Clark reached out to its Clark has spelled in two different ways right there. This website might suck. See, he's got an E in the first one. Then afterwards, no E. As the story goes, that Dr. Clark reached out to Craig Lindsey, former role Air Force press officer who had kept a copy of the photo after the story was looked into back in the 90s. Lindsey even kept the original envelope containing the Colveian photos in his possession. Hmm. That's the dude. That dude looks like he might sell you a bad car. For instance, an astronomer's left amazed by a UFO caught flying across the moon with the fuck's that. Click on that. Okay. So he's looking at it through a telescope. What do you see? Yeah. What? I did see the little cross-screen there. Oh yeah. Right. And there's a lot of space between his telescope and the moon. Yeah. That could be satellites, right? Says not the ISS. Okay. Maybe it's another satellite to be to bug or? Or maybe it's UFO. Aliens. Yeah. Or UFOs. UFO. UAPs. Yeah. Why did they change that? Did UFO have a stink to it? I think it was so Hillary Clinton had a sound bite. Really? Do you remember when she was the one who announced it? Yeah. Did they change the name? Yeah. She was the first one to do it. Have you seen that clip where she's like UAPs actually? No. We have it. All of it's weird. Yeah. It's weird. It's a waste of time. Because if there's no real evidence in front of you, you're just sitting around here spinning your wheels, having stupid conversations. Well, like tonight, what happened? What's that one about? It was promising to tell the truth about UFOs back. Oh, she lies. She's just trying to get elected. Maybe if she won, she would have told us. There was Charlemagne. The god. Hee hee. Ugh. I think she smells like sulfur. I do. No, I don't. Have you seen the remake? Maybe Alex Jones, where you make of that song? Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's like the best thing. Yeah. That was amazing. Yeah. It's amazing. It's easy to get very cynical about our world now. It is. It's terrible. That's also a feature of this whole UFO thing. It's that people want the UFOs to come and save us. Yeah. Because they think we're fucked. I think that extraterrestrials, if they exist, are evil. Really? I do. Really. Well, I mean, if you look at the lion's share of abduction reports, they're all really nasty. Yeah. There's always an anal probe and we're being paralyzed on an operating table. And yeah. But also it's like you got to imagine the fear that a person would have. It's not evil in terms of like they don't get killed. Right? So they get released. They get returned. But they have this terrifying and frightening experience. So you got to imagine that just being taking a board a UFO, even if they're being kind to you, it would be fucking horrific. You'd be so scared that you would kind of assume that they were negative. Right. Well, according to Dr. Carla Turner, she has three rules. There are 10 rules about UFO abductions. The first one is that we don't actually know what they are. So aliens are carban or terrestrial. Aliens interdimensional or something else entirely. And the second rule is that they lie about their origin. Because they give in lots of places and none of them panned out apparently. Then the third rule is that they're full of shit and that they have total control over the abductee. So like you only remember what you want or what they wanted you to remember. And like it's nuts. So she was like a doctor of language, nothing to do with aliens or anything until in 1991 they let her remember that she's been abducted all her life. Oh. And then Iraar strangely enough, same thing happened to her husband. He remembered that he'd been abducted all of his life. And evidently they told her something like, why do you think you guys married each other? And the implication was that it was just convenient for the aliens. Whoa. I know. And it's so weird because like you can watch her lectures, they're mostly blacklisted, but there are ways to find them even on YouTube. And does she seem rational? She seems so rational. She just has this sweet, she's not old, but kind of an old lady voice. And she talks extensively about how all these abductees have terrible traumas left from it, even if they have positive memories of the abductions. Right. Just because the subconscious probably has. Correct. And that a lot of them have terrible issues of cancer. And then she dies of cancer everywhere in 1998. I only discovered her a little while ago. And it was very disturbing stuff, like really disturbing stuff. Mmm. Wow. Tucker Carlson seems to believe that they've always been here. He doesn't think they're coming here from another planet. I think that might be more likely. He thinks that they're in the Bible, that this is something that's a feature of human history that people have always discussed, like these beings, these things that are with us. And that somehow, they're able to evade our detection on a regular basis. However that is. But he thinks they're like angels and devils. Well, I'm sure that's the words we used for them. Yeah. Did you read that the angel description? Like it's a wheel with 16 eyes or something? That's Ezekiel. Yeah. That's a bizarre way to describe an angel. Yeah. I don't know what he's describing. I think he's describing a craft. By eyes, he means like sensors or something. Like the translation got wonky. That's the problem, right? The problem is the translations. First of all, you have to think that a lot of those stories were told for hundreds, if not thousands of years before they were ever written down. And then they're told, and written down in Aramaic, they're written down in ancient Hebrew, and then they're translated to Greek, Roman, Latin rather, translated to English, French German. A lot is lost. I mean, there's a lot of lost. You translate Russian to English today. Right. You know, like if you see a Russian, I see a Russian post sometimes on Twitter and I'll hit translate. And I'm like, oh, that wacky kind of puts it together. You know, kind of puts it together in a wacky way. And that's common. But that's a language that we're well aware of. Millions of people speak Russian. Millions of people speak English. This is the best we could do. Right. And still the telephone game? Yeah. Now imagine, a time with no science, no real understanding of what, you know, the forces there at work in terms of like natural selection and all the different things, space and all the things that we're aware of today, the things that we do know. And imagine these people writing down these stories about the origins of humanity and the origins of mankind. And I think there's some truth to what they're writing. There's something to it. I've always said that about the big bang, like the beginning of the Bibles in the beginning there was light boy, that sounds like a big bang. Sure does. Like what is it? If I was going to tell you the story of the big bang and then you told other people for a thousand years and then finally somebody writes it down, what do you think they would look like? Probably in the beginning there was light, you know? What is it? They say theologians need many miracles, create your evolution, pressure, Dawkins type people only need one. Yeah. Yeah. How did it happen? But it just did. And it created everything that we say. Like, okay. And doesn't Sir Roger Penrose, doesn't he believe that that wasn't the beginning of the universe now? I think Roger Penrose has a completely different theory about that now. Which is fascinating. My brain's not big enough for that stuff. I don't think anyone's is. That's part of the problem. Well, but like I acknowledge it and I don't. So I don't even care. Right. That doesn't interest me. Like I'm too fascinated by the smaller level. I don't need the overarching giant one. I need it all. I need it all. I mean, I'm just it's all interesting to think about. Like occasionally I want to ponder. How does this thing just expand to some insane point and then come back? What was before the big bang, the theory of Roger Penrose? Attempt to answer the question, what was before the big bang led last year's Nobel Prize winner, Roger Penrose, to an interesting cosmological concept in which our universe is just one link in an endless chain of predecessors and descendants. I mean why not? Why not? If there is a big bang, why not a series of them? Why not an infinite number of different possibilities that these things could play out in? I mean, it's all theoretical though. Right. It's probably the problem. So like not if it, I don't know. It doesn't mean anything. Right. I mean, it does everything mean something. Yeah, I mean something. But yeah, I mean you're basically just spinning your wheels just like you're spinning your wheels thinking about aliens. It's like we're just kind of spinning our wheels. That's true. Yeah. Until we're not. Until they come. That's the other theory, so they're giving us a slow trickle of disclosure. Yeah, but why would they be a little bit accustomed to it? So civilization is in collapse. The stock market doesn't crash so that we don't, you know, we're a pick off World War War three. Did you mean humans are giving us a slow drizzle? Yeah, that's fair. Yeah. That's, I mean, if you're writing a Diana Pissulc has worked, very interesting. And she's a religious scholar. And her, her take on this is very similar to like a lot of what Tucker Carlson saying. And one of the things that she said with talking to people that especially Gary Nolan from Stanford, these people that examine materials that these materials, like whatever the fuck this stuff is made out of is not something that we make. We can't make it. Or if we did make it, it would cost hundreds of billions of dollars or so or some whatever the number is. I'm insane amount of money to create these composites, whatever this some sort of whatever their metallurgy examinations of this stuff is. And that they describe these things as donations. These crashed crafts. Like a donation, like that these race, this race of super intelligent beings, they figure this out. Like, you know, you leave a 57 Camaro in the fucking or a 57 Chevy in a parking lot somewhere. And then people stumble upon it, but what is this? What is it? What's that? Is that a tire? Oh, if you get wheels and tires, oh, I can get it to roll. Right. It spins this thing. There's the transmission. It causes the wheels to the. We can make one of these. And that's what they do. And this is the Bobbo's R thing. Like Bobbo's R said that one of the in this, all these classified documents that related to these UFO's, he said one of them they said was from an archaeological dig. That's the problem, right? It's all nonsense sitting here just wasting time. It could be very productive with our lives. And so we're talking about UFOs. Yeah. I mean, you're doing all right, I think. What else are you making videos about anything interesting you're going to come up? How I'm doing sharks because sharks are cool. Mm hmm. Who doesn't love sharks? I'm doing a dream. A dream one. Yeah, about a dream I had. Oh, no, I. Lanky gray aliens, but I finished that one already. Yeah, I saw that one today now. Yeah. Do you watch it? Yeah. Is that your dream? That was me. So you've had this recurring dream of Lanky Gray aliens? No, Lanky Gray aliens are just like a figment of my imagination in my like, you know, bogeymen that kids have. It's like just in your liminal. Is that the word liminal? No, a liminal? Liminal space. Okay. Like if there's like, did you have a basement when you were a kid? Yes. Okay. Did you ever have to like turn the switch off somewhere and then go up the stairs? No. I had that and then like when it's the fear of what where you can't see. Right. And I think everyone has a distinct thing that their brain imagines. That's pretty terrifying. Mine were always lanky gray aliens. But if it's always this one thing, yeah, isn't that weird? If you wonder if these people are saying that their memories are erased and then you do have an encounter or you do have a a sighting of a thing. I so I never gave that any thought whatsoever until I saw Gary Nolan's, that's his name, right? Nolan has speak or his talk on like new channel seven news or something. And he described his electric feeling that he experienced after something. Yeah, this is how you connect is what he said. And that's the really the only thing of that entire video that ever that made me like, because I remember that I had this weird weird ass dream about a gray. And then after that dream, I was just like, I remember feeling very electric that I am not saying that I had a daily encounter. I'm not. I'm truly not. But that did get me pause. Excuse me. I keep burping. It's really embarrassing. But it's interesting to me that these things always happen while people are sleeping or they always happen at night. And this is just when the dream state happens. And like, so what is the dream state? Dreams are bizarre. We have this very realistic thing that we're experiencing that we don't really understand. And we sort of just accept that we have this wild imaginary experience that seems realistic. And you wake up, you're like, oh my god, you can't believe this dream that I had. So not even like, what is that? Like, what is this thing this different than any other sort of imaginary thing that you experience in your life? All the imaginary things that you experience in your life are like, they're easily written off for the most part. But dreams seem hyper realistic sometimes. They sure do. And you have to remember, oh, this is a dream. I had one last night where I woke up and I was like, oh, that's a dream. What the fuck is that about? How weird. They seem like real experiences while they're happening. Right. And if you're having dreams that seem like real experiences and they're recurring and they're involving extraterrestrials and you've had this sighting. And there is this understanding that they could manipulate what you remember and don't remember. You can kind of mind fuck yourself into thinking you're getting abducted. That's why I don't think I was because to think that you were or to think that you have been abducted is I feel like, I don't it's right. Like, because I don't I don't feel like I've been abducted. Like I don't feel like a weirdo. I feel like you've been abducted. Do you? I don't know. It is. But yeah, I don't know. That wasn't it. So if there are people who are like suggestible and think they've been abducted, right, then what I am describing is a good case study in that. I think that's a factor for sure. Yeah. Well, that's a factor to with memories. Like people can place memories into a person. And also people can distort their own memories over time and then have this like very rigid memory of a thing and you have it completely wrong. That's very common. I imagine. Very common. Yeah. Right. Which is why the mind is such a bizarre thing in the first place because it's how you formulate your view of reality, but it lies to you. Right. Well, but they're hopefully useful lies. Yeah, hopefully, but sometimes not. You know, sometimes people have a very bad version of themselves from memories. Like they're maybe they have a lot of self hate or a lot of self doubt. And then they connect these memories to themselves and they distort themselves and make themselves even worse. Right. And hopefully, it's beneficial, but sometimes it's not. Well, it has to exist from an evolutionary perspective, I'd imagine. That serves a purpose. That's not random. Probably, right. If you if you're remembering yourself is doing something obnoxious or stupid, that's because the essence of you doing that is true. And now you're ideally supposed to over correct or supposed to correct. Right. And that you can learn from that. Right. Yeah. But you're right. If it just make cripples you emotionally, it doesn't do any good. Well, it's just fascinating that this animal, this calculating animal is like constantly forming images of what's real and what's not real. And you know, what it is and what it's looking at itself and some sort of a strange way and trying to examine how it fits into the world. And which is impossible for it to do. Right. So it's like an exercise of torture. Yeah. And yet we all engage in it. Constantly. Yeah. Yeah. Any other things you're working on before we wrap this up? No. I'm trying to get a book published. Oh yeah. And what? That's a novel. So everyone, all my subscribers would hate it. I don't think so. I do. Why do they do it hate it? Because it's not about Bigfoot or anything. What's it about? Well, it's a high fantasy. High fantasy? High fantasy? High fantasy. What does that mean? Wizards. Oh. Knights. Lord of the Rings type stuff. That sounds fun. People love that shit. Yeah. But there are two protagonists who are gay because I am gay. So there's that. And I think I don't think that'll. I sent this plenty gay people. Yeah. That's plenty people that don't care if someone's gay. Why would that be bad? I don't look at it all negative. Yeah. Maybe. Look man. People love those kind of fantasy type books. And I think about the Hobbit, Lord of the Rings. No, I'm a woman with thrones. Like people love that shit. All the agents they want magical realism. Magical realism. Magical realism. What does that? That'd be like Twilight, like when magic engrains in the real world. Oh, that's interesting. Magical real. Which is an oxymoron. So instead of a fantasy world, like Lord of the Rings, they want it in the modern world, a realistic modern world, but with magic. Correct. Fuck them. Even though none of the big sellers of all time are that way. Well, a few of them are. But we have funny. Yeah. But just the weird gatekeepers, it's almost like you should write it on your own and not even talk about it. And then get it to where you're done with it. And then just try to pitch it. Right. Well, don't let anybody. I haven't pitching it. Oh, yeah. Are you done? Oh, yeah. I'm done. And I've got it through Fred by paid. And I paid and I paid for an editor and all that good stuff. Oh, wow. Well, so you self published the whole thing. No, it's not published. Self wrote the whole thing and did it all yourself without a deal. Yeah, I self. Yes, correct. I mean, a lot of times people get contracted. Yeah, no. And but like I gave up because it was like every day I was getting an email back from someone telling my kid was ugly. And I couldn't do it. And it was just too depressing. Well, maybe you should self publish. Like there's a lot of people published things just on Amazon, right? I have pride. Oh, you need to be with a legit publisher. I do. I would rather wait. I mean, I'm actually very young for publishing Stan. How old are you? 33. Oh, wow. So you've been doing this YouTube page for a long ass time. So you like 21, 22. Yeah. So wow. Yeah. That's cool, man. Yeah. It's cool. And I had other jobs most of the time. I only recently started doing the channel full time. Oh, so now it's your full time gig. Yeah. How recent? Two years ago. So you basically get ad revenue and stuff like that. Well, it's very good, dude. It's fun. It's really fun. Like I said, it makes me feel like old timey radio. You know, I come here in the spooky store. I've listened to it quite a few of them actually in my car. You know, where it's just like you have all the animations and like the big foot when I listen to it in my car. Now. The one where it was reaching in and hitting the light switch and the laugh. It's fun. It is fun stuff, man. Scary. Tell everybody your YouTube channels, they could find you and my channel name is Bob but Gimmlin B-O-B-G-Y-M-L-A-N. And do you have Instagram or? No. No, no, no. Good for you. I don't want it either. Good for you. Yeah. Good for you, man. That's rare amongst young people. I just want to make my videos and that's it. Good. Don't read the comments either. I do. It's, it's you all the time. It's so depressing. You don't need to read them. How many subscribers do you have now? I think 239. Yeah. Once you get over 100,000, you got to stop reading them. Yeah. Too many humans. Too many humans. Too many opinions. Too many crazy people. Too many, too many mind viruses that can get into your head. There you get you. I enjoyed, though. I think your channel is very good. It's very interesting. I like your, your, your calm voice through the whole thing. Yeah. It's really good, dude. Good stuff. Thanks for being here. Appreciate it. Good luck. Best luck in the future. Thank you. Good luck with you, brother. Thanks.