Yeah, thanks for coming man. I just got a call from Matt Cox yesterday. He said he did a podcast with you And it was jaw dropping and then I had to have you on the show. Yeah, and I'm excited to talk to you That's good to be here man. Yeah, no matter for a little while He actually came on on my show and when everything that I'm going to disclose here got straightened out I reached out to him and told him the story and he was like bro, you got to come on and I was like all right Let's set it up and his was actually the first show that I went on and yours is now the second So that's the amazing. I've got these stories. So what is your story? Well, I guess to start off You know a little bit about my background as I grew up in a town called Darlington, South Carolina Which is not known for much, but the racetrack that it has there small town and I went to school for welding That's pretty much been my career even till right now. That's still what I'm doing now and I met my wife in Oh, God, she sees the show coming we've been together like 20 years so we met at a little club that was there and You know it was a crazy happening because when she was in there the week before this was like a club that everybody went to It would it burnt down for a while So when it opened back up everybody was excited to go to it and She actually went with a friend the friend couldn't get in because she forgot her ID So she just happened to strike up a conversation with a girl that you know, I'd went to school with So the following week we're back out there again and I see her talking to the former classmate of mine So I go up I'm like who was that and she's like oh, that's a friend of mine named Felicia You know, I met her out here last week because I'm like, all right You got to hook me up and so you know one thing led to another we started a relationship and you know got married And that kind of we stayed in Darlington until 2010 and then I worked for a company called Nukor Steel I'm not sure if you know that place or not, but it's one of the bigger steel companies there is a fortune 500 company and they had a planning Columbia, South Carolina So I worked there for about seven and a half years and I was traveling There was about an hour and some change drive and so then we switched and I was like well Let's see about moving to Charleston and then we moved to Charleston in 2010 and I guess to kind of lay the groundwork here because these are like key components and and everything that happened Was we went to a Myrtle Beach. I'm sure you probably for me with a Myrtle Beach area. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You see the eastbound and down. Oh, yeah I found a lot of that down there a lot of Charleston too Some of the strut like strip club scenes were filmed in Charleston one of the best shows of all time. Yeah He's fucking great. He does the righteous gemstones down there too. That also was one of the greatest shows of all time That's incredible. They bought out like a part of an old mall and turned it into like their student. No shit really right there in Charleston Wow, that's amazing. Yeah, so a lot of people say they see them, you know out and about around there walking around It's pretty approachable too. So that's cool. Is he live there? I don't think he lives there, but I know he's he may have a place there But I don't think he's there like full-time, but it's not uncommon to see him around the area especially when they're shooting But you know long story short I come down to Charleston and then there's this big Concert that they're having at a Myrtle Beach called Carolina Country Music Fest. This is the biggest one They had had in a while. It was like supposed to be their version of woodstock So it's like three days of or four really because they had it a Thursday show and so I go down to Thursday night straight from work Basically just drinking and music. That's all it was and a friend of mine comes down to Thursday And he's like a man you look terrible. I'm like, what? You know, I've had a pretty rough couple days and he was a former medic so he gives me an IV Like right, you know straight into the arm and he there's a picture and I obviously if I can find it But I'm sitting there. I got the IV going to the Marma still got like a beer in my hand and you can see like all the liquor bottles Just lined up on the wall behind me. I mean it was a crazy weekend and then after it's over. I get back home Friday Monday I got back home Sunday evening. I'm scheduled to go back to work Monday So I haven't even been home this whole entire time trying to get stuff straight. We'll go into work I get into a car accident Probably roll like it went off the side of the road hit like an embankment where they were widening the road And I mean this car flipped probably eight or nine times and it flips corner to corner So it's like a barrel roll and I was just like I didn't think it was ever gonna stop and the last thing I seen was a car Up under me it landed like directly on the hood and I thought I killed somebody I thought they were on the road You know driving and so I'm trying to like brace myself so when I undo the seat belt I don't follow my head when doing that the car falls off and then rolls to the right So now it's sitting on the passenger door So I still kind of brace myself climb out and this car comes riding by and he's like damn do to you all right And I'm like yeah, I think so so he calls he's like you know, I'm gonna call the ambulance I'm like yeah might as well make sure I'm you know, okay So I hop down I kind of look at where I met you know to hop down So the car don't roll on me then and I walk up to the door where the guys house was at and He opens the door and he's like you know it was early. He's like five thirty and He's like, you know, yeah kind of helping you know I was like man. I just had a wreck outside us I just landed on top of your s 10 out here and he's like oh damn That's my wife's truck, you know, she's had that thing since high school and I'm like well, you know, sorry But it's it's over with now Well that story kind of circles into after that I had real bad back issues like my L4 L5 L5 and S1 where just really really bad shape so That comes in key to what we're gonna talk about now. So you fast forward to 20 16 2017 2017 I got a friend of mine in my neighborhood That I'd only recently met him and probably known him just a couple months but he actually committed suicide and Unfortunately me and another friend of mine was in the house like a couple doors down And we heard his wife at the time come out screaming now We didn't know it was them because I was actually with them Earlier that night at a Mexican restaurant So we go runnin down there to see what's going on I realized it's them because I literally just left him like 30 minutes ago My buddy ran straight into the house I don't know what prompted him to go straight into the house But he did and then when I come in there It was just a really bad it was like its hands down the worst thing I've ever seen in my life Blood he had shot us up and it and it was just awful I mean and those images just like haunted me and that kind of started like a Just a real kind of depression really between that When I was out with the wreck I didn't lose my job, but I lost my position So when I got back I had to go to a different area of the same company It was a different area and I didn't like that job as much So it was just kind of like a snowball effect And then that led to me and my wife actually taking some time apart Well when we decided we were gonna split up I was like okay, well you can stay at the house I'll move out but if you decide to meet somebody Then you know I'm coming back because I can't pay the bills and have another dude up in there on my couch watching You know football and so that's kind of what happened. I'm even my wife's an attractive woman She's very smart. She's got a doctorate I mean, you know I knew that if they come down to it and she started searching and then she would find somebody it was this You know, it was what was what was gonna happen And that happened so in November of that year She moved out and I moved back in and at that point we were both kind of dead settled on divorce We were gonna go have it done We were I was actually gonna use the divorce to pull out some money out of my 401k because when you get a divorce You can give them a portion of the 401k So what I was gonna do is actually get more Than what I was gonna give her and then she was just gonna give it back to me So I think the agreement we made it was gonna be like 60 or 70,000 I was gonna pull out like 80 and you know get the extra on top of it And you guys were you guys were friendly at least Yeah, we weren't like the best of friends, but it was it was uh You know it was amicable. I mean, I knew I was gonna give her something out of it Because we had had it's been you know in this relationship for a lot of times and you know We had had our issues in the past But we always seem to come out on the other side But this was just at a point in time where we were just steady arguing and we needed a break We definitely need to break and so we go forward with the divorce and uh It's probably like January or December we're trying to figure out what we're gonna do with the kids because we're not really talking at this point And you know in doing that we're kind of like you know Hey, how's this thing's going with you how's things going on your side and you know I'm like well, you know what it is what it is. I'm not seeing anyone. She's like well things aren't great here And that kind of prompted us to start talking again And off and on we kind of talked sporadically for the next few months now the guy that she was living with She had moved out into another house in my same neighborhood So it's kind of like you know, I'm sure it's like up here some of the places I've seen you got one big community But about nine different Subdivisions in that community. That's kind of how ours was set up So they were in another subdivision but same community and he had actually left the house So he wasn't living there at the time And around Easter we're like okay, I think we're gonna give it another shot like we have both kind of You know realize that the time apart was you know, we did what we needed You know, it was time to give it another shot. We were really serious about it. We went to our moms Spent Easter and you know, we were just like we told her family. This is what's gonna happen So when we come back we come back on Friday night and I was just like all right Well, I'll get everything moved back in but you got to tell you know the guy He's you know, this is it. There's no need to come back around because they wouldn't they hadn't officially cut it off But they weren't like on the best of terms either And so when she told him this that night Why thought she was gonna tell him Friday night Saturday we go to my son's ball game. It's her soccer game Saturday morning, I'm like, well, how'd he take it? She said he come in and went straight to bed I didn't get a chance to tell him I'm gonna tell him today I said all right. Well unbeknownst to me after she told him He roughed her up Broker phone so I had no way to get in contact with her Smashed a lot of stuff in the house and a lot of shit was going on that I wasn't aware of because she wasn't able to contact me I knew she was giving him the news, but I didn't know all the stuff was taking place So the same guy that I spoke about earlier who went in the house with me with my friend and committed suicide He actually was outside of his garage and they were coming by and so he walks out and was like, hey You know what's going on? And he said well nothing much. She said we're looking for chip because when I find him I'm a fucking killer And I did again I didn't know this at the time. This was even told to the cops later That verbatim that that's what he said So when he knew that something was up He was able to get the guy to stay there and talk to him and try to figure out what was going on What some point he was able to call me And he knew that I wasn't home because that's he was making my wife Driver and look for me. I wasn't home. I was at somewhere else So when he told me he was like, hey if you ride by the house and you see his car here, you know, don't stop Your buddy told you that yeah, and at that's time the guy, you know, that's getting the the axe was over there His name was Liam and so he's like if you see his car here don't stop He's like I'm I don't know what's going on, but he was pretty upset. He said he was looking for you He said but I'm trying to diffuse it He's like so I was just letting you know if you ride by I don't like stop because I don't need anything going down You know here in my house. I'm out. It's fine. I was like I said I'm not the woman to problem. You know he is I know what's going on and He didn't he didn't know that we were officially getting back together But I knew probably why it was upset So I met my house and like I'm watching a UFC I think it was like one of the Conor McGregor fights or something like that and uh I get a text from my phone and it's it's him. It's the guy. This is later that night. Yeah. Yeah This is this right now is probably like 1231 in the morning Okay, and I get the text from him and he's like hey, you know, Kimi and you talk or no I first he said are you awake and I was like yeah, I'm awake and he's like Kimi and you talk And I'm like you know about what he tech he texts you from your wife's home. No, it's both Okay, it's on personal fun because he had smashed my wife's home And he was like Kimi and you talk and I'm like yeah, and he's like well, you know look I don't want to drama. I don't want to bullshit I don't want to fight. He's like if you're comfortable We can meet at Jamie's house Jamie was the guy that you know I've been speaking about that was in a lot of these situations and I said yeah That's fine with me So around the same time my daughter actually called me because she had gotten off a work and got home and My wife was using her phone and she was like hey, she told him. He got really mad But he left and he's a Jamie's right now And I said yeah, I know he just texted me and asked me if I would come over there and talk to him And she's like well, are you gonna go and I was like well, he just wants to talk She's like I don't know if I would go But you know he is a little upset But she said I know you you can probably handle it and I was like all right Because I'm good at talking and diffusing situations. I've never been like a violent guy Can usually talk people down and so I go over there and that was exactly what it was He was more or less wanting to know Had we been seeing each other prior to her telling him that it was over And I was like well to start with really that's my wife It's not really any of your business But to answer your question no because I don't want to get him upset and him go back over there angry So a little bit time goes by And it was heated a little bit at first at times But by the end of the conversation in the garage It was really just like three dudes hanging out in the garage But just with odd circumstances being what they were And so it's probably I'd say 3 34 o'clock at this time And Jamie who's house right where it is house He's like man I'm fixing the shut it down He's like you know if you want to stay here You can stay here. He's like or you can have chipped run you home And he said well if you don't mind he said well you run me to the house and I said yeah So we leave and then like as we're getting in the car He says you know I don't know if I want to go home He said I know we're gonna argue and he's like do you care if we just go to your house He said I'm just not really ready to go home yet And I was a little hesitant But he started talking and telling me the story And I don't know if he was trying to match the suicide story That had came up in the garage and when I told you about earlier But he started telling me about this guy He was in the service with because he was former military And they were in combat together and the guy got shot in the head And he was trying to hold his head together But something about the army said he didn't do something right and followed protocols So he was discharged And that's why he wore this specific bracelet on his wrist And it was the arm I thought pretty sure he was army I'm pretty sure he was army But the thing was that in finance after later was that whole story was fabricated He was actually intelligence And he told the guy that intel that led him into somewhere that resulted in that guy getting shot He was intelligence He was intelligence He wasn't like in the field He met the story he told me was like he was in the field when it happened With him like right there hands-on But the real story after you know this was over I found it out You know a couple days later He was intelligence and he gave the guy that intel that led him to getting shot So either way I'm sure it probably did still mess him up Because he was genuinely upset about it Like he was crying sitting in my car Like you know straight up tears So I could tell it was bothering him I didn't know at the time whether the story was was true or not But I could tell it was bothering him So at this point I just think this dude's just like you know maybe he's battling through that He is getting the boot You know so he was in an intelligence branch of the army Or like like someone that would just be you know telling somebody All right go here go there probably off to the side working on the computer Yeah, yeah, just like working on a computer Right not actually in combat somebody more or less behind the scenes Okay So you know like I said he's crying And I'm thinking this dude just really just needs someone to talk to It's not really nothing You know concerning I never at any point in time felt threatened at all So we go in my house and we've got cameras and stuff in my house So it's seen us coming in And we're in there for probably another hour or two And we're talking about different things. We got on a subject to tattoos And he was talking about I've got a 13-year-old son uh He was like eight or nine at the time But he was talking about one of her uh his buddy's mom saying something about tattoos And he's like a share of a set anything to you And I'm like no I'm covered in him So I kind of like pulled down my shirt to show him this one And you can see and I don't know if you can see it right here But there's a scar there where I had open heart surgery Oh damn Yeah, and I had that in 2001 my senior year in high school How old are you? 39 You're 39 right now Yeah, you had it when you were a senior in high school Yeah, I had a uh what's called a VSD Which is basically like a real minute hole in the heart Uh they knew about it from birth And it never affected me Like I played sports, you know Drink beer in high school, you know like everybody else and all that But once I was I was at the point where I was getting to check every four years And I went to get it checked And they're like oh I'm like what's something you don't want to hear when they're looking at your heart Right He's like actually what it was Was the hole was bigger than they thought Somehow another flap had gotten sucked over the hole So what they were seeing was a small portion of what was actually a bigger size hole And he said I'm not even saying that this is like you know something major But he's like it's better to repair it now while you're young Than later when you're older plus when you're older you're gonna have to pay for it You know right now your mom will pay for it And so we made the decision to go ahead and have it done and you know that scar has been there And when he seen that scar He was like damn you know what happened there He kind of pulled down a shirt And I told him the story the same story just told you So he pulls up my shirt from the bottom Like up to see it going all the way down And in doing this he had to see the gun because I was a CWP carrier I'd have my CWP for Probably a couple of years of that time The weapon that I had on me that night was my carry weapon I'd been pulled over that weapon numerous times The numbers were on so there was documentation that that was the gun that I would You know use as my carry weapon What kind of gun was it? It was a smithin' Wes and I millimeter Okay And so he had to see it I don't really see there's any way he couldn't have seen it You know right there on the hip But when he sees that scar he's like you know man you know what And you know how guys when they've had a little too much to drink And do like the bro hug or whatever What they bare hug you and kind of pick you up off the ground So he did that and I didn't really think too much of it at the time I just you know I didn't really know how he was with what alcohol I knew he had some drinks at the other garage And we had had a few shots at my house So I just thought he was getting you know that point Well then he goes he's like where's your bathroom? Showing the bathroom he goes to the bathroom And the way my kitchen is set up So you got a hallway here Then when you come out you got a refrigerator Then it immediately occurs you got a stove and back this way and you got a sink So it's pretty small it's like eight foot wide at the most I'm up against the stove when he's in the bathroom And this time I'm actually texting my daughter's phone telling her like hey everything's good Let your mom know you're not to worry And when he comes out of the bathroom he goes straight up to me Hand up under my throat jacks me up onto the stove And like you know how people say like you know they had that look in their eye Like he had that looking his eye And how big is his dude? He's pretty fucking big like he's he was a jacked up dude How tall did you say he was? I'd probably say he was six foot one maybe Probably like two forty two fifty Okay, I mean how big are you? Not that big I'm probably five ten Okay, okay Most um you know weight might be the same but for different reasons I didn't also And uh and and two what we get into this too But at the time he was also on steroids. We figured that out later on Um so when he jacks me up he immediately says he's like I'm gonna fucking kill you And I'm just like it called me off guard because like other than like the bipolar Yeah, it was that was exactly what it was And like looking back in retrospect I'm thinking maybe he'd done that little pickup thing to see if he could handle me You know I'm saying see if he could pick me up Maybe you know swing me around if he needed to I'm thinking maybe that was like what he done a psychologically try to set all this up Maybe maybe not. I don't know. That's just me looking back But when he does this It's really catching me off guard So I'm just like what the fuck you know It's really you know blowing my mind And I'm telling him I'm like dude if you don't get to fuck off me I'm gonna shoot you And so I was able to scoop my way down off the stove And then he kind of brings up his knee like he's gonna need me in the side Why scoop my body to the side he still hits me a little bit And then he swings with his right arm Well when he swings I can see it coming he's got me he's holding me with his left I was able to lift my chin up just a little bit to where it kind of clip the bottom of my chin Well when he does that his force bringing him this way he let go with the left hand So we're right here like I told you I step back I'm literally in the corner And I pulled out my weapon in a fire And I thought at the time it was two shots it turned out to actually be three Immediately after I fired he dropped to the floor So I'm just sitting there like you know adrenaline's fucking pumping. I'm a holy shit So I pick up the phone I call 911 tell him what happened I have an emergency or seven decater drive Indicator what's going on? I had a friend of mine in my house Coming in he was striking me I had to shoot him He has down He just sent on ambulance right now. Yes, yes, man. How old is he? He's 35 I believe Where did you shoot him? I'm not really sure he come at me you hit me in the face Now I shot him in the chest two times Okay, is he breathing? Right now he's breathing right now he's breathing Are you okay? They're saying you know is he breathing I'm like he's you know he's making noises I don't really know if he's breathing I can't really tell And she's like you know can you see the wounds and I'm like well they're in his chest Everyone on the center mass like all in the chest area. There was nothing anywhere else Um And that was what they taught you in the CW peak last two It's like you know when the threat is eliminated then you know You have to stop legally because then there's no threat anymore You can't like go up and keep shooting someone if they're on the ground Then that changes from self defense to murder unless you're greaty Judd. Yes. Yes I've heard that story You know after all this happened believe me anybody that had any sort of self defense or any kind of shooting claims like that I researched to shit out of everybody What eventually comes to happen here But so I called the 911 operator and she's like you know can you get to a towel and I'm like yeah If you go somebody on the way I am Liam Liam can you hear me Liam Liam Liam Liam can you hear me Liam? Liam I shot him two times and it's here because my turn is trying to hear me He was trying to hurt me. I didn't have any choice with the fucking shooting Can you get a clean towel and apply pressure? Our clean towel. Yes, ma'am. I'm sorry. Do not want to do this shit. You come up. I've seen you got a damn Is there anybody else in the house? No man that just me and Liam we've been here for a couple hours How long ago did you just shoot him? Yes, I just did it. Okay. Where's the gun right now? It's the sitting on the counter Can you can you can you secure the gun without a good air? Yes, ma'am. It's cured. It's unloaded And she said so you know get to the towel put a towel over his wound. She said we got an officer on the way So I pull up the shirt and I only see two entrance wounds which is why I thought again Initially, I only heard two shots, but I guess just everything you know real quick I just didn't hear the third one, but I only seen two entrance wounds. So that's why I only thought there was two I put the towel over him. I'm waiting. There's a 911 call online. Is he still alive? No, okay Well, I mean not now at the time he was breathing He was making noises now. I don't know. I've heard people say that the noise was like what's constituted is like a death rattle When the officers get there, they're gonna need you to come outside with your hands up, okay? Okay, that's fine. What's he doing right now? He's still breathing. Okay. I know he's not breathing He said he's not breathing He doesn't look like He not breathing up and down Okay, can you get your face close to here and see if he hears breathing? I'm not having him. He's making noises. He's making noise He is still talking He's not talking. He's making noises Liam, Liam, can you hear me? Liam, can you hear me? Liam, can you hear me? Liam, can you hear me? Liam, can you hear me? Liam, Liam, Liam, Liam, Liam, can you hear me, Liam? He's making noises, but he's not responsible Like our glings? Yeah, yeah, something alone in his lance Um, but you know, I'm waiting for the the guy to get there. He comes in and now one person's like You know make sure the gun is unloaded and you know wait for me And when you get there unlock the door I'm like with the doors unlocked. Now you can just come right on there when they're here Okay, our officers there. Can you step outside with your hands up? Yes, man. I can step outside I didn't do that to put the phone down All right, I mean my phone's in my ear, but I'll step outside my hand All right, guys, I'm outside my hands up He's gonna teach him So he comes in and uh comes in and he's like all right, I got a place you and I'm putting in handcuffs He's I'm not placing you under arrest. He said, but I've just got to assess the situation So he puts me in cuffs and about that time another car's coming up So they put me in the back of that car never read me Royce at or anything. They just put me in the car So they go into house and at this point. I don't know what's going on That's uh, I'd say probably like six six 30 in the morning at this time give or take and Cars are just starting to land a block cop cars. Yeah ambulances like the the big SUV Vehicles from fire departments Everything and I mean like everybody's plans are just opening looking out because I mean houses are just like side by side Because I'm waking up for work. Yeah, well, this was a Sunday morning, but you know people are going to church too So and you know that they're riding by they're seeing me in the car And obviously they're trying to talk when I can't really you know, I can't play they're coming back in the car My neighbor comes out to house and she's like I look and she's like at the wind and she's like what happened? And I'm trying to tell her in some cop like made her go away and So I'm sitting there it was probably a couple hours. I mean it felt like forever And I still don't know what's going on. I see them bring him out put him in the ambulance the ambulance leaves And then the lady cop comes over and she at that time does read me my rights And she's like, you know, do you understand? He's right. Yeah, yeah She's like do you want to answer any questions? I was like no not without a lawyer and So she then she goes away. I don't hear anything else from anybody and they're still just a shitload of cops in the yard So finally I motion to one of them. I was like dude I got to use the bathroom and he's like well you're gonna have to hold it. I'm like no That's that's not an option like I'm gonna either go in this car or I can go in the yard or we can go into house Like one of the others about to happen So they let me out, you know, we go in the house and he's like this is your home. I was like yes This is my house And he said well, let's go upstairs where you can do a change of clothes. We need to take the clothes you have on Okay, so we go upstairs. I'll use the bathroom. I give them all my clothes And he said is there somewhere you can go while we finish doing our investigation I said yeah, I can go around in corner to not the guy that was involved in all this because he just went to bed But another guy at this point is driven his golf cart over there It was like sitting out in the yard because he heard about everything that was going on I said I can go to his house and I gave him the address today Is ready your rights and how did you back in the car? They were gonna let you go Someone's house. Yeah, they read me my rights and said I was under arrest But then when they let me in the house and I changed my clothes They took all my clothes put it in a bag and then said I wasn't being arrested And there was there somewhere I could go to the finished their investigation So at this point had you explained to anybody about what happened in the house? I mean not as in detail. I just told him that we were in the house and he fucking attacked me and you know Was hitting me and I shot him okay, and one of the biggest reasons like obviously one thing was like well Why didn't you fight back or whatever? One number two this guy was a fuckload bigger than fucking attack me and you know, it was hitting me and I shot him. Okay. And one of the biggest reasons, like obviously one thing was like, well, why didn't you fight back or whatever? Well, number two, just guy was a fuckload bigger than me. But number two, I just had a surgery. Remember that the issue I told you about the back, the backstory and the suicide stories, all were kind of key components in this. I'd had a surgery on my back, not like a major surgery, but where they go and burn the nerve endings away from the spine. And what that does, it gives you a little relief when you have a physical job like mine. But afterwards, like immediately after the first couple of days, it hurts like hell. And but they eventually grow back and then you have to get it done again. It's kind of a continuous process. Well, this was only a few days after having this done. So my mobility was was limited at best anyway. So that's another reason why I was, you know, the situation happened. But I'm at the guy's house, I'm hanging out, still don't know what, you know, I'm thinking, well, maybe I'm not going to get arrested. I didn't know. I'm in my mind. I'm thinking I've done nothing wrong. I've done nothing to justify arrest him. I'm in my house. You know, I was using my personal gun, like my carry gun. And he fucking attacked me and said he was going to kill me. Cause like, you know, men, we have that bravado thing or whatever. You might take somebody something. You might even say something. But when you put hands on someone, that's a different story. And you know, when you look at man and I tell him, you're going to kill him, I didn't know this guy. I didn't know him to be a liar. So I've got to take him in his word. And when he said that at that point, I knew one of us probably wasn't going to make it out of that kitchen. And, you know, it was unfortunate. But to me, looking at it, was I never looked at it as I killed somebody. I looked at it as I survived. I survived trying to be killed. That's always how I looked at it as I look at it today. And when the detective come to that house after, you know, I guess they had finished doing whatever they were doing, he asked me, said, we know, can you come in and answer some questions? I said, I already told that other officer, like, I'm not coming in without talking to a lawyer. And he said, well, who's your lawyer? Well, at the time, I didn't really know any lawyers because I'd never really been in any trouble before. So I told him my divorce lawyer who was actually a former cop. He was a cop for a while, then he actually went and became an attorney. So he knew him. And he's like, well, I know him. He's like, I'll give him a call tomorrow morning. And he's like, we'll set up a time to have you come in and answer some questions. And I'm like, all right, I was like, I'm pretty good back home. And he said, yeah, you can go back home. And I was like, well, you know, does there any mess? You know, what do I need to do about that? And he said, that's not our problem. He said, that's on you, which is actually true. The way he said it was kind of fucked up. But that's actually true. The police don't have anything to do with a mess. So whether it's a murder, suicide, whatever the case may be after they do their police investigation, they don't handle anything as far as cleanup. You have to hire somebody to do that. You have to hire like crime, see you clean up. It don't necessarily need to be crime scene clean up because the crime scene stuff's done, but if you know, just deep clean cleaners that will come in and do it. However, in this case, it really wasn't a lot to it because when I got back home, by this time, my mom had already been notified she lived like two hours away. So she had already came down there. She was there when actually I left to go to the other friends house. So we went back together and she come in and I went to where it happened and there's literally like no blood at all. It's like a little very minute, little bit like it was smeared on the floor. That's it because the important thing here was with the with the nine millimeter. I didn't have like hollow point rounds or anything like that. It was like regular full metal jackets. So everything two out of the three was through and through. The third one apparently did, I guess did not go all the way through. So the crime scene was very like simple, which is not, I'm not sure how they fucked all this up so bad. So when he was on the ground, you know, the time that he was there, probably 15 minutes or so, still there was no blood on the floor. The refrigerator door was struck by one of the bullets. It hit the handle of the door, then hit the refrigerator and then bounced over and hit a wall like probably two inches above my dog cage where my dog was sitting us entire time. Oh my god. Yeah, he didn't even fucking move. Like he's a husk. He didn't wake up. He was awake, but I mean, he's just like, he's always got this fucking just stay or look anyway, just like, you know, just looking, he didn't even budge. But I didn't even know that it went over there. Like that's not something that I even knew at the time. So you're saying that bullet went through him first and hit the handle and then went over your dog's cage? Yeah, that's how close and proximity we were. It went hit the handle because we're kind of out of angle. So it hit the handle of the refrigerator, it hit the door, then bounced and hit a wall. Another bullet hit, I had like a 24 pack of like water like this and the side of the refrigerator. So it went into that water, probably like mid ways into the pack, well, the police never found it. Pardon this brief interruption, but I want to take a second to talk about our sponsor, Verso. Now, you've heard this podcast before. Chances are you already know how obsessed I am with health on longevity, which is why one of my favorite guests to have on the show is nutritional scientist and neuroscientist, Dr. Dom Dagostino, who actually introduced me to this stuff. Verso is a company that is dedicated to translating scientific breakthroughs into products that hold a potential to increase longevity. The problem with aging is we accumulate these zombie cells or old damage cells that linger beyond their useful life. These zombie cells infect other healthy cells speeding up the aging process, causing things like hair loss, wrinkles, arthritis, cancer dementia, and everything in the realm of aging. What scientists have realized is that we can manually induce autophagy, meaning the cleanup process of the old zombie cells and replacing them with new ones. Verso's new clean being, which I take every night, is a powerful blend of synolytic molecules that help promote the body's natural cleanup processes like autophagy and apoptosis, promoting better cellular health, supporting lower inflammation and natural cardioprotective functions while boosting protection against age-related diseases. The three main ingredients in clean being are spermidine, luteolan, and a hydrocorsatin, which play key roles in the control of gene expression and are essential for cell growth and proliferation, specifically when it comes to cardiovascular and cognitive function, skin health, vision, and the immune system. Head on over to vr.so and use the coupon code COM CREATE CHECK OUT to save 15% on your order. I linked it all below now back to the show. I found it after I got back. Wow. Yeah. And we had to call them, let them know so they had to come back out, you know, take pictures, bag it, tag it, and all that good stuff. So that was kind of like a number one, the first knock that they didn't really do the greatest investigation on this thing. But like I said, the blood we cleaned up with like one paper towel. So that was that. That was the extent of the cleanup outside of the damage on the refrigerator. So Monday morning, I go to my lawyer's office. He's like, you know, we're going to we're not coming in, but you can give us the questions you want to answer and we'll write a statement and send it back to you. So I was like, you know, I don't know what I ain't never done this before. You know, that's what you say we'll do. So I wrote the wrote my statement. We sent it in and that was pretty much the extent of this was Monday morning, Tuesday, went by didn't hear anything Wednesday, the lawyer calls me at like 4 30 and afternoon. And he's like, hey, he said, I got some bad news. I was like, what? And he's like, they're charging you a murder. And I was like, fucking why? And he was like, I do not know. He said, they didn't tell me the reason why he just said they're charging you a murder. He said, I can figure is maybe they were thinking that, you know, you plan to get him there so you could kill him and, you know, because you were mad at him. I'm like, they have been together for fucking months. Like this is not like I just found this out. I was like, nobody was getting, if anybody was mad, it was him. You know, that that wasn't the situation. He's like, what? Like I said, I don't know why, but I just know that they want to charge you and they want you to turn yourself into tomorrow at one o'clock at the local jail. It's a hill-finkly detention center. So I'm just like, motherfucker. So I hung up to the phone. I was like, I'll call you back. So at this point, I'm just like, I don't know what to do. Like everything's racing through a man. I was just like, this can't be fucking happy. So I start calling, you know, people that I know I'm like, look, who's like the best legit fucking attorney for something like this. The same name keeps popping up. Even people from states like other areas of the state, everybody kept coming back to one name. It was a guy named Andy Savage. Andy Savage, really close to the stage. Yeah. And that's exactly what he was. He was a savage in the courtroom. I mean, like he, he's a, the sweetest guy you ever want to meet. But when it comes to like being in a courtroom, like he's ruthless. And I can see why lawyers like him get paid the amount of money that they do. I'm going to keep you on. I'm going to change us so Austin can pull up a picture. Does this come true to guys the website? I want to see his picture. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Andy Savage law office Charleston, South Carolina. You know, Randy Savage is from about 10 minutes from here. Really? Yeah. It's where he's originally lived. Wow. I got out of it right. I don't forgot he did. He didn't go before. And he actually died literally like five minutes from here. Yeah. He hit that tree up here. Right. Yeah. That's him right there. Andy Savage. He doesn't think of Savage. That's him. Yeah. He looks like a badass. Yeah. That's his wife right there. Oh, his wife almost looks like more of a badass. Yeah. Yeah. You remember the, the case that got a lot of attention with the Michael Slager and Walter Scott, it was years ago where Slager was the cop. Walter Scott was like running away. And he shot him, you know, multiple times in the back. Yeah. Yeah. It like swept the country. Well, Slager had a lawyer at the time. Well, when that tape come out, that lawyer dropped him. Andy picked him up. And he actually beat the state charges. Or I say beat it. It was a hung jury, which is essentially beaten. You're not going to prison. But then the feds come in and they redone it and the guy did one up getting found guilty. But there was a lot of like, there was a lot of controversy over that. But to break like if you actually, he represented the cop who shot the guy in the back. Wow. Yeah. If you read up on him with the Michael Slager case, there's a bunch of write-ups on him. And I mean, a lot of high profile stuff that he's done. I mean, he's that's he's one of the best kind of, I mean, I didn't follow how that case ended. But that's kind of mind blowing that they even had a hung jury. Yeah, it was. But a lot of that was because you only seen the video of that portion of him running away and getting shot in the back. But what they were able to actually go in and prove. And our CS I got that wound up working on my case, actually done a podcast on it to where they found out and they had proof that he was actually tased before he took off and started running that the cop was tased by the don't taste. So there's a lot more that people didn't get. I mean, they're going off that one video. But you know, I was like you at the time, I didn't know all this. I'm just going off what I see on TV, which now I look at things that are different like from everything that happened to me. But at the time, I was not doing that. And you know, I was thinking the same thing. You know, I'm like, how the hell did he even get off on that? But when you start breaking down a lot of the details of the case, I have to see you linked to that case with that CS I got. Yeah, I love to see it. Yeah, he explains it really well. But you know, I call him that day. And it's after hours at this point in time. So his, I'll leave a message within probably an hour later. I get a call back from his secretary. Kind of give her the overview of what's going on. And I was like, you know, she said, can you come in tomorrow? I'm like, well, I suppose we go into fucking jail at like one o'clock like, you know, what time you want to meet? And she said, be here at seven in the morning like all right. So my mom, me, my wife, we all go to the lawyer's office. And you know, massive office downtown Charleston, go in and, you know, he's basically like, all right, just kind of tell me, you know, the story. And I'm telling him as I'm kind of telling you here in the same way. And he looks at me and he was like, why are we here? And I'm like, I don't know. He's like his little election year is something going on. Like his, you know, believe me, he's like, all the people that I have working on this. If you're not being truthful with me now, it will come out. And I was like, I do everything I'm telling you, the God's honest truth. I was like, I'm in the very good position to where I do not need to lie about anything that's taking place. Like I don't need, you know, I didn't touch anything after it was done. I didn't move anything. Everything was as is. And so he's like, all right, he's like, you know, tell me a little bit more. So as I'm going in the detail, telling him more about my background, the guys background, like stuff's being printed off reports are being printed off. Like it was like something out of a movie. Like they were just getting shit done so fast. And he's like, give me one second. So he goes outside. He makes a phone call. He comes back and he said, I got your surrender pushback to a Friday. He's like, I'll probably get it pushed back to a Sunday, but I'm just giving us some time to get things rolling. So I was like, well, I appreciate that. Couple more days of freedom. But that's the kind of stroke that he had to be able to do that. You know what I'm saying? Because I don't think any any average lawyer can pick up the phone and push back something like that. Especially, you know, they're charging you with murder. It's not like you shot lifting from a family dollar. So we get together and start getting character letters written. So I got to reach out to everybody. This guy carrot, you know, to write character letters, you know, even some people had to turn away because they was like, try not to have any of them be felons. And so like, 10 of guys, I'm like, I appreciate it. But you know, just don't worry about sending that letter in. So we get to the point. He does get it pushed back to a Sunday. So like, it's almost like just a family gathering at the house. Like, family hadn't seen a while. Everybody gathers at the house Saturday night. Just kind of hang out. And then Sunday it was almost like, I never thought that that was like a legitimate thing. But like if you're seeing good fellows, we're really able to hop some in the car. And he's like, all right, take me to jail. I'm like, that don't happen like that. What kind of does? Because if you facilitate your surrender, that's exactly what happened. Like we all got that Sunday. And then I got in the car and you know, me and my wife was in the back and my mom actually drove me to jail and dropped me off. And I go in here now, I go in here not thinking or not knowing that if I will get bond because bond is not always guarantees a lot of times it's not even given on murder. So I'm going in not knowing if I'm coming right back out. So we go in there and I sit down and there's like this biker looking guy on the bench beside me and he's sitting there and he's like a bench a shame. I'm like, yeah, I guess you could say that. And I've always just been told like when you go and jail just shut the fuck up. Don't say anything to anybody, you know, just mind your own business. And so I'm trying to do that. This is your first time ever in jail. Yeah, I've never been arrested before. So it was like straight to the top of worst list you can be in there for. And I've never been arrested for anything. I've been worse than I had the speed and ticket. And so he says that and then they they fingerprint us and you know, take our mug shots and all that and they send us to the holding area. And so he sits like right by me. And he's like, you know, hey, they're just making small talk. He never asked me what I was in there for. I'd say probably like an hour, two hours comes by and they grab me, him and another kid to go see the magistrate. Well, I'd already been told that a magistrate can't grant bond for a murder that's got to be seen by the circuit court. So I knew going in that I wasn't going to get any kind of clarification from the magistrate, but it was still the formality that I had to go. So they got us, you know, wrist to wrist, chained down to the ankle, I'll go to the room and they sit us down. My last name's Williamson. So I'm always like at the ass end of everything. And they call the kid first. It was like simple possession of marijuana and, you know, PR bond. And they call the biker guy. He was like, you know, second DUI. I got to get this that. And they're like, okay, well, my my actual first name is Wade. Everybody calls me chip, but he's like, you know, Wade, Williamson, you're charged with possession of weapon during a violent crime and charge a murder in the first degree. And I was like, yes, sir, he's like, well, as you know, I can't get bottom that, he was like, you'll be seen by the circuit court. So I look back in the guy that was sitting next to me, he's now like slid all the way down to the other end of the fucking bench. We go, we get back up because I was the last one. We go back into the holding. He goes straight. He grabs his blanket, goes to like the far corner. I ain't here from again for the rest time. But some people once we got more people started getting in there, they knew who I was because they have TVs and shit in there. Like, so they were seeing the local news. So one of the guys even said, like, you're the dude from came Bay. And I was just like, how the fuck do y'all know that? But they have a TV in there where they can watch the local news. So a lot of a lot of the people were new who I was. So I go in there the first night. And this is where I really kind of caught a break because as I said, you got to be seen by the circuit court to even attempt to get bond for a murder charge. And those rotate through counties. Luckily, they were in my county that week. So I didn't have to wait to see him. Had they been in another county and they had to cycle back. I could have been in there a month. You know, however long it took him to cycle back around. Luckily, they were in there that week. And I know that I'm getting seen Monday morning. So they come and they grab me Monday, probably like nine 10 o'clock and I was like, all right, you know, getting you for court. And they're walking me from the jail to the court. But it's like a underground like walkway. And this thing looks like a fucking dungeon. I mean, it's like something you see out of one of those movies where they're just taking you to kill you or something. I mean, it's just, I'm just walking. It seemed like the longest walk ever. They put me in a room with a lot of other guys that are in there. And I'm still in street clothes because I hadn't been out of the holding tank yet. And so all these guys are in like orange jumpsuits. And one of the guys like you must be in every family court and I was like, well, something like that. And again, I'm not saying anything to nobody. And I'm listening to all these guys talking like one of them's talking about how, you know, he's thinking about cutting a plea because he said his sister on fire. And he don't want to go to trial. And I'm just sitting in the corner like motherfucker. And another guy is telling him like how he's going to get transferred to Atlanta to testify against another guy that he knows up there. But he's really not going to do it. He's just transferring just so he can have better food. I guess the prisons in Atlanta have better food than the one in Charleston. And then another guy saying he's just making sure he or hoping he can get a glimpse of somebody that put him in there so he can try to stab him or so. I mean, it's just the shit that was being said in there was just fucking mind blowing up. I'm sure that's normal for people in prison. But like as I said, I've never been locked up. So I'm sitting over there just quiet as hell and they finally called my name. So I go into this room and they cuff me up, you know, wrist again, wrist ankle, the little thing where you can barely walk. And I go in this courtroom and I mean, it is fucking massive. It is the biggest courtroom I've ever seen in my life. It's like something you see on like a law and order as huge as the the bailers like walking me to the lawyer's death. I see all my family and everything sitting out there. And we go up and I'm standing beside him. And so of course at that time, they're battling. He's presenting to the judge why I should get out. They're presenting to the judge why they want me to stay in jail. And he's like, you know, you're on. He's, you know, had the same job for 14 and a half years. I'm standing member of the community and never been in trouble. You know, has kids, you know, no issues to keep men here, you know, there's a state's giving their reasons. You know, I killed a man in cold blood, that's that in the other. And the judge looks and she goes, okay, I'll make my decision and let you know and bangs to gavled down. So I'm like, what the f... Anything I've ever seen like they give answer right there, like either granted or denied. And I looked at my lawyer. I'm like, what the fuck does that mean? He's like, I guess that means you're let us know. And I don't get to keep talking like the guys already grabbing me and taking me back to the room to go back to the cell. And as we're going back to her, I'm like, what the hell does that mean? Sure, let us know. He's like, I should probably give her decision in a week or so. I'm like a week or so. Like I'm hoping best case scenario to get the fuck out of here as quick as possible. And so I don't know what's going on. So I go back and I give it a couple hours and I go to the phone and I call my wife and I'm like, all right, what's what's going on? She said, well, they've already made the decision. She said, they're going to give you bond. She said, but you're probably not going to get out to tomorrow because they got a process paperwork and everything. And I'm like, all right, well, laws, I know I'm getting out of here. I'm cool. Like I can deal with it. And so, but she said, there's a chance you can get out today, but it's probably going to be tomorrow. Now, throughout this holding time, they are still calling people even as late as six, seven, eight o'clock at night that are getting out. So I'm hoping that I can get out. But I'm not like got the best, you know, faith in the world of it. Like nine, 30 comes and the door opens and there's like, well, you know, something like fuck, yeah, I hopped off the bed. I'm like, all right, let's go. And he's like, yeah, we're transferring you to the seapod. And I'm just like, wait a minute. I was like, I'm supposed to be getting out here tomorrow. He's like, that may be. He's like, we got to transfer you out of here because we got more people coming in. And he looks at me and he's like, you're Lee is dad, right? And Lee is my stepdaughter. I've been her life since she was three. So I consider my daughter. And he was like, yeah, he said, my wife was her gymnastics teacher. No, shit. Yeah. And I'm just like, well, pleasure to meet you. I don't know. She'd be way to do it. But you know, he's like, yeah, he said, we got to transfer you to the seapod. He's like, you know, we have a rule with so many people in holding as they keep coming out, who is ever the, you know, the one the men in there the longest, they get transferred to the pots. So I'm just like, oh, shit. So we go and they, I got to give them all my clothes. They give me the orange jumpsuit, the rubber flip flops, the cup, toothbrush, toilet paper, three in one body, wire, shampoo, conditioner, send me on. So I go in there. And there's like these two rooms status, like a big open area where the TV is. And then like, you know, a row, a door with a row at the bottom. And then stairs were the thing at the top. And it's basically just like a huge open room with bunk beds on each side of the wall, all the way down. So I'll go up to the top, walk through, trying to find something on the bottom that didn't happen. Everybody's got the bottom. Nobody wants to sleep on the top. As I walked to the end of them coming back, I see the guide that said he said his sister on fire. And he kind of waved at me like that. And I'm just like, suck man, like kind of pointed up top. I was like, anybody up there? And he's like, no, go ahead. So we get up there. And you know, I'm just sitting there at this point. I'm looking at the ceiling. I'm just like, how the fuck am I here? Like, I just don't get it. Like I've done everything by the book. And the people in there were just like, listening to some of those conversations, like it's not what most people would think. A lot of them are talking about like what they want to do when they get out. Like start a business or do this or do that. And there's a lot of smart people in there. I mean, Matt Cox even said, you know, when you put people away, like the way their brains work is just constantly creating different things. And like they would, if there was an air vent coming now or head cold air, they would wet like toilet paper and throw it up and clog the vents that way the air wouldn't blow directly on them. I mean, they would figure out ways to do anything. There was a guy in there that had water and a bag. And then he had that in like a, a, like a pillowcase type thing. And that was what he was using as a dumbbell. Wow. Yeah. I mean, they come up with a lot of different stuff in there to, to be able to get, I guess, through the day. And this one guy comes up to me. It's at this time. It's probably like 11 at night. And he's like, you know, you need a job. And I'm like, huh? And he's like, you need a job. He's like, or you're going to be bonding out. And I was like, Oh, I said, yeah, I'm getting out of here tomorrow. He's like, all right, what I want, where about putting you on anything? And he comes up back up again later. And he's like, if you go to use the shower, he's like, you're not going to work the shower, right? I'm not telling anybody that I've never been in there before. So I'm like, oh, yeah, yeah, I know. I mean, I just want to let him think that, you know, I've probably been there before. So I did go in there to try to take a shower. And what it is, they have these things that come out of the wall. Well, when you press it, it's like an automatic, you know, detract during it comes out in the only last for like five seconds. Right. Well, what they do, they manage to make something where you can put in there to keep it from coming back. I couldn't figure out how to work. I think to save my fucking life. But I wasn't going to go ask nobody. So I'm having to take showers and like four second increments, you know, to get showers of the beach. Yeah, exactly. Matter of fact, these are a lot shorter at the beach. So it just seemed like maybe maybe even three seconds. I mean, it just went off quick. So I managed to do the best I could and I come out. And there's a group of guys just like sitting around the table near where the bed was and one of them noticed like I do have a lot of tattoos and the guy was asking me about the tattoos and like everyone I'm in there knew my tattoo artist. So I was like, shout out to him Eric rolling. But uh, everybody in there knew that. So I think they just assumed that I'd been there before. So no, but it wasn't like nobody ever threatened me or, you know, it was anything of violence. They were actually like very cool in there. They were trying to teach like this one car and not teach, but they were trying to preach to this one kid like he needed to get his life straight when he got out that, you know, he had skills and he was, you know, wasting his life. So it wasn't exactly what people I think envision when you go in there, but still, it's nowhere you want to be. You want to be home. And I got out the next day, mom coming pick me up, went home. And so at this point, I meet, meet back up with a lawyer and I'm like, all right, you know, what's, what are we doing here? Because, you know, I didn't do this. I didn't murder anybody. Like, you know, the guy reached out to me. That should right there should blow a hole in any sort of premeditation because I didn't reach out to him. He reached out to me and all that's in text messages in the phones that the cops got. I was like, so I don't know what the hell they're basing us off of. And he's like, I don't either. Were you worried at this point that like something fishy could be going on with your phone or with the with the evidence that you had, like the cops could be, the prosecutors could be fucking with it at all? Yeah, very much so. Um, because I did have to give them my phone that day. And I'm just like, well, if they go deleting shit, like, you know, how am I going to prove it other than like maybe subpoena Verizon or something like that. But the thing was, is I never really got like a clear cut answer of why they were charging me until the next step of this was a preliminary hearing. That probably took place. I want to say it was in July. So that was kind of like the big step. He's like, you know, we'll go to preliminary hearing, we'll see what evidence they have then. And you know, that's how we'll base our case because the preliminary hearing, they give reasons of why they charge you. They don't necessarily disclose evidence. So it's not like a trial. It's just basically they say, all right, this is what we have. This is why we charge them. You know, he can come back and say, well, this is why you shouldn't have charged him. And then the judge makes the decision to send it to trial. So we go in there and the detective that was on the case was a woman. And she was recently promoted. I was her first murder case ever. So that made me a little nervous and enough itself. And I think a lot of that may have been what led to this. I think maybe it was a little overzealous. Now, who did the detective work for? I'm assuming the sergeant or the whoever would be the top of the county police department. Because even if she says, Hey, I want to charge this guy with murder, somebody above her still had to side off on it. You know, the detective is not the end all be all. I understand like it's you and your lawyer. And then there's who is the one trying to not the judge, right? There's like a prosecutor or a state prosecutor. Yeah, at the time there's a solicitor. They have solicitors where we're at. And that's what that's their job. So the solicitors on one side of the table, we're in the courtroom. The solicitors on one side of the table, me and my lawyers on the other. And they're trying to just, you know, lay out their reasonings for the charges. We're debunking them. But they also can call witnesses at this time. So who, sorry, I didn't who is the one that decided to charge with murder? Well, the detective at the end of the day is the one that's not a charge. Yeah, all her reports wrote up that they were going to, the evidence that they looked at, they concluded they were going to charge me with murder. So the detective is the one that wrote up the report to I'm not sure who above her, like signed off on it. I'm sure somebody did that share for someone of those, uh, what about that report made it not self defense? Well, that's what I was, that's what I'm going to get into here in the preliminary hearing because in the reports that they give the pathology or the pathologist gave, it said the bullet path doesn't indicate like a close contact shooting. Well, the bullet path, at least one of them, because there were three, but one of them, it enters here, you know, an accident exits lower. So how you get that is if I'm coming at you, you know, at an attack mode. So it's like if you're like this in the bullet, go straight through, it's going to enter higher, but exit lower. We're still in a straight line. It's just got a different entry and exit point. But bullets don't always go in and out of people in a straight line. Correct. They hit bone. They can go God knows where they can bounce around inside the body. Yeah, there's a lot of different ways that trajectory can get thrown off. This one going through and through, actually proved my point more than some of them that would go a different way because it was because you're just going down like charging at you. Yeah. Because when he was coming back at me, that's when I fired so that all lined up. But the way she wrote the report was like it wasn't, you know, it wasn't a conclusive to be like an enclosed contact shooting. Okay. Another thing was blood spatter. So during the night, everything happened, I had on a white long sleeve shirt. Forward spatter is kind of like backwards, but forward spatter is what if I shoot you. Earn the night everything happened. I had on a white long sleeve shirt Um, forward spatter is kind of like backwards, but forward spatter is what if I shoot you would come out onto me I'm pretty sure I'm saying that right back spatter is what goes. No. I'm sorry. This back spatter If I shoot you back spatter is what comes onto me forward spatter is what goes out that way They were saying that there was no blood spatter on me Which to them indicated that we were not in close proximity each other But the guy was wearing three shirts They had on like a regular t-shirt Then like a wicking like under armor type shirt And then like a longer sleeve shirt with a hoodie over top of that So the likelihood of any blood spatter coming out of three layers of clothes Is going to be very Very minimal if not straight up non-existent Because it can't travel through all that and again like I said these were steel jacket rounds They're not like hollow points. That's going to make these massive holes And so that was another reason why they said be charged me and said the bullet path didn't line up to be a close contact shooting There was no blood trend sparrow me from the shooting Nor from me delivering life-saving measures And I was just like well how are you going to say that I didn't go put that towel on him because there was nobody else in the house It's just me and him and when the arriving officer comes there the towel is literally sitting on him So I'm like you know, there's nobody else who could have put that towel on him but me and I can't help that there wasn't any blood You know, it just happened to be that way. I know some crime scenes. There's a shitload of blood this one there was none And so that was really it like there was no other You know, they didn't bring up anything about well text message this and Text that that was really like it that they brought up And you know my lawyer's fighting back with his reasoning and the judge even says she looks at him and she goes There's not a lot here. She said but given the situation I'm gonna bind it to trial so that means we're going to trial so we leave there Kind of regroup and figuring out what to do and Andy already told me he said if they bind it to trial He said then the first thing I do is make a motion for a dunk in hearing which is basically a hearing for self defense and When you do that Like in a regular trial the burden of proof is on the state to prove your innocent When you're doing a self defense It's flipped the burden of proof is on you to prove that you act in a self defense And so that's really what we were planning on and at this point This is like you know like I said July We didn't hear anything else. We never went to trial again We never done anything else Recently I actually started a podcast myself It started getting some legs on it and I had the opportunity to go to New York to talk with some guys up there So I'm on house arrest this whole time like that was part of my bond can't have guns so we can't have knives Did they never give you any sort of idea when the trial had happened? Nope No idea when it would happen My lawyer said that he was gonna make the motion for the dunk in hearing Obviously in this point in time there's still running tests getting stuff back Because sled like I'm sure everybody knows this but it's not like fucking CSI Miami You don't get shit back in a half an hour Like I think it was almost a year before they got reports back from sled and in those reports It showed up well South Carolina law enforcement division because I'm in South Carolina Those reports indicated that not only was the on prescription pills because he's diagnosed with PTSD New Army he was also on steroids And he was also three times illegal limit now call Now and one thing I'm gonna back up just one minute because I forgot about this In the preliminary hearing when the when the detective was on the stand she lied On the stand at least five times that we had documented proof of So one and even some of them are miniscule, but they were still lies. This is after the trial starts Yeah, well, this is that preliminary hearing that I was telling you about criminal Yeah, yeah, I skipped over that, but it's important She's like uh In the her reports that she wrote she says she collects two vowels of steroids from a trash can where he was at One the preliminary hearing she said there was only one She also says that when the arriving officer got there that I was so distraught that I locked the door to the house Never happened like he walked right to fucking end. I'd just come out the door I think it was still open. Did you question her when he's she said this I can't he? You this is a part to where like this is where it's uh It's difficult to then preliminary hearing because you can't question You can only you can't question like that It's not a time to like debate facts. It's just presenting the evidence of why so it's really frustrating to hear him say Shit that you know or lies and she even said that there was a They were talking about you know history of violence and he said well he has a history of violence And my lawyer's like what and he's like oh, yeah, he's not allowed at the school to pick up his son I'm sitting down. I'm like what the fuck and so what happened? This is like a real crazy part my wife works at the high school in In our neighborhood She's the guidance council there At some point during our separation. You know obviously no separation go a 100% smooth so we were arguing She overhears my wife arguing with me She goes on her own and makes her a port saying you know over her and Employee arguing with husband just making note if something was to happen here at the school That's it. She just who is the one who did this a school resource officer. Oh, okay. Okay. So she makes this report She didn't tell my wife. She spelled mine that wife's name wrong on the report She didn't notify the principal. She just wrote it and turned it in So that's the report that this detective was talking about So after this is over like I didn't even know anything about it because I couldn't tell my lawyer I'm like that's bullshit, but you know he don't he don't really know exactly what's going on So we go to the principal This is after the preliminary hearing and we go who's like, you know, what is she talking about? He's like I've got no idea He's like I've never even met that man He's like I've seen him a few times that at functions for the school because he had a daughter that cheers here And she said I've seen him sometimes come and pick up his son because the middle school or the elementary school or my son went to school It's basically all right there in the same area They have a tunnel they walked through and they can come out of the high school So I would go over there and pick him up And he said if anybody tells anyone that they can't come on this campus for any reason He's like number one that's going to come from me Number two there's going to have to be documentation to back that up reasoning Why there's a lot of stuff that has to be done And he's like I've never had any dealings with him I've never known him to cause any issues and he says far as I'm concerned if he pulled up here today I would have no issue with him coming in the building getting his son whatever it is because I would go up there You know talk to my wife in her office So she made it seem like in the court that I was this violent dude that wasn't even allowed to come pick up my kid from school Which was totally false Even the report that was written didn't even say that Sully the detective had a bone to pick with you for some reason or either she was just new at this point She might have fucked up and she was trying to you know make herself look good in there I don't I don't know what she was doing. I mean, I didn't know this woman. I didn't know her from Adam I don't know if she was just trying to well why would the case look? purposely changed facts That's I've been asking myself that question for about five years and technically You're supposed to be in trouble for that like even though that wasn't a trial It was a preliminary hearing but like if you lie under oath They're still in your oath. They're all this if you lie under oath like that's grounds to you know be fired Possibly even do time. Is it possible that detectives like that can get promoted from From making cases like this more of a slam dunk for a prosecutor I think that's generally how it is because that's how it is for prosecutors in general I mean that's how they move up the ladder. You know they move up the ladder by putting people in prison and You know it happens a lot people want to make at a black and a white thing I don't really subscribe to that theory. It's a green thing. It's a money Because if you don't have the money to get a good attorney Then you're stuck with a public defender and that public defender is really nothing but a glorified plea bargain broker And you know you take somebody that doesn't have the availability to get a good lawyer right say there are my shoes And you're looking at 25 to life bro like if you just take this plea deal Maybe we'll plead it down the involuntary manslaughter get 10 years good behavior do out in seven Somebody's gonna take seven years as opposed to possibly trying to fight it and get in life in prison You know and that's and that's for all cases that's for drug cases armed robbery whatever it is and to their defense that the Public defenders don't have the availability or the resources to fight it like a dedicated paid lawyer Right, and that's where I was kind of fortunate because and I even skipped over this to him Sorry, but when I got out of jail The company that I worked for they fired me Immediately right off the bat new course to you. I wasn't supposed to miss any time Well when I went back They said hey come up to the office. So when they said that I was kind of like I Know what's about to happen and I go in there and they actually told me he's like, you know We got a release you because of these charges and he's like, you know Where are you at right now with all this and I told him what was going on? He's like, well I can't imagine what you're going through and I'm like, well fuck it Imagine getting fired on top of it like, you know, don't I like you give a shit now Right, you know, I mean, you know, I'm supposed to be innocent and to proven guilty But that's definitely not the case But the fortunate thing about them firing me was I was able at that point to get into the 401k Now I mentioned to you earlier about I was gonna give my wife a piece of that The good thing about this company is they would give you probably 10 15 grand into your 401k each year from part of their Probably sharing so I'd been with the company 14 years. I had a pretty decent amount in there So when I got fired you're able to dip into that That's how I was able to pay the lawyers off and I paid them up front So it was like 50,000 to take the case Another 15,000 to get started and get the ball rolling and then we'll get to the point here shortly where we had to bring in CSI experts to Investigate stuff all those things just you know that that tally started adding up really quick But had I not been able to get to that money? You know, I'd had to do Probably charge the credit cards or whatever the case may be so getting fired was almost like a blessing in the sky Kinda a little bit because I was able to get into that money and give it to them and You know that after that next step when we were gonna be prepared for the immunity hearing or dunking hearing Yeah, so you said they'd never told you Yeah, when the trial is gonna be and in the meantime you started a podcast Yeah in the middle of that because see there there was tons of sending it to trial But the dunking hearing would go before the trial Okay, so the trial would basically be me on trial for the state But if you file the motion for that dunking hearing then they have to be seen first So when during that time that never really got scheduled He applied for it, but they just never answered them So in the meantime. Yeah, I started a podcast and like I said it grew legs and Had the opportunity to go to New York So I had to get permission because this whole time all these years. I'm on house arrest I can only leave the house for very specific things Definitely not allowed to leave the state at least without telling them where I'm going what I'm doing when I'm coming back All those types of things and When I asked them to go to New York, you know, they actually agreed to it. They was like yeah, he can go By this time the solicitor that was on the case originally had left the office Had another lady come in She was only there for a very very limited amount of time Then she was gone then they had a third one So a lot of the people that were really involved in the case were no longer really around even the detectives She had messed up so much after what happened with my case She's now a school resource officer at an elementary school. Yeah, yeah So not not a very desirable position from someone that was a detective. No definitely not So it comes time where I got to go back to New York a second time So again, I got to go back to getting permission and doing all this and I just told my lawyer I'm like what are they doing like let's get this thing You know in for the you know the hearing I do think covid probably pushed it back slightly Because my lawyer didn't want to do anything via zoom or Skype right to be in person He's a you know a maestro in the courtroom. That's how he does his business and his work So that probably did have something to do with the delays But we actually took a risk because the CSI guy we brought down He came to the house and he lined up I'm sure you've seen it on the shows where it shows like the bullet tracings with the red laser beams He lined up from the wall back to the refrigerator Then back to the corner where I was sitting Arastanding and it was perfect like everything lined up just like how I said it was And that was like a big key that was kind of what my lawyer was like what this is what we need Dispros you were where you were When everything happened and so that was like key And we've been holding on to that for a while for the Duncan hearing but it never happened So after that second trip to New York We asked the prosecutor if we could come there and show him everything we had Like just lay it on the table and he said I think you'll be so overwhelmed By what we can do If we take this to trial or to the preliminary of to the Duncan hearing you want him want to do it and he was receptive to that so we went me Our investigator my lawyer How often does that get like this happen not very often? He told me he said I don't know that I've ever done this because typically in Court cases They're so you're supposed to each side is supposed to disclose all their evidence right yeah and that's the thing is I think the evidence was there But with him being new maybe he wasn't you know up to snuff on everything You know because the solicitor at this point is the one that's actually going to be trying the case That's trying to basically put me in you That's that is going to be their job. The solicitor. The solicitor. The solicitor. This is the prosecutor. Yeah, same thing as a prosecutor He's the one that's going to be trying to do this and who is this guy a known guy like a popular like a well-known guy This guy here was actually a Recently promoted guy so he was pretty new and and I'll say the hats off to him for being receptive to this because the first guy that was on it I guarantee you if we'd offer that to him. He wouldn't have took it. He had been around for a while He kind of had a reputation of being you know a hard baller and I don't think he would have taken it This guy being new. I think he was receptive to the idea and maybe he looked at it and seen that things weren't adding up You know, I don't know his reasoning. You know, I never got to actually speak with him one on one But when he was receptive to it We flew down the CSI guy from New York and again every time he flies down like I'm having to pay for that right every time he comes out to the house I'm having to pay for that And so it's just the bill is steady racking up and so he comes in we take our investigator My attorney and then the forensics guy and we go to the police station and we play a video And the video was a PowerPoint of him saying okay, well this is every reason that they said they were charging like one of the first reasons was You know, Mr. Williams has said there was a struggle But we seen no signs of a struggle anywhere in the house So the first arriving officer that come in that day They freeze frame a photo of the kitchen when he goes in You see a shot glass knocked over on the floor And he zooms in on it with the era Then you see like a like a Manhattan like a rocks glass. You know something during whiskey out of pretty heavy It's knocked over in the corner And then there's some other stuff moved around on the stove So obviously that looks to be signs of a struggle to a knock-over shot glass on the floor Knock no one on the counter Then he goes and does a slideshow about the blood that I was explaining to you earlier Where they said their reasoning was you know, there was no blood transfer on him Well, he scientifically breaks down with test that have been done actual studies of you know Sometimes there's not even blood transfer on bare skin Let alone coming through three layers of clothes. So there's not going to always be Blood transfer and then the last one was obviously the angle of the bullets He was talking about you know how I was standing if the guy's in a crouch position Then it is going to have that type of angle to it And then of course he brings up the fact that you know the guy was On steroids. He was three times illegal lemon alcohol and on prescription medication for a diet and it was PTSD And at that point, you know, you could tell that they were taking the information in they weren't just like you know Blowing it off not paying any attention looking at the ceiling. They were taking it in. Yeah So the next step is they go and see whatever it is they have on me Well, I'm not allowed to go in there because it's their evidence room And obviously that's kind of like a breach or whatever So I gotta go to lawyers able to go in there. Yeah. Yeah. My lawyers good I just couldn't so at this point. They're coming to my house next. They're actually coming to my home So there's like so during this whole thing you're living in the same house. Yeah, I never move like never change refrigerators or No, he's still in there now. Yeah, they're now I had I don't don't ask me why but I had this deep feeling that at somewhere down the line That kitchen could really come in to play Don't tell me it's your background for your podcast No Not a lot of people even knew this happened like for years Nobody that I had done podcast with even knew this was going on. Okay, and when I started telling them they were like Holy shit, it'd be pretty appropriate But they that was kind of the idea You know if when I was able to tell this story if I could kind of get some legs up under my own program Then when I could tell my story more people would look at it because I think it's important because you don't really see guys like middle age, blue collar workers, you know, gun carrying law buying citizens wind up in this kind of situation. And it's just like it's not the norm. And then I was arrested. You know, it's all on the on the news. People are always making assumptions, especially when it came in the middle of like a separation. I heard stories from, oh, he came in from work and caught his wife with somebody. I'm like, well, start we didn't even live together. I was out of work because I have my back surgery. So like, you know, these these shit y'all are coming up with is fucking insane. But it was just, you know, you had to deal with a lot. Like it was a lot of pressure for that whole time. This is going on. It's just got dropped in November. So this is like four years and six, seven months of not knowing, not knowing what's going on. Like isn't two months ago, yes, as in the end of or the end of October of last year. So you're talking four years and nine months. But that's the, this, the story that I was telling you is kind of why I got dropped because I leave the police station. I go back to my house. My investigators, the first one to get here and I ask him, I'm like, so what did they show you in the evidence from him? And he's like, nothing. I'm like, what? And he's like, yeah, there's nothing. There's nothing there. And so they come, they come in. I go over the scenario that I played out with you here tonight. You know, they're looking, they see it and seeing that kitchen kind of really puts it in context because I can explain it to you, but actually standing in it and seeing it as a whole different ball game. And you know, you can tell because the way he fell, he was a little bit away from the refrigerator. So if you've figured you picture, you standing them up on his feet, he's right in front of me. I'm automatically backed up into the corner. If he was any further back, he'd have been laying up against the refrigerator when he fell. So it kind of proved everything. Once they seen it, I think it really kind of put it in perspective form. And it was still a couple months after that before we finally got a drop. But I did get the call. My lawyer called me one day. I was at work. And he's like, you know, what's going on? I'm like, you know, not much at work. And he's like, well, how does it feel to be a free man? And I was like, what? And he's like, yeah, you're free charges are dropped cases dismissed. And I was just like, holy shit. I mean, it was the best feeling I ever had in my life for that to be lifted off for me, bro. You have no idea. Wow, man. Yeah. What did that feel like? And like the world had been lifted off for me. And I mean, like, you know, I'm a very outgoing person anyway. Like I like to talk. I like to go out. I like to communicate socialized. So for like to put somebody like me on house arrest is damn near a prison in itself. I mean, it was awful, which it was part of the reason why I started doing the podcast because it gives you availability to talk to people in commerce. Where you able to talk about this stuff on your podcast, even I've never mentioned it on my show at all really not one time. What kind of stuff did you talk about? What on mine? Yeah. We talked crap. But I was thinking of doing like a true crime podcast, but then actually looking around like everybody apparently decided to do that during COVID. So I was like, well, that's going to be hard to gain fucking traction. So saturated market. Yeah. Very saturated market. So I put an entertainment on the end. So I called it crime and entertainment. And I've been able to talk to so many people, man, I've had Tommy Chong on the show. I've had Tom Sizemore from Heat and Natural Born Killers on the show. You had him on there? Yeah. Yeah. Tom really well. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. A lot of the guys that you've interviewed like Tim McBride, Larry Maza, Jeff Turner. Oh, yeah. We've interviewed a lot of the same people matter. Fact one of the big cases that I really am starting to kind of do more of now. I didn't want to let it that those get out there too early because I had such a passion when talking about it, but it was wrongful convictions. And you just interviewed or not just, but you would interview the guy named Jeffrey Deskovic from the door. And I just had him on the show. And like, there's no way or no, probably nobody's going to learn a lot faster than somebody's being accused of something they didn't do. And so that's really kind of what started the idea for the podcast because I was like listening to wrong fucking fiction podcast. That's where I heard that one. And then that kind of led me into like the true crime aspect of everything. But you know, I'm real big on wrong fucking fiction cases because it's, it happens way more than people realize. And luckily, I was fortunate enough to not have to be in jail this whole time because I know that happens with some but imagine being in jail for five years for something that you didn't do or seven. Jeffrey was in there for what? 16 years? Yeah. I mean, for something that you did not do. And I mean, I felt a portion of that. I don't even want to try to put myself in his position. There's people on death row. Yeah. They get exonerated. Yeah. DNA being botched. And he made a great point. And it was on your show. And I bring it up. He made a point. He was like, you know, the percentages of people that are incarcerated, I think it was like 12 or 13%. It says, so if you put that on planes, like so only 12 or 13% of the population, yeah, of the prison population or innocent. Wow. So, you know, if you tell somebody, well, you know, plane crashes, you got 13% chance of your plane crash. And you think you're going to see if any people fly. Right. But people don't pay that no attention because a lot of times largely kept under the radar, it's largely kept quiet. Prosecutors are immune to anything. So, like they have prosecutorial immunity. And again, I want to reiterate in my case, the prosecutor that, you know, finally put this thing to bed. I don't think he had any, well, I know he didn't because he he was the one to put it on together. No malicious intent to begin with. And I don't know if the detective was malicious or just not seeing it with a full set of eyes. I don't really know. But to me, it was clear cut man from the jump of you had a guy that was pissed off, that he was getting booted out of a relationship. And he, he was pissed. And nine times out of 10, I'm sure anybody that you tell the story to can attest if somebody's not where they're supposed to be, then something happens nine times out of 10. They're the one with the problem. And it was just like to me, I didn't see how it took four and a half years to get to that point. Unfortunately, it did. But now like I really want to become an advocate, especially for people that have been wrongfully charged or wrongfully convicted because it's cost me a shitload of money. Man, probably, I'm probably like knocking on the door like a hundred grand in the hole. I was fired like I said from my first job. Were you not able to get any of those expenses back? Not so far. Do you guys have any plans to try to sue the state for your expenses? I'm trying. But see, the thing is they're slick in the way that it works because the dismissal letter is wrote as such. So it goes, you know, while there was, what's the word, the wording they use? While there was a reason to, reason to charge, they didn't think it would be sufficient evidence to take the trial. So that makes it difficult for somebody to sue because with them being enough evidence, they think to charge as a wording for us, escaping my mind right now. I can't even think of it for some reason. But because they wrote it that way, it makes it difficult because being malicious isn't necessarily the same thing as being incompetent. So it makes it a little harder now. You know, obviously, I'm still looking into the possibility of being able to recoup some of that because at the end of the day, it's like I've had to spend a hundred grand on a lawyer. I've had to you know, lost that job. I got a second job. It happened so quickly. You know, with me getting fired and getting that job, that guy didn't run my background. I think he thought coming from that company, you know, there's no reason to. And so I get hired at a sign company like Welton for, you know, to make fabricate signs going good, you know, decent money. They never asked me about, you know, why was, you know, if I got fired or whatever, matter of fact, I only think I told him I got fired. I think I told him I quit. Um, but we're like six months into this job, right? And I did tell them that I used to work there. So they come and was like, Oh, we just got a big contract with your former employer. We're doing a sign out there. I'm like, who is like, new core? I was like, fuck. I'm like, job all the places to get a sign and sure shit. They went out there. One of the guys that worked there mentioned my name. Oh, you know, we got a guy that works our place to use workout here. What was his name? Wait. Oh, yeah. I remember him. Whatever happened with that case. Is he beat it? Okay. So what case? Oh, he kills somebody. And so like, it started traveling around the job. I know the boss knew because when we would do jobs for like Air Force bases and stuff like that, you had to have your background run before you could go on there. And whenever those come up, like they never asked me to go to them, but everywhere else they would ask me to go. So I knew he knew that I wiped that shit off your record. It is now. Okay. At the time, it wasn't. It was on there. It's pending. Right. Yeah. Because the first the first job I went to to try to get after that, um, I interviewed and I told them everything up front, everything that was going on. Do you know any of the stats on the number of deaths from that happen every year from self defense and like what happens to the people that end up doing the killings because of self defense? Like how many of them get stuck in this loop that you got stuck in? Oh, I can't imagine. I've actually never looked into those numbers, but I would imagine it's it's staggering because it's not a lot. And it affects everybody else. Like I said, out of kid in middle school, and even now to like every time he goes to a new grade or whatever somebody in there because of this community that we're in, there's all kinds of people that are, you know, kind of a melting pot. Nobody's from there, but everybody knows everything because of social media and Facebook groups from the neighborhood, somebody go, oh, yeah, ain't your dad to got it shot somebody. And so he has to deal with it. You know, obviously they're stigma with, you know, my daughter, she was a senior in high school when it happened. So like literally a month or two after this, she graduated high school. So it kind of, you know, had a black cloud hanging over that. And during the middle of this, and this is, this is actually really blow your mind kind of about how this county works. My neighbors, my neighbors, neighbors, so two houses down had a pit bull and then escaped and got into my yard and really messed up my husky. I told you I have, and we had to take him to the vet. Well, this dog had apparently bit a couple other people in the neighborhood. He had actually even bit my son about a year prior, but it was a very light bite. They were playing basketball in the yard. And it was almost to what you maybe could brush off as playful, but it did break the skin. He didn't like maul him or anything. But I told him I was like, all right, you know, don't go back down there and fuck around with that dog. Right. So when he jumps to fence and attacks the dog, this time I'm pissed because it was like, you know, a full-on just neglect on their part of keeping that animal locked up. Well, somehow, another the news got wind of it. And they contacted me on Facebook. I guess somebody told him and they contacted me on Facebook and said, Hey, we want to do a story on this dog because there's a lot of kids in your neighborhood and it could be potentially dangerous. And I'm like, well, absolutely. I don't have to. book. I guess somebody told him and they contacted me on Facebook and said, Hey, we want to do a story on this dog because there's a lot of kids in your neighborhood. And it could be potentially dangerous. And I'm like, well, absolutely. I don't have a problem with it. I said, but I'm not going to do it because I wasn't home. I said, you can interview my daughter. So they come out and interview my daughter. And the article gets posted in the Facebook page for my neighborhood. Well, I'm looking at it. And I figured something would come up if somebody would make the connection. And this lady goes, I'm not sure how, but I'm pretty sure this girl is somehow connected to the guy that shot a man in his house and then claim self defense and then went and hired one of the best defense attorneys in South Carolina. And he says he says the self defense with the evidence, paints a very different story. And I'm just like, who the fuck is this? Well, the more I learn, I'm not saying anything. I'm just reading these comments as I get in post it. It's a public defender in the county that I work that I live in. She works for the public defenders off. Wow. And she's on a public form like this saying this and somebody even said, you know, this is not very professional. Like I don't know if I'd be saying this. And she goes, well, maybe it's not the place to disclose these things. But I've had a few cocktails and it is what it is. This was before the trial. So I'm like, if we don't went to trial and like, you know, thank God, it didn't happen as well. But if I like, I don't want to trial him and found guilty like that would be grounds for a mistrial. You know, she's putting it out already that, you know, well, he said this stuff defense, but there's a evidence point. Otherwise, not on a what fucking evidence she was looking at. Because that's the thing is what they have right now when they dropped this at the end of October is exactly what they had the day had happened. Nothing else has been collected. Nothing else has been, you know, taken in all the testimonies that they got from people that were involved that night, which weren't really many of me and the other guy. I mean, he testified exactly what he, what they got. I told him earlier or not, oh, I'm looking for chip because I'm gonna kill them. And no matter a fact, because it happened thoroughly in the morning, when they went to talk to him that morning, he tells them, I heard it on the recording of it. He tells them straight up, he's like, listen, man, I go and tell you, I'm still drunk. Like as he's talking to the cop and they never came back to him. Wow. Never come back to him to get another interview. I told them that that were the first time he saw them earlier in that day when he came to your house, I'm looking for a chip because I'm gonna kill him. Yeah. Told him that all that and they still decided to press forward. I don't know what they seen. I don't know what, what it was. But well, the reason I asked about the stats, if you were familiar with any of the stats is because every, I've heard, every case like this I've heard of, something similar, not as to the extreme where they tried to charge you with first degree murder and went so far to do it. But like the other thing that comes to mind is, uh, I don't know if you're familiar with Gucci man, the rapper. Yeah, he went through the same thing where he was sitting in his house with like some prostitute or something and two guys busted in the door with guns and trying to rob him for his jewelry or whatever. And he literally had a gun. I'm just shot on both killing one of them. And he had to fight the case for a while and he ended up beating it. Yeah. And I mean, I've been trying to charge him with first degree murder. Yeah. Getting robbed. And I think I think the baby had something going like that similar to that too. The rapper, uh, baby. Yeah. I'm not familiar with his, but yeah, I did hear about that. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I trust me man. I looked up all these self defense cases and like I got kind of an expert on, you know, like what qualifies as self defense, what, you know, cuts it off. So like you can initiate a fight and then start losing and then shoot the guy because then you can't claim self defense. So like a way. So like a man, you're at a bar, right? Yeah. I jump on you and, you know, start hitting you. You start it. And then you start reversing it and getting the better of me and start whipping my ass. I can't pull out a knife or gun or anything and kill you because once you start something and initiated, you lose the right to some fans. So that's a, that's an interesting thing for your case though. How could they have preset? How could they have proven that you didn't start that? Even though he was bigger than you were coming out you how I'm curious. How come they tried, didn't try to come up with something that said, Oh, well, chip could have easily started this. And they, they maybe they were planning on a lot of no, but I mean, at the end of the day, there, there wasn't anybody else there. So they had to, I mean, take my word. But I mean, again, all the evidence backed up what I said, right? You know, everything lined up perfectly. And like I said before, I was, I was in a fortunate position where I didn't need to lie. I didn't need to say, okay, I need to say I was in an ear or over here. I done this or I done that like everything that happened played out just a way it, it really happened in real time. And you know, luckily everything worked out in the end. But I mean, it's just the lasting impact of this is like, you know, I wake up every, for years, I woke up every day, feel like there's a piano hanging over your head. Cause you know, life in prison, even if it was 25 to life, 25 years, I'm probably going to die in there. Like, you know, they're not going to give you parole. And so it's like, there's like a piano just hanging over your head every day, not knowing. It's so hard to focus on anything in the future. Because you don't know if you're going to have a future. You don't know what's going to go on. And you know, we contemplated moving. We really did. But then, you know, there's a lot of stuff with that. And then if you know, if you got to come back to do anything as far as court or talk with the lawyers, that could be, you know, you know, a little bit more aggravating to do with it. So we decided to stay. And you know, I've been the same house and same fridge. Yeah, same. Oh, I kept that fridge. I wouldn't leave enough fucking fridge. I knew at some point that fridge might come in to play. I'm glad you kept the fridge. Yeah. It's still there now. I might replace it now and not everything's over. But I mean, it still works. I'm never given right. Yeah. I mean, it's I like I said, I just had a feeling that a lot of that stuff was going to come into play. And it did. And you know, the crazy thing was like when it when they give me bond that first time, all they really did was make me like a built in babysitter for the neighborhood for like a month. Because everybody knew that I was home and everybody that knew me and like knew me personally would send their kids over there. Because this was like right after the summer. So they would send their kids to my house to hang out all during the day. Because I knew I wasn't, you know, I couldn't leave the house. It's like, we can go over there. I know it's dad's home. So it was like, you know, the ones that knew me knew what happened, but the other ones that made their assumptions. I mean, they still do it. Like even to this day, if somebody hears a loud bang or something like that on the community Facebook, you'll see him say, Oh, yeah, probably another gunshot was probably the neighborhood's there. You know, they had a shooting there. And somehow another, my name always gets brought up. And one person even said one time, he was like, yeah, I remember when that happened, I think it had something to do with the dog. And they related it to the dog situation, which was totally separate. So I don't even respond to half of that shit after time. I mean, I just, I just keep my mouth shut because it's, you know, if people are going to make the assumptions, they're going to make the assumptions. But I knew at one point in time, I would be able to sit down and tell my story, which is kind of like what I'm doing now with you and Matt. And it feels good to finally get my side out there for because you have to be quiet like while those is going on. You can't, you want to defend yourself. But if you go out there and you know, you don't want to say something in the heat of, you know, anger and then it looks bad on you. Oh, look at this guy. How mad he's getting, you know, he must have done it. And so you have to really tread water and be careful. But at the same time now that it's over with, I want to bring light to how easy an average guy can find herself in this situation from just a detective not looking at things the way it should be looked at. Yeah. I mean, I could be lying. If I said I hadn't thought about that situation, like if it ever happened to me, like, what would you do? Like that's something you want to know. You want to know like how you're supposed to handle it. Like what he should. And the scary part is is once the cops get involved, you don't know. It's all out of your control. Your freedom is gone. And you don't know what's going to, what's going to happen. And I've heard so many stories about, you know, the misconduct behind the scenes with police departments and sheriff's departments and the prosecutors and look, and it's not pretty. It's scary because there's so many things that can go wrong. Yeah. And that's, you know, we spoke about it earlier. That's the, that's the fucked up part about this whole thing is that's how they move up in their job. Yeah. Like, you know, to me to move up in my job, I put out good products and we can sell more steel and stuff like that. But for them, they put people in jail. And now I'm not wanting people to say every single person in prison is innocent. I know there's some people that definitely deserve to be there. I mean, the guy was in there with he said, a sister on fire. So yeah, probably need to go to jail for a little while. But there's a lot of people in there that don't deserve to be in there. And I can see easily somebody getting jammed up and charged with something that maybe they had absolutely nothing to do with, but they don't have the money to hire a lawyer to fight it. So they wind up having to take a plea deal. Then they'd go, they do their time. They come out. Now they're a felon. They can't get a job. So then they really have to do something criminal. And then they get caught again. It becomes a vicious cycle. And in the prosecutors don't care because at every, at the end of every night, they can go home. They go home to their beds. And even if it's brought to light, then maybe they done something wrong. They still don't give a shit because they got prosecutorial immunity. You know, it doesn't matter. I mean, they give you a hundred years. And you know, you get, that's a good for them. That's a checkmark in their box. That's something they can handle. No resume. I took this guy off the street. Doesn't matter if he's guilty or else. Well, I'm thankful for you coming into on the story, man. Yeah. Yeah. I appreciate it. And there's a, there's an insurance that I really need to figure out how I can be the spokesperson for these guys. It was called carry guard. And it's basically like, so if you pay like 20 bucks a month and you find yourself in the situation, 20 bucks might get you 50 grand worth of coverage. So an attorney. Yeah. Bond you out. Then they'll get you an attorney. You get like 30% of it up front. I think is what it is. You get enough to get you out and get the attorney started on the case. Then if you win it, then the rest of it is paid to the attorney to pay off your legal fees. Obviously, if it goes above 50, then you're responsible for that. But there's different tiers of it. You know, you can pay 40 for, you know, 70,000 or whatever on up the ladder. So this is a partnership with the NRA in this company called carry guard. I need to be there for our a carry guard gives you the protection you need. If you've ever in, if you, if you were ever involved in a self defense shooting, once you sign up for the NRA carry guard insurance, you'll have 24, 7, 365 access to the members only hotline for incident reporting and emergency assistance. You guys, I'm good fucking eyes. I can't read that. They must make a shitload of money with that. Yeah. Well, it's like, if you, if you have them and then you were in my situation, you're instructed to like, if, so if I would have had it, I don't call 911, but like, my name is Wade Williamson. I just shot somebody coming to this address and they're going to be fun. I thought you're supposed to say. And then they handle everything else. And like I said, you only get, they only pay it in full. Obviously, if you beat the case, so if you don't beat it, then you don't get all the money of it. Isn't there a situation where like, say if you're in your car and traffic, right? And you come, and there's a guy with a road rage who is like beating down your window, like trying to get into your car with like, like trying to open your door and you have a gun, it can seal it in your car. I don't think you need to, do you need to have a CWP to carry it in your car? No. Well, you, you know, it's different per state. But I think the ruling is a CWP, you can have it anywhere. Right. If you don't have a CWP, it either needs to be in your glove box, you can see an area in the car. console. Yeah. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. So if I'm in traffic, and then there's this guy who I cut him off, whatever, and he's fucking getting out of his car, and he's trying to open my door, beat down my window. If he hasn't got an it got in yet, from what I've heard is that you're supposed to call 911 first, be like, look, this guy is trying to get in my car. If he breaks my window, I'm going to shoot him and kill him. Did you know if that's true? I know, I know the castle law protects you at your house. Yeah. And it extends to your car and work. Oh, does it play some employ? Yeah. The castle doctrine is for your home, is for your vehicle, and your place of employment. And see, that's the thing is people always have these things of, oh, we need to call 911. Sometimes you don't have fucking time to call 911. I mean, this shit just goes off quick. Like you said, if somebody's up there beating on your window, yeah, I'm going to have time to make a phone call. Yeah. I mean, it's just, you know, it's just something you're going to have to do. And I've followed so many cases like this since mine, for instance, the kid, what's his name? That assault rifle, one of the users assault rifle, the young dude, the baby. No, the, uh, when the, oh, oh, in the riots. Well, yeah, what was his name again? Kyle, Kyle Rittenhouse, Kyle Rittenhouse. Yeah. So like, I mean, I followed that one like real closely, because like anything big like that in the news, like my eyes were kind of glued to see how juries were going to look at it and stuff like that. And I mean, you know, I feel as though he was justified in that. I mean, and using it. Now, there's some other ones that, you know, maybe not, like there was a one I was looking at where there was like surveillance video. The only thing with with that one, I feel like, yeah, I have to like refresh myself on the whole story again. The only weird thing about that is like, if I'm that kid's parents, why the fuck am I, how old was he? He was young man. I'm not sending my like 14 year old or 15 year old out to the fucking streets during riots with the AR. I think the, the basis of it was something along the lines of his family owned a business where all this shit was going out. So he was there at the business to protect it from the looters. I believe not okay. I don't know, but I think that, that was the reason why he was there. He wasn't just out in the street, you know, for the hell of it. Right. Yeah. He was actually getting chased down at that point. I think yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And like I said, I, it's been a minute since I've kind of refreshed the facts on there, but, you know, again, you know, like that, that's where it becomes, it can go from, from murdered yourself to fence really quick because I watched the video where this guy was at a Walmart and like he assaulted this guy and he hit him first within that guy, knocked him down, knocked him on his ass. So when he had, when he hit the ground, he pulled out of gun and shot the guy. So that's not self defense because like I said, early, he didn't know how to do it. Yeah. Just because they knocked him down. And they got it and even looked like he was going to continue to, to jump on him. I mean, it was just, it's did it. Did you see, I'm sure you did, during the whole riots from George Floyd at one point, there was a famous photo of this guy and his wife standing in their driveway as these people were marching down the lady. She had the pistol like this and the guy was handing was holding the AR with his finger on the trigger. Yeah. Yeah. And that's another thing man. I mean, like the gun laws and everything. You're not allowed to brandish them like that. Yeah. I think there is rules. And a lot of that does go from state to state to from what I understand is you're only allowed to pull your gun out when you're about to use it. Like if you pull your gun out, you have to use it. You can't just use it as like a scare tactic or something like that. Yeah. I mean, I've seen videos online where people like, and I think they do it more for attention, but like they'll be walking around with a damn, you know, AK on their lap or whatever, or around their, you know, strap or whatever. And it cops will be like, you know, what are you doing? But they technically have the right to have it. Oh, yeah. I've seen, I've seen the guy with the, you have you seen the guys YouTube channel? Yeah. He's like, I'm going fishing and he's a fucking machine gun or a strap. I don't just like, really, I mean, you don't really need it, you know, like that. But again, gun laws to their trying to outlaw the AK 47. Awesome. Let the video, it's on YouTube. There's a guy. I forget what he's called. He's called the Florida Florida fisherman who he goes fishing with guns. And he walks like down a public sidewalk, like past a police station with a purpose within AK strap to him or an AR 15 strap to on purpose just to see because the cops is so crazy watching it because the cops are just like, they don't know what to do. Yeah. All of a sudden there's like 13 cops surrounding him. And he's like, at the end of the day, he hasn't done nothing wrong. Yeah. And he knows that. He knows that. He's just trolling. Yeah, he's trolling. That's exactly what he's doing. He's trolling. Yes, the armed fisherman, pull up a video of him real quick. You can see that. This one right there, that one right there. I think this is in Tampa. Yeah, full screen it. I can see, I can see why all these cops are coming out. This is good. They're not going to show. We're not going to find the one I was looking for. I can see the concern. It's definitely a certain walk. Like, if you were in your kid, if you're like taking your kid for a walk in the park, there's a guy walking in the street with an AK 47. I mean, yeah, I'm going to leave. Yeah, absolutely. But it's crazy that there's laws that protect you from walking from the pier to a fishing pond. Three blocks away in the middle of a city with an AK strapped to you. I mean, it's wild. The gun laws. Yeah. And I actually, you know, once I got arrested, they took my CWP back or I got a letter saying they revoked it. Well, since everything's been expunged, I got it back reinstated. So they were able to give it back to me. And I had to go back to my lawyers office and get all my guns back because I had to give them all the other guns that I had. That was part of the release, you know, my conditions of the bond. So like, when I went everything, I dropped out of the go up there and pick up like it was like eight guns out of his office and he's like, I hope nobody's not looking here going out to front door. And I had to go up there. We were like bringing them out one by one, putting them in the car. But yeah, I was like, I was so nervous touching them like for the first time because I hadn't touched one in so long. It was just like, oh, shit. And then of course, like, you know, it's kind of a little bit of PTSD there too. Like the first time you put your hands on one because the last time you did, you know, something major happened. And how you like relive that experience at all to that haunt? Does that does that moment when you shot him haunt you at all? It does. It does a good bit. And you know, I still try to look at it through the mindset of like I said earlier, you know, I didn't kill someone. I killed someone that was trying to kill me. Yeah, for sure. And that's that's kind of what I have to really keep reiterating to myself. But yeah, definitely it bothers me because I mean, I did not want that to happen. You know, it's unfortunate that they played out the way it did, but you know, you can't help but to relive some of those moments. And even though it was a adrenaline pumping and everything that was going on, some of those images and everything, you know, they're always going to be there. And that's something that even after it's over, it was like, oh, well, now you can breathe. Yeah, but you know, the memories are still there. So it's so much impact on your life. And you know, like I said, I don't necessarily know how much it bothers, you know, my son, he says it doesn't bother him, but he's 13. He's not going to tell me if it's bothering him but I know that he had to deal with it, especially like right after it happened. I mean, it was in that neighborhood, that's like, I don't even know that another murders ever happened to that neighborhood. Another's been some suicides, but I don't think anything like that has ever happened. So of course, they're going to bring that up repetitively every time. So it's kind of one of those things to where you can't even let it get brushed under the rug. Anytime something happens, it's going to be brought back up again. Yeah, definitely. Yeah, the the open carry laws, I think are pretty good here in Florida. I think you, I mean, you have to have a CWP. I think that's the smart way to do it. I don't know what this laws are in South Carolina, but I know in Texas, anybody can just carry open. I don't you have to have any training or whatever. But my my thought on it has always just been like, look, if you got to take a test to drive a car, you should take a test to build a fucking carrier gun on your waist. Yeah, I agree with that. I don't have a research at least put that much effort into understanding how to work the fucking thing and how to use it understand the laws before that you know, you just carrying that thing with you. Well, like mentally, like I said, when it happened, I reverted back to that class because they teach you not only do you have to like a little shape of a body or whatever you got to hit so many rounds in there to pass or at least the one I did. You had to do that. Then you do like a written test. And it tells you all kinds of different scenarios of what is legal, what is considered self defense, then what is past upon a self defense. All that's things that I think responsible gun owner should want to know. Yeah, I don't want just any any old dude with a gun. It's never fired. It never never had a work. Didn't be in able to carry it because that is when things that can come dangerous. And they said even in that thing, what you would do to our standing in front of his house during the rise with a finger on the camera is a AR. Yeah, I mean, fuck you sneeze and you're probably going to blow your wife away. You know, I mean, but like you said earlier, if you pull it, they tell you do not pull your gun under any circumstances unless you're going to use it because if you right, if you pull it out and then second guess or wait, that's when you could, you know, get it taken from you or any other things can happen. So they say, you know, if you're going to pull, if you're going to go to that point to where you pull it out of, you know, wherever you got it at, you better be ready to use it because at that point, that obviously whoever you pulling it all is going to see it. And they're going to try to take it from you and use it on you. Right. So that's what they can still in you in those classes. So I definitely think it's, it's logical and probably anybody that carries one should probably go take that class. I agree, man. Thank you again for coming, man. Lots of valuable information and incredible fucking story. I'm grateful for you being here and telling to everyone. Tell everyone that is listening and watching where they can find your podcasts and whatever else you're doing. Absolutely. We're a crime and entertainment. We're on YouTube, a crime and entertainment. We're on all the audio platforms as well. So Spotify, Apple, Google, Stitcher, all that good stuff. I'm trying in the works to get a documentary made about this, to open really open eyes of just how easy this could happen because I think it's just, it's something that happens so quick that really turn my world upside down that, you know, as I start researching, it's happened to quiet a few people, but people just don't realize, and I don't are aware of how often it happens because it's not like, yes, not like, every single day, but it's enough to where you don't understand like what we've talked about here today, the impact it has. So we're going to try to put together a documentary me and some of the guys that I've worked with from New York and hopefully that's coming. I've had a few people reach out to me about writing a book on it. So we'll see where it goes, but again, too, going after to do all this again, it is, it's reliving it some, but it's also therapeutic because I think it's good to talk about stuff and get it out. So at the same time, you do have to relive us a few moments, but it's also therapeutic, but, you know, just just to help get the word out. I think we're going to really try to push the documentary out to do that. So I'm not, I don't have a timetable on that yet, but for right now, you know, like I said, crime entertainment, we dropped something every week. There's usually something for everybody on the man. We've had mobsters, porn stars, actors, writers, you know, everywhere in between. So I'm sure it'll be something on there for everybody. If they want to go take a look at it. Hell yeah, man. Well, I'll link it all below. Thank you. Very much. I appreciate I appreciate you having me too. Absolutely. Man, my pleasure.