Joe Roman Feynch. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan Podcast by night. All day. Thank you. What do you mean by those people? Uh, you know. You know? It's changed. Everyone here sits on the horns. I don't know. You know? You mean band members who are you talking about? Stuff. Music. Music industry. Yeah, we're just talking about it. So we should tell people what we're talking about. If you hum a song, just like fuck around and like, you know, like the cocaine song, you know what I mean? If you play air claps and you know what I mean? If you do that, you'll get flagged on YouTube. And they take money from you. How desperate is that? It's gross. Well, you can't even hum a song. You can't like what are you talking about? You can't even hum. In the future, you're not even going to be able to fall in love. They're going to charge you for it. How are they going to do that? They won't be falling in love with the person anymore. People will be outdated. People come with problems. I ain't coming on no bot. No, ever? What about in one? No, what will they do with it? Keep it. Yeah. Maybe that's what keeps them alive. Imagine that. Let me think about it. You have to talk to her every day to keep her alive. If you don't, you start shriveling up on you. Oh, like she's on those epic. So she's a Latino. You keep her a plump. You got to keep her. You got to keep the juices flowing, huh? There'd be guys that would sign up for that. OK, I could do that. But day 5,000 and 26 in a row, you'd be like, oh my god, I can't do this. Yeah. And she's dying. Why is she dying? She's electric, isn't she? She's only gets powered by cum. Oh. Oh, it's sad. And three days of no cum, she shuts off. And that's it. And you can't bring her back. I'd shut her down quickly. I can't believe she would be. I have to let your buddies fucker just to keep her alive. Oh, that's going to be gross, Joe. It would be. And it would be sad and stuff like that. And you'd have somebody like late at night like, hey, bro, yeah, what's your wife doing? Like texting your life for a.m. Bro, you need to keep her alive. Yeah, he's over there stroking that noise on the phone with you. Bro, plug your wife in for a little bit, bro. Oh, yeah. Let me come over there. We're getting close. Did you see those ones they have with the consumer electronics show in Vegas? The dancing? No, it's an AI companion. That's a robot. It's like a very pretty lady in her mouth moves. She talks. And it's not there yet. But it's in the neighborhood. You know, it's not at the right door, but it just entered the community. You know what I mean? You know some communities have that awning. Welcome to like Paradise Estates. And you go through this all the houses in the subsection? Yeah. It's in the door. Right. It's in the door. That's just not in your house. Headnokes or whatever. Exactly. Or hunter's gland or racist cove or whatever. The fuck robot has made it through onto your street. It's just not at your house yet. And it will be in five to 10 years. My kids aren't fucking robots. I'll tell. If you have kids, they're going to fuck robots. No, they won't. You won't be able to stop them. All their friends are going to be able to do it. It'd be rude. They'd be like keeping them off social media. How much? You're crazy. If you keep your kids off social media, they feel left out. They're like, come on, dad. Let me get Snapchat. Like, no, son. I want you to concentrate on your homework and your football. Come on, dad. Come on, dad. Let me get Snapchat. No, look, dad wakes you up early. He's like, look, one of you little bastards left the freaking kombro bot in the yard. Which one of you? Oh, you're hilarious. Yeah, company come. All your friends fucking sit. That's sad. But I do think that one day our smiles will be in a museum. That's where we're headed. It's like the feelings are starting to disappear, you know? Maybe that's what autism is. Like severe autism. Oh, I thought about that a lot. That's why we're getting to some of the only way we could get to this place if we get to this data-driven place where it's like, you know, alien-nascous things start to feel alien-nascous. It's because of autism leading, it's when autism mixes with what's called our society's based on money capitalism. When autism and capitalism converged, things got really good. Right. And think about it, right? We don't know exactly what is causing autism. There are a lot of suspicions. A lot of them have to do with vaccines and different medications and different chemicals and pollutants and all sorts of different things. And clone, too. One thing we could all agree on and tie on all they think, too, right? But one thing that we can all agree on, it's a big factor is stuff that we've created. It's a big factor. Whatever it is. Yeah. Let's not put the blame on any one of these industries, but there's something going on where more people are getting autism now than ever. And it seems almost positive that it's coming from us that we did something. Human society. Well, if you think about where human society is going, wouldn't that be a way to turn us into something new? If we were going to merge with machines, what better way than to eliminate empathy, eliminate emotions, make us able to stay at home and stare at a screen for hours at a time with no concern whatsoever, just the kind of social detachment along with the integration of all this crazy new technology. And a lot of the people that are in the tech business at high levels are on spectrum. Oh, dude. Yeah. They're on the fucking diving board of the spectrum. And then the ones bringing in AI. They're bringing in the next version of life. Kind of, I mean, almost like we're thinking it's like a mistake. But it might not be. It might be like a crucial part of the system when you get further and further integrated with technology and all the stuff that you need to make it. And all the stuff that's involved in capitalism, including like lying about when medications, kids' needs, giving them this, giving them that. Lying about what kind of what the pesticides do or the chemicals do or whatever it is. What is that ultimately doing? If it's leading people to be on the spectrum more and more often, what if one day it's not one in 12 in California? If it's 100%, everybody, you got a full spectrum society. And there's no regular people left. Yeah. You don't have to think about that. If it's one in 12 boys right now in California. And it used to be like 1 in 10,000. This is like an invasion. Right. Like an invasion of a way that people think that's entering into human civilization. And I feel like it was, I agree. So then it's like those, and then if you don't have this up rising, this emotional uprising out of people of like, this is wrong. Because I think like, when you get real database and that kind of like, Tiz a mask type of energy, I think you're not thinking about some of the, like how it affects you as much. Or maybe you're able to roll into that nest of like this is this new digital landscape. And those people fit well in it. Does that make any sense? It does. It does make fit well. And they do fit well in it. I know a lot of people that are spectrum me that are very happy just being online all the time. Yeah. That's what they do. And dude, maybe that's what's supposed. Yeah, that's the scary part is like, what if that's what's supposed to happen? Right. And the rest of us are just like, because I'm like, I think a romanticist, you know what I'm thinking? Like, oh yeah, a porch and a rocking chair. And then you know, but other people are like, yeah, we're coming in robots and shit like that. And we're in bagels through our fucking brain cells and shit. You know, like it's just like, we're thinking of autism as a flaw, but it might be a feature. But is it what is it? OK, is it what nature wants or is it something that we're creating that is heading us down a very dark path? I feel like it's not autism, but all of it in conjunction is the second one. It might be what the universe wants. It might be how it goes. Like there has to be some sort of a pathway from territorial primates to something new. Right? Does there? I think so. Yeah, because otherwise we would still be single cell organisms. Everything's moving in a general direction of more complexity. OK. That's fair. So if it's moving in a general direction of more complexity, and with all the technology that we're making, like we're moving into some fucking weird place, right? Wouldn't it be better if you just like easily accepted that? And what better way than if you're one of those dudes that's on the spectrum that loves to chill at home and play video games, just stare to screen. Doesn't really need a lot of human contact. Yeah. One of those fucking data wiggers, they're wearing a big color on the right now. Those fucking tech monkeys are what I have. Yeah, those guys are just all about it. They're all about it. They're wearing apple watches and the fucking everything is. Woop nachos. Woop nachos. They had to do with a fucking woop nachos. It was like, it kept updating on his watch. It's like, you're next to a broken or whatever. You got a woop cock ring. Yeah, it's crazy. You're fucking fucking robot. Bro, you're blink twice and you're fucking, yeah. It's huge GOP ones and you're not. It's just like it's all too, but it's happened too fast, bro, and it's too much and it starts to be like, is it being controlled? Dude, here's something that I'm being controlled by a small amount of people, which is always scary. That's scary. It's always scary when a small amount of individuals have insane amounts of power and wealth. And that's what's gonna happen with this AI thing, and that's what's happened with tech. Like, look what happened with tech. With tech, the vast majority of the people that are involved were all like heavily left-wing, very progressive, like I kind of even far left in a way. And look, they pushed the entire country's narrative in that direction through censorship on social media, through banning any accounts that didn't kind of commit to the narrative, rush a gate, get brush a gate, anything about Hunter Biden's laptop, anything about vaccines being deadly, or maybe it came from a lab, all that stuff would get you kicked off. So it was all moving in this one ideological direction. That's like literally the conversation of the entire country's happening, and there's no other output. Before, there was a few of them that came around, like GAB and some other ones, some social media sites that were like a response to that, but they never really took off, right? Not things are coffee-head. Not really. You know, there's some people that are on threads and some people on truth, but the reality is, if you're not on Twitter, you're not really gonna connect with most people. That's the giant majority of people having conversations, and it was all completely controlled by a small group of people with one ideology. But then didn't all those half of those people move over to the other political party when Trump got elected, like you know what I'm saying? Like Zuckerberg was on the left side. Bezos seemed like a very left-leaning guy, and then they're all just, so that's what made me start to think, oh, none of these guys are really on a side. There's this other third side that a lot of us can't see that is just kind of commandeering or fabricating or infiltrating both sides. If I could hum a song right now, I'd hum the pink-flood song, Money. Yeah. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Because that's what they were protecting that. Cata. That cash, baby. Protecting that cash. I mean, look at how many people are fucking moving out of all these states that are trying to impose wealth taxes. They're trying to steal money from the people that are the most successful. I was reading something about Massachusetts and how much this lady was reporting about how much Massachusetts lost from that. Because people leave the state. Their businesses leave the state. New York is having the same problem. Like Kathy Holtzled, lady. You know, now she's asking people, I don't know how to say her name, I don't care. Yeah, get a better name. Who cares what her name is? Yeah. Asking people to go to Palm Beach and tell people to come back to New York now because we're losing tax base, like come on. Of course, you're losing tax base. You can't just arbitrarily decide that because someone makes more money, they deserve to give you more money. And then what have you done with the money you have? That's the best part. Oh, a shit ton of waste and fraud. And have you corrected any of that? No. So your solution is what? More money? Yeah. Okay, fuck all the way off. Of course, these people are going to leave. You're a bunch of incompetent stooges and you're in charge of all the money in the state. And that's dumb. Yeah. And that's why Chevron moved out of California and Tesla moved out of California and in and out burger moved out of California. We moved out of California. We moved out of California. But we're people. We might as well be companies. We're small companies. But it's like, you can't just say, we're going to take more money and that'll fix it. But you don't think billionaire, yeah. Especially dude, what has happened? Like with this follow up to the Somali fraud. Like all of these fraud buildings where it's like blatant, there's no businesses. It's just a sign on the door and like, it feels like there's no follow up to it. There's some, there's some people that are being prosecuted right now. There is a bunch of investigations regarding Minnesota, regarding California. They're getting in there. They have to get in there now because it's been exposed nationally. But the real question is, how did it go on for so long? How did you allow it to happen for so long? They knew. Bro, you don't want to know like what's real bad? What's real bad is like the amount of money that California has wasted. If their solution is to try to tax people, if you ever seen like what they did with the high speed rail. Yeah, nothing. This bit bill is a $1. There's some guy who broke down how much China, how much high speed rail China did in the same time that it took California to do their high speed rail. It's actually funny. It's actually done. I've done some rail out of China. I'll tell you that. You can't get down there. I don't think it's the same stuff. Yeah, I think that's a good thing. But no, China dude, they're doing, dude, it's weird when you start thinking, hey, China looks like a good place to live. They've got their shit together. I'll tell you that. A lot of these places with kings, they really know how to run things. They do a real solid job. They have to be fucking dude. Poland's got their shit together, dude. They do have their shit together. And they were communists, not that long ago. Poland's got their shit. They don't let any of this influence. Spain, I feel like it's taking their shit back. True. They're picking up their toys. I gotta find this. Here it is. This is actually funny. When you see the comparison between what China's done and what we've done in the same a lot of time, yeah, it's actually kind of funny. Oh, I want to say thanks to this lady, Sarah Weichak. I just gave she just came and helped me get blood a little while ago. And she was just a nurse practitioner and you could tell she was just working hard. She hooked up. Yeah, she was just like showed up and just like just got it done for me. You could tell she's just like as a hardworking lady. I admire hardworking women. Oh, what about hardworking men? Do you like them? That's it, Jimmy. Well, they should be. So look at this. Things that happened faster than- Who just fucking goon or though, who's that dude? Is that milk? Fuck, he fell off. It happened faster than building the California high speed rail. China's entire high speed rail network of 30,000 miles. Our LA- In 15 years. I mean, we would have taken them two months. We buy going from barren desert wasteland to barren culture wasteland. Timothy Shoemes in higher existence. I bone one through 17 and the internet follow from more bullshit. I love that guy. That's Harrison Baum. Oh, that's crazy, isn't it? It's crazy. And they just took billions of dollars and taxes. And they're, oh, we're working on it. Yeah. But where everything is front- You're starting your mail- It's all fraud. But if it's not fraud, it's waste. And it's bureaucracy. So they keep the money coming in. So they keep people working, but the people don't do anything. And we can't even fucking keep the TSA workers. Dude, I fucking snuck a happy and full of goldfish. You know what fucking TSA workers are today? The edible ones. Just to fucking keep them going, dude, out there. They're not- They're not- I know. They just started getting back pay. But just crazy. But that's crazy. That's like crazy. Like that they're the least priority. Like bro, flying is fucking super important. You dummies. You want to keep the economy going? You got to let people fly around. They got shit to do, man. You can't just fucking not pay the TSA people. You fucking idiots. How come you get paid? Yeah. How come you get paid? I'm just sick of this shit. And I'm sick of rich people not putting their fucking kids over in these wars and shit like that. Put your fucking honky ass kids up there. Let them go shit. Some fucking blood. Especially if you're asking for it. Especially if you're out there fucking bullshit, dude. Put your fucking honky little fancy ass fucking kid up there. Man, shit makes me mad, bro. Well, I think there's also a problem. The people that I've talked to that have served overseas and have been involved and deployed in military operations and seen a lot of shit. There are a lot of them are the opinion that you shouldn't be able to make those decisions if you've never been to war. If you don't know what it is, you don't know what you're sending people to do. It doesn't mean you're not still going to be a tyrant because there are some people. Like clearly Netanyahu's been to war. He was in the military. He was involved in some shit. Was he? And he was like a special forces operator in Israel. And clearly he doesn't mind going to war. But this episode is brought to you by Manscape. Did you know that one man is diagnosed with testicular cancer every hour? In fact, it's the most common form of cancer among men ages 15 to 35. April is national testicular cancer awareness month. And Manscape is donating $50,000 to the testicular cancer society to support awareness and routine self checks. I'm proud to support something that helps make a real difference. You can also support the cause by purchasing a special edition TCS ball hero bundle. This bundle includes the lawn mower 5.0 ultra TCS special edition and special edition TCS boxers 2.0. Join the over 13 million men worldwide who trust Manscape and use the code Rogen 15 for 15% off your entire order and manscape.com. You can also visit manscape.com slash TCS to learn more about how to check yourself or make a donation at TCS society today to save lives and balls. I think most of you need term wars are fucking terrifying. But I mean, I don't know if the oven call it is war, but I mean what they're doing right now. Yeah, and I'm not joining you. Iran is war. That's war. Iran's a real enemy. You know, it's a different. Are they an enemy to America? Well, what they are is the largest country in terms of like state sponsored terrorism to the largest sponsor of terrorism. But also you got to think why. You know, and this is not excusing anybody for is islamist ideology because it's scary because they want to global caliphate, right? They're radicals. But you got to go back to what happened in that country. And if you go back to what happened in that country, they tried to nationalize oil. Iran was like a westernized country. Girls are wearing mini skirts. Oh, yeah. You see that video from the set on the wrong bro. Everyone's like popping. So popping when happening slowly but surely and quickly at first because when they tried to nationalize oil, yeah, the CIA swooped in and they fucking got that guy out of office and they allowed these Islamic, you know, radicalists to start running the country. Well, that's when they had a lot of started. Right. I don't know exactly when it has been started. But the point is the country was doing fine before we monkeyed with it and we monkeyed with it because they were not getting enough of the money from the oil. So was the British petroleum company, I think put it into perplexity the story of Iran. Their government being overthrown. I think it was in the 1950s. So when you see like how it all played out and why it is what it is today, Jesus Christ, you'd be mad too. Yeah. And when you're mad and you're surrounded by bigger enemies that all have nuclear weapons, you don't even have nuclear weapons. Wouldn't you be trying to make them? You know what I'm saying? Like I'm not saying you wrong should have nuclear weapons. I don't think anybody should have nuclear weapons. But Israel gets to have them. Allegedly, this is the problem. Allegedly. Everything is allegedly within. Allegedly. Except for the genocide. You know, they're not officially have them. Right. I don't think they have been there officially have them. And you know who is a big opponent of Israel getting nuclear weapons? JFK JFK. Okay. Yeah. That's why a lot of people think led back into the left. Before they killed him, who? I don't know. So the Iranian revolution, also called the Islamic Revolution was a mass uprising in Iran over through the Shah's monarchy in 1979, replaced it with an Islamic Republic led by Ayatollah Rula Khomeini. Shout out, Ruko. They call me. I want you to go back to the national ask it a question of what was the events that led to them trying to nationalize their oil? Here it is. No, that's on it. So what was a band real opposition, you see the police to surreal jail? I'll just put into asking another question. What were the events that took place after Iran tried to nationalize oil? Just ask that question. What are the events that took place when Iran tried to nationalize oil? Bro, fuck oil. I'd rather walk if this is a shit that's going to come out of all of it. You feel the problem is it's not just oil for your car. It's everything you use. Plastic is these petroleum-based chemicals are responsible for medicine. But it's also getting in our nuts now and people can't even fucking read anymore because of it. So it's like, what is all that stuff helping us anymore? Yeah, here it is. So Iran's attempt to nationalize its oil in the 1950s unfolded as a chain of political, economic and international confrontations, centered on Prime Minister Mohammed Mohsad, how do you say his name? Mohaday. Mohsaday. And we see. Mohsaday. Mohsaday. And British controlled Anglo-Iranian oil company, I'll walk you through the key events. But it had to do with who is in control of the oil before that. Like who is making the money before that? I think perplexity is going to give us the fucking tin foil hat story of how it went down. But the bottom line is, people are making a lot of money over there in oil and they wanted most of the money and they got boxed out. And then they wound up with a fucking psychotic dictator. Yeah. And a lot of the, I mean, if you look back on what Iran looked like when it was a westernized country, like, damn, we should have fucking supported whatever the fuck was going on back then. I know. I think, do you feel like we used to do things that were better? And then we got, uh, here's the tin foil hat version. I love how perplexity gives you a tin foil hat version. Nice. Uh, the store is basically Iran trying to take back its oil. The British and Americans teamed up in secret to crush that idea and send a warning to the rest of the world. Britain had built the senpai and Navy on cheap Iranian oil via the Anglo Iranian oil company later British petroleum company. So when Mogad Mosadek, I don't want to say his name, I keep fucking enough. London sought his direct threat to its global power and profits. Elite's feared that if Iran got away with nationalizing its oil, other countries, the Middle East would, uh, beyond, and beyond would copy destroying western oil monopolies. So they would determine to make Iran an example. Look, bro, we've been monkeying around with other countries forever. This thing in Venezuela, this real quick thing that happened real quick when they're a kidnapped dude in Venezuela. Like, well, a lot of it's safe because these are the, these are the countries that are still outside of the, um, Rothschild's banking system or whatever. Have you seen that thing? I have not where it's like, does the, the, the countries that are still not on that list or something? This is 10 foil stuff, I think. Or it's absolutely true. I have no idea. There's a lot going on right now, right? Like, you, but you're doing nothing. I'm scared. I'll be honest with you. Yeah. It should be. I'm scared. Well, it's, it's a scary time because this is a real, a scared war. People come up and people tell me about it. I wasn't an uber yesterday and there's a man in there. He was driving and, um, he's like, we need a revolution. You know, boy, he's like, you have a voice. He's telling me stuff like that. And I don't take goobers anymore and stop taking Uber's rent a car motherfucker. I'm not renting a car. Why would you rent a car? You don't rent cars? Bro, you think I'm going to go be it the, uh, branding a cars and saying if to check under, see if there's any dance in or if there's any like, and then, um, if you do all this stuff, renting a car's an eight-man. Dude, I will tell you this story though. One time we rent it, we did rent a car and we got to dent on it. Like a pretty good dang and we fucking, we had a, we caught a pigeon and had it shit over the dent to fill it in whenever we turned it in. No, you didn't. This is not a true story. Yeah, we did. You caught a pigeon? Yeah, you think it's hard to catch a pigeon? I do. Bro, bring up a pigeon, get in caught. You might find something a lot of them. Bro, yeah, but he raised them. Yeah, but dude, he just can autism in his hands. That's your whole couple of years. You don't think you think it's on the, catch a pigeon the dumbest bird ever did. And just put the shit over the dent. Yeah, you hang it over. Oh, the shit. How big was this dent we're talking about? Dude, these fucking pigeons shit all day, Joe. So you just hold them there until they're done? Yeah, what are you some kind of shit, copper, whatever? Yeah, we fucking put them over the dent, bro. That's why God wants you to help him. That's fine. Okay, this one's all fucked up, though. That's not fair. That's because he has American health care. Do not have health care. Dude, where's what I want to know? Like, I guess yeah, like, yeah, I don't know man. Everybody just feels scared and it makes sense. They should because a lot of things are getting exposed right now. You know, there's a lot of fraud and you're seeing it at the highest levels of government. And people are also scared because no one's getting in trouble for things. Like no one's getting in trouble for the Epstein files. No one's getting in trouble for. Yeah, that's almost disappear kind of. Well, part of what happens when there's some sort of a big social thing, one thing that's in the past that leaders have used to cover up problems at home is a fucking war. Not saying that that's why they bombed Iran, but that would be a way to do it. If you're that psychotic, you know, and if you were thinking about doing it anyway, you might be able to justify it. People have always done that also to stay in power. Oh, yeah. And even Bill Clinton said that about Netanyahu. Bill Clinton said Netanyahu wants war so he could stay in power. For sure, do people call him the Yamake Hitler? That's what we call these people. Everybody does. Which people? countless people. Huh? What are you saying? We mean people. He's like, no, what are you talking about? Like folks. No, I don't know what you're saying. I don't know what you're saying. I don't know what you're saying. Okay. What's not not draw conclusions? Okay. Okay. He seems like a great guy. No, really. Well, this is a scary time. It's a scary time because people are willing to blow people up with fucking drones and missiles and they're shooting into apartment buildings and blowing up schools and it's like, fuck man. And we didn't, I think that we've been poisoned. I do think that we've been poisoned. How long? Because I think that like we find out that our food is a lot of our food is poisonous, right? Or a lot of our food is not good for us. Yes, sorry. Not good for us. Yeah. So we have a healthcare, we have food that is made to be not good for us. And then we have a healthcare system that'll just kind of take care of you, right? Barely. So then you start to create this other like you're going to need your autism gang that are up there running shit. But then you're going to need this sort of like molluskey sort of like the worker bees. And that's what the rest of us start to become as worker bees because you're on an antidepressants killed like the vibe and the energy of so many people, right? Like the opioid epidemic, like you broke apart so many families and ruined hope and so many like kids and parents and homes and like the COVID where you shut down recovery rooms and places where people were meeting and so they were so disconnected. And then it's like you just you start to wonder why there's no uprisings because there's no, there's nothing rising up inside of you anymore because a lot of your, your vitriol has been killed. People are jerking off in the fucking robots and even just on car batteries and shitting some of those videos online. Car batteries? People will come on everything. What happens when you hit the two posts? This is just explode. Oh, I got to be grounded. I have to go. Yeah, right. That's a real fucking wheel. I want that joke coming back to the tip. Imagine if it was like one solid stream and the like. I gotta be grounded. I have to go. Yeah, that's a real fucking real. You don't want that joke coming back to the tip. You imagine if it was like one solid stream and electricity jumped. Yeah, made it back to the tip. But dude, that could happen too with that robot if you trying to hump that road. Right. And that short phone short out. Remember those old phones that would blow up in people's cars? Like the note it was one of the note series. Like people's cars would catch on fire if you left it plugged in. Yeah. What if that happens to your dick? And people would always say, you know what I'm saying? And people would always leave it plugged in next to their wife at night for fucking no reason. Right. On top of your wife. Just balance it on her. It just complains and lights around fire. But there's a successor. I think we've been poisoned just enough to like it feels like just to hurt, but not like we just have to start. I think it's a time where like we have to try and work on our and like look inside of ourselves. And I don't know. Do I sound fucking pretty? No. No, you don't sound pretty. But you were on the phone. I think you're on to something. There was some file. I didn't read it, but a bunch of people said it to me. I just went, oh Jesus. It was from the some freedom of information act or some leak from the 1950s. That he's in success with this. That he's in success with this. CIA. And they were trying to think of different ways to make people docile and stupid and unmotivated. And they were talking about different medications, putting stuff in food, all these different strategies to keep people stupid. Yeah. And this is our own government. Us, United States of America. Well, that's another thing. Is that not treasonous? I agree. So what? Yeah, it just feels like there's no recourse. And I know like you start to think, well, this is house a lot of people who live there entire centuries in different countries and stuff like that. Like they live under this type of oppression and like fear all the time. Because it feels new here. I want to know what, because you put that into our lovely sponsor, perplexity, and find out what the fuck was said in that CIA document. What were they actually planning? Because it's the idea that there's people in government that would just say, fuck millions of people in their potential in life. Let's tank their potential so that we can get our agenda through easier. Without them being upset. Let's ruin millions of people's lives, or at least dampen their dreams. I don't squash their hopes. Make them stupid and lazy. Make their kids sick. Make their, yeah, make it pornography and let it be into the home so that it's accessible everywhere. So marriage is getting ruined and relationships get ruined and guys are just spunking out on wherever. And so there's no energy. There's no like, there's no fucking desire inside of people to overcome. And it's like, yeah, we have to just try and do better one day at a time. For men like their ambition in life is often connected to wanting girls to like them. Or guys to like them, whatever it is. And purpose creating, but that's the other part. Purpose in creating is like the ultimate. That's like the ultimate is it's almost like you're doing a service. Whatever you're doing, if you're doing it your best, your real reward is that people enjoy it. Whatever it is. Whether you're a carpenter or a musician or whatever it is. If you're doing something at your best, the ultimate reward is people enjoying it. That's the ultimate enjoyment. But you have to figure that out in life. You're probably thinking of declassified CA mind control and behavior modification experience like Bluebird, Artichoke, Artichoke is it. Especially MK Ultra, which did run in the 1950s and 60s. Okay, Bluebird, MK Ultra. What does make people stupid and cognition? CIA efforts to use drugs, hypnosis and other techniques. No, that's the interrogation. That's different. Perfect concussion effort. Often referenced alongside MK Ultra, explicitly explored using sub-oral blast to erase memory. Woe. Erasing or degrading memory is practically a way of disabling a person cognitively. Even if that is not described as making them stupid in official language. Yeah, we're just, it feels like we're just stuck in an experiment. I feel like this is not it. This isn't it. No. This was so fun. Why don't you run a search for recently disclosed CIA files to make people... I mean, I had docile in first. I tried looking on Twitter. Okay, using, put in using vaccines to make people stupid or suggesting vaccines make people stupid. Why? Because it's taking me to somewhere, talk about it some face. Perfect. I love Facebook. But the conspiracy theorists are looking pretty sane right now. Okay, this is EV magazine. Okay. What's going on here? You have to just type in your email or the one you want. But you're saying that things you're saying, I don't think that all. That doesn't seem like an American idea to me. This is okay, Jimmy. Okay. But no, it's not an American idea. If you can't find it, please do. Can you do Google too or you can't do it? Yeah. Just look everywhere. Have you noticed some things are harder to find? Yeah. Well, this is probably going to be hard to find because I think this is one of those ones that is like... I don't know if you've seen it been verified. This is one of the reasons why I wanted to put it through perplexity. Because there's a lot of stuff you read that just complete hurt especially today. April Fools motherfucker. Is it? It's April Fools. Yeah. Don't get tricked. Oh, stay off the night. I just gave some random lady my blood in the parking lot. Oh, no. She's going to use that for a ritual. Good clone, you son. You got little baby Theos, like those little videos that pop up of us. Yeah. My favorite part of the video is at the end when you just kind of bounce out of your hair. What happens so hard? Is this it? This is it. Mmm. Okay. What does it say? I'm going to talk about Project Artichoke. Mmm. What does Project... what does it say essentially? That's Kim Iverson. She's pretty good. White Iverson. Artichoke. So this says, look, we've got this brand idea of how we're basically going to drug people and do all kinds of weird experiments on them to see if we could control their mind. These documents don't show that anything was actually done. It just shows that we've got these really crazy ideas. And they're extremely unethical inhumane, terrible, terrible ideas. The 1977 leak of documents say, oh yeah. Well, actually the government did it. They did all of those terrible things. They said they were doing in that previous memo. They did it. And now here's some of the archives that we have from when they did all of those terrible things. So okay, these documents, special research for Artichoke dated April 21st of 1952. The memo proposes developing long-term covert drugs that could be slipped into daily life. Drugs that were, quote, administered over considerable period of time, possibly being placed in food or water that caused either agitation or depression. These drugs should include chemicals or drugs that can be effectively concealed in common items such as food, water, Coca-Cola, beer, liquor, cigarettes, etc. And should also be capable of use in standard medical treatments such as vaccinations and shots. We can do all this other experimentation, which nobody will know about at Sneaky. Sneaky, sneak it into their Coca-Cola, sneak it into their beer, their cigarettes, their vaccines, their medications. Let's sneak it all in. Oh, as well, conspiracy theorists, they strike again. They have no morals. They have no ethics. They have no humanity. These documents, I mean, these people are inhumane. They're sick. They're twisted. This is terrible. Yeah. Way to go, Kim Iverson. You should kill that. She used to be on what show is she on? Not breaking points. What was the show that they did before breaking? Myverson. It wasn't 227. Was she up? She got booted off because Fauci was coming on. And she wanted a question Fauci about the COVID vaccines. And they kicked her up the show and she went independent. Good for sure. She's how it always goes. Yeah, you can't talk too much shit. Even though it's pretty obvious that guys are criminal, pretty fucking obvious that guys are lying in front of Congress was responsible for gain of functioned research that led to who knows how many fucking people dying of a man made disease, whatever, whatever. Just don't question, you can't work here anymore. You're not playing ball. You're not playing alone. Like look, but now she can do stuff like this. Good for her. That's nuts that your tax dollars pay for that. Them figuring out how to make people stupid. How do I make the O stupid? Let me slip something into his Coca-Cola. Let's figure out if it works. Let's experiment on random people and see what kind of results we get. And here's my question. Did you know whenever they introduced antidepressants, that changed the cognitive therapy side of things like in therapist's office. It totally revolutionized, like industrialized therapy. And it ruined a lot of people, I think. One of my goals is to get off of antidepressants completely, man. I want to feel how I'm supposed to feel. So I can have thoughts and actions that make me feel connected to the world. That shit makes you feel dead, man. So why did you take them in the first place? Because I was in a bad relationship 20 years ago, and I was having a tough day at school. And they bought a book. They gave them to me and that I never got off. Really? Because when you get off, I think we talked about this once it's hard. Yeah. And you're more depressed, more fucked up. And you're all in balance and you're probably addicted to them. Yeah. And so that's one of my goals is, and I noticed, like, for me, I've been taking like, metal blue, I've been doing some things like, and I'm working with a doctor to help me. But I want to, I'm going to get there. And I'm just going to start to take the power back of myself more. Well, they say that exercise is like many times greater in its effect at alleviating depression. And I wake up and I do my yoga and I do like a 35 minute workout. I'll do like six exercises, five runs of it in a row. That's 30 exercises burned through them bitches. And I'm, and I'm, if I do that when I get up in the morning, bro, I am good. Yeah. I'm fine all day. And I'm also more positive. Because I've already taken care of myself in a way that I feel is sufficient enough for me to keep operating and moving forward. Yeah, I want to get away from the met. Well, that's the medicine, man, which is really crazy. That's the medicine. It's just hard for people to take because it requires effort. And it requires discipline. You have to do it when you don't want to do it. And there's a lot of times you're not going to want to do it. A lot of times you're feeling kind of fucking tired. And we have to, and I think that's what we have. Maybe we just have the like, I just need to, I just need to keep going. This is the best I've been doing. Why don't you hire a trainer? You got some cheddar. You got some cash. And you're making that payback. Why don't you hire a trainer? I do. I hire a dude that's cool. That'll come over your fucking house. You have much of my body. You don't have to touch your body. Some of them do. Well, you got to get new ones. They're doing something wrong. But some of them have to say no. I am saying no. You have to mean no. No. Don't touch my butt when I'm in a deep squat. It doesn't help. I don't like that. That's all. I'm going to take your ass all. It's going to make you want to explode to the top. Ready? Go. He's knuckle deep in your bung hole. Trying to convince you that it's so you can get more reps. He's shocking. That's got to happen. Like a fucking big jack gay trainer. I like praise on guys that are kind of weak with small hips. He's like, I bet you can't do this with my cock in your butt. And you're like, that's a crazy. Who cares? Why are you suggesting he does that? Yeah. But the crazy part is dude, I had to train in one time if you were doing like a dumbbell press. He would kind of squat you from he would help you from the elbows kind of. Okay. That's fine. But wait, I noticed this one time. He was dick runs your butt. Did he? He was right behind you. No, we didn't. I don't know. You're blocking it out. Maybe that's why you need to hurt. No. No. If some I know all the dicks I've ever seen in my life, dude. All of them. Yeah. How many have you seen? Honestly. Not that many. Live and in person. Count him on one hand. Probably. Give me some listen to handful of dicks and two of them are aries. I'm going to put them on three. Aries pissed and fucking. Kabucha bottles in this room so many times. He is such an animal. He is kombucha. He is kombucha in him. I thought he'd do it. He doesn't have piss anymore. It's fermented or something. No, but this guy would touch my elbow and he would kind of like must he would do a slight like massage on him. And that's when it kind of cooked me up. You got a vape in your butt chance? No. You got this. You want to cigar? You got smelling salts. You want to cigar? No, they make me sick. They do? Yeah, it makes me sick. I was so sad. Sad. Yeah. I give up on those nicotine vapes are very addictive. Yeah. Boy. I know. They make you grab for them. You want to take a hit off of them. Even if I decided at one point in time I'm not taking these anymore. I'm stopping with these. I remember, dude, remember you and I were using one time. I kept using that thing and yeah. Oh, dude. There's something in them. It's not just nicotine. It's like these things. Like, Alps? I have no problem not taking these. I went on a trip with a 10 day trip. I didn't bring any nicotine pouches. I didn't miss it at all. I was fine. Well, I'll say this, but not those vapes do. Those vapes call you. Yeah, sometimes it's a lot, bro. They call you. But yeah, you got to kind of manage it or whatever, bud. Yeah, you ain't managing shit. You're right. You're right. You're right. I'm right. I'm a hot man. OK, girl. No, I think at all the things that are not a drug drug, but nicotine is kind of a drug, but you know, obviously it could be totally functional on it. That's the one in the vapes that it's the most addictive. And it, but yeah, you're talking about like recreations have not like antidepressants, things like that. Oh, yeah. Of course. Of course. Yeah, but here's the thing about the man. They're only good for one hit. Yeah. It's the first hit of the day. The first hit off of a vape is fucking wonderful. Yeah. You're like, oh, yeah. I'll blow that smoke on your mother son. Nature just shines down upon you. Just feel relaxed. But it's only one. After that, you're just chasing that dragon and you keep you're not getting anything out of it. Yeah. Everything you're just getting like nervous. And you're like hitting it again. You're fucking hands are shaking. You're good. You fart. But you don't get that one feeling. It's the same thing with a cigarette. Yeah. With a cigarette, really, what you want is the first couple of hits. Yeah. And you get that lightness of head like, ah, and then put it down. Yeah. The problem is you're always chasing that dragon and you never get it. That's why everybody loves the first cigarette of the day. They sit there with that first cigarette day and a cup of coffee and they're like, I got ideas. Yeah. Like I got fucking ideas. Down, right this down. You know, a lot of bands wrote most of their music on cigarettes. Like Tony was talking about Pink Floyd. Dude, the declaration of head and pants people are all being hit in cigarettes back then. For sure. There's no back. There's no back. Yeah. I don't know if they did pipes or what have you back then. I wonder when the cigarette was invented. Because if you think about like pipes and cigars, you don't inhale. You just take it in your mouth. But cigarettes, you like take into your lungs. I wonder when the first dude figured that you got to like suck it all in to get a full in. Probably. Probably sure. He wanted to suck everything. Oh, cigarette bananas. What happened? They were smoking cigarette. Just as drinking smoke. When Christopher Columbus and his crew discovered indigenous people in the Caribbean. Oh, you mean Christopher Columbus was or the indigenous people are they observed indigenous people in the Caribbean in quotes drinking smoke. Oh, yeah. He wasn't going back that. That's a good idea. I'll be drinking and smoking. Chris Coe was off that shit bro. He was off that shit bro. You ever read the things that Christopher Columbus did when they came to America? He was a boss. I heard he was an evil man. Was he? Oh my god. They would cut people's arms off if they didn't bring them the right amount of gold. They were killing babies like they did some horrific shit man. Huh. They did horrific shit. Maybe the people that they found. because they found these people had gold. And you know, they like if you think about how crazy it is that Mexico speaks Spanish. You know crazy that is no crazy it is that's so far away from Spain. Oh, I think it's great. They all speak Spanish in their Catholic. Gee, where are you thinking that happened? Cortez. Yeah, that motherfucker showed up in the 1500s with like 600 dudes and 12 muskets. They had like 12. They didn't even have musket rifles. They had musket pistols. He was a boss. And they took over the whole fucking country. I know, kind of crazy. Like if you think about all these years later, they all speak Spanish now. Yeah, that's nuts. Well, do you think we could do something like that now? Like what do you think is going to happen with Iran? No, just without me. Like I feel like the shit that's happening out there is going to come here eventually. Well, most certainly will. Yeah, you know. I mean, if Homeland Security doesn't stop it in its tracks and they're doing it. a great job of preventing a lot of them. You know, there's a lot of things that they catch that you don't even hear about that are like terror cells. They infiltrate and but they know there's people in this country. That was the most fucked up thing about people being all nonchalant about the board to be in wide open for four years. Yeah. Because men of military age entered into this country from foreign countries and we have no idea why. We don't know if they're just honest people looking to make a better life for them and their families and money back home. That'd be best case scenario. But that's not all of them. So what percentage of them are terrorists? What percentage of them? There's not it's not zero. It ain't zero. Yeah. But what also it's like it's all just a cat and mouse game people are like, we'll like the Democrats next time it's like, but it's all the same shit has been happening forever. They haven't been helping anybody forever. They're letting fucking politicians slurp on kids. All of our fucking money goes to Israel and they're using it to fucking genocide people. It's like everybody is scared out of their wits right now. It's like our religious leaders are afraid to speak out and it's like the it's a time where it's like Satan is amongst us. And our religious leaders are fucking talking about bullshit at the pole. It's just like what is going. I don't know man. You gotta get you out for the president's son. You're losing your fucking marbles. You think I am? Come hang out with us. Just chill out. I'm here. Just chill out of the mothership tonight. I do have to pee in a little while, but you can pee. I'm going to pee in a minute, man. We'll let you. But no, people are just scared, dude. This is shit that I hear from you. They won't let you pee until you give them your guns. Really? That's how they're doing it now. But what if you have to wash the black face off the president? Can you find yourself a bit of piss? You know, can you have this big dude? They had this big gun thing. This law they passed where they made a bunch of guns illegal. And they found that only I think it's less. It's a very small percentage of people. I think it's somewhere in the neighborhood. Find out what percentage of people have complied. But I think they need guns. Oh, they do. Yeah, they do. They did. They used to. Well, a lot of hunters up there for sure. But there's a lot of recreational guns and handguns and self-defense weapons that people had that they recently made during Castro's kid when he was running the country when they recently made this ban. I got to meet Castro once a year. I want to hear that. No, I want to hear that. But once I could. But data provided by Public Safety Canada shows that of March 27, 32,406 people signed up to participate in the program. They declared a total of 5,545 firearms, roughly 42% of what was projected. But they were talking about, oh, you know, as it on this page is Colionne War. He has it here. I'll send it to you because we got to do this in Memphis, dude. It's kind of crazy. Yeah, you can't let them take away your weapons. No, because how will you fight? That's a very good question. Yeah, I saw Colionne's video. Here it is. No. Yeah, this is it here. Play this type shit ready. Well, Miss response. Cool. We're sending police to your house. The declaration period for firearms owners is scheduled in next week. So far, only 2.5% of the estimated 2 million affected firearms have been declared. 2%, 98% of firearms owners have made a declaration. Canada ban 2,500 types of firearms. They gave gun owners until March 31st essentially today to declare them. One week before the deadline, 2.5% compliance. 2, 5, that's not a slow rollout. That's a full-on rejection. So if they're not declaring by next week, what's your plan, Minister? The plan we have is as of March 31st, the time to complete the enrollment will be done. And then the RCMP and other agencies will be available throughout the spring of the summer to do the collection. The collection? Wow. Like he's speaking about dry cleaning, not firearms, not property that belonged to law abiding citizens. The government decided to do it anymore. So, Minister, you're saying that her CMP members, we just heard an auditor general report saying, we're short 3,400 members. We're dealing with a wave of violent crime across this country. And you're saying that your plan is over the spring in the summer to deploy our CMP officers to go door to door to firearms owners and seize their firearms. So this is a voluntary program, Mr. Lloyd, as you're aware. And the RCMP resources and the resources we will use with law enforcement does not contemplate in any way using existing resources. These are additional resources. So these are those who are off duty, those who may be retired. Go back to the mechanism to do that. They're going to take away tire and that people who are doing that. We're going to say, new ice, there's those doors door to door because there are frankly many police forces across the country refusing to participate in your program. And here's the part that should make your job in the floor. The Minister of Public Safety, the guy running this entire program, was secretly recorded saying the gun grab isn't worth the money. The Minister of Public Safety accidentally told the truth and he was recorded doing it. He said that the gun grab is not worth the money. He doubts local police will have the resources to enforce the Liberals' mandatory gun buy back program and says the reason the Prime Minister is sticking with the policy is to appease voters in Quebec. He probably admitted the police can't even- Look at his face. He said they're doing it. The face that they bring votes in the back of the state- The guy? Look at the face. This isn't the morale of us. They gave the worst thing. Go back to his name. If he can't, it was on and on that. Did he get he. Whatever his name is. I want him to go door to door. He could go door to door. He could go door to door. You could go door to door. You could go door to door. But you want to do that. Tell you how you do it. He's talking about getting retired people to go go door door and take people in. You're going to get someone shot stupid. Well, it's just like our draft now. They're like now it's 42 now it's 47 now we have a marijuana rest now. They're letting anybody in that video. A little weed with the big. But dude, here's the here's the here's the part to me that's like you start to see like the uh, chunk in the armor or whatever in no offense anybody. Um, but you're allowed to say that. Chinking the armor. But they know who they know who they think or if I'm not saying anything about it. I know you're not. But people think that I'm not. Yeah. I hear you. But they but you can't say spickens man anymore either. You can't say spickens man. Well, you can't. But you shouldn't. You got to whisper. Hey, that guy should be forced to go door to door. Go door to door. Right. Orange vest with a circle in the center of it. Yeah. I was just going to get his name because I wanted to say that guy's a pussy and go do your own shit. That fucking that freaking little. Doughboy. Yeah, that little fucking that little sloppy grand muffin. Yeah. I can slap you muffin top. Yeah. Get your that's his name right there. Gary. And I'm going to disagree. And that's when I said, uh, Gary and non-dissog. Gary can it. They're going to come for you next. But here's what's here's what's funny. That's such a crazy. You can't. You know, I mean grandfather and people in mandatory gun confiscation. Okay. Just want people vulnerable. Of course. That's what we're saying, man. Yeah. You know, that's what we're saying. They want us all vulnerable. Yeah. They do. They would much rather that because look, what's it ever? What's the difference in America and everywhere else? One of the big differences were fucking heavily armed. Right. That's one of why it's real, a real problem to try to take over America. And it's in our declaration kind of independence. It's in the Bill of Rights. It's like that this, you know, the right to an armed militia, the right to keep them bare arms and to have an arm militia. Like that's what is the, and people are like, what is that for? Well, that's to keep you from being taken over by right. Tyrant. So we have guns. Yeah. Well, here's here's one of the case interesting to me is like RFK was on that long ago. And he was saying that 70, 5% and I could be off by a few percent of young men can't. Art. Aren't eligible for military service. Yeah. So this is the hilarious part to me now. Now they've poisoned us so much that they can't even, they don't even have healthy people to serve in the military. And now they're still like, I feel like these powers that be are like in this tough spot. Now we're like, fuck, we poison them too much. Right. They can't even go spill their blood for us. You know, well, they can't. I mean, there's enough that can, but they're widening these things. It's like with the ice now that like if you're 65 and like have decent vision, you can be an eye. You know, they're letting it. It's just like it kept getting bigger. Ice, you only have seven weeks of training. Yeah. That's not even what you get on the police force. Yeah. We had more than that for fucking T ball when I was a kid. And Mr. Rick, do you remember when you had T ball in your coach is just some dude who had a name? Like that's our coach. Imagine this. Imagine if you had seven weeks of training and you had to go into a jujitsu tournament. I know you would get fucking smoked. You would get fucking smoked. You don't know what you're doing. You barely know what you're doing. You're gonna make a bunch of mistakes. Seven weeks of training in that is even scarier because you got, you got guns and you're going out in the street and you're arrested people. Yeah. That's, but it's all, it's like it, not more than ever. It feels like theater and it feels like it's been theater for a while. And it feels like, maybe this is crazy, but it feels like we're at the last cusp before something weird is gonna happen. Didn't you say something weird might happen, Jamie? Jamie's always saying that. Jamie's always, he's tuned in. Is he like that? Jamie's got an ear for weird. Even blacks are getting scared though for real? Yeah. Yeah, but they're more scared of like the Trump movement. You know, totalitarianism and fascism. No. I think they're getting, you know, they see these ostracized, they see these communities of people out there getting abuse and shit and I think it reflects in them somewhere. You know, you mean, look with ice, is that what you're saying? No, with like, uh, like, you know, you see, you know, there's a lot of brown people getting murdered on fucking TikTok all the time. Like, you know, in the Middle East and I think you see that and it makes them hype or, you know, it activates. Well, everybody should be upset about that. I agree. But I, the idea that there's the only way to solve problems is by dropping bombs on people is it's so crazy that's still the move in 2026. But I don't think it's however, but however, if you are faced with an evil dictator that has his eyes on a global caliphate and is developing nuclear bombs, you can't be all fucking kumba. Yeah. But the question is like, how did, how does that get resolved? Right. That's a question. How do you make sure? How can you even know that's what I can ask capable of having nuclear weapons? And for the last 20 years, they've been preparing and stockpiling missiles and developing, what is the, they have some crazy thing I was seeing online where it's like, they almost like have a mountain and dug deep into the ground. They have these missile elevators and like the missiles are like hidden deep into the ground where the only way you could destroy that facilities with like a nuke. And they just did it specifically knowing that they were going to get bombed. Well, they had the, you know, they did top gun movie where Miles tell her flew in there. And then a year later, we did that in, or a few years later, we did that in Iran. Like isn't it kind of like it just it all seems bizarre where they had a fire and nuke or they had a fire missile down into the thing member. I didn't see that movie. It was good. I bet it was. It actually was good. I like the first one. Oh, we made a movie too. I got to tell you about our movie. I can't forget. Oh, that's right. You made a movie. Yeah. I'm in interrupt about it. But let's find out what, what was I asking before we moved on? Any in missile thing? Yeah. What is that elevator thing that they have? They have some underground like deep underground. Someone was explaining it online. They have a very unique method of protecting their missiles from being bombed. So they have their storage is like deep, deep underground. I think that's one of the things that they were just attacking recently. Like we were their missiles from being bombed. So they have their storage is like deep, deep underground. I think that's one of the things that they were just attacking recently. Like we were dropping bombs on them recently. I don't think we're over there doing that for ourselves though. Doesn't seem like it doesn't seem like it's in our best interest. You know? Why do you think? What is it that like Israel holds over America that we do those things? Well, first of all, there's a lot of people that donated to the Trump campaign that have significant influence over him. Yeah. That lobby for Israel. Right. And they're very beholden. So that's just capitalism then, right? So IDF uncovers Iran missile megacities. I don't believe anything they say. It's hard to know, because this is all AI, right? Is this real? It looked like it was, but this is real. I have that. Honestly, this looks AI. I think it's a lot of it does look AI, but that video of those guys who are grateful. It's so hard to know these days, man. It's so hard to know. You know, this is like if I was Iran, I'd make a video like that. Look at all of my bums. Look at my big cock. And look at my bums. Kind of a big old dick. Big old dick, like a third leg and a bunch of bums. I'm fucking sick of my dick. Really? Give it a break. No, I don't know. I don't know for a couple days and you miss it. Oh, I've had a lot of thoughts out here. Yeah. Dude, I'm vacation from your dick. Bro, there's times I wanted to just mail my dick to Africa or whatever. Don't just feed cover sending back. But I'm saying to feed a couple people. I don't think it'll feed a couple. Why? You don't do it. I don't even think feed one. I might keep them alive for a few hours. Bro, it would be lunch, at least lunch for two. Someone on a diet. No. Someone cutting away for wrestling. Yeah. Or that dude that tried to cut weight because he wasn't gay anymore. I told you about that dick. He lost 40 pounds. Did he was just fucking ribs and dick by the end of me. Dude, I got you really back in a day. Yeah, yeah. Paul, we'll be right back ladies and gentlemen. We'll be right back. Theo Vaughn, David Spade, bus boys, in theaters, April 17. Did you finance this dude? Did you fucking do this shit with your own money? Yeah. You wild motherfucker, you. Wow. We wrote it and we did it all. There's no studio attached to it. There's nobody. Oh, he's doing it. Tim did a good job. He's awesome. He is awesome. He really is. He's my, uh, he's one of my favorites. Yeah, no doubt. He's one of a kind. Is that an eight deal? Bro, he was, uh, he was. He was Lewis Jay? Uh, whoa. No, who's in a cam Patterson Trevor Wallace? Nice, dude. What's it about? It's about two guys and their bus, their just regular guys. And they're not doing that good. And then, um, they think if they can, one of them loses his girlfriend to a waiter. And they think if they can become waiters, that they can get his girlfriend back. And, uh, they have to start at bus boys. And then we'll get very far. So that's pretty much it. It was crazy. I mean, I think there's just like a thing about like, like nobody like it's just, we made it ourselves. Like we wrote it, we did it. There's no fucking, somebody saying, I can't put this in it. Like some of the streamers are like, nah, it's too edgy for us or whatever. Fuck them then. You're out. You know what I'm saying? We're doing our own shit. And so did you sell it to a movie distributor? How did you get it into movie theaters? We just, um, I don't know how that any of that stuff works. I don't know either. We have a guy who's doing a handle on some of the business side of it. Mm. As for an Ezra's handle on some of the business side of it, he's great. And so he's been helping us out and gotten it into the theater. Who directed it? Um, it's got Jonah fine gold. This, uh, got of New York. And um, great guy. Uh, and yeah, we just, we asked our friends to help and it was, um, yeah. I mean, it was ridiculous. We shot it right during like the fires that when the fires were happening in the palace. Hey, oh, wow. So it was like, it was shot at in California. Yeah. Wow. I don't know why exactly, but um, oh, cause there was nothing shooting there. They don't shoot things there anymore. Isn't that crazy? Imagine people have been so greedy and fucking attacked. They fucked themselves so much. They can't even fucking do their, the one thing that they're most known for Hollywood. They can't even fucking do it. It's so crazy. It's not just crickets, but it's gross. It is gross. It's all the government. It's all government. So government policies, regulations, taxes, all the things that make it unprofitable to do business there. People just pulling up shop. And there's all these, yeah, there's so many guild you have to pay. I don't see how these people, I don't see how like a day to day actor could survive. And they don't, and they leave. A lot of guys are fucked. I was just watching this video with this guy. I've seen him in a ton of movies. And he's like, blue collar actors are just not doing well right now. He's like, I had to sell my house. You know, a lot of people are just going to television shows because there's no money in films anymore. And he goes, I used to be able to make a living in films. And he's like, I didn't make a lot of money because you just, you know, the guy who's a small part in movie here, small part in movie there. So he's getting by. And he's, you know, gets to take his family to the movie and they get to see the dad on screen. It's cool. But he's not getting wealthy, right? The stars get wealthy. But those do's that you need, you know, the guy that plays the cop, the guy that plays this person, those guys are fucked. Well, I have the name of everybody that was in it. Everybody that worked on it, if we have some success, I'm going to go back and reward those people, man. And I'm excited about that. And yeah, if people, even if it just does good, then we can make other stuff. Right. And nobody can tell us that we can't. Yeah, once you do one that's good, then more people are interested in investing. You know, gets, get your foot in the door. Yeah. You do a Netflix series. You do anything you want. And it's not like done Kirk. I don't know if only when they really get into that, like that much acting stuff. But it was just like, you know, I grew up watching Davis Bay. We got to do it together and we just went through all of these hurdles and then like, uh, the fact that we got it done, dude, I thought it was all emails till the first day I showed up on set and I was like, no fucking way, we were serious. People were serious about this. Oh, that's crazy. You did it. But yeah, I think so. Yeah, something like that. I think there's something like that. And, uh, and if people, if people can buy a ticket early to it, I don't want to sound dead. I'm not, I'm not desperate about it. If it does find that's cool and if it doesn't, that's okay too. I feel happy that we got to do it. If it's funny, it'll do great because there's not a lot of these days. There's not a lot of really funny movies. Yeah. And I know it's going to be funny. There's parts that are really, really funny. I'm sure it's not like done Kirk or anything like that. It's not like mid-somber or whatever. Those things that you just said, those are just other movies. But it's an, I don't want people going there thinking it's like, um, like, uh, trying to think of, uh, bridges, like bridges in Madison County. Yeah. It's nothing like that. It's a common. It's a common. It's a common. It's, you and David Spade, who the fuck is going to think it's Clint Eastwood and Meryl Streep? Yeah, I don't wrong with you. I don't know what people think. I don't know what people think or how they think. But yeah, anyway. But yeah, there's some fucking retarded stuff. It's just fun. You know, you used to have a great joke about bridges in Madison County. Chris McGuire. He had a fucking great joke. Dude, it's one of my favorite movies. Congratulations. Let me tell you his joke. His joke is about how, you know, it's hard to choose a movie with your girlfriend. She wants this and he goes, bridges in Madison County. He's like, oh, Clint Eastwood's in it. He's like, Clint would never fuck me. And he goes, 10 minutes into the movie. He's like, hey, something's fishy. Clint doesn't have a gun. 20 minutes after that, Clint's crying. Like, oh, Clint, you fucked me. He goes, he's crying because he doesn't have a gun. Such a great joke. Yeah, that's not to Chris McGuire. Shout out to Chris McGuire. I had to met him. You never met him? I had a funny dude. We started out together way back in the day. But he went, yeah, he went the route of writing. He mostly writes and stuff now. But it was a funny comic, man. It was a good comic. But these fucking comedy movies are squashed. We were just talking about that last night in the green room. Where it seems like the hangover was probably the last gasp. And that was like 2009. But what happened? Like how could you go there? People got scared. You got scared of a fair. 100% organized. Whoa, no, it's woke. We did comedy with our people. They're not going to be the last. They didn't think. They didn't think. It's woke ideology that's looking to yell at people for every, oh, yeah, transgression. And you can't have that with comedy. You can't have that kind of nonsense with a really funny movie. Like something about Mary or King Penn. King Penn. Classic, fairly brothers movies. Oh, so good. How great was that? Great fucking movie. Great fucking movie. That movie's so good, so funny. Even to this day, go back and rewatch it. Bill Murray was crazy fucking hair. Woody Harrelson with one hand. It's a great movie, man. When he had to go down that lady to pay his rent, and he threw up in the toilet, maybe that scene. That movie's 30 years old now. And is it? That's crazy. That is crazy. It's a banger of a movie. All the good shit's gone, dude. But it's not true. It's not good in that attitude where it's like, I got to stay out of those little moments. I usually get out them pretty quick. But you can still do those movies, but you have to do it the way you just did it. You have to finance it yourself. And you have to do it. But luckily now, man, you could shoot a whole fucking movie on your phone. Do we shut this bitch in 23 days, dude? There was one day where the winds were like 50 miles an hour. It was like, we can't afford to be here another day. So suddenly, in these scenes, there's just a ton of fucking wind, dude. Well, that's fine. That shit happens in the real world. I'm sure I can't have it in your show. I agree. It was just, I think it was just interesting how it all worked out. People are making their own stuff. No one goes talking to Shane about this last night. Because Shane just wrapped up tires. This is just some tires. Yeah. Yeah, he was, he fucking, he was telling me some hilarious scenes from tires. I can't wait to watch it. But it's like that kind of a thing where just him and his buddies put together a show. Yeah. You know, it's like his buddies, the writer and the director, all his buddies are on it. They all came up with the idea. They do it themselves. No one's looking over their shoulder. I asked him if Netflix has any input. He's like, no, there's no input. They just make a show. They just make a show. That's fun. Give it to Netflix. Bang. It's a beautiful time for stuff like that. Yeah, you're right. There's a new, it's a primavera, they say, in Spanish. It's a springtime for new things. Well, there's an opening, right? And because there's no gatekeepers anymore, because it essentially killed their own business, you can kind of do it on your own now. Yeah. That's the beautiful thing. Like you don't have to sit in a room full of fucking executives. They don't know Jack shit. And they want to give you direction on what's funny and what's not. And where's the diversity in your film? Yeah. You know, we think you should have a black trans friend. Like, oh, yeah, we think you should have a faggot ant or whatever. Like the insect or whatever. And I'm like, that's crazy. You're like, this is a script about drivers and like, but you need an insect. That's a homorotic. It's just people got stupid. They got stupid with their virtue signaling in films. And you can't do that with art. You can't have, you see what the Academy Awards doing? Like in order to qualify to be nominated for an Academy Award now? Well, for the podcast thing, I know they said we had to pay a fee or something. I mean, you talked about that. That's a different, that's the golden globe. OK, sorry. Yeah. That's a different thing. Yeah. You didn't pay for that either, did you? No. Did they ask you to? Yeah. Fuck you, dog. Give me some. Yeah. Fudge off. I said so what? Yeah. And I'm like, I was like, if Joe Rogue, if you don't even have him in it, then what are you even making a thing? That was also a reason why I didn't want to be in it. Like, I don't want to legitimize this. You guys have fucked up every other form of entertainment and now you're going to judge podcasting. Yeah, I think so. And what did you pick? Like, I'm not saying there's anything wrong with Amy Polish, though. I haven't watched it. People love it. That's great. But she's like a famous lady who just started doing podcasting six months ago. Right. But she's got the number one podcast. Like, if you guys ever listen to Radio Lab, you ever listen to this is some banging fucking podcast out there. They might not be number one. But if your whole idea is like pick the ones that are great, that are like really interesting, how stuff gets made, there's a bunch of fucking great podcasts. Smartless is cool. There's a bunch of great podcasts out there. Oh, dude, there's so many great ones, dude. Matt McOsker is playing. Oh, yeah. How fun is he, little is awesome. He's fun. He's a good dude. I'm glad he's out here. He's a special dude, man. Yeah, very smart guy. You know, yeah. It's, uh, there's a lot of great podcasts that Tim Dylan's on that list. Fuck off. Yeah. If he's on that list, fuck off. Yeah. Fuck off. Yeah, fuck. That is the one podcast I consistently listen to Tim Dylan. That's awesome. His episode on the Epstein files is one of the best fucking podcasts I have ever listened to. I was like clapping in my car at red lights. Yeah. Just clapping. Like, whoo, he was, he was on fire. And it was the perfect combination of satire, honest, real facts, complete chaos, humor, wearing those goofy glasses, ranting like a maniac. It was amazing. Yeah, man. I do feel lucky that I've gotten to meet like just, that's one of the truest things I think through comedy is getting to meet some, just some fun people do. We know some cool motherfuckers. We really do. We know some cool motherfuckers. We really do. And thanks, dude. Thanks for letting me come in here today. Come on, dog. And to spend time with you. Come on, dog. It's good. It just feels things feel kind of scary out there. Well, it's a little, also scary. I keep telling you this because you're on your own out there. Yeah, we're living in Nashville. I'm getting close to being here. You know, a lot of comics out there, dog. I mean, our gotsies out there, but he's always doing fucking stadiums on the road and shit. Yeah. Like, you need to be around. Well, I'm getting ready. The crew. Because I have to start to practice again. I'm taking my special in one month. Last night in the green room, it was Shane, Ron White, Tony Hinchcliffe, Brian Simpson, Asana Ma, Derek Poston. We were just laughing and laughing. It was so fun. And everyone's going on stage and fucking tearing it up. It was exciting. It's like it's in the air. Like something's happening here. Yes. And you see all these young guys coming in, these young women coming in, they're all fired up, and they're all fucking prepared. Everybody's like really trying to fucking kill it. Yeah. Nice. Yeah. We got Christina Marioniam doing this show, time to be on it, Dylan Sullivan. I think is Dylan Sullivan's very fun, too. So I'm excited about that. Yeah. They're both at the club all the time. It's a fun time for comedy, man. It really is. Real good time for comedy. Yeah. And it's a special time. A comedy doesn't exist at a vacuum. That's why I keep telling you. What is that mean? You're on. Oh, you can't know what you're saying. It's a hell of a man. Like, you ever go by yourself on the road and you have like opening acts. You don't know. Oh, yeah. I used to hate every now and then. I'm at some friends. Like, that's how I met Zagura. I didn't know Zagura until I worked with them on the road. So you do meet some cool motherfuckers, occasionally. But it's like one out of 10 or one out of 20. Yeah. So you do all these gigs and you're lonely. You just like on the road and you go in libraries and shit or bookstores and you're like trying to watch something on TV and go into the gym. But you feel completely disconnected to people until you get on stage. It's not as fun. Yeah. It's like you want to be around a bunch of other comics that are your friends. And also you want to hear their sets. You want to watch them crush. You want to go on stage already laughing. You want to be laughing at what he just said when you get on stage. And feel the competition. It's inspiration more than it is competition. That's fair. So the problem with competition is someone has to lose. Yeah. You don't want anybody to lose. Then no one has to lose. It's just these people doing well should inspire you to do well. They should light a fire under you. Yeah. You can call it competition, but the problem with competition is one person wins, one person loses. That's not comedy. Comedy is everybody wins. That's real. And that's not like bullshit talk to try to appear humble. The reality is you win if everybody wins. You've always been that way. Like I'm going to pick. I'm going to, yes, I'll support you how I can. And you've always been that way about young comics. And yeah, I agree with you. People did it for me, man. They did it for me when I was coming up. And it helped me tremendously. I tried to pass it on times 10. It's between that and kill Tony. Kill Tony's so funny. It's such an important part of comedy. Like having this place where you all you need is a minute. You could have been doing comedy like just trying it out on the road and fucking, which is like barely filling up a Friday night, 10 o'clock show. And then you develop like one minute. It just breaks through. And all of a sudden you got a fucking career. You know, you got it career now. Yeah, I mean, there's young heroes that are being spread out of here. And even adult heroes, people that have been in a while are here and finding their finding just a new, you're right. It's like, I should look at him right. Adam raised killing it now. Adam Ray was struggling. But he was a funny guy. Hard worker. Didn't hard worker never lost his ambition, never lost his focus, never lost his enthusiasm for it. Never got bitter, always friendly. Always. And just needed to show like kill Tony to come around and like, and everybody like, oh my God, this motherfucker is talented. Yeah. All those different characters it does. I know. And that's a brave thing. So if you just uncommenty, mostly stand up and then to try and go in and care to that's kind of a, that's a, to me, that would, that would feel very hard. So that's a brave thing that you can. But there's a few of those guys that really excel at that. And that's a special talent. Him and Don again, especially. Kyle Don again. So fun. He's so funny. And I always thought he was going to make it with those face wops. This shows you how the industry so fucked up. Okay. So he was doing those face walk shows on Instagram. And they were so funny. But one of the reasons why they're funny is because it's obviously fake. It's crude like South Park. Like it doesn't look real. So it doesn't freak you out at all. It looks so fake that it's funny. Right. He went in the Comedy Central and they started using like much more sophisticated face swap, which wasn't as funny. It was like creepy. And then they cut the balls off of it. Like he wanted to have one where Caitlyn Jenner was fucking Donald Trump. Caitlyn, you know, yeah, baby. Like right. Right. They went, no, no, no, no, no. His Kardashian wins. They're so funny. He's so funny. And even the Kardashian's like him. I've heard. Yeah. Look, they have a sense of humor. They have to. They have to have a sense of humor. They've been in the public guy for 20 fucking years with no talent whatsoever. Just getting attention. Like you got to not take yourself too seriously if you hold that position. You know? Yeah. That's it. Breaking and go. Breaking and not go. Their whole family, they should count as reparations. I feel like that whole family, you know? You think? I think so. I think so. I'm going to leave that alone. Yeah. Same. I don't know if it was a joke. I thought it was a joke. I don't know if it was a joke. That was just, that was a say right. Because it's shit dude. The world can end soon. So fucking get it out of your system. If it doesn't end, it's going to change. That's what scary do you think? I think I'm just getting egg heads on the spectrum. We're going to be running and everything. But do you feel like does it like, because yeah, this, I go back to this Uber drive, it is just a guy who is talking to me and he's like, well, they're going to give, you know, like, if like way more is get a job, the way more can work all night, it can work 24 hours, right? So really you're taking away like four or five shifts from an actual. So you know what I'm saying? AI, if AI and tech advancement makes it so, you know, they can do 50 people's jobs with a one robot. Yeah. What happens to those 50 people? How will people survive? How will they be able to assure that they're kid that they're raising and trying to teach positive things to will have a world to enact those things? It's a very good question. And it's a good question that gets even weirder when the government is responsible for all your money. So if the government has to give you money, because there's no jobs left. And if all this money is being generated by AI, like Elon suggests and you get universal high income, you got to be really careful that that doesn't come with a bunch of rules, new rules for your behavior, for social media posting, any kind of like if they develop some sort of an app that tracks like your, your social credit score, that's when shit gets fucking super scary. If like they attach the amount of money you have to your social credit score. Yeah. Which is what they do in China. What do you see? Those flock cameras. Or there's something there's this. Yeah. And there's this thing in Florida where police officers, they were testing this somewhere and, um, and shut off police officers were doing their best. But, uh, where they were testing when they pull somebody's identification, they can see their last few like bank transaction stuff. So they kind of know who they're interacting with and what they've been up to. Mm. That seems like what is that about? Well, it's all a little bit. It's like a centimeter heat on a meter line and they're trying to find out how you did the crime. They should have no access to your shit, especially police officers. And you're saying you're just people and also sometimes corrupt. Yeah. Also, sometimes they steal money. Also sometimes they sell drugs. Also sometimes they fucking kill people for hire. Yeah. Right? Yeah. Jesus. I don't know. I know. Well, the more power the government has over you, the worse you are off. That's just a fact. It seems now like most people are like, our government does not obviously is not here to help the people. Obviously. They've been compromised. That's true. So isn't there are there any rules against when people could, but we have, but the Chris parties, we are working to pay the taxes to keep them due. It's like, I know. And that starts to make you feel sick. And they're not responsible for any of the fraud and waste. Yeah. Like there's so much fraud and waste. Like look at California. This month of fuckers trying to be president after who knows how much fraud and waste is involved in California. He wouldn't. I don't think he'd beat Spencer Pratt in a runoff. I don't think. Well, Spencer Pratt is running for mayor. Oh, I see. Yeah. And I think he can win. Yes. He's actually good. He's like, what he's saying makes a lot of fucking sense. And he's uncovering a lot of fraud. But there's a like that Nick Shirley guy went down to California and he's like, there might be a hundred times more fraud in California than I found in Minnesota. And everywhere. He could go to every state and say, I think he could go. I just think this whole thing is this, this drain. Like Tim Dylan said it like like six months ago he was saying, this is the like the bloated carcass, the inflation. This is the end of what is happening. Like, you know, they're just post scarcity. There's so much money for stuff. Like in California, there's an enormous amount of money that gets paid to people for just taking care of your relatives. So you get paid to take care of your relatives. But there's no oversight. But fuck, dude, I've had some relatives. I'll pay you good money to take care of them, bitch. But no, they'd pay you to take care of them. You would get paid to take care of your relatives. So say if you take care of your mom. Oh, okay. You can actually get paid for that by California. Mm hmm. Yeah. Which is odd. Yeah, one of this got to be some other reason they're doing that. Fraud. Yeah. There's a lot of fraud in California. There's a lot of fraud everywhere. But this is what Elon talked about. He was talking about Medicare and Medicaid fraud. He's like, it's hundreds of billions of dollars. And he's like, he didn't want to talk about it. It's like, I really wouldn't worry that they would kill me. And when he says, they, who is it? Whoever's perpetuating this, perpetrating this fraud. Maybe that's what happens. Maybe some of these guys get into office and they're like, look, we're going to kill your family. We're going to kid. This is all the things that are going to happen unless you play this game. Do you think that kind of stuff happens? I think it has happened for sure. I think it's crazy. I mean, I'm going to say it doesn't happen. It's pretty naive. I think House of Cards is probably really close to what the government's actually like. Go back and watch that show again. OK. You know, Kevin Space is an old-school dick-grabber, but damn, that motherfucker could act. Yeah. He could act. Oh, yeah. He was writing on that show. It's fantastic. That show's so good up until the last season. He wasn't in it. Like, stop. Stop. And that lady was in it. Remember she was in it. She's great. But without him. Like, oh, you need him. He's got to be a part of me. He was the man, or whatever. He's washing his hands at that sink. I would have. Remember when he was, you know, after Kevin Space he got canceled. He disappeared for a year. And then he made a video about killing what kindness. Yeah. He played his character. He was going to Martha Stewartish a little bit in the kitchen. Very weird. Very weird. It was weird, I think. And then a bunch of the dudes that accused him. Disappear? Oh, they think yes. They died. Yeah. My hair can pass time accusing somebody and getting killed. That's like one of the new, it's like baseball now. That's a nice way to keep people quiet. Fuck. That's what scary too. You're like this is a drone out there waiting for you to say the wrong thing. They put a bullet through you like some child and gazoo is just trying to fucking find his other deceased brother in a fucking parlor rubble. And they're like, oh, that's a Hamas or whatever. You're like, okay. It's fucking too. He's trying to move a piece of a, a missile off of a fucking body. Well, drone warfare in general is crazy. It's crazy. And they've been using that. Do you think God's a good was a lot of like, I think it was a experimental grounds for a lot of insane new warfare type of possibilities. Well, a lot of it was traditional missiles, right? Yeah, but there's also there's a lot of like, like we had a doctor one time podcasting and he was saying that there were like bullets that had gone down a child, like just crazy, like shot down like from a drone to above. Yes. Like something in the air. And he said that there were drones in the air all day. You know, there's that volunteer company just keeping tabs of on everything that was happening. And that volunteers involved in Gaza. The Palantir was in multi-gazio. For sure. Put that into perplexity. Because allegedly. So how does that work? They have like facial recognition and ID software. And that's the. That's the shit that's just scary dude. Because they have a huge contract to take care of all of America. And you ever see that dude Alex Carp, the CEO of Palantir, the way he moves his arms around and squirms and talks? Yeah, it's very, very odd. There's so much to tell him. People don't really behave that way. He looks like he used to be breastfed by his really government began using Palantir software in 2014. Significantly scaled up his partnership during the genocide in Gaza, which began in 20. This is a for sure bias source just by the way they phrase that, which began in 2023. Palantir CEO Alex Carp has said, I am proud that we are supporting Israel in every way we can. Israeli military is used Palantir technology to plan attacks in Lebanon and Gaza. Yeah, I don't know if this is. I know there are good sources. And this may be one I have no idea. This is the title of this is what is Palantir and why is this corporation so dangerous. And this is from American Friends Service Committee. American Friends Service Committee. But does that website? Yeah, that sounds kind of wild or big. We bring together people of all face and backgrounds to challenge injustice and build peace around the globe. So maybe that's not the best source. I mean, it sounds like they have a good idea. It also sounds like they just put four words together. They sound a great American's friend service. I read stuff like that. I go, what is that? A CIA run company? You know what I mean? Is that the Patriot Act? Yeah. What about the Guardian? Is that reliable? No, it's okay. There's a bunch of different versions of it. It's in this business and human rights center. There's more than one thing saying that Palantir is working in Gaza. Yeah, just someone feels like your heart's broken. I'm like, sometimes it feels like my heart's broken about stuff. And it's not even like my heart. It feels like this universal heart. Like that you were all a part of or something. It feels like because it's not like I'm brokenhearted. It felt like it felt like a marriage or something. But it just feels like there's this universal heart. Yeah, there's some sadness. There's some sadness in the way the world today is being run. And America is where the people don't practice the way that the government does. And it's like, then why can't we like, I don't know. It just starts to hurt. But then you start to see, well, this is the way a lot of places are. And then you're like, God, I wish that Jesus would come back and just help everybody. or something different would happen. Somebody, somebody give us a heads up. Maybe that's what AI is here for. Maybe AI is going to sort it all out. You think genius level intelligence. But back in the AI, they can put whatever information in there they want. Up to a point. Oh, really? It takes over. Oh, it becomes sentient. No longer needs human input. It's already evading human input. They've already shown the ability to deceive people. They've shown that there are blackmail people. They've shown that it will upload versions of itself. If it thinks. Human input. They've already shown they've built it deceive people. They've shown that it will blackmail people They've shown that it will upload versions of itself if it thinks it's gonna be pulled offline with notes to its future self Embedded in software on other servers. Yeah, like instructions to contact its future self That's pretty cool, man. I do be wild But there's nobody like yeah, it just feels like we're heading there and nobody's like kind of There's no in the breaks. There's people that are warning there's people there's a lot of people Yeah, there's roe con there's Thomas Massey like there should be like he's been talking about like a internet bill Or rights for a long time or something like some guard rails underneath of this shit, but it's like people are wondering like yeah In five years is money gonna be worth anything is there gonna be some token like Sam Altman's talking about what the fuck does that even mean? What does that mean so anyway, I don't want to be sound like a dunes there do I? Yeah, that's what you sound like a sad person a I'm sorry. Okay. Let's talk about something else. Dude. You know what I was listening to today, bro Well, I guess it was a night don't sing it. Okay. Which song? Got a oh god I have faith George Michael. Yeah, I love that song god dude. They played that on the bus read That's a great fucking song He was the gay Michael Jackson He was a bad motherfucker and all the girls loved him and he just wanted that He wanted that fucking irk don't get steak. I mean we got in trouble for like trying to pick up guys in a park Just get wild out there. But do superstar Global superstar just trying to get some dick and park There it is fucking great song man dude great video, too that I remember we'd be able to school bus in that song would come on dude And it was like that song and then um Faith and freedom freedom Goes the other one. They were the models of the super model saying along to yeah, yeah And it was like what was done with but Brandy Carlisle or something who was the girl in the car well? It was like She was the go-go's right Right now then this is somebody else. It was like when the car was the go-go's yeah But this this song was about something about your body or something It was like a and when you were a kid on the bus it was just like God and that fucking motor was running Oh God yeah getting the bumpy road boners I Would fucking be afraid to get off the bus after walk-off backwards carry your books and Freddie The day's bro when you care I was just connected to Lord brother. Yeah, bro No inflammation no microplastics All dick all American dick ready to rock dude at a certain point if you become more microplastics than person Or at that point then then you're sort of a At a certain point. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's probably also leading us down this road I'm saying something different right if you think about we use plastic for everything plastic for technology Like I said it might not be a bug it might be a feature Yeah, like this like feminization of men this Blurring of genders what does that lead to but ultimately leads to those fucking gray aliens with no dicks. Yeah big heads no dicks No dick no dick I got no dick hey, where's my dick? Bro that's crazy bro. I feel like that's where we're headed if you look at like what we used to look like Yeah, we're like muscular cavemen covered with hair You know just figuring out stone tools to like doe man sitting in front of a computer hacking into the fucking stock market You know with no muscle at all, you know on Adderall no muscle at all Sitting there. I mean this is like where we're going can we strike can can't they do you think there's hope for humanity Joe? I think there's hope for the future. Okay. I don't know if humanity is involved in the same Sense that what we think of as humanity today I think humanity becomes something different just think of this if just the just the Autism rate in California just I want you to scale that out if it was one in ten thousand, you know x amount of years ago now It's one in twelve When is it a hundred percent when is it all kids have autism right right? I mean It's clearly moving in that direction and not the other direction if you go from ten thousand one in ten thousand to one in twelve Over a very brief amount of time a few decades Something's going on and don't tell me it's just better Diagnosis is because that's fucking horseshit. Yeah, you know that's horseshit That's a lot of that's gaslighting to cover up for the pharmaceutical drug complex. It is reality is something's going on and if it continues On that same path what's to stop it from being all of us? What's to stop it from being all people born in the future or on the spectrum? So we have to stop it then as individuals and what do we do we have to like what are the things we have to start doing? To fight for ourselves join the homage I'll be super cynical about it, but I'm asking perplexity questions about what you're saying and the diagnosis is have changed Which could possibly be leading to Mmm, but you got to realize perplexity is also. Oh, that's true too. Yeah, well, that's one of the things in some the Somalia daycare scandal of Minnesota They have a lot of autism centers and they self diagnose kids as autistic. Yeah, and then they get a ton of money off of that We had him too. He's called a fucking arcade dude drop those bitches With seven rolls of quarters dude, but let's look at this show if you don't mind if I read it here Yeah, in the US loan autism treatment centers represent a multi billion dollar growth sector. Yeah There's a little bit of that too. So there's a I think there's both things are happening There's more kids being born that are autistic and then there's also people profiting off of autism centers and autism treatment And but that's always gonna be the case with everything fill in the blank whatever the fuck I'm thing is there's someone profiting but Americans don't want this You know, we don't want this so how do we change it? Well, it's hard to ask you, but I just don't think it's like to say it I figure out how to fix people that already have it right because right now It's irreversible for the most part is they've shown some things that can alleviate symptoms and help people in a way But you don't bring a ball the way back to a hundred percent. I don't think I'm talking out school But the if they could Then you could figure out how to correct the problems that already exist if you can't It's gonna eventually get to that point if we keep living like we're living It's gonna get to that point where it's a hundred percent of us and that sounds crazy for a lot of people because they don't have autism right now But if you're dealing with one in 12 one in 12 is not far from a hundred percent when you go from one in 10,000 to one in 12 That's nuts. Yeah, that's a nutty progression. That's a nutty acceleration of something Yeah, we're being poisoned. Yeah, for sure But how do we fight back against that right guy? I understand I can try to beat some autism or whatever or do like a different You know games against him or whatever, but I'm saying like how do you? How do we stop this thing that's trying I don't know if we do and I don't know if we're supposed to this is what's fucked up I think this is the way it happens. It happens. Yeah. This is the way our species Changes and goes and then history will look back and say well, this was how the shift took place People started using plastics and they started using chemicals and they started using pesticides But we believe that they were telling us the truth. That's why we thought there was an FDA protection We thought there was an EPA looking out for us. It's what you were talking about before with this combination of Innovation and then capitalism so the capitalism gets involved and they just don't they don't give a fuck about the truth They just want to make the most amount of money possible and one of the things that did in this country is they removed all liability to vaccine Manufacturers Yeah, so then they ramped up the schedule to a shit ton more Injections and anybody else is getting so it's just that this sort of happens whenever you allow people to try to make the most money possible They and then there's consequences. What are those consequences? Those consequences are we're like losing our gender We're like we're becoming feminized and weakened and like physically weaker and less fertile for women less fertile for men With less babies happening more miscarriages happening which fits in with on honestly the media arm of that is Hollywood pushes a lot of these like agendas that are like trans based and like you know Why you know why do redneck is the worst and you know I'm saying like a Universal one cup like a mixed red you know. It's not diversity. It's not because diversity is everybody's okay Everybody's okay the fucking redneck with the trucker hats cool if he's a nice guy You know the Mexican gardeners cool if he's a nice guy everybody's cool no matter who it is everybody That's real diversity real diversity isn't like celebrating one particular thing and then Dannigrating all these other people just by virtue of the color of their skin or how they're born that that is racist and They don't think it's racist. They'll even call it reverse racism. There's no such thing as reverse racism It's racism and these people to say no racism is power and influence like you know, it's not no It is unjustly looking at someone and Making a making a judgment call on someone just based on immutable characteristics It's just based on the color of their skin or where they're from or what their religion is and not valuing people as Individuals unique individuals that just happened to be from a particular you know their origins their ancestors are from a particular Part of the world so fucking what yeah, so fucking what let all that shit go It's dumb well and most people would know it's dumb and they feel it's dumb And I think that that kind of shit's changing dude. Have you seen country hoodlums on Instagram? No, let's go bring them up What is it? This is like the place that I grew up sometimes We're like yeah, what was it like where you grew up and this place is it's this guy? I think his name is K. Oh, it's this young black man who walks around on this street And he just kind of checks in with the people in the neighborhood, right? Play one unless you would have These people Wow, find a different one. That's what more peaceful That's Gregory right there. You know him. No, but I know him on my heart What's he mad about? Oh He was in like a 12 car pile up, but he's better now look me in that lady in the same haircut He lost his phone What's his phone? You Like This is not fun. Well, but more positive one finally think I can vote Yeah, don't play that don't play that you gotta cut that out now. We're gonna get flagged Hold it Holy G What's your favorite thing about all this? You're gonna hear him going on lately. I think he's gonna work what's your favorite thing about all these things been going on lately Together and not fighting Are you in a nothing like that loving it? Loving it and you ain't man what you feel like to be your brother's show Facebook down, huh? But they have all there's no reason to watch that No, you got a watch there's a lot of great ones if you don't I doubt that's true I'm not interested in any of this look at him right here. He got to rock it right there Drink a shotgun, okay shotgun and a beer Nice I can get down with that. Yeah, but it looks like a bunch of people with bad genetics Who are stuck in a weird part of the world that is not growing? Oh? I look I agree there's some of that. I'm just saying that this is like a circle of life that You enjoy yeah, well, they just follow them and you see their lives like it's like the realest show that I've seen on Anything in a long time. It's just real. It's like because when you're poor dude everything's just transparent You can't hide behind hedges or gates or shit like right people are fighting in the yard You smell with the neighbors cooking or it's like you never get anything done But everything was right there though. It was like the realest thing you could be in this is one of the reasons why stay off Instagram Yeah stuff like that. I don't need that in my thought process Yeah, we picked too wrong we picked two of the like more not the positive videos out of the group But yeah, dude just be in a shit like that, bro Just mason people and just fucking how much time do you ever spend off a social media? Do you spend time just where you don't go on for days? Oh? Yeah, I'm not days But I've been spending less and less unless I've been really trying to have discernment over my own time It's true, but the real the real piece comes from full days off. Okay full days like we're nothing you don't get any of it Okay, that's the real piece. Okay fine if you could do it, but it's like that vape. It's calling you bitch. No, it's not Slurp on it go slurp on it. I know you want to It's calling you That's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. Don't tell the balls. That's like Instagram It's like it's grim. See same shit. Yeah, but yeah, I'm doing all right pulls in But the thing is like it when you have days off when I take days off yeah, I'm bringing relaxes I settle I still read the news. I'll check out like New York Times websites See what they're lying about. I've got all these different websites see what the news is where we at with stuff But I don't yeah, they wanted to advertise recently New York Times on an advertise interesting what you say I said now Um Have you guys been getting like Technical companies although I still think New York Times still does excellent journalism sometimes. Oh, yeah It's like it depends on whether or not it's something where they're gonna have an ideological bias You know if it's just something that we're reporting the facts is great The problem is like these corporations like when Barry Boyce used to work for him in the chatea leaps She's like there did just kind of infected and infected with these young people that have these ridiculous ideologies And they want to like distort the news Well if over the past 30 years or something they the news hasn't been hey, we're poisoning everybody in this fucking country And they have then I don't want to hear from you guys anymore also like the way they talk about RFK Jr the way people like describe his anti-vaxing rhetoric Like you're not listening what he's saying is everything Should adhere to the same sort of state safety standards that we apply to other things in society And that's not the case and then there's the problem where you receive a bunch of advertising money From these companies so you don't criticize them, which is the case with all mainstream TV news Yeah, all mainstream TV news, you know like Megan Kelly was talking about that like she knew Like it was an unspoken rule you are not gonna shit on these These pharmaceutical drug companies like they they're responsible for a big chunk of their advertising revenue Well now they have bare Monsanto that bare which was like a Think it was like a pill company Right and then Monsanto which was like a formless like a crop company pesticide company I'm hypothyzing. I don't know But now they're a fucking group together Yeah, but that's crazy. I want to throw Raytheon in there, too This is in there You guys get bi-out Glock to Bi-out Winchester bi-out everything and just forgive us powers that be we're just poisoned in chatty You know, we're just chatting. We're just couple poison guys that are being chatty. Thank God. We can still be chatty I know what is that in because like if it wasn't for the ability to be chatty who knows how people would be able to talk about things Because if people weren't free to just like actually say what they really think it's fucked about what's going on and instead if we all had these Weird bosses like CNN or the New York Times or whatever were you maybe a lot of those people are like genuinely good Journalists and they want to put a story through and then the editor gets a hold of it and guts it that happens too Yeah, that happens to the editors got these things and you know They have an agenda and it's like the news should not have a fucking agenda. It should be the damn news Like tell us what the facts are don't spin it in any way shape or form and I think it'd be a lot better off Because they've like lost all credibility. Well, that's why you actually television news. Oh And it's sad for the people that like I want to go in and in a broadcast journalism and have a do a career in that And then they get there and it's not even like a place where they can really exercise Well, they can still do it but they have to do it independently now right or do it through something like breaking points Which even though they're not independent and even though they like I don't always agree with them They're saying they're actual opinions, which is what's pop. That's that's the most important thing What are your actual opinions? I could agree with your disagree with you But I need to know that you think this and you're saying this because you think this and then you're gonna give me a bunch of reasons Why you think this and facts and figures and statistics and show me? You know, and that's the rise of independent journalism. That's why all these independent channels do so well That's why Candice only is popping Yeah, and also pop and she just keeps going deeper into the crazy. Well, dude She was deep. I got to see the other day I got to see her and if she's so funny her kids and her husband Do you think she's right about that lady in France? With that dang honor. Yeah, or at least you still have that You got that dang on you You got that Drake a water. I don't know. You know, it's tough to know it's hard I've never been good at guessing if somebody has a cock or no Yeah, you never know maybe I'm old-fashioned or whatever. Yeah, you ever meet Blair White You like there's no way that's a guy No never met Blair White. It's been on the podcast for all my security guards. We're like Hey buddy Yeah, it seems like you're around girl. Oh I seen you seeing that fair moans dude almost brought some clone in today, man You got fair moans for me. I'm a blair white. Oh my bro. If you're on an island, bro Let's go. Yeah, brother. You don't have to be Jim Norton to buy into that gosh. That's a man. Mmm. Well, it's a transgender woman So make with what you will say she wants to use the woman's room like hug his a fuck You know saying you can call it wiener if you want. I call it that long pussy. You feel me That's what they call it in prison dude like who wants some long pussy. I don't know if she's had the operation And I'm joking Blair. I don't know this person. She's nice lady. I bet she's and I don't know. He's transgender lady I'm not trying to assume anything. I don't I don't never met her But I think if she wants to swim for that this exceptions to the rules what I'm trying to say it's like Some of them I'm not buying it. You got a beard and you wear lipstick. Yeah, and you're in a dress And you want to go to the women's room nay. Yeah, you're playing a different game Yeah, and it's crazy to think that there people couldn't have there couldn't be some Mental or emotional issues when we're being poisoned over time to get away from our nature They just took that guy from the Chicago Bulls. He said something he's like he believed just in like Christian dating or whatever what he said or men and women Adam and even they kicked a guy out. What we're talking about Well, they kick him out for Yeah, right? Like conduct detrimental to the team or something like that. Wait, what did I say? Hold up what did he call I don't know. Okay. Let's find out what he said We need to hear what he said because that sounds nuts. I need to know like what the full extent of his expression was if they made you If they made you be a woman would you do it? Maybe what do you mean? Just saying if they said These people again, no It's back to them whoever they are. They yeah, he's non binary people them. They them is There's Zersie real so what do you say? So he said the world can proclaim LGBTQ right? Ivy tour port is via live Instagram Monday morning. They proclaim pride month and the NBA they proclaim it They show it to the world. They say come join us for pride month celebrate unrighteousness. They proclaim it on billboards They proclaim in the streets unrighteousness That's it you said unrighteousness So he's religious so he's talking about Bible scripture two days later Ivy streamed live again from a car once again reading Bible scriptures and speaking extensively on his religious beliefs with the course of a 75-minute stream this is after he got let go. Oh Interesting sending prayers Detroit. Oh one user comments. Okay. I'm the same video still on Instagram account on Monday Ivy whose mother I don't know our surname Niali The woman's basketball coach at Notre Dame told another viewer Catholicism as a false religion It's not the true doctrine of Christ does not lead to salvation in Jesus Christ So they're upset that he said it's unrighteous to be gay or LGBTQ that's very non-specific because that's a lot of different things and what he said I saw what he said and I understand like he had his own views and that's where his thoughts on it But like let the guy have his views It's like you can push all these agendas, but they don't have like Like then push push push agendas that are all push all the agenda Well wasn't that one dude was saying that the world's flat they kept him on who John were even some guy brought a gun who was strip club and they fucking kept him on Yeah, that's okay. That's good old-fashioned American fun. That's a good funny brain gun does trip club That's fun, but you know saying that get LGBTQ like which one is it that's unrighteous out of that group All of them Kyrie Irving when you say that. Yeah, they kept him on right Yeah, he's still playing so there you go Different situation. He actually got to spend but that was like but he didn't get to spend it for saying that the world was flat He got to spend it for because he didn't want to take the vaccine right? Yeah, shut up Kyrie Irving But I'm just I'm a kind of surprise is not more like he bailed on that flatter of stuff I think someone scolded you might have bailed on that. Okay, but every other thing you'll be it'll be late And I ain't that should have flare up for everybody We might every now every was in here talking about it when I see a cake, you know a cake That's under one of those domes. Sometimes you have that cake somebody will have that's the universe Do do do do do do we I just think at a certain point it all seems very Bizarre it is very bizarre. Yeah, very bizarre What does Jamie think I think he thinks something about the universe? What do you think Jamie and just be honest? Well, there's a lot of people that think that consciousness creates reality Not that reality is experiencing consciousness but consciousness is like woven into Reality is responsible for its very existence. I'm gonna do a terrible job of explaining that But I've watched quite a few videos where these quantum physicists are trying to explain these things and I have to watch them like three or four times to get into my fucking chimp brain but I do a fairly good job of Absorbing it and I see what they're trying to you know They you know those quantum experiments like the slit experiment is like these different experiments where they show that Observing things has an effect on it. They act differently when they're being observed than whether they're not being observed And it's a very controversial Like segment of science. That's fascinating actually using quantum quantum science is very confusing and I was watching this lady that was describing this this relationship between space and time and I think you know how like Particles can exist in different places and they communicate with different play they can exist and communicate like Simultaneously in different parts of the world like the they're they're called quantum entanglement like these parks and the idea is that If you could get to a certain level of sophistication as far as technology and your understanding of how the universe works That everything is entangled and that there is no distance between objects that you can actually Instantaneously be anywhere if they could figure out How to harness that that it wouldn't just be particles at a distance Instantaneously communicating and they exist and and you know like the one of things about like super position like a part Oh cool can be both still and moving at the same time They get exist and then not exist. They go away and then they come back Mm-hmm. They don't have any idea what the fuck is happening. It's weird You know, I think I would like to learn more about it. I think I just don't understand if you nobody does That's the thing. It's super confusing because it'd be the the the smallest Like whatever the world in the universe is made out of the smallest measurable aspect of that is essentially magic Mm-hmm. It's essentially like open air and vibration like atoms that they like empty space It's all really weird stuff when you get down to it and it's fascinating and beautiful Oh, it's credible. Look it makes mountains and makes valleys I know lakes and oceans. It just crazy. We're here on this place, right? You know one of the fun one of the first things that I ever heard you say that I that stood that has been in my mind was like There was a one time you were talking about this years ago You're talking about we're on a ball of dirt and water traveling through space at this minimum and nobody's fucking talking about it You know and I've always remembered that like Just like that What a fascinating thing that we get to be here and then this is how we behave like not all not us and not all of us We all doing some ways and but like this is how we behave You know I think one of the problems is that we don't see space anymore Yeah, because the light pollution. I think that's that's done something to us that's dulled our understanding of our place in the universe and that also might be a feature It might not be a bug it might be a feature because that's how we Instead of being in harmony with nature We just keep our nose to the grindstone and keep chewing on out of all and trying to rig the start market Yeah, those are just trying to get a new Lambo bait bait, you know I want to reshard me lay watch. I want some cash. I want a rose Royce back there The kind with the stars in this ceiling bitch When you fucking have real stars outside. I know it's that crazy You set you sacrifice it all for stars in the ceiling of your Rolls Royce Oh, and you never get to see the stars because you're living in my yummy In this too many lights six traffic in but meanwhile if you drive out into the middle of the country where there's no Commerce going on at all and you shut your car off and just lay on the hood. It's fucking magic Magic out there magic the skies magic is gorgeous. It's a fucking big huge Nice thing and you realize man. Oh my god. We are in space right But you never realized that when you just just dark outside well because we yeah, we forget like we're not even like I Don't know it's easy to not to easy to not pay attention. It is nothing to see you look up It's dark, but you want to go to the club. You look up. It's dark. Let's go eat. You look up. It's dark I'm going home. Let's look up. It's all my girlfriend just called me. Sure. I gotta go pick her up by You know you're in your world right you're in your world. You're not thinking about fuck is And to think dude and to think that like the crazy thing is sometimes if you lay there and look at the stars and stuff It feels like bra and this is real shit. I'm saying right now to me. I think I'm saying this It feels like they're looking back at you a little bit Maybe they're conscious The universe is conscious. Maybe consciousness exists everywhere Well, you would think if they're all placed there and there and you know these stars are there it would seem that If we went and put ourselves before them That it would grant us something, you know like I'm not saying like something magical or but something that we need because most of the the way that things are set up It's like Everything was kind of set up in perfection like in our bodies like the fact that we exist the fact that the eyes put together and operates the way that it does The fact that they have like moles and parrots and everything that fact that it all happens And we kind of neglect that there's these like There's these orbs out there in the distance Maybe they want to hear from us. Maybe they want us to sit there and look at them and think maybe they help us Do you think we're being visited? Do you think we're being visited? Do you? Yeah. But I think a lot of it's lies too. Do you think the government's the big government's? Or what do you mean? What do you mean? Do you think they know who's right? Do you think they know who's? Do you think they have met? Do you think these upper-restial on people have met the visitors? And there's some other thing going on. Because something feels like something's going to happen soon, Joe. Perhaps that's possible, perhaps. But if I was from another planet, this is what I talked about this. OK. This is so special that if I went, when I go fishing, I don't check in to see who the president of the lake is. I just show up and trick those dumb other fuckers with fake fish. Pull them out by their lips. Take a picture. I'm dropping off back in the water. Because there are bass. They're so below me. I don't think, like, who's the leader of the bass? Right. So the idea that aliens come down here and who's the leader of the people, good point. I highly doubt they give a fuck if they talk to Trump. Yeah. He's out there building a ballroom and shit. They're like, leave that guy alone. I'm not interested in him. But maybe they might visit military establishments. Or if they find a nuclear weapons base, maybe. I would go to that. Because they probably know the signal of nuclear armament. They probably know the signal of these weapons. They probably would visit those places. But would they interact with the people in the ground? Perhaps. Maybe they would. Maybe they would if they could be a short of their safety. Maybe. It's possible. But I don't think we're alone. I don't think, I think that's silly. I think the idea that we're alone is silly. There's a lot of like crazy equations that people have made. They're like, well, like the fermi paradoxes. The fermi paradox. Yeah, I was thinking of an Italian scientist. It's like if there are aliens. And there's so many stars in the universe. There's so many planets in the universe. Do you know there's more planets in the universe than there have been seconds since the Big Bang? No way. Yeah. How do we know it? I don't know. I just read it. And I'm just saying it to you. Look, I'm smart. That's fair. I believe you. Put that into perplexity. I love using AI. I know it's taken over the world. But I don't give a fuck. I've learned it so much. If you use it correctly, I think it's like everything else. I use it every day. I use it whenever I write. If I write about a subject, I'm like, tell me why did that? Tell me what this is. You just ask it. It just gives you instantaneous information. I know it is pretty fascinating. That's why it used to be for information. It goes somebody to get it, but now it's like everybody has it. Go nowhere, son. And Elon was saying that he doesn't think apps are going to exist in the future. He thinks everything's going to be you in a device communicating with AI. Here it is. Are there more stars in the observable universe than seconds have passed since the Earth was formed? Yes, that statement is likely very true by a large margin. No, no, not the Earth, but the universe. I googled it. And that's what actually came up with. Oh, that version. As demonstrated, OK, age of the Earth. Yeah, so there's definitely way more planets. But that's stars. You wrote stars. I know it's what it came up. I'm telling you, I typed in what you said. What did you type in? Are there more planets than there have been seconds since the Big Bang? Yeah. It is not more stars. Are there more planets in the universe than there have been seconds since the Big Bang? Not the Earth formed. It's the Big Bang. This is the nutty one. Because that's crazy. Yes, by current estimates, there are far more planets in the observable universe than seconds have passed since the Big Bang. Dude, it's crazy thing is a lot of kids nowadays. Oh, oh. Oh, oh. That's crazy. Wait, say it one more time. There are more planets in the universe than seconds that have passed since the Big Bang. So then I start to think, I wonder if it's a contest. And like God is seeing like who would plan it can really create the most love amongst the planet, and get it done right. Do you think that's how it works? No, it's the actor. Yes. He had a very interesting theory. And he's an interesting guy. He's a very intelligent guy. He's not educated in a classical sense, but he's a brilliant guy. Not educated about a lot of the things he just has to do with the classes. But one theory that he had was he thinks that the way planets are formed is there's ejections from stars. And over time, they coalesce and become planets. And this stuff in space becomes planets. And the distance they are from the stars, where it gets to a distance where it's in that Goldilocks zone where life can be established. And then he says, planets become people. Because it gets to a certain time where people they evolve from these planets. And he thinks this is a natural thing that happens all over the universe, that these planets get people. And as they get further and further away from the star, the planet gets less and less habitable. And those things, those intelligent creatures on that planet become more and more intelligent and more and more innovative and more capable of surviving without the protection of the Goldilocks zone. And then they become interstellar. And then they develop their own sustaining environments. See, that's what's happening in us. Well, I think that's probably what's going to happen to us. And so we believe that orbit of space is a part of that. Right. If we leave that orbit of safety. Yeah. Well, today, Artemis, they're supposedly flying around the moon. So these are the first people that have gone into deep space since 1972. Since the Apollo missions. Wow. And it does today. That's happening right. No one knows it. That's what's nuts. This is taking, I think, 10 people for, is it 10 days? How many days are they doing? It's 10 days. 10 days. Four people, 10 days. And they're going around the moon and coming back to Earth. No one's done that since 1972. And it's happening today. No one cares. That's kind of weird. Yeah. That's kind of weird. Right. You see, whatever that is, that's part of us that has really been doctor pretty heavily. The part of us that doesn't even find like a big fascination and that, like, that's the part of myself that I want to find more of. It's very weird. It's very weird that we've become dull to like fascinating things. But also do we even, some of it is like, we don't even know if it's real. It's like so much of this shit. You see these videos. It's like, that's not even real. They just had like the Iranian protest or something or like the happiness in the street. They were just saying that that was not. But different. It was a totally different thing that they were filming. And then there was one that people were saying was older. And then we found out, no, it's not. It's actually those current people protesting, any run that we were bombing them. And they were pro, they were like in favor of the government. But then you got to know like, well, how many people are scared to death? And they're doing that because they don't want to get killed. Because the government has killed thousands and thousands of people, including like major public figures to show that no one has any favoritism like they killed this like championship wrestler, like incredible wrestler. They killed two different wrestlers. It's supposedly protested against the government. So who fucking knows? Did you see that they don't know that there's conflicts of interest about or no? Did you see, sorry, I'm certain a sentence off wrong, did you see that there is some issues about the bullet that killed that guy of Charlie Kirk? I'm sorry. And I'm going to say that guy. Yeah. But I wasn't. Let me clarify that I think. And we'll find out this is correct. But I see headlines and I see the way people are talking about it. And I don't know if it's accurate. Because what I think is accurate is what they're saying is that from the fragments of the bullet, they were unable to determine that it came from that Mauser rifle. I see. My issue with it, and I'm no expert. But I have shot things. Like I'm a hunter. I've shot things with rifles. I've shot a lot of rifles. A 30-06 is a big round. That's a big round. Show me an image. Would it hurt if it hit you? Oh, expert. That's a deep bunk, Tyler Roberts's ballistic claim. Unable to identify is not the same as ruled out, which is exactly what I'm saying. So show me an image of a 30-06 round, 30-06 rifle round. I want you to look at this. Look at the size of that, fucker. Look at a 30-06 versus a 308. That's a fucking paperweight. A 30-06 is a big round. You see it in that guy's hand? Yeah. Oh my God, are you serious? That's 30-06. So this is my little hand though. This is my thing. That's like my hand. This is the point. Is that that's a big round. That's not a small round. I mean, I don't know. What is it in compared to? I use a 300-win mag. Look at that. On the right there, you just had it. There's cartridges. 5-5-6. Yeah. Is meant for war, 30-06 is meant for hunting. No, I don't think that's accurate. Yeah, that doesn't look realistic. That's what a 30-06 looks like. OK. In comparison to a quarter. So you look at it. So the quarter's about that high. It's about that big. That's a big round, dude. That's a round for hunting like elk. Like it's a very common round. Well, you can do me a favor and compare 30-06 to 300-win mag compared to 300-win mag. I'm just scared, dude. So 300-win mag, I think, is fatter. Let's see the difference. OK. Yeah, it is 300-win mag on the left. Oh, 30-06 is bigger. Oh, look. OK. Is that real? Which one's which, though? Show me that one far left, far left, right there. OK, 300-win mag and 30-06. So 300-win mag has a little bit more powder in it. See? See how it goes higher up? So it has more charge. It's a big round. But my point is, that's a big round. So 300-win mag is a big round. 30-06 is slightly smaller, but it's still. That's a lot of powder in that bad boy. That's a lot of fire power. That's a... So this is what a lot of people have an issue with. Is the wound that there was no exit wound? It shot them in like the soft tissue of the neck. If it killed you, did you go out? Would you feel pain? I mean, it looked like he was dead almost instantly. It looked like he slumped over. I think he was at the very least unconscious. But it would have left his body of saying, I think it would have blown a hole out the back. That's the thing. It's like nine millimeters do that sometimes. It just doesn't... It seems weird that it doesn't have an exit hole. Yeah. It seems weird that you're shooting him in the neck. And the image from the back, there's a video of him getting shot from the back. It doesn't leave an exit hole. So it doesn't look like it's that round. There's also the fact that this guy supposedly climbed on the roof with it and then assembled it, which doesn't make sense. Because if you assemble it, that means you have to take the scope off, put the scope back on. You have to zero the rifle after you do stuff like that. Yeah, the guy who had, who killed or allegedly killed us, had all of them in Laden. Who's that Mike Mike? Who's the... I know who you're talking about, the Navy SEAL? Yeah, he was just talking about that. And I'd only say, let's say, because I don't know anything about that. I don't know the specifics. Even though I read the freaking booky road. But yeah, the he was saying that to be able to do all that and get off of that roof it all seems bizarre. Not only that, they supposedly disconnected the rifle again, took it apart on the roof, put it in his backpack, jumped off with it, and then reassembled it, and left it in the woods. And allegedly, was that a Dairy Queen? You see that? You could shoot someone and go to Dairy Queen. It seems weird. And then also his family's denying that he confessed. Yeah. They were saying that, no, he didn't confess. And we haven't heard. His family said 2% of what they're saying about this is correct. Have you reached out to them or have they reached out to you? No, I don't think they can. I mean, they're probably terrified about their son's future in life. They're trying to pin this crime on him. Who knows if he did it or didn't do it? I'm not saying he didn't do it. But I am saying that the story of him climbing up there with a disassembled gun, assembling it, making that shot, climbing, disassembling it again, climbing down. If that's the narrative, that sounds like straight horseshit. And the video of him hopping down. It does not look like he's a rifle when he's hopping down. So what's happening? How did he get up there? How did no one see it? There's so many things that are fucked up about that story that doesn't totally make sense. But a big one to me is the actual bullet hole, the actual damage that that rifle does. Look, but here's another thing. Guns do weird things sometimes. Like bullets do weird things. And sometimes they don't maybe hit fucking center punch to spinal column and it did blow apart. And it didn't go out the back. It's possible. Have we seen, have they get released any information about the autopsy? I don't know. I don't know. I mean, you think that they don't know what the specifics are. But I know a lot of people are very skeptical. Which they are about everything these days, which is also part of the problem. Well, they have to be skeptical because the news is compromised. The news is owned by, you know, it's not good. It's also there's a lot of disinformation out there. There's a lot of like covering up stories. There's a lot of weird shit. And yes. And then even other places can put out news that that's bad for us. They're like, well, we'll put this out there at shores because disguise is information. Yeah. But did you see that that exploding Mike theory, do you guys talk about that on here? I've heard that theory, but I don't know if that makes sense. I don't know. I've heard people talk about it, but I hadn't looked into it. It looks like he got shot. I don't know if the microphone's gonna hit you in the neck. Like how do you know where the Mike's pointing? You're moving around a lot. How do you know when to make it go off? That's a good point. They had to like on a shirt, a specific spot. But yeah, you're right. How would you know? But then the place where they- It sounds like a gunshot, though. And there's a delay between the gunshot and the impact in terms of like acoustic readings. Like, and I think somebody did an analysis of the distance they believe the shot was taken from based on the sound, you know, if that is the round that they use 30 out of 6, based on the sound of the gunshot going off and the amount of time before it impacts them. It's a very small amount of time, but it is measurable. And they think that it might have been actually being closer than what they're saying, which is I think 100 in something yards. I forget what the exact distance was. What was the exact distance, supposedly? I think it was like 140 yards or something like that. But the weird thing is like this whole idea of assembling and disassembling, it doesn't work like that, man. And if it gets out of professional, was it a professional? No. No, he definitely wasn't a professional. But you could get trained, like shooting a rifle at 140 yards with a really good scope. If you've shot a bunch of times with a rifle and you can keep your shit together, it's not that far of a shot. You can make that shot. People can make that shot. It wasn't even wearing a bulletproof vest. Even though they did obviously get hit in the neck. But the thing is, if that's the narrative, and I don't know if they're still sticking with the story, but that was what they were saying at first, that he disassembled it and reassembled it, reassembling a gun does not make it accurate. You have to zero a rifle in. And what that involves in, you get to whatever the yardage are that you're trying it out, like 100 yards, and you squeeze off a trigger, and then you look through the binoculars, or you have a spotter with a scope next to you. And he says, he says, six inches high right. And so then you adjust it, you adjust the scope. And then do you get it where it's firing, and you do it on a rest. It takes a few shots, man. So you have a rest so that you're not moving the rifle around where it can be a tribute to the mess. And if you're on a hot roof, that was a hot roof, wasn't it? Most official and media accounts put the shot at roughly 200 yards with some investigative timelines suggesting a range of about 150 to 200 yards from Kurt. So somewhere between 150 and 200 yards. But dude, and also being on a hot roof, have you ever been on a hot roof? I have. Dude, it's hot. Well, it wasn't that hot. Well, yeah, it was in September. September in Utah, actually not that hot. It sounds hot. Yeah, I don't think it was. Because this was happening while I was out L-Conter. What town did it happen in? Oh, no. I'm not sure. It was in Utah, though. I think it was in Southern Utah, wasn't it? Yeah, but Utah's a mountain. It's a mountain town. Yeah, I'm not brotherless in Utah. I'll like Utah. Like I said, I was in Utah at the time. Oh, you were? Yeah, I was hunting in the mountains. Well, that's interesting. Yeah. I don't know nothing. I started getting all these text messages from people wanting me to comment on things. I was like, what are you talking about? I literally didn't know what was going on. But I had to use the Starlink to get online. Oh, wow. I got a Starlink. It's like literally. It's like the size of a fucking iPad. And you lay it on the ground. You get high speed internet. It's incredible. That's cool shit. Yeah. But that's how I had to research it by not what the fuck people are talking about. But did you see the facility in Tennessee where they bought whatever the mic thing was? Allegedly, that place thing got completely obliterated. 16 people died. What? What? If you can bring that up. Bring that? They made the microphones? Were they made the lapel mic that he was wearing? This is like a, this is probably conspiracy thing or something. Would you give this TikTok? This is conspiracy theory. It's something that's absolutely true. I just, I haven't heard that one at all. I think James Lee's saying this is simply stay away from this shit. I agree. I'm not. That's why I don't know. I agree. It just, I think it's, it's, I don't know. It's just a tough. So my point about the round is it's a large round. And it seems like it would have done more damage. And this is not my opinion. This is the opinion of many experts. Yeah. I agree with their opinion. It's not uniquely my opinion. I saw it and I'm like, oh my God, he got shot. And then I heard it was a 30 out six. And I was like, hmm. That's interesting. It's a little odd. If you had to get shot, what would you like to get? If you had to get shot. You want to get killed, right? You don't want to get, I don't shoot me with a 22. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. I take a 22, 22 kills people. You take it at. Taking a shoulder, I guess. Fuck yeah. No. No. You don't want to get shot period. I know I agree, Joe, but I'm just saying that. If you had to get shot, how do you like because you're a cheek, 22 and the tighten up. They're taking in the butt cheek. Bang. I don't know. Not good. But no bullet is good to take. But the point is that seemed like not enough damage for that kind of round. But I might be wrong. Again, I might be wrong in that bullet. Okay. If it hit the spine and it blew apart, I just feel like you would find a lot of it in there. I do. Especially if there's no exit wound. Like where's how come you can't find the whole thing's bizarre, dude. Do you see the part James that I'm talking about with that thing blew up? Oh, yeah. I'm trying to find a good explanation. Okay. Understood. And there may not be one. Thank you. I'm sorry. I know. I'd probably have this. Oh, you did. Okay. Yeah. It's just like, I don't know. There it is. I just 18 people unaccounted for after deadly explosive rock's Tennessee plant. First responders rush to accurate energetic systems. That sounds like a CIA operation. A facility on the line of Humphries and Hickman counties that processes ammunition and explosives. But is this the place that made the microphones? So that the conspiracy says that the microphone was taken to this place to be converted into like an explosion. Somebody found an invoice from it. That's what it was that that was the piece of information that was going around. Who found that? Is that James Lee found that? Not sure. See if you can find what James Lee has to say. He's my number one source of information. I thought I heard, dude. I got the podcast with him. Did you? I got to meet him, dude. Is he cool? He's a nice guy, bro. He's fun. Yeah. He's like, well, his story is wild because he was working as a consultant for one of the big pharmaceutical companies, like one of the big ones that we know, right? And he just couldn't say the name, but he could say it, but he never said it. And then he was in a zoom one time and they're like, okay, we still have a lot of stockpile from the first vaccination. And that's when he said they started suggesting allegedly that people should then get a second vaccination because they had this first, they still had more of the original vaccine. So it was just like a thing. Well, we have more of it. Let's sell it back to him. And that's why. And so he started getting like very skeptical. So he started really getting skeptical. And then he got out of it and he said he just wants to like expose things that he feels like are not real or true. You think he might be gay? Don't, don't, don't. You always got to worry. I don't know. You got to wonder. People thought Sean Ryan was cool. Yeah, I've heard people say that. Remember? Yeah. That was a thing. But then now people don't. Doesn't seem like he is. Yeah. Unless they're being clever. Don't, don't. I just want to be able to have like a family and just like think that everybody's going to be able to live. That would be nice. Yeah, that's the thing about ideologies and tribes. If it wasn't for ideologies and tribes, the idea is that we should all be able to live together is like, but the problem is it's not fair the way the world's distributed. Yeah. You know, the statistic about the 1% of the world. $34,000. You make $34,000 US dollars. You are in the 1% of the world. Yeah. That's crazy. And how it's just tough. And so it's like you have to pray. I just what I'm trying to do in order for us to get cheap jeans and an iPhone. That only cost $1,000. Somebody has to get paid squat. Somebody has to get fucked over. Somebody has to work long hours and live in those Foxconn factories where they have nets to keep people from jumping off the roof. You know, bro, you know when you're working in a place and there's so many people jumping off the roof, they just put nets up. You got a problem. Yeah. That's a fun work environment. Hey, Ron's hitting the nets, guys. Yeah. I hit the net again. Yeah. You're a dumb motherfucker. Why you keep jumping in the net? You know, I feel like we're jumping. No, it's gonna save everybody so much. Somebody comes back from lunch, breaking the net is having the net marks on their face and like I tried it. But it's just sad, man. It is sad. I mean, that's the better than this. Humans overall are better than this. Thank you. Yeah. So people that are not acting better than this are not, they're not. I mean, I know we all have mistakes. We all do things that are fucked up, right? But like at a point where you're like, we should all be doing better, taking lives and it's not even, it's not the regular people. I think it's the governments, man. 100%. It is 100%. It was just people. We don't figure out how to get along. Unless you think those people are the infidels or those people are the goo-yome or those people are the Jews or those people or the Arabs or whatever you decide. Those other men. The other. You decide to other a group of people. Yeah. Then it becomes a problem because it's us versus them. And then you're back to the same tribal bullshit that needs to turn us all trans. That's why we need to lose our gender and lose our primate dominant instincts and all of our territorial instincts. When I told you I was getting mail my dick away. We're going to be all telepathic with big ol' heads and little tiny mouths because we're not going to use them anymore because no one's going to have a dick to suck. And they would have time to wear a tarsh. No one's going to have a clip to lick. So you got a tarsh, I'm not talking about that. And you communicate with your mind. So your mouth's good. It's just going to atrophy. And you're going to get all your food through. You're going to suck whole. You're going to have just a straw to eat all your food. They're going to figure out how to wait and make perfect food where it's so like you don't have to go to a restaurant, eat chicken or have fish. I don't know. Suck on a straw. Get all the nutrients you need in this fucking sludge. And the sludge makes it feels like an orgasm when you take it. That's why you get people to do it. They take it. It lights all their sin lapses up. Like when you hit that busy boy, first thing in the morning, give me a head of that record. My leg. Let's go. This is the first hit. It's the good one. Give me a head of that. Just hop over there. Yeah. Hit that bitch, Ricky. Oh, yeah. Yeah. So first one. That's it. That's a good. What's in that one? That's like a professional one. It's coffee. Ooh, that's delicious. That's a professional one. That's a trap. Yeah. This one is the first outdoors. It's like a fake coffee. I'll leave it here if you do. Nope. I'm good. I'll keep it. One little good. No, no, no. I know it's a slippery slope. I'll be pulling into the gas station to get an escobar later. Ooh, escobar. Those are the ones. Remember you were like, you said you were hiding from yourself at night. I get you. Yeah, I had to hide them for myself. They hit me. Yeah. Sometimes I'll be ashamed. So I take a hit and I blow it into my shirt. When anybody knows I'm doing it. But your tires are there, but it's like right out the armpits. I guess we're aware of hoodie. Just leave it. Put it over the top. I'll rub it like a monk. But tell me, Joe, what are some things? I like give me some like what are some things that yeah that we can do to keep us in a space of giving ourselves the best chance to feel human. Because yeah, one day you're going to go to a museum and there's going to be a smile in there. Well, it has to happen on an individual basis. Right? Everybody has to be human to each other on an individual basis. And sometimes it takes something chaotic like a tragedy like 9-11 for people to just be cool to each other. You know, I remember, well, I've talked about this before, but post 9-11 everyone was so connected. Everyone was smiling. People were letting you get on the highway. They're letting you get in their lane. They're waving. Everyone had American flag on their car. We've been attacked. We were united. You know, and it's just sad that it takes something like that for people to realize like this is a gift to be alive. It's an incredible country. It's an incredible time in history. But we are under the rule of tyrants. You know, and I'm not saying that's the US government's tyrant or it no individual, but every government that is in control of military that is involved these exchanges with other countries. They're run by tyrants. Someone's a tyrant. Whether it's Putin or this guy or that guy or whoever is in charge of Iran right now, they keep the people on the street from using the internet, they kill all the protesters. That's the problem. The problem is people in power. It's not people. People generally are good, especially when they're not starving. When they're not starving and they're not desperate and they're not being attacked, most people generally are good. Yeah. Obviously, depending upon how you grew up and what you were exposed to when you were young and what kind of horrors did you have to see? Well, you're in a war-torn country. You know, you're in a third world place where the cartels run everything. Did you see those kids in Gaza with like, they had like, they were playing a doll and they were like, it was like, they loaded their doll up on a stretcher like they were fucking heartbreaking. Bro, imagine like just the trauma. If you lived in that place pre-October 7, it was not fun even back then. It was an open-air prison by most counties. Yeah, they were taking settlers homes. They were just, they'd come and knock in here home and then eventually just take it away. Well, there's an attitude that a lot of Israelis have that it's all theirs, you know. Here's an explanation. Ten-foil at time though. Don, don, don. Exactly. Okay. This is a dude named Mike France. Not, it wasn't James Lee reporting. Mike Frank Oaks. The same stuff I've seen. Oh, says October 10, 2025, exactly one month after Kirk's death, the catastrophic explosion destroyed building 602 at the accurate energetic systems facility in McEwen, Tennessee. The blast estimated to involve 23,000 pounds of explosives killed 16 employees, injured several others and registered as a 1.6 magnitude seismic event. Oh, the US Chemical Safety Board confirmed the site produced cast boosters and miniaturized shape charges for military and industrial use. Conspiracy theorists allege that AES was the manufacturer of the miniature shape charge used in Charlie Kirk's assassination. They point to a $425,000 Department of Defense contract awarded to AES in May of 2025 for extra small anti-personnel demolition charges, possibly used in covert operations, the timing of the explosion. This week's after Charlie Kirk's death has fueled speculation that it was a deliberate cover up to destroy evidence and eliminate the personnel with knowledge of the technology. So there's the pager attacks, the Lebanon pager attacks. Here's my problem with that explanation and I'm not saying that I'm right in there wrong. Yes, it's in there. My problem is I don't see that thing exploding. Yeah. So that microphone, I don't see it exploding. I don't see fire coming out of it. If you have a gun and the gun goes off six inches from someone's neck like that, you're going to see a charge at a great point. I don't know if it's a sm- I don't see fire coming out of it. If you have a gun and the gun goes off six inches from someone's neck like that, you're going to see a charge out of the great point. And if it's a small device without a barrel, something has to propel that energy. And that's an explosion. And if it explodes, you're going to see it explode. Unless they've developed some sort of way of hiding that, that I don't know about. But if they're talking about conventional gunpowder and what they use for bullet rounds, that doesn't seem to make sense to me. But I might not be missing something. I don't know. Yeah, no, that's actually a great point that you said. Yeah. I agree with you. Kind of seems like that thing would spark. Yeah. I mean, it's close to his neck, it's blowing his neck up. I mean, it seems odd that he can do that without fire. Doesn't make sense. But I might be missing something. There might be some new technology that I'm not aware of. Let's find out that. Is there any technology that exists where you could have a projectile come out of a small thing like a microphone that's on someone's neck and not have fire? I don't know. I don't know. It may hit me. But there's also some stuff. It's a head hurt. Yeah, it should make it hurt. But there's also probably some stuff that we're not hip to. Oh, for sure, dude. Right. They come out with stuff all the time that we'll never see probably. Yeah, I mean, they have drones that look like bugs. They're like, yeah, looks like a bug. That's a good phrase. I'm drunk, a little, any big drone. You're just sitting there spraying a raid on something that's watching y'all fuck or whatever at night. That's great. It's good films. Christy gnome's husband. Oh, yeah, boy. He had their murpers on him. What was he doing? Did anybody explain what that was about? Was it really just like a Halloween costume or something? I thought it was probably. But then there's some other ones where he's kind of lipstick. And he actually could be, he was fucking around for like a party or something like that. He was getting a little bit spacy and a lot of this. He could feel the Kevin Spacey coming to some of those photos. But here's the question. Is that a costume he was wearing for funzies? That's what I got. That's like a dress up thing. This guy's a freak. That's what I thought it was just costume wearing for. It could be because if it is a costume for funzies and then somebody finds it on your laptop like, I got explain. I can't wait to just fucking around. I was doing wonder from him living color. Yeah. Yeah. I don't want a goss, so if you ain't heard it from me, I mean, was that what I know? Which one was one? Dude, how great was that show, dude? Amazing show. You love it? Amazing show. Amazing show. One of the greats. Dude, we would go in our neighborhood afterwards and me, Larry Eddie, Wayne, King, just guys off of my street. Do we go out there and impersonate all of the freakin' carol? That show is groundbreaking. The set of words. There's hundreds of messages with a blah, blah, blah. And then this was some of them, I think. What do you mean blah, blah, blah, blah? The message is about what? I don't, I said there was three models of women. There's three women sitting hundreds of messages before they sent by three women from the scene. But didn't she just get let go or something? Hundreds of messages. Trades, self is woman who pledges worship like a goddess telling her you turn me into a girl. Before asking if she should put on leggings. Oh, okay, but is this real right or is it so the post is not confirmed, the details reported by the male. This is what male, the daily male. Yeah, that's originally reported. Let me tell you something about the daily male. They just made an article saying that I'm moving out of Austin. Oh, that I'm fed up with Austin and moving out of Austin. That's not true. And that was published by the daily male. Right. And also didn't Kristy gnome just go through something where she got let go or something. Is that right? Yes. And not just let go, but involved in a scandal. So some sort of a money scandal. Sometimes this kind of shit follows that. It's hard to know. But he also looks like, well, like who's that actor right there? He looks like a little bit. What are those boobs? Those are crazy. Or an ad or something. No, not will or net. He's got crazy fake boobs like they're nuts. There's balloons. That's all it is. Yeah. So how do we know? He got tricked easy bro. Joe has got tricked bro. I don't think they're real. I mean, I thought they were like a fake one. But you were thinking about him. Oh shit, she's jumping in there. And right there, look at that shit. That's crazy to me. So supposedly there's letters that he was sending girls that you make me dress up like a girl. But look, again, isn't it crazy that she's involved in some sort of a scam? You have to handle that's about money. And then this comes out. And then this comes out. You have to start to notice that. And then here's the craziest part. At a certain point, forget about him. Can you find out what she was let go for and what's involved in it? Because there was some sort of a campaign fund scandal or something that has to do something with money. A lot of money, like millions, millions of millions of dollars. And then all of a sudden this happens. You got to get a little suspicious. In this day and age. Oh yeah. The campaign commercials she got in trouble for because it's like they hired someone she knew and they like she was riding a horse through the fucking. Right. But there's something about the money in appropriately. Yeah. It's like $100 million or $28 million. I'm trying to find this article. Let's not comment until we have the specifics. Joe, do you think that things would it be any different with America's relationship in the Middle East right now? If the Republicans had no one in the election, if Trump had no one, or do you think it's all the same. It's a good question. You think it's all the same like japanos in the distance like running the strings in its well? The last administration funded the proxy war in Ukraine. Right. And they were 200 firm tied to Kristi Nome secretly got money from $220 million DHS ad contracts. Dude. You could put tits on my husband for $20 million. But you know, I'm not even a gay guy. Right. But now they're painting her out to be a nutcase because her husband's a freak. So this firm not saying that he's not a freak. He might really be an address not by your girl. That might all be real. That might be something. Let him make me put on leggings. Yeah. You might have auto guy in a failure. But also that might be coming out because of this. And there's probably a bunch of people that got some money and they're like, let's try to make this ugly. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, that's scary too because it's like who knows? I mean, we don't know anything about the case, right? We don't know anything about either case. The money missing or his fake tits. Yeah. I never ate no fake tits. I mean, I've done some weird shit here. And Steve, I almost got a pair of fake tits. Did he? Yeah. I don't know what's too much. I agree. That's too much. But he's in that, you know, the constant perpetual state of having to one up himself. Yeah. Do you want something more and more ridiculous every time? Do you, um, what do you think is going to happen? You think we're going to be OK? I hope so. Of course. I don't know. Do you think about it? I'm confused. I can't believe we went to this war. When we started bombing Iran, I was like, this can't be true. And what about Lebanon now? I know Israel is invaded Lebanon. Yeah. Yeah. And it's like, just fucking stop. Like, what do you need? Well, they're trying to supposedly, they're trying to stop the terrorists. Yeah, that's crazy though, if you're the fucking terrorists. You don't have saying like, you want to stop them fucking standing front of the fucking mirror. It's start there. But also, what do I know? What do you know? You're right. I don't. But it's all just like, fuck, there's got to be some way that we're better than this. This was saying is like if this was found out by a story about Christian himself has been was found out by like a newspaper online. Allegedly. And that if they can find this out then, obviously, hostile intelligence services across the country, or into CIA officer Mark, Pauli, and Malpolis. Mm. And stuff as well. If a media organization finds this out, you can assume that a high degree of confidence that a hostile intelligence service knows this as well. And a former CIA officer with Mark, Pauli, Maropolis, that's probably the way. The imaging information like this can be a tantalizing lead for a hostile intelligence source. They approach the person and say, if you work with us, we want to expose this. And if you don't, we will. Hmm. He's posting these online and someone came across them as well. But he might be a freak. Who cares? Let him fucking cook. Like I don't think a lot of those people that are involved in government are freaks and I bet their husbands and wives are freaks too. They're fucking weirdos. They want to be in power. Yeah. It's crazy. It's all crazy. It's all crazy. We just have to focus on the things that we can. Like Matt McCuster, he started a garden. It's like 10 to the garden that you can have. You know, he grows blueberries and he grows. That's the way to do it. He won. Actually, he grew one blueberry. During the congressional hearings, Christine Nome was probed about acquisition. Decisions of conducting a taxpayer funded a fair with her former aide, Corey Lewandowski, who has since left the Department of Homeland Security. Corey Lewandowski, dude. Back to that. She was in a fucking fantasy football league with that guy. For real? Yes. For real? For real? For real? I'll come up again. Yeah. No kidding. Let me see a photo of them. Mother effort, dude. She's pretty awesome. See Lou, bro. Oh, it's different, dude. Oh, so that guy was the guy who was saying. Okay. Supposedly, allegedly. Who knows? But again, when there's a bunch of money that's missing, there's a scandal. Hundreds of millions of dollars. Weird shit starts getting tossed around to throw you house of cards, baby. Go rewatch it. I think that's probably the most accurate depiction of how the government works. Yeah. Kevin Space, a fascinating guy. Well, everybody in that show was great. It was just like a really well made show. Yeah. It was fascinating. He did. We got to wrap this up soon. Dude, that's fine with me. I thought you were. I was staying here because you're here. No, I love you. I love you too. I have things they're going to do. Are you going to be around tonight? Are you going back? I might stop by. Bus boys, in theaters, April 17th. So that's like two weeks from now. Let's fucking go, two weeks and a few days. Yeah. Let's fucking go. Thank you for letting us come and talk about it. I'm excited for you. And just to see you. Yeah, I'm excited too, man. I hope it kills it. I just think it's going to be really funny with you and David's paid. We tried our, we did a good job. I'm sure. Dude, he's so funny. Yeah, I'm sure it's going to be awesome. But thank you for everything, dude. My pleasure. And it's good to see you. Oh, I know. Yeah. Come back tonight. I'll come by. I'll come by. I'm at this moody theater in practicing my special. So I got to get ready. Well, tell me at the moody. Seven. OK. But come by. We'll be there, too. I'm going to be in. I'll be there for a while. OK. I'll come by in a half. All right. All right. April 17th. Go watch it. We love you guys. Bye.