The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day Yeah Just close your day very interesting. Yeah, I'm excited for that Yeah, he was always like way ahead of the curve when it comes to the whole UAP UFO stuff You know with close encounters of the third kind he had that French Scientist that was essentially modeled after Jacques-a-lay. Yeah, he's always been I would love to talk to him I wonder how much he knows is that an accident was he fed some information was he a part of disclosure the whole time That's what I've always wondered I mean What does that mean right cuz there hasn't really been disclosure? No, but there has to be a slow process too, right? Do you think so? I don't think I mean the whole idea is that they're just sort of normalizing it right? Neural and guistic programming they call it where you're slowly getting people custom to these ideas like the The aspects of close encounters for instance where you have the radiation burns on the guy's face You have a time travel component where these world war II soldiers get out of the craft To little beans in the bigger bean and I mean I just just seeding seating our culture with those little bits of information that might help later on That was like in the 70s wasn't it like when was close encounters? Oh Yeah, I think it was the 70s 70s early 80s maybe yeah either way. I mean Like a lot of stuff he's done like I re-watched the Co-host was of Jeff Bridges star man. Mm-hmm. There's a lot of elements of disclosure in that too like I think there's just I Don't know I mean obviously we don't know who's pulling the strings We don't know what's going on. We don't know who's in charge But it does make sense that if there is this thing that they know about that we're supposed to know about Leak it out do it slowly get in our culture get it in our our media and different way You know the how put off story right with George Bush Do you know a story where they were talking about okay? How talked about it on my podcast? But he also talked about it in the age of disclosure documentary where They brought in him and a bunch of different prominent thinkers. Yeah, watch that episode and oh watched the doc So to people that don't know I'll just explain it so they brought in him and a bunch of other prominent thinkers and they had They sat them down said essentially we have recovered crashed UFOs. We have Biological remains of these creatures We are considering releasing it to the public and we want to make an assessment of what are the pros and what are the cons So we want to assign a numerical value that you know you're estimating what kind of an impact it would be on Government finances religion etc. Well whether they should do it right whether or not they should be Lisa's information and all of the people that were brought in Came to the agreement that there was more con than there were pro and that formed their decision to not release And didn't he say at first like he was pro disclosure? It was like of course we should do this and then after the conversation he switched teams and yeah, I don't know about that I'm maybe perhaps I mean he said that he he went into it thinking well Yeah, obviously we should do this and then sort of was convinced otherwise after the conversation unfolded Yeah, how could you be convinced like whose decision should it be if some people know everyone should know? Yeah, it's a humanity decision. It's I don't think it should be it is anybody's hand Anybody's hands no to decide whether or not this information gets distributed and the implications too if they have zero point energy The cow would that solve the problems that we face today. There's so many ramifications of it that Yeah, who's decision is it and why has it been kept from us? I don't I don't buy that whole like worse and well It was 1938 everybody a freak out bullshit. I don't I don't think that's the case at least not anymore It's gotta be something more to it than that. It would certainly have I don't know if they Factor the sin but a uniting element like you remember the Reagan speech we gave in front of the United Nations We said imagine how united we would be would forget our differences if we were faced with an alien threat for another world I mean just knowing that we are all you not I mean How old are you? 47 okay, so you remember September 11 mm-hmm one of one of the things that happened after September 11th was there was It was a horrible tragedy, but there was a beautiful result temporarily where everybody was we're not really united like really united like there's American flags and everybody's car in Los Angeles, you know like the most ridiculous progressive sort of kind of You know Kind of fucked up place, but everybody became patriotic and in New York Everyone was friendly and we people were smiling and saying hi to each other on the streets We had all decided that we were together and we were faced with a real threat and that we had to be united and I Remember it well. Yeah You're right and then not to get too weird too fast here But if there are aspects of sort of an all-encompassing consciousness that unites us Associated with UFO phenomenon too if we recognize that we are just finger prints on the same hand or all iterations of the same over arching consciousness if seemingly there's a part of that in the UFO phenomenon. Yeah, so how would that unite us as well even beyond the threat from outside like if we did start to Understand that we're all part of the same sort of cosmic community Sounds kind of weird to say it does sound weird But have you seen the Apple show? Pluribus? No, it comes up a lot it's worth watching. It's really good. Yeah, it's really good It's very very original very unique But that is essentially what happens and it has a negative aspect to it. There's a virus I don't want to give away too much of it for people that want to watch the show because it's a really good show But there's a virus that they get a signal from another world and they figure out what this signal is and Through this lab work they reveal that this signal is some sort of the encoding of a specific virus They work on this specific virus. It spreads and the entire planet becomes one consciousness Except for a small number of people interest. It's a weird show. It's a really good show I'm gonna explain any more of it like that. Don't explore alerts, but it's fucking great But it's strange. It's like wouldn't that be better? There's no crime. There's no this There's no that but then it reveals all the problems that come along Yeah, I'm gonna have to watch that as a counterpoint if anything else because it makes sense to me that everyone's kind of united as one Yeah superorganism of sorts, but but you lose all individual Yeah, you lose all the fun parts about being an imperfect person because We are an imperfect species, but that's also what makes great art. That's what makes great music It's what makes great fun most creative people have the most drama and their past From what I've seen and if you have zero trauma, you probably have sucky art I mean, I wonder why would be if they would even have a need for it It's getting your angry out right or your angst or your anxiety or depression Whatever it is you're getting something. I was telling my son not the other day Obviously his name is you know, it's hard being in these bodies especially going through puberty You know, you're just what is this thing? I'm carrying this little meat suit, you know and and I was like man I was the same way I stay I'm the same way and I picked up instruments. I started painting I'd learned to play every sport. I could physically play like there's ways to get that out, you know But it seems like a lot of that does come from just the anxiety and the answer And you know you're growing into yourself. You're starting to get the feels, you know You look at women differently. Yeah, it's like what do I do with this? Well, it retranges It requires the entire way you view the world Mm-hmm and meanwhile your body is physically changing and growing and like what am I gonna look like eventually this is weird So you know there's actually this in a small island in the Pacific They have this weird Characteristic where they start out as females everybody does we all start out as females and you drill and then male This is imposed on the developing fetus But they they don't until puberty because they're not sensitive to die hydro testosterone the precursor to testosterone So they grow up their entire life as girls and then at puberty they turn into a boy So they get raised as girls. They are girls. They're physically have girls. Not yet. Nope. What this is a planet It's an island in the South Pacific is called pseudo hermaphroditism I know I learned about this in grad school They look like they look like girls what exactly like girls they are girls and then the ovaries descend as testicles and the Clitters grows out into a penis So you think puberty is hard enough already these people turn into the opposite sex it aged like 12 or 13 It's wild man. So is this a bizarre genetic anomalies or something to do with this? So a lot of times on islands you get like really strange Characteristics of people because of the isolation that in those characteristics get selected just through genetic drift alone So it's a small population So just probably one person had this really weird trait where they're insensitive to die hydro testosterone and then it spread throughout more of the population It doesn't do anything. It's not something natural selection would select against. It's just weird to shit What is the name of this island? I don't remember the name of the island But the conditions called find it I think it's maulo island and vanadoo or that's not oh yeah Yeah, many people were on that island. This is there's a population in 1979 of 2300 people Yeah, and think historically different kinds of people there Different kinds of people cultural groups in that wild though man. I remember hearing about that in grad school to Ohio state I was just like I'm sorry what Strange I'm sure you've seen those people the ostrich feet people in Africa It's a very strange genetic anomaly where they don't grow toes They essentially have two very wide appendages Yeah, they look it looks like a like a like a weird birdfoot It's very strange but a bunch of people in this particular tribe share this trait. Is there any advantage or it's just it's like this We're just kind of happened and yeah, I don't know. I don't know. I mean I don't know what advantage there would be maybe it's Maybe it's your you sexy to him Like maybe you could move better with it. I don't know. It's that's what they look like whoa. Yeah, I don't know how I haven't seen that That's wild. Oh, no, I'm not crazy. I mean it is kind of sexy. Um if that's what you're into dog I've never gone on what you've been going on for vidoma See that seems like more of like a defect that just Work toward fixity in the population. Maybe not, but just makes you wonder like why don't we it's in Bob way apparently. Why don't we all have that? You know like what is what is the reason why we have all these toes that? It's called electro-dactyl. Yeah back of electro-dactyl I mean historically Pre-historically evolutionarily I should say if you did have something like that and you were on together You're kind of boned, you know, you're not gonna be able to run after gazelle. I don't know. Maybe you can Say there's a little feeder well adapted to the zombabzies. Oh Zombazi not zombab way Zombazi valleys rough terrain allowing them to move quickly and efficiently through the landscape. All right. I take it back I guess what kind of makes sense right because what what it's saying is that they're their bones are fused if you scroll up It'll say the condition affecting ostrich footed tribe of genetic mutation passed down through generations causes the bones in the feet to fuse resulting in a claw-like structure with two large toes toes are very vulnerable. I don't know if you ever broke in a tub. It's a broken and hour before I got on the plane to come here Really if you can see my left foot. Oh, that's hilarious. It's ridiculous. Oh, the whole thing is just purple. Yeah, they're so small Like my picture toe. I was messing around my pinky-dill the other day because I I have to trim my toenails Right and the pinky-tonus is like barely a nail. It's so tiny and I'm like, God, this little thing is so vulnerable And it has to support my entire body weight or part of my entire body weight Yeah, they're so dumb. Oh, yeah, you can see that Oh, it's jacked. Yeah, it was like right before I was coming down. I'm like you're kidding me That's all that yeah, I've broken a bunch of toes It's it's very very annoying You and you would imagine if you had two giant fucking elbow bones down there instead of these bitchy-ass little toesies Oh, maybe that's why they did it. Maybe that's what they got going on kind of a sense that that would be an adaptation Invincible fee. Yeah. Well, you know, we're we're so vulnerable We're and that's one of the weirder things like so first we should get into what you do because you have You have a very interesting theory tell everybody what your background is first of all Yeah, all right, that doesn't seem like good place to start My background is in anthropology and biological anthropology My research mostly focuses on evolutionary anatomy Biomedicine of Dumps of archaeology fairies place around the world in Montana But the reason I'm here I assume because according to my friend Matt We were we're butchering a mule deer. I think I shot and I was like yeah, I got this conference And I was like do you want to know what it's about? He's like nobody gives a shit about what you do other than you Right like I did actually used to do a lot of what I thought was cool stuff But no the the main thing is that I've become known for advocating for this idea that UFOs And the aliens are actually are time traveling future human descendants I wouldn't even say as opposed to extraterrestrials because I do think that's a component too Oftentimes get pigeonholed people are like oh you just think they're all time travelers. I don't I actually Say this all the time, but it doesn't matter. I do think there's a lot going on But but my background and the reason I Approach this question this way is because there's a lot of characteristics of these aliens that Look so hominin they look just like us and specifically what we'd expect to see in our hominin future If the same evolutionary trends continue into the future So I kind of just tie those things together and even the the saucer shaped craft seemingly or time machines themselves So it's kind of the cliff notes version Well, it's a theory that a lot of people have independently sort of come to right? Yeah, especially recently and the concept of Well, it just if you just think about ancient man. I was watching this documentary on Neanderthals last night about this One intact Neanderthal Skeleton that they found that was it had sort of been He had died in a cave and you know, there's stalagmites is stalactites remites How do you say it's her up mites or down? So he was essentially mineralized There was stuff all over the body and it took a long time for them to break this body I guess all that was in that flicks. No, I was watching on YouTube Maybe originally on Netflix, but it was just documenting how strange this this body was that they had found but it was immensely strong like much stronger than us one of the interesting things was that their visual cortex The the part of the brain that would process imagery was larger than ours 10 to 20% larger Yeah, and that these things probably had better eyesight than us Perhaps even were able to see it night and that this was a bigger stronger Version of a human being like much more durable than what we are modern 2025 homo sapiens If you just look yeah, that's it That's one of them. Cool neither human nor Neanderthal. Oh really Is this the same this might not be the same one? This is maybe a different one. That's a weird one because what's that fucking thing on its head? That's what it says. It's a slag tech growing out of it Wow in a weird form Weird like a unicorn. Yeah, it's a crest. They do they do have a sagittal ridge. Yes homo homo erectus had one where there's an offshoot in our hominin lineage called the Parentherpists or robust australes but this means and they had a full on like gorillas style real sagittal ridge X they were a vegetarian so they just chewed all day right so they had massive muscles. Yeah, their whole face is huge Wow Neanderthals kind of I mean, they were just big. It's just a robustness Anything but there is evidence from Shenadar cave in Iraq where they were using their teeth as tools We think they were like tan and hides. They were holding the hide in their mouth and then like scraping all the nasty bits Oh, and you can see that in the toothware. So yeah, they were they were pretty badass. They were the first I don't know. I think this is cool, but a lot of people think I'm a nerd too Um, they were the first to to use the flake like for two point eight million years We just hit a piece of rock and I go over the school tool But then they figured out That if you hit the rock and just right way the piece that falls off makes it even better tool It's like it's like two point five. Yes exactly You can hear and from that point on like I got to work at a place called shape You know a Jean Zach in southern France For a summer and it was an Neanderthal site And we found these actually is pretty funny because when we first got there These tools called MTA hand axes Mustaria and it was surely in tradition hand axes There were only eight found in all of Europe And they said if you guys find one of these will buy you all the beer and all the cognac You can drink so we're in the cognac region of France And we found one like the fourth or fifth day We went on to find seven more over the course of that week We doubled the number of these things in existence Wow, and all of Europe and they were not mine. They bought so many tambiers The gargiologists like to drink, you know, it's short We dig and it's boring as hell You know, it's not Indiana Jones. We're not running around Bang and hot chicks and flying on planes. We're like we got a spoon and we're doing this for eight hours So uh, yeah, I actually found the last one on the last day and it was by far the worst one Like I had to argue that this is even it should even count as one of these Um, but yeah, no, it was it was a cool site So yeah, they were they were doing well But we were doing better. We came in and we'll say something happened where we replaced them Yeah, but this is an ad for better help the holidays come with a lot of traditions gathering with family Cooking those once a year recipes and leaning into the little rituals that bring everyone together That's something I always look forward to But there's another tradition I think we should all start doing during the holidays and that's taking some time for ourselves This season you do so many things for the other people in your life You plan get together as around everyone schedule You spend hours picking out the right gifts and cooking the right food But you also deserve just as much attention Otherwise you'll burn yourself out So do yourself a favor and take some me time Going a hunting trip have a quiet night with a book Maybe even schedule a session with a therapist Therapy is an extremely effective way to make sure you're focusing on what you need And better help can easily set you up They have access to a wide network of fully qualified therapists And they do a lot of the work for you Even if that first match isn't a good fit you can easily switch to another therapist This December start a new tradition by taking care of you Our listeners get 10% off at betterhelp.com slash JRE That's better H-E-L-P.com slash JRE The point is as time goes on humans today are probably the most feeble version of humans that have ever existed And we're with the most feeble versions of people that have existed within the last century Right? Like if you go back to humans from the 1920s or since humans from the 2020s People have way less testosterone now, way or higher instances of miscarriages, way lower sperm count You know, there's a lot of factors that are at play right now that are changing what a human is And if you extrapolate, if you look at the future You would naturally say, well, we're probably going to be very thin It seems like there's at least some sort of a push to eliminate gender Like gender seems like it's on the table as whether or not it's even necessary There's all sorts of new technological innovations that are leading to The possibility at least sometime in the future of an artificial womb There's genetic engineering with CRISPR and a lot of other different technologies that are being explored That we might be able to engineer human beings and then even create a complete individual human being Without a mother without a father So if you thought about what that looks like in the future, look one of our problems in this planet is We all have different ideologies, different religions come from different parts of the world We look different and human beings as tribal primates have a tendency that other We other different tribes. Those are not us. We are us. Those are the enemy We go up, but if everybody's exactly the same and we share one mind You know, then a lot of our problems go away If we no longer have to compete for resources We no longer have the desire to procreate and to acquire land and to be you know to have a territory We eliminate a lot of our issues and that's what these things look like when you look at the archetypal these iconic Sort of shapes that have been on cave walls all the way up to close encounters with the third kind One thing they share is that they have no muscle. They have large heads. They have big eyes And they childlike they're really paid on more thick as we say Yeah, you just tied together like a lot of really important points related to this theory aspects of why they're always interested in our gametes Why they come back and put that little machine on a man to collect semen why they're constantly taking eggs from females and planning fetuses pulling them back out later like they're clearly focused on reproduction gamut extraction and One of the things that might be fueling that in the future if these are future humans Let's just assume for a second hypothetically is that they might be having problems directly resulting from These trends towards self domestication these trends toward feminization These trends toward reduce sperm counts which is 60% Across most populations of the world in the industrialized world 50% across the entire world Yeah problems with reproduction and vitro fertilization Exogenesis chambers might help solve some of those problems growing the fetus outside of the body So so yeah, and like you said, you know, what do they look like? They look like kind of Hybrid between males and females to some extent, but there's still an essence Of gender like if you talked to Willie Streber, you know, he's with this bean He says in communion that I had a sense that she was a woman. I don't know why I'm gonna kind of sense that so It's almost like the the essence of the individual the soul of the individual still retains that sort of gender identity Even though our bodies are becoming more childlike more gender indiscriminate I don't know but yeah, yet another one of those ways in which we might sort of grow together as a species Now when you say they are extracting sperm like how many of these stories do you Take seriously there's a lot of these stories a great question. Yeah, you know, there's unfortunately for any sort of spectacular Public thing that's in the zeitgeist like alien abduction whether it's with Lee Streber from communion or the John Mac books The guy from Harvard that wrote What was that abduction passport to the cosmos? Yeah, yeah, two great books great books, but These are all books about Encounters closing counters of the third time with some sort of a being from another place Whatever it is. It's just not a human being and it seems to be Technologically it disappeared It seems to be one thing they all seem to share as they seem to be able to communicate Telekinatically or telepathically. Yeah Yeah, and I mean they aren't human, but they are very human too So for instance like that's one of the main reasons I started exploring this I was actually kind of put into this when I was eight or nine years old Sort of activated in a way and put on this path by a weird thing that happened to me what happened to you well So I talk about it in my first two books identified flying objects and the extra tempestro model where my I learned about A close encounter that my dad had he was a veterinarian and northeast Ohio where I grew up and he was out one Night on a coal with another guy. So there's two people as far as jail and I next reliability scale How's more reliability because there's multiple witnesses? It's also strange on his scale because they crested the hill. There's a bright light Sussamish country. There's no lights in homage country and all of a sudden this bright light darts toward him Hover's just above their truck starts back to where it was and straight up into space like an incredible speed So this happened before I was born, but I overheard him telling the story to some friends One night he got Whitley Streepers book communion as most people did in the 1980s and as they should because it's a great book and I walked into the living room The book is sitting on a shelf facing out and I remember like it was yesterday I sort of stopped and there was like this light like a white light and then I saw this image in my mind of like An early hominin chimpanzee like creature a modern human and then that archetypal gray alien from the cover With this information. What if they're related? What if they are us from the future? And obviously I mean that's why I became a biological anthropologist people are always like so you saw this Yeah, it was like a flash like a light and it you know That's weird looking back on it because I know a lot more about these experiences I've talked to people that have had these types of experiences. What was the setting? It was our living room So it was like the you come in the front door and just to the left there's this living room Built-in bookshelf Willie's books right there. I just turned the corner saw it and then like Just kind of They just came like I didn't know shit about evolutionary biology You saw it was so hot. It was hot. How in my mind just this white light image and those that image of the three faces and then the question Could they be us from the future? And a lot of people are like how'd you get into UFOs like your your biological anthropologist? It's the opposite I got into biological anthropology to research this question of what are they could be us from the future? Huh so So this you felt like at that moment it wasn't just like a weird thought or a dream it felt like a message like what did it feel like? Yeah Yeah, it was some it was a tasking You know, I think I think Rupert Sheldrick said it that that people don't have ideas ideas have people I think that was like the hey go do this thing Mm-hmm, and I did that's why we're here now talking about it And obviously, you know, we got to be careful about like selection bias and confirmation bias like I didn't go into this I didn't go into grad school. I wasn't telling but in grad school. I was there because they would have kicked me out But I went into it with an open mind, but I was there to study these things because of that event when I was a years old wow Yeah, it's it is a problem the confirmation bias it is a problem with Wanting it to be real and I struggle with that because I desperately want it to be real and So every time I talk to someone, you know, I've talked to a bunch of people that are you know, air quote whistle blowers and Some of them I think for sure have been sent in here to distribute this information. Yeah, no doubt for sure because it's a great place to do it Yeah, I'll listen to you. Yeah, I'll entertain almost anything which is great We need that yeah, but yeah, I mean obviously there's people who are gonna take advantage of it But I think it's also important for me to say I'm not convinced You know, I don't know how much of this is horseshoe, but it's not zero. No, and that was your question is how how do I Yeah, differentiate among these different cases um I do draw from Hi, Nick's in his book the UFO experience he lists out how we all should approach this based on the reliability scale and The strangeness scale um, Jacques Valle also drew from that helped him develop it It's part of the invisible college and all of his work but Regardless of like my own personal discern mix my second book the extra tempestro model is about 30 case studies 15 main all of his work. But regardless of like my own personal discern mix, my second book, the Extra Tempestro model is about 30 case studies, 15 main case studies, but then I pull in other ones. And it explores the different theories. Obviously, the main one being the Extra Tempestro idea, this future, which by the way, I saw the word of the day. Today was anachronistic. And I was like, man, that would have been a way better word than Extra Tempestro, which everybody struggles with. I could have called him anachronauts. And that's how cool. Anachronauts. Oh, that sounds really cool. I know. What the hell is I thinking, man? Anyway, but so one of the most commonly reported things across all cases, regardless of what you think is bullshit or you think this definitely happened is they really want our sperm. They really need or want our reproductive material or games. And it's funny, when I wrote my first book in 2020, I started in 2012, published it in 2019, right at the end. I did an interview. And some of it's like, have you heard of Jim Peniston? Like no, which is kind of a failing on my behalf. I'll admit that one. It turns out, so it was the Rendlesham Forest incident. He touched this craft. He got this binary code. And he, when deciphering the binary code, they legitimately specifically said, we are you from the future. We're having problems with reproduction. He underwent hypnotic regression. We're having problems with reproduction. And we need this genetic material to help ourselves. And a lot of people are like, well, why are they coming back and doing stuff to us? I think they're coming back and getting stuff from us because of problems they're having larger related to what you were talking about earlier with the reduced sperm counts, the problem with female infertility. What if we do try to create the perfect human specimen, or we try to cure these genetic diseases through genetic manipulation, crisper, and we screw something up? We might have to come back. We can't go to another planet. There aren't people on these planets. We can't go and sample gamutes from these other places. We might have to go into our past to get those wild type on, uh, unmanipulated gamutes in order to fix these problems. Yeah, that's, that's a crazy level of technological sophistication, the ability to venture back in time. And somehow another not fuck up the timeline that's leading to, I mean, this is the problem that's always been theorized about time travel. Anything that you do if you went back in time, any interactions, you would completely change how the future would play out. In the many worlds and interpretations. Yeah. So that idea is unfortunately very pervasive, and mostly because of back to the future, which I think grew into the brains of most people might do certainly in my generation. Um, but what most visit and physicists don't agree on many things, but most agree that we live in what's called a block universe landscape time block time, where if you imagine all moments from the very beginning of the Big Bang to the end of the universe, where all matter disappears into like a black hole or contracts or whatever it does, all moments are already there. They exist as this massive four dimensional block of all moments, all world lines, everything. So you go back into the past as you perceive it. You can do whatever you want. You can walk around step on butterflies, you know, slap people on the face, kick over, you know, dinosaurs or whatever. I don't think we can go back that far, but you could do anything you want and it doesn't change anything because you're going back in the block universe and doing those things you were always already going to do. And when you get home, everything's the same because that was already there passed to everybody that stayed behind. That was already there passed. It was only the future for you to go back and do those things that you were already going to do. And then you just went and did them get home, everything's the same because you were always going to do those things in the first place. That's hard. And if that is the actual model of the universe. And again, I can only work in writing these books. I can only work from what we know now. Clearly there's a lot of things we don't know. I'm not claiming to know anything beyond what we can know right now. But physicists, despite not knowing what time is, they know it's an emergent phenomenon. There's something more fundamental that time comes from, but they do agree on this block universe model. And in that case, there is no paradox. How do they all agree on that? Like wouldn't you have to test that and come up with some sort of a hypothesis and then try to prove it or disprove it? I shouldn't say they all agree because there is the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics where if you went back in that situation, it would be change. You would be changing the timeline. Would it be changing your timeline or would it be changing a different timeline as the question? And how would you know there's more paradoxes with changing things than not changing things? Why do you confidently state that you don't think that they can go back to the dinosaur age? Partly because three different reasons. One, I think they need tremendously high speed in order to be able to go back into the past. So basically, again, working from all I can work from in this time with the limited primitive primate knowledge that I have in the year 2012 to 2025. I basically just started with Einstein's theory of relativity, which he published in 1905 on the literature dynamics of moving bodies. And then in 1915, he published his paper on general relativity. From that point on almost instantly, there were solutions to spewed equations that showed with the right parameters of a massively highly energetic rotating ring or sphere or disk that you could create close time like curves. That you could actually orient light cones back toward the past so you can physically go into the past. We saw this with lens and thirring in like 1917 and 18. Kurt Rodell. Go Del Universe was not long after, I think the 20s maybe. And then importantly, in 1970s, you had Frank Tipler who showed mathematically that you can shrink that down to a disk. He actually called it a disk. And there's one of the reasons I think that these are time machines is because it has all of the parameters described by Frank Tipler. He wasn't talking about UFOs, but they seemingly have the ability to jump in and not a time they appear and disappear. And I'm talking too much. So I'll wrap this up in a second. But you're definitely not talking too much. Well, I mean, we're here to talk, but I have an internal trigger where I'm like, shut up, master, I'm talking to you. I'm not going to listen to that trigger, let it roll. So anyway, you know, if you look at the history of how we understand backward time travel, what I think they're doing is that I think they're combining general relativity and special relativity. So I think they're orienting the light cones toward the past by rotating these things really, really fast. You hear that all the time. They power up, they're spinning, or at least there's some sort of flywheel on the outside that's spinning. I think that's what's allowing them to move toward the past. And then they take off. So it's that high speed that I think allows them to go further into the past. So they're using your aware of the twin's paradox, I'm sure. Time deletion where you have two twins, they're the same age. And then one goes into a spaceship, they move it tremendously high speed. They come back and they're much younger than their twin because time moved faster back on Earth. I think they're using that high speed motion while light cones are oriented toward the past in order to travel deeper into the past through that process of time deletion. There are limits to how fast we can go. Einstein was very adamant about this because there's an increase in inertial forces. The faster you go relative to the speed of light. That's why I thought we could never go. That's why he thought that anything with mass could never go faster than the speed of light. Light can do it because it's a wave or particle or both. So I think there's a limit to how fast we can go. The other reason is because Jim Peniston in this hypnotic regression said that. He's like, we can only go 40 to 60,000 years into the past or we might not get back. You also have, and this is a more speculative one. So take it for you also have the Dan Burish testimony of this J-Rod, this allegedly captured alien. Who said we're from the future? We are you from the future and we're from about 55 to 60,000 years in your future. So those three things together are why I don't think we could go back 65 million years to hunt dinosaurs, which actually would be kind of fun. When you've been talking about going the speed of light, you're talking about not traditional propulsion, but some form of propulsion that allows you to go at insane speeds. Yeah, electromagnetic is what it seems to be. And importantly, the electromagnetic force is 10 to the 40 times more powerful in gravity. So not only do I think that's what they used to fly. I think that's what they used to manipulate space time. Actually in Dan Burish is not Dan Burish. Dan Farrah, I think you just tattoo him on to the age of disclosure. Yes. There's this really cool thing at the end where how put off and I think Eric Davis as well, we're talking about this space time bubble, right? A really weird thing happened when you get to that in a second, but I don't want to jump around too much because I'll lose people in myself probably. But this space time bubble that they form around the craft, I think is also indicative of the fact that they're manipulating space time that they're traveling in and out of time. They use it to hide in plain sight. They manipulate the rate at which they move relative to us and their frame of reference and they're moving fast all around us. And they've slowed time down outside of that bubble. So everything is really, really slow to them and they can easily evade our bullets and our missiles, but we don't see them because we don't have that frame rate of perception. And if you slow videos down, sure, you've seen these all the time where there's and then you slow it down and you can see this saucer shaped craft moving slowly across the sky once you slow down the frame rate. But a really funny thing happened because I've never actually talked about this with anyone before. I owe a lot of the fact that anybody even knows who I am to help put off. When I first started talking about this publicly in 2018 and then I published my book in 2019 identified flying objects, he, I guess, reached out to the head of Mufan at the time who was putting together the 50th anniversary Mufan event and was like, hey, should I have this Mike Masters guy come talk? And I found that out from the head of Mufan. He's like, hey, just so you know, how put off with all people recommended I contact you. I had no idea that is so I get on the internet and I Google how put off. He also put Jesse Michaels, mutual friend and touch with me after I think he did interview with him and Weinstein. Forget his name. Eric? Yeah. Yeah. So he did an interview with those two. I guess how it was like, hey, should we tell to Mike Masters? He did and we talked and we've done stuff together. But what was cool is that at the end of that age of disclosure film when he's talking about the space time bubble, I thought back to after my first book came out and I was contacted by someone who claimed to be an ex-intelligence person who explained that exact same thing to me back in 2019 that these things aren't doing 10,000 G maneuvers that would crush anything inside to them. And their frame of reference, what they feel is completely different than what we see because in that space time bubble, they can be moving at 50,000 miles an hour, do a right hand turn and it would splatter anything inside because of the G forces. That's what what we see on the outside. But in that space time bubble, they probably feel one to G is at the most. So I started thinking, man, was that how did how reach out to me with like a different email address and say, Hey, just so you know, this is how these things are happening. This is how they're able to do it. And I was a dumbass. I still am a dumbass, but I was an extra big dumbass back then. And I was like, Oh, cool. Thanks, man. You know, like a story went viral about my books and Fox News picked it up and space.com. And so I was going through a bunch of emails. They recognized I wasn't getting what they were saying. I was not picking up with their putting down. And they were like, No, this is important. Set it again. And then it clicked. I was like, Oh, yeah, that makes perfect sense. They're manipulating the rate at which time passes in this bubble around the craft. And we see something completely different. So when we're seeing this, we're imagining what we can do. And we're sort of saying what would be an advanced version of what we can do. And what this technology is is something that's levels of magnitude beyond even our theoretical, like any sort of idea that we have currently about, you know, potential future timelines of technology. Yeah. There's no one talking about gravity bubbles that allow you to instantaneously traverse immense gaps in the universe. Well, they might be talking about a buying closed doors or right powder snare for space. Right. And have been for 70 years. That's the real problem with disclosure. Like how, how much progress could we have made if they had opened up all this stuff? And you got to imagine if you were an intelligent life form from another planet, you know, Diana Pasulka talked about her and Gary Nolan talked about how they refer to some of these things as donations. They don't think of them as crashed vehicles because some of them are not crashed. They're completely intact. And I think David Grusch said that too, didn't he? Yeah, I believe he did. Yeah. And even, you know, Lazar when he was talking about it, he, you know, he had a sports model. Wasn't that fully intact too? Fully intact. Yeah. Fully intact in operation. I want to apparently float around. Okay. Yeah. That'd be fun. Well, that was one of the reasons, you know, the whole story of how he got is a really crazy story. So he used to work at Los Alamos. He was a propulsion expert. Guy put a jet engine on the back of a Honda. It was real freak. You know, he made a hydrogen Corvette like the 1990s. He was nutty dude. Clearly an engineer. Yeah. That's part checks out. So he, uh, guess his job on area S4 and goes there and it's all documented in Jeremy Corbel's, uh, excellent movie, uh, Bob Lazar area 51 flying saucers. So he goes there and sees this thing and it's got a American flag sticker on it. And, you know, they, they basically say, tell us how it works. And he's like, oh, this is ours because he sees it as a sticker on it. And then he realizes this is made out of some completely unknown alloy. There's no seams in it. It seems to be 3D printed. There's no controls inside of it. It's designed for something that's 3 feet tall. It's all very fucking weird. Um, so he's working on this thing, not making much headway at all. They understood that there was an element element 115 that was, uh, not even on the periodic table, uh, eventually found to actually be a thing by the large adjunct collider. Um, but even then they only measured it for a millisecond, right? So then he's saying that they have this stable version of this element and you bombard it with radiation and creates this sort of gravity drive. Um, he's working on this thing and it's all top secrets. We cannot tell his wife. So they're calling him up at 10 o'clock like, hey, get to the airport. Uh, we need you. And so he would have to fly out at random times, fly out to S4. And his wife was like, this motherfucker's having to fare. Well, I'm going to have an affair too. So she starts fucking her flight attendant, or a flight instructor. I think that's what it was. Um, when you have that kind of clearance, they are monitoring everything. They're monitoring all your phone calls or do those. So they've realized that his wife is having an affair and they think that he will be emotionally unstable and it's too dangerous to have him working on this insanely top secret information if he's not stable. So they, they tell him, you know, we're going to at least temporarily relieve you of your duties. So he's freaked out and he tells his friends like, Hey, this, this is, this is what they're doing there. They have these things and they fly them every Wednesday. I'm going to take you guys. There's an area we can go watch. So they take, he takes his friends out there on two separate occasions, I believe. Um, they get caught. They get caught, gets arrested. Uh, they release him and he realizes like, I'm kind of fucked. They might kill me. I'm going to have to go public with this contacts, George Knapp. I did see that. Then the whole thing is history. Yeah. Yeah. No, that's wild, man. And I, I think it's still happening. You know, there's still these whistle blowers. He says they, they used to fly them and you could go watch them fly these things and they were moving these really weird ways across the sky that you cannot do with conventional aircraft that they only sort of understood how to like pick it up and put it down. They didn't understand how to like really that was not a dream like, right? Yeah. Yeah. I remember as a kid, I've been obviously been in this for a long time. I remember as a kid seeing videos of people going out and then they eventually closed it down. You couldn't get to that spot. But there was like a, that was during the Obama administration during the Obama administration. They actually had to admit that area 51 was real because before that they didn't know one even knew it was real. I mean, that was always just a joke. Like area 51 was like for fun. But then they said, no, it is real and we need to expand the forbidden boundary. Yeah. And isn't that when people are going to like bum rush it too? Is that when that happened? That was during COVID. Okay. During COVID, there was much dorks that like really crush every 51. That's a good way to die. They'll fucking kill you. And that's the show selection. Yeah. They're working on a lot of stuff out there. Some of it is weapons. Right. They can have you uh internet dorks from Reddit just running out into area 51. Yeah. I think they eventually realized that. So I don't think they went out there. But I could have been bad. I think it was all bullshit. There were no. What are you going to do? How do you think about there? Yeah. Engagement farming. Yeah, man. There's a lot of crazy shit that's been going on. It's been going on for a while. Jamie and I were talking before and about the stove piping too and all the dope piping. Yeah. The different ways that they compartmentalize what they're doing and they talked about it in age of disclosure too. That's a big problem because certain people are working on these parts of the craft to reverse engineer them to understand them. But they don't have the whole picture. Liz are always talking about that from the 1980s. Yeah. In 1989, he said the people that are working on metallurgy. We're not in contact with the people that are working on propulsion. And he's like, science cannot operate like that. Yeah. No, it can't because you need to know what's going on beyond just this little part that you're working on. And if you have a bunch of people that are sharing information, you get a much more comprehensive understanding of what this thing is. Yeah. We all benefit from communication. Right. Because there could be something involved in the actual structure of it that lends to its ability to do something. It might not be simply just structure. It might be structure with some sort of an ability. Yeah. You can't see the forest through the trees in these situations. And it's unfortunate. And what the argument they made in this dakko is that we're putting ourselves a disadvantage because other countries are probably retrieve these things too. And they might be working on yes and secrecy. But if people are working together and not stove by opinion this thing, add in for an item, then they might be able to actually make more progress faster than us. So part of the disclosure pushes to be like, yeah, these things are real. We have them let's get our best scientists together to work on this holistically instead of compartmentalizing it. Which is imagine if they had done that from 1947 where we would be. Exactly. If that's real. If Roswell was real, if all the crashes real, Philip Drake course, I was correct and all these people were tone of truth. I know. And we still have to preface these things with if it's real. And yeah, I do the same thing. I mean, coming from academia, when I wrote my first book, I had to be like, if this is real. But it's hard, it's this paradox of sorts because how do you write to explain something that isn't real? Right. What's the point of even doing that? Yeah. So I think we have to assume I'm actually teaching a class Montana Tech this spring called UFO History and Science. Oh, I'd take that if I was in school. I think I think it's going to be a lot. I know. I'm pretty stoked about it. And I had these artists design a poster in a Norway and the UK and just this crazy like I was like, how, how conservative should I be with this? Like just a UFO? And I gave them total artistic freedom and there's like an alien holding the earth and this UFO. I'm like, I guess that's what I'm doing. Plastered it all over campus to recruit people to take the class. But like I'm going in on day one, we're not, we're not going to fuck around with like or these things real. We're not going to waste time on that. We're going to jump in. These are real. Here's what we're doing. This is what we know. This is what we don't know. Explore the theory is explore the history, explore the prehistory because it's, it's always to time. Like these things, these things are real. You think they're real. I know what makes you convinced. Um, I have read enough accounts in researching this and from people that I know, I mean, starting from when I was a kid hearing my biological father's account, you know, the way he told it. And then I interviewed him again in college to try to get more information because I was just over hearing from the stairs when I was supposed to be in bed. He saw what he saw. And then eventually I saw some UFOs. What did you say? I was kind of pissed actually because I started talking about this in 2018 and people were always like, you ever seen a UFO? No, never seen a UFO like to. And then finally in 2022, uh, it might have been late 2021. I don't remember exactly when it was kind of warmish. So it was probably 2021. But I was everybody's in bed, met my house. I live in a canyon and I was having a whiskey and I was like, I just walked up the canyon wall for some reason. Like the hill behind my house. I don't really know why. I turned around and I could see these five super bright lights over what's known as the east ridge and butementana. They were just like sitting there right over the east ridge. Like, well, that's not normal. Those aren't usually there. And they weren't stars. You know, they're way too big, way too close. I would say they were probably within eight to five to eight miles. You know, they, they were in the distance, but they were like there. And then I just kind of looked at them for a second. Oh, that's weird. And then one by one from right to left, they just went shot off toward the southeast at like crazy speed. You know, like the kind of like in and Star Wars or Star Trek, hyperdrive and that little light trail, like just one by one until they were all gone that I have no conventional explanation for that. Wow. But I've never been one of those people that's like I need to see it to believe it. Right. Because I believe the people who say the same thing over and over, there's patterns that we can extract from people's testaments who have had these closing counters. And that's one unfortunate thing that's happening right now is we're talking about the pilots talking about police, but people have been seeing these forever, but they did such a good job manufacturing the stigma around it with Project Science Project, Grudge Project, Blue Book, did this count these people to make them seem insane. You know, these, that is one of the main points of evidence that I would point to that there is something. When people think there isn't something, I'm like, you should really pay attention to what they were trying to do during Project Blue Book. Yeah. Because one of them, I have a body mind, my friend Steve Graham, shout out to Steve. When he was a boy, he was living in New York, upstate New York, and he filmed this red orb that was flying across the sky and he took some photographs of it. And they called someone, some officials, somewhere, I don't remember, he was, he was very young. And they said, we're going to analyze the photos and then we'll bring them back to you. And they never returned the photographs. When he called, he said, no agents, there's no record of any agents coming to visit you. We don't know what to tell you. So they just took his photos and that was it. But he said, whatever it was, you know, he was young, I believe he was 10 or 11. And he said, whatever it was was really weird. He goes, it was this red orb that was flying through the sky. It was a spacecraft, it wasn't a sun, it wasn't a meteor. It looked like it was moving purposely and under control. And it was there long enough for him to take a polaroid of it. Yeah. And they just completely erased any memory of it or any, any evidence of it. When he called, like I said, they said, no agents visited you, whatever the agents name or there's no agents by that name. That's kind of the status quo. But they tried to make you look like a fool. Absolutely. And that was intentional. Like the stated mission of project grudge was to debunk these things, come up with conventional explanations and make people seem like idiots. Right. Not science to investigate. No, no, no, no, the purpose wasn't let's get to the bottom of this. Find out is this Russia is Russia doing this? That was not the purpose. The purpose was make these people look like fools. You only do that if you know something that other people don't. Yeah. This episode is brought to you by Monster Ultra. Everybody knows the white monster that clean white can zero sugar crisp. It's everywhere lately. Jim's your favorite convenience store studios. You name it. I see people toss it into their bag before training or a long drive. Big flavor, zero sugar, that same monster energy kick. But Ultra didn't stop there. There's a whole lineup now. Vice guava blue Hawaiian and the new wild passion. My favorite is strawberry dreams. It's smooth and sweet with a touch of tart strawberry flavor. Ooh. And if you're loyal to the white can, cool. Just know that you've got options. Visit monsterenergy.com to learn more. And it worked. It did a damn good job at it because we still feel like Fool is talking about this. Oh, yeah. We still have to check ourselves and be like, is this real? If this is real, you know, right. But, but I think that shame is starting to diminish. I think the stigma is starting to go away. Well, I think the New York Times article, that was a game changer. That was a big one. Yeah. And then from then on, it's been this trickle. These guys like Ryan Graves and you know, guys like David favor, these David favor guys that was, you know, he was in a fighter jet saw this thing move from 50,000 feet above sea level to sea level in less less than a second. Yeah. And they saw this thing. There was something under the water below it. It's like whatever he saw. And if you ever talked to him, you ever ever talked to him? I've talked to Alex Dietrich who was with him. Sure. And not. He's a very reliable guy in very intelligent by the book. Very disciplined. No, he was like a top gun pilot. He's leading the exact group. Yeah. He's a commander. Yeah. So and when he describes it, it sounds very real. Whatever, whatever he's talking about, he experienced, I believe that. And there's also video of it, this video of it flying. They have the radar data. They know that it went to their designated meet up point. The cap point, yeah, which is really weird. It is. And indicates they knew the future. Or they were part of our military. Right. I kind of wonder if they take tech because it is somewhat anomalous in the context of a lot of things in the UFO lore as far as spinning discs or big triangular craft. This one kind of seems like one of ours. Well, it is odd that these things happen where there's a lot of military training exercises. Like this one was off the coast of San Diego. It was off the Nimitz. You know, so they had the Nimitz which was out there. Obviously, you got a lot of military in San Diego. And the Roosevelt too. I think is where they were capturing the radar. And the ones that Ryan grave experience were all east coast. Again, it's all near military bases. It's all where they do military training exercises. Yeah. And why not figure out what you can do with people that you train with already anyway? Right. And why not see like what is detectable and what's not? You know, Ryan Graves talks about how in 2014 they upgraded all the sensors and the jets. And then also they start picking these things up all over the place. He said they were encountering them virtually every time they went out, which is so weird. Imagine you're encountering was it a circle inside of a sphere or a sphere inside of a circle in a sphere? Yeah. Whatever it was. Yeah. Which one was it? Was a circle in a sphere? It was a disal control of a sphere. It was a little circle in an cube or something. Very fucking weird. Whatever that is. It is. Able to hover motionless and like 200 knots of wind. Yeah. And it would make sense if we are reverse engineering these. They're gonna look pretty primitive. It's basically a big propane tank that they're flying around. Like they probably started simple. It's probably unmanned, but they're testing that capability to like manipulate the space time to shoot off. You know, because it dropped 10, 80,000 feet. That's what I was saying. A cube. Oh, I had a back sphere. Yeah. I can remember. Apparently my dyslexia extends to images to explain using UFO patents. Click on that. Explained. A recent article about the hill is highlighted the reports of a cube in a sphere. The image is to explain using UFO patents. Click on that. Explained. A recent article about the Hill is highlighted the reports of a Cubanosphere, UAP military pilots have been seeing as reported by graves, where he once again highlights how often our pilots are seeing these things and why he doesn't believe their conventional drones or balloons. And so this is obviously some sort of a computer-generated rendition. Ah, that fucking pop up. Yeah. For sure. But so I mean, I think I can get a picture of it, but... We hear the patents grow up a little bit. So a month ago I did a deep dive on a post about UFO patents, how magneto-hydro-dynamic propulsion systems could explain some of the observations, includes an expired patent for the 1960s and a few newer patents describing not only the propulsion, but how the plasma field can make the craft invisible radar. Huh. Huh. Yeah. I mean, again, it makes sense. Like if we have been reverse engineering these for 70 years, we would start bringing them out. They would look weird. They wouldn't necessarily look like the craft that we struggled to fly a groomed lake that we could go up and down with. And that's about it. Like they would look like this little thing that's simple. It's based on its propane tank or it's a cube within a sphere. I'd probably add that backwards again. And then experiment with this. See what you can do. And a lot of people make the argument, wow, they do that dangerous. You know what? It's a collision. If they are actually manipulating spacetime and these things, like they seemingly are with the saucer shaped craft, you don't have to worry about that. You know, this isn't a cat and mouse game where the cat and mouse are equal. Like you have complete control of spacetime and around that area. You're not going to run into anybody. They're all moving extremely slowly relative to you. According to Putoff and Davis at the end of that doco and whoever reached out to me, whether it was how they're not, somebody reached out to me and explained the same thing in 2019. And it makes a lot of damn sense. And to kind of extend it into my area of research, if you come and stipulate space and time in and around this craft, what's keeping you from using that to travel through time? I guess. I mean, but again, that's with the different model, not the multi world's model, but what was the other model that you described? Blocky University of North University of North University of Missouri. Yeah. The idea that they would be so advanced that they could genetically engineer a body and get to whatever state they are at where they communicate telepathically, but yet they can't solve the problem of old DNA, like needing what do they need? Genetic diversity? Like what is it? What are they trying to get out of us? Are they trying to get the source material instead of the old stuff or instead of the stuff that they've had forever? One of the arguments I made in my first and second books is that really since European colonialism started about 500 years ago, we are all becoming one inner breeding population. So it used to be that you had different isolated populations and then occasionally there would be gene flow that introduces new genes. If we all are just one population on this inbred island of earth, where are you going to get new gene variants? And then you combine that with the things we just talked about with the potential for things to go wrong with trying to make designer babies or the trends toward reduced fertility and men and women. And importantly, the potential that there could be some massive cataclysm that puts us into a huge bottleneck where there just is no genetic diversity at all. Like if you think about something that happened that wiped out a huge percentage of the population and there are warnings about this over and over again with the experiences and contactees, they're like, there's some cataclysmic thing coming. If that were to happen, all of those problems were already having, all of the trends that are already leading to us having problems with fertility in the future would be hugely exacerbated by a very limited gene pool. Well we know that human beings have gotten down to a very small population in the past. So we are already kind of limited. Yeah. In our diversity. What do you think of the theory that human beings have been genetically engineered? Man, when I first started in all this, I wouldn't touch that one because I had to impose restrictions on myself so I didn't seem like a crazy person. And keep your academic standing. I don't really care anymore. That's to be honest. Well you sold a few books. Yeah, I sold some books. I mean that's the thing. I do have the respect of my peers. And it's not a career killer anymore. No exactly. No, I'm back in 2018 and I was kind of rolling the dice. I was really nervous about it. I went to the chair of my department and was like, hey just so you know in case there's any pushback and published in this book about whether UFOs or future humans and he looked at me and cocked his head and it's like, that's our job. So what were supposed to be doing? Asking questions like that. It was all pissed off like why are you even asking me this or telling me this? Well that's a cool guy before. I was like sweet. All right, well check. I got one. I got one on the board at least. But I was really conservative in this approach. The Dean actually of my college who gave me an award for scholarship and researchers and there's a lot of amazing researchers at Montana technological university. Like we're very well known for research and scholarship. She gave me an award in 2022 for research and scholarship and all I was doing at that point was UFO stuff. You know that was kind of a nod too. She was telling me the other day in a meeting from the chair of the department unfortunately. And she was like oh your dissertation book. Because I did kind of write my first book as a dissertation. It's very scientific. It's very dense. It's very technical. But I needed to do that because of the stigma and because of the shame. And you're right it is changing which is great. But there are certain things that we still can't. That are hard for me to talk about because it starts to get into ancient aliens territory and that's one of them. Are they manipulating us genetically? Have they been for a long time? I don't know. I used to say I don't know so I didn't have to talk about it. Now I say I don't know because I genuinely don't know. Maybe. Well how could you? Good point. I mean it's all theoretical. But there seems to be a trend in at least the encounter reports. There's when people have reported some sort of communication with these things. There is a lot of talk of genetic manipulation. There's a lot of talk of... It's the most common trope. Yeah. But it also makes sense when you look at how different we are than any other animal that exists or has existed. We're so advanced and so weird and we vary so much. Like biologically and structurally. I mean there's animals. There's different kinds of wolves. There's gray wolves and red wolves and they vary. And red wolves and gray wolves, they can't even interbreed and create viable offspring in terms of like, they would be hybrids if they did breed, where they wouldn't. But they don't breed with red wolves. And coyotes, which is also a type of wolf. But that's kind of where it ends. Whereas humans are fucking... At least coyotes all look like coyotes. Wolves all kind of look like wolves. Look with humans. You get seven-foot tall people and five-foot tall people and round people and thin people. But we are actually all very similar genetically. There's a study done in the 70s. Hooking at polymorphisms and they found that between like, it used to be thought there were races like African Asians and Europeans. That was it. They didn't consider Native Americans or Australians or anybody. But they did this study on polymorphisms found that only about 6 to 7 percent of all of our genetic differences can be accounted for by those between group differences. And they did the same thing with white chromosomes. They did the same thing with craniofacial anatomy and found that were all very similar. So despite those differences in height, weight, skin, color, hair, color, eye, color, we're very, very similar. Which could again lead to problems related to genetic homogenization, limited gene pool in the future, needing to go back and sample gamutes from the past. So argument, I hear people make related to what you're saying. An argument for potential genetic manipulation of the human species over time is that it all happened really fast. We see this acceleration and our rate of change, rate of our technological development. Those things might indicate that there's some sort of seeding in the past with not just technology but the genetics that allow us to expand our minds and develop these things. One of those is the weird stories from ancient scripts, ancient texts like the book of Enoch. Like what is that all about? That's some weird stuff. We're talking about the watchers coming down from the sky and mating with humans and creating the Nephilim who destroy everything. Yeah, I might get some shit for this but I would be willing to bet that all major religions and the little ones have some sort of UFO alien component to the myth and legend that gave rise to them over time. It makes sense. It does. Actually, the third book I wrote, Revelation flips the whole script on Revelation and it interjects time travelers that interjects this whole, there is for a while there's this question of like whether there was a fight over the timeline, whether the grays were coming back to because some cataclysm needed to happen and we all went underground and that's why we have big eyes and pale skinnings. We had to evolve underground for a while and then another group like trying to keep that from happening. So the book kind of explores that in a fictional capacity and I wrote it because my friends weren't reading my science books because they're dense and scientific and I was like man, you know, what if I wrote a book that's just like a crass sex drug fueled exploration of like this time travel idea and that's where that book came from. It still ties in all of these same concepts scientifically but in the story, like the main character is an inter temporal sex researcher. She goes back in time and just fucks everybody to learn what sex is the book I gave you and I got here actually. It's a weird one. That's right here. It's a weird one but it's super fun to write, you know, and they're like and then her, the professor in this book, he's like the, he's an inter temporal drug king pen of sorts. But it's like, it's exploring the same idea in a different way, you know, with fiction, it's satire, it's comedy. The word most commonly uses it's hilarious. It's a comedy book. You know, because I wanted people that don't read the science books to still be introduced to this concept and the science behind it in a different way and then it was so much more fun to write than those science books. What do you think of when people start theorizing about some sort of a breakaway civilization that lives under the ocean? Yeah. So we actually published a paper about that last June about the crypto terrestrial hypothesis. You mentioned it on your show and really funny when, as it went viral internationally. It was absolutely insane to impact this thing had. I did go on Fox and Friends one morning to talk about it and then the next day I did. What made it go viral? What was the, well, because I published it with two guys from Harvard. I was a co-author on the paper and so it's click bait. It's Harvard researchers say dinosaurs are aliens and they live among you. So stuff like that. And it worked because it, it, I, yeah, well, it makes you go, what? Your yours was the funniest one. You guys pulled it up on your screen and you're like, man, these, these Harvard researchers must snuck in where they're doing the psilocybin experiments and ate all the mushrooms. That cracked me up. And I don't think we did. I don't remember if we did. I don't think we did. But it definitely had elements of like these guys ate a lot of mushrooms, which was part of why it went viral. But there were some really solid arguments in there. And the title of the paper was Scientific Openness to the Cryptocrestrial idea. That's all we were advocating for. And we listed four main ways in which this crypto, crypto terrestrial idea could happen. And the fourth one is what really got click baity because we're like, maybe there is a breakaway civilization. That's the crypto terrestrial idea. But maybe in advanced reptile dinosaurs didn't go extinct. And this was, you know, we don't think this actually happened, but we're just putting a little argument for what this idea could be. And so yeah, they took that and put like dinosaurs at keyboards and stuff like that. But one of them is time travelers. And it would make sense if you were in the future instead of jumping back through time in order to study people on a specific time, you set up a base on the far side of the moon or up until the 60s, 70s, we wouldn't know they were there. Set up a base under the oceans. And this would go for the extraterrestrial idea too. And instead of traversing the vast swaths of space, come here, set up under the oceans where we're not going to find you in artica, far side of the moon. And then you can do everything here locally instead of having to jump across space, that's your terrestrial jump across time, extra tempestry. Well, it also explained some of the very strange ways that they've observed crafts moving under the water. Like they've observed crafts moving under the water at 500 knots. There's big as a football field. And apparently there's video of these things. Apparently there's the Navy has something that they filmed that is as big as a football field that was going essentially 500 miles an hour underwater without any ripples, not disturbing the water at all, not creating a wake. And then moving right out of them, the trans medium capacity. Yeah. Well, you know, when you think about how little exploration exploration, we've done to the bottom of the ocean. You know more about the moon than we do about the surface of the actual bottom of the ocean. Yeah. Yeah, it would be a great place to hide out. And again, you know, the ability to move in and out of air water, space, upper atmosphere, no disturbances, the trans medium capabilities, that whole warp space time bubble around them when help explain that too, that they're not experiencing the water. They're not experiencing the air as they move between them. I always think about I really love skiing. And one of my favorite times to ski is late season. You know, it's April, the sun's out, everybody's in t-shirts or pikinis or whatever. I don't wear bikinis, but people do. And you get into that slushy stuff, you're cruising down the mountain, you hit the slush and you just go pass over cattle over the top of your skis. And that's what we would expect if they're moving in and out of air and water and space is that there would be some resistance. There's not, you know, they don't have that. And it does indicate that there is some sort of manipulation of space and time around them. And yeah, moving underwater, these football field size crafts going that fast. I mean, how can you do that if there is actual resistance from the water? Well, it just makes you wonder how much does the government know? You know, you've seen that guy, Tim Breshette, talk about it. There's, he's hilarious. It was very funny. I mean, he was just casually mentioning that there's five different locations in the ocean of the world and the seas of the world where they've observed crafts coming out of. That's a very weird thing to just say while you're walking, just casually talk about it. And with such confidence, yeah. I mean, they're doing these skips. They're talking to people behind closed doors. They don't have the same requirement to not disclose things as those people do. You know, even sign NDAs. And he has a hilarious way of talking about it. He's got the best one liners of anybody discussing this stuff. I mean, somebody knows. Somebody knows a lot of things. A lot of people probably know a lot of things and have for a very long time. But you know, what is that relationship? What do they control? Why are we not allowed to know? Well, this is the real question. Like what do they actually know about what's going on in the ocean? If there are bases somewhere down in the ocean, there's that weird one, the Baltic Sea anomaly. I don't know what that one. Jesse Michaels just said a show about it where he interviewed the guy who found it, I think they're treasure divers. And they found this very strange thing that is sitting on the floor of the ocean. And it has right angles to it. It's kind of curved. There's an actual, I don't know what kind of images of it, but they have explored this thing and he's convinced that it's not a natural formation. Yeah, interesting. See if you can find something on the Baltic Sea. Put that in our sponsor's. There's an indication. It's like a, that's what it looks like. It looks like a fucking Millennium Ploughlin. Let's run through my mouth today. I can't say Millennium Falcon. Like that's what it looks like. That's interesting. So look, this could be something that's sitting on or it could be something that was built at a time where this was not covered by ocean. Like you live in Montana. Montana used to be the Great England Sea, right? You could find seashells in Montana, which is really weird. Yeah, and even all along the coast of Alaska, there was about 110 foot rise and sea level of the last 12,000 years. So what, more images of the thing? What is that thing? And these are all artistic renditions. Some of them are. But the other one, that blue one that you see there, that's the real thing. That's what it actually looks like. Yeah, it's pretty anomalous. Right. What is that, though? Right. An ancient structure that people built, you know, 20,000 years ago? Like what is it? Baltic Sea anomaly is a sonar detected sea floor formation in the Northern Baltic Sea found in 2011 by Swedish Ocean X, formerly Ocean Explorer, team during a treasure hunting expedition most geologists who have examined the available data, considered a natural rock formation shaped by glacial processes, despite ongoing, popular speculation about UFOs or artificial origin. Yeah. It's tough, man. Is that thing off the coast of Malibu too? Is it Malibu or is it Catalina Island? Was that one thing where it was in Google Earth and they blurted out after a while? I think that's just a Google Earth thing. Maybe. Maybe not. But it was on Google Earth. And then it now blurred. I learned Redwick where they're getting the data from Google Earth, you know, like where that, what is that data, you know, and I think it's a picture. So it was like bad data. And then it cleared up. Oh, okay. Also, that's a good answer. I did a good answer for the government. I did a talk in Manhattan last year. And Tim Gallaudet was one of the speakers. He was showing images of, I think what you're talking about where there was like this sort of almost like a cliff on the water and then had some strange things around it. Yeah. It had been modified or I don't remember exactly what he was saying, but I think that, I think that's what you're talking about. Yeah. That was just off of Catalina Island. That's right. Yeah. It was very weird looking. And a lot of people were spec, and one of the reasons why it's very weird, there's a lot of sightings off of Catalina Island. Mm-hmm. There's a lot of sightings out there. Yeah. And it, you know, again, it makes sense if they were trying to covertly study us regardless of their origins, ultra terrestrial, extraterrestrial, whatever, um, use the oceans. Perfect. Perfect base. It's very different. Especially if you can move in and out of there with impunity, not just because we won't see them, but they have the technology to make the water and the air the same thing. Click on that image where the cursor is. Yeah. So that's, that's it. Whatever that is. Like that looks real weird. It does look weird. That looks real weird. Whatever the hell that is. That's so strange. That's so strange looking. But again, that's like, is that what it really looks like? What are the new images? Is the new one the right? Okay, that's it right there. It's from 2014. Like what the hell is that? It's got pillars. I mean, that's very strange. It has those sort of uniform shaped pillars. Yeah, and the top looks very flat. It's very flat. Like something you would make to withstand the weight of the water. Right. I love you. Like a garage door. Yeah. Like it's a garage door to a base. Yep. And again, when I started out in this, I was relatively conservative with my views on things. But man, further you go down this rabbit hole, just the weirdest shit gets and you can't do that anymore. Got to recognize that there's a lot of things that just, you can't write off, you know, if possible become possible or at least you have to open your mind to the fact that these things you used to think were impossible. Need a second look. Right. Also the people that work in military intelligence that work with these defense contractors to say there's black operations, like operations that are completely top secret that are 30 years ahead of anything that you can imagine right now. So we go, okay, well, what does that look like? What does 30 years ahead of us now look like? Yeah. Like that was SR-71, the black bird or whatever it is, black, whatever. Yeah, like we didn't even know about that until 20 years after they had made it. Right. And it makes sense. You know, you don't want your enemies to know and that's an argument that's been made over and over that we can't disclose things because then our enemies will have this technology. Of course. Now we thought growing up that it will take a war before they're like, oh, we need to use these things. We've been developing like we're getting our escaped in this war. It's time to bring out the UFOs and our mistakes actually as our weapons and stuff. But I kind of think it's going to happen before that. It's weird to say, but I kind of get the sense that it is happening. There's been a lot of false horizons. People have been saying that for a long time, but that doesn't feel different. I mean, you definitely does feel different. It definitely feels that the general public is a lot more open to the concept without being thought of as a fool. Right. It used to be when I was a kid, if you'd bring up UFOs, people just roll their eyes, especially before the internet. Oh my God. If you brought up any of that stuff, they would laugh at you. I was reading some book on Roswell once, like I think it was in the 1990s. And you know, this guy's like, what the fuck are you wasting your time on this complete horseshit for? There's no such things UFOs. I was like, how do you say that with such confidence? Yeah. We live in a galaxy with hundreds of billions of stars just in this galaxy, with hundreds of billions of stars in other galaxies and there's hundreds of billions of other galaxies. Like what are you saying? It's crazy to say that we are the only ones. It is. They did a really good job at making us feel like idiots. Yeah. Well, you can see how that can be done. You know, I mean, look what they did during the COVID crisis. You know, if you don't get a vaccine, make your end of life preparations now, you know, like you're going to be killing everybody. No one's going to survive. This disease targets the unvaccinated and people believed all that. Well, you think the two are related too, because we started to figure out that we've been lied to about UFOs. And obviously question is what else? What else were they lying to us about? Yes. Well, I think once we realize how strong the propaganda machine is and how gullible people are, oh yeah, that's the big one. Easily. I mean, if people were going to accept something as 100% true to any investigation or any skepticism from the pharmaceutical drug industry, they are the most evil motherfuckers that have ever lived. They are responsible for more death from releasing drugs that have horrible adverse side effects that they knew about. They have taken the largest criminal fines of any companies. I mean, what they've done is really fucking creepy when you look at how they release drugs that they knew were going to fuck people over and they knew those people didn't need those drugs. And yet when you put people in a scary situation and you make them terrified and you offer up at a solution, they believe wholeheartedly that the pharmaceutical drug companies were only telling the truth and anybody who didn't believe is absolutely obsessed and interested in the mind. So it's like that sheep mentality is so strong with so many people. There are so many cowards in the world and so many followers that would just step in line the moment things get weird. Whenever they get challenged, the moment things get weird, that it just makes sense that if you make it socially, you become a social pariah. If you start talking about UFO, who's Mike was fucking wacky UFO theories like people don't talk about those things. They don't want to bring them up. And the military industrial complex is kind of the equivalent of the pharmaceutical companies on the other side of this coin. Sure. We trust them. They defend us whatever they are making. I'm sure they'll use for great purposes. But yeah, I mean, a big part of that was making us feel like idiots were talking about this stuff and that is changing though. And it's not largely because of, you know, ancient aliens, I've been on the show five times. I had a little bit of cognitive dissonance the first time I went on. That joke goes, they go way out there, man. Totally. Totally. It is fun. You know, and that's how I approached it. Well, I also approached it because I was trying to talk about this theory. Did this funny bait and switch for the first three episodes I was on, whether like, hey, come down talk about your theory. I'm like, oh, okay, so I go to LA or wherever. And we do the shoot. They cut out everything about my books and this theory and just use me to talk about whatever the show was actually about. Well, small snippets. Yeah. I cut onto that. And so the fourth time I went on, I was like, all right, but I'm only doing it if you guys actually, you know, but one of the episodes was about this whole theory anyways. Mm. It made sense, but, um, I forget what we're talking about. Oh, the stigma. So one of the cool things that's been happening largely because of ancient and your show, you know, you talk about this a lot and it helps normalize it for a lot of people is that there's a safe space now, you know, like where you'll be talking about these things and somebody will come up who had a sighting when they were, you know, a teenager in the 40s or whatever. And they never told anybody. And now it's like, wait, it's safe to talk about this. And that's so cool to see, man. And then it makes me realize just how many people have had an experience that's been bottled up inside and it's liberating to let that come out and we're sharing information and contact these two. You know, unfortunately, I started saying earlier, we're still kind of stuck on S is changing too, but we're still largely stuck on the cockpit videos and the FLIR and the GEMBO and the GO FAST. But people have been taken into these craft. They've had stuff put on their junk and their semen taken. There's a lot of no-no square touching that happens, anal probes, you know, and we used to laugh at that, but that is such a common theme throughout these and we need to recognize that these people are having real experiences and have been having them for a very long time. Let's move on. Let's talk to these people. Let's let the contact these and the experiences who have had the closest form of a close encounter you can have. Let's trust them now. Let's listen to what they have to say. Let's be discerning, you know, but let's keep an open mind. But I think one of the more interesting things when you start talking about stories and encounters, one of the more interesting things that some of the research that Jacques Vale has done where he brings up stories that absolutely predate the modern cultural visions of UFOs. Like the modern cultural concept of the close encounter of the third time type grades that come down in a flying saucer, all those things like flying saucer didn't even come out until the kind of carnal experiences. So it's these encounters, people were talking about from the 1700s and the 1800s and they're talking about something coming down and something interacting with people and you know, them having some sort of experience of lost time. The threat is very common. The Betty and Barney Hill story. Yep. Yeah, it's not just the gamete extractions. I mean, you could make the argument that a lot of things that happened in very mainstream religious texts were exactly what people are describing. Even the CIA admitted that like unexplainable pregnancies are an aspect of the phenomenon, you know, where Jesus come from, kind of an unexplainable pregnancy. I think Jesus was done traveling personally. A time travel. Yeah. That's another aspect of that book that's in your satire. This is my satire book. Yeah. Uh, I think how you literally have Jesus coming out of the U of Col. I got some shit for that with the double bird. He's thrown up the double bird. Oh, so it turns out Christians don't like that. Well, you can't please everybody, right? No, you can't. But there are many aspects of Jesus's life, big fan of Jesus, by the way, that are very paranormal. A lot of these seemingly miraculous things, I think, can be explained with a lot of the same technologies that we see today. We just didn't have a way of conceptualizing them. Obviously Ezekiel is the one that gets talked about a lot. The wheel within a wheel, the telepathy, the embers, burning embers. Yeah. Um, yeah. And then you look at the Nephilim. As the one that gets talked about a lot, the wheel within a wheel, the telepathy, the embers, burning embers. Yeah. And then you look at the Nephilim, like, and all kinds of different, and Baba Wanna Raisa, this story from Zulu, lore. It's a fucking alien abduction man, and they've been telling this story for thousands of years. So it's this woman, the sky goddess, who chooses a man to mate with, and comes down, tests him to make sure that he knows that it's her. It appears in his dreams, communicates telepathically, gets him ready for this interaction. He's in love with her, never a matter before. She comes down from the sky, and it takes him up with her on this rainbow of light. Like all of the, like, and I made the case in my second book that if Antonio Vias Boes had been able to go back with the woman that he had sex with, that's basically the same story. So as Brazilian lawyers telling a story that's identical to the Zulu legend that's been told for centuries millennia, I don't know how far it goes back. How weird. But we need to look outside of just the mainstream view, which is finally happening. So I'm excited about that. I'm very grateful. I have a lot of gratitude about what's happening. But the question is, so far there. Why did the mainstream view become what it is? And we know that that is because of a concerted concentrated propaganda effort. Yeah. Yeah. And a very effective one. I mean, they nailed it. But they had, there was no other media back then. They had complete control of newspapers, complete control of television stations. I mean, how many people, I mean, how much do we know now about various news anchors that were actually CIA agents? So fucking shit ton of them. Yeah. And even that if they weren't there would be in force, that this stuff that they were happy to regurgitate. Absolutely. Yeah. They just wanted to look good and have a suit and speak like an expert. Here we go. And if you don't tell the lines somebody else will. Yeah. And you're living a great life. You're driving Mercedes with a nice house. Why would you fuck this up over a UFO story? Just tell your friends. Just tell everybody who you're supposed to tell them. Yeah. It's easy to get people to comply like that, especially when they're dependent upon, you know, whether it's a corporate entity like CNN or whether it's New York Times or whatever it is. It's not hard to get people to comply. No. And you're right. Since the internet, things have changed radically. Like really radically. Right. But I think there's a downside too. We're, we've already kind of been moving toward a post truth existence. Good Lord, man. Like I'll scroll through videos on Twitter now. 90% of them are fake. Oh, there's so much. It's so ridiculous. And then I'll crazy. I make the unfortunate decision to go into the comments to see what percentage of people think it's real. 80. 90. I would say at least 90. It's the same. Like I just, I have it still having on my phone. It's a stupid fucking video of a rabbit, like nursing that's little rabbit babies. And one of them's a cat. So the mom cat comes in, picks the fucking baby cat up by the nose. Like they're magnetically attached. It doesn't even grab it. Like they just, the baby kind of comes with it. And then walks out the back of the burrow. Like there's no back to a rabbit burrow. You know, and everybody's like, oh, whoops. That cat made a mistake. It's drinking from the wrong species. People don't see it. They don't see that this is very obviously fake. And it's, it's not just for that. Like they're using it for propaganda. They're using it for the same type of thing that they've used forever. Oh, well, this UFO phenomenon's not real because AI made this video. Well, there's also the problem with what percentage of people that are even commenting are actual people. Exactly. It's a huge amount of bots that are communicating on all the social media platforms, a giant percentage of the comments are not real people. That's a really good point. Yeah. No, you're right. So they would comment on anything and just say, what that also still feeds the perception that it's real. Yes. Because other people that maybe don't have critical thinking skills or discernment because, you know, they're 90 year old grandma that doesn't know how to use a computer. She sees that. Oh, it's cute. I think it erodes the consensus intelligence. Yeah. Like the, like the, the overall level of intelligent discourse that a society puts out, you know, if you have a town square, which is like Twitter is our town square, right? If that town square is populated by fake people, like enormous percentage populated by fake people that are just designed to say the most inflammatory ridiculous things to get interaction and engagement. And also to erode people's faith in other people and to make us argue with each other construct the other. Like you were saying it to the end of this conversation. It feels tribalism. It's really problematic. My hope is that eventually there will be some way to accurately discern and it'll stop that stuff from happening. You know, that you'll be able to tell like very clearly whether or not it's an actual person. The problem is that if that does happen, it's a gateway to digital ID because you would have to lose your and not an iminee. Because if you're like, anonymity is very important for whistleblower. Like say if you work for corporation, you find that corporation is dumping stuff into a river and it's all secret and it's illegal and you know that if you tell they're going to kill you, you know, and you're an executive of that corporation, you're conscious is troubled. You can make a fake account. You could sign up through a VPN. You can make a fake account and you could post all this information that you know and you could break a story and you don't face any consequences. You don't get killed. If you have digital ID, if we know who everybody is, it's posting something and you make that same post, who knows what they do to you? Who knows what happens? Yeah, and it's been happening. There's been whistle blowers who have had mysterious deaths all over a long time all over the place. Yeah, it's it's Gary Webb didn't you shoot himself in the head twice? Was that the story? It was the a timber shed always says get shot or you shoot yourself in the back of the head four times. Yeah, I mean, I think it's a reference to that. How did Gary Webb die? Yeah, there's but even if that's not true, there's a bunch of stories about whistle blowers who go missing. Yeah, there's any examples. If you're in convenient, you're going to cost them billions of dollars and they can just get rid of you. They just get rid of you. Whoever they are. Yeah, it all comes down to money and it has for a very long time. Was deciding if this was accurate, they found in the case where someone shot themselves in the head eight times. Oh, there's a couple cases for example. Boy, that's a commitment. I mean, I guess if it was like an airsoft gun or something, I don't think that killed me. I'd be a really inefficient way to kill yourself. Yeah, the whole thing's crazy. Do you think it's even possible to kill yourself? Gun or soft gun? Maybe you should like a a little soft. I mean, kind of you shy. So, but that knows eight times. I mean, you might the brand new CO2 infection. That's easy. So you can I guess you got enough airsoft bullets in you. Just fills up your day. So you ever went to the doctor. Maybe eventually get an infection. I think somebody might intervene at that point. When I was living in LA when I first moved there, a guy had killed himself accidentally on a set because he took a gun that was a blank gun and he shot himself in the head like trying to be funny and he killed him because the force that comes out of the gun is still extremely powerful. And he put it to his temple and he literally caved his skull in. That sucks. Yeah. That's rough. Yeah, this is an actor who just didn't know any better and he thought he was just going to be funny. Yeah. So shoot yourself in the head twice highly unlikely. Eight times. But I guess you could shoot yourself in the head once and just really fuck it up, be aware that you're still alive and be committed to doing it and then shoot yourself a second time. I guess it's possible. I mean, unless the pain response was like, yeah, it didn't feel good. I don't want to do that again. Or maybe the pain response is so bad. You want to do it again. Oh, that's a pain point. Yeah. Like, whoops. Let's get this over with. I don't know. But our point, what we're getting at is that for the longest time, there was no real outlet to get true information out other than books and books are so easily maligned. You know, if someone has a cookie book, you're reading, go, oh, that guy's nuts. That is a conspiracy theory. And then, of course, that terms of popularized during the JFK assassination because that very reason there was a lot of people that doubted the official story and those people became conspiracy theorists. Have you looked into that much? Oh, yeah. I kind of thought you had. Who do you think did it? I think there was a lot of of people. I think here's a mistake that people make. They say Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone, or Lee Harvey Oswald wasn't involved. And he was a patsy. Lee Harvey Oswald shot a cop. There really there's like very few people that disagree on that. I think he's off officer tippet. I think those is named when he was on the run. So Lee Harvey Oswald absolutely seems to be some sort of intelligence asset in some way or another married a Russian woman lived in Russia for a while came back the United States during the time of the whole, I mean, this is right after the red scare. The fact that this guy went to Russia married a Russian woman came back and like the whole thing screwing. He could have been a patsy and involved too. Yes, absolutely. I heard some theory once about like the driver turn around. That's some that's a horseshit gun or was there something about like a poison, a couple of fish horseshit. That's all. That's all. That's all horseshit. That's why I was asking because I don't know. But there's a lot of those, one of the best ways to make a conspiracy theory seem absolutely ridiculous is to add a bunch of really silly ones into the mix. And so that any conspiracy theory involving something that's not the official narrative. But there's just so many aspects of the Kennedy assassination, the back into the left, the headshot, the shot and the neck from the front, the magic bullet, which is proposed is the most preposterous. There's a lot of them. There's a lot of these weird aspects to it. And there's also that fact that Kennedy was very hated. Also the fact that it's in Daley Plaza, which is like, why would you ever drive someone through there in a convertible? That's the president. That's a very, any president is, you know, we think of JFK was the most love president. Right. By half the country, that's how it always is, folks. There's always half the country that thinks you suck and half the country that loves you. That's how it was with Clinton. That's how it was with Obama. So it is with everybody. Yeah. No, we don't tend to agree on those things. There was a lot of people that were very happy when he died, including Dulles. So Dulles was fired by JFK. And then was on the Warren Commission, investigating JFK's assassination, which is hilarious. It's kind of crazy. Richard Nixon, also in the Warren Commission, the Warren Commission, there's a great book on it called Best Evidence by David Lifton. And he was an accountant that was hired to do something with the Warren Commission, something, something, something, some aspect of the Warren Commission. So he decides to read the whole thing. It's a huge amount of pages. I forget how many pages are in the Warren Commission report. I think it's at least 900 pages. So he reads the whole thing. And after it, he comes this conclusion, like there's so many inconsistencies. There's so many contradictions. There's like this, this doesn't make any sense. Like they were trying to reach a conclusion. So many of the witnesses that saw the assassination died in very weird deaths. The statistical possibility or probability of all those people dying from murder, suicide, car accidents, you know, it's just too weird. It's too weird. What about the UFO connection? Like that's the one I hear. I don't know. Cause there were like CIA ties and I don't know. I don't know what's bullshit and what's not. You know, like, yeah, there was clearly like we had the technology for 20 years at that point. But yeah, what does a president even know? I don't know what they know. I don't know whether or not they would kill them for that. That doesn't make any sense. You know the Nixon story with Jackie Gleason? No, I don't think so. The story is that Jackie Gleason and Nixon were drinking one day. And you know, they were friends. And Nixon was like, want to see a fucking UFO? They can't play in it. He took him to was it Wright Patterson? Jamie, do you remember? I think it was somewhere in Florida. But I don't, days, I remember when we looked us up. They said there's, he went somewhere. I'll look it up. So anyway, supposedly sees this recovered craft and bodies that are in freezers. So Jackie Gleason, one thing's true about this, he became obsessed with UFOs. That is true. And in be hard not to after something like that. Yeah, there's definitely a catalyst. I mean, fucking dude, right now, someone took me if Trump called me up. And all of a sudden, I'm standing in front of some craft that's made of this unknown alloy. And especially some of the weirder stories where you have a craft that's like 40 feet wide, you go inside of it. It's bigger than a football field. That's wild. So here it is. Nixon arranged for him to visit homestead Air Force Base in Florida upon his arrival. Armguards took Gleason to a building at a remote location on the site there, Gleason, who harbored an intense interest in UFO, saw the embalmed bodies of four alien beings, two feet long with small bald heads and big ears. He was told nothing about the circumstances of the recovery. He swore his wife to secrecy, but after the divorce, Beverly freely discussed the story. In the mid 80s, UFO uophologist Larry Bryant sued the US government to get it to reveal its UFO secrets. He tried without success to subpoena Gleason. Wow, I'm going to subpoena Gleason. Yeah, that's crazy. I mean, he could just plead the fifth all the time. Oh, yeah, I was drunk. I don't remember anything. Yeah, exactly. Yeah, I mean, how would you know? But Gleason built a house in upstate New York. Oh, yeah, I heard about that. It looks like a UFO. Right. Is that you're seeing it? It is right now. Yeah. We thought about buying it. I did. I looked that up one time. I don't remember why, but it's kind of cool. Yeah, it's kind of cool, but the promise if we bought it, everybody would know that that's ours. Yeah, true. Like, oh, Joe Rogan's got the UFO house to clean and then they'd visit and fuck up my vacations. That's always bound to happen. I remember that's the house. Very cool. There's a house. I mean, come on, man, that's very sweet fucking crazy. Something happened. He was, he was, there was a catalyst involved in his interest. Well, I mean, if your friends with Nixon and this is in the 1960s and this, all this stuff is, yeah, I saw an interview with Barry Goldwater where he was talking about dope house by the way, talking about asking, asking some commander general about what's it right, Pat? And I guess he's custom out. Barry Goldwater. It was like, really? Never fucking asking that again. Yeah. Really? Yeah. He cost out Barry Goldwater. He was a, yeah, I don't think he was ever present. Can't a date for president, but yeah, no, there's people that don't want us to know. The big thing going around now is that Dick Cheney was the ringleader of all of this, the deep state, the UFO secrets, the, the gatekeepers. Wow, he had to know. Of course. I got to know. Kissinger to probably like the legacy programs. These are legacy people. Well, someone is got to talk, right? But, it's like, but at to what level? And the idea here's, here's the really erroneous idea that a lot of people hold people can't keep a secret. Of course they can. Of course they can. Especially in their life, yeah. Of course they can. Especially if, I mean, there are certain programs that if you disclose the existence of this program, it is considered treason and they are allowed to execute you for that. So you have to take that in consideration. I would keep a secret of that. Yeah. So the case, of course, then you have to take it into consideration and the immense amount of money. And this was discussed really very comprehensively in the age of disclosure document. And I think they did a great job of highlighting the whole problem with the misappropriation of funds. So someone had a lot of Congress. If they have these back engineering programs, if they've been spending as much as a trillion dollars over the course of X amount of years, where's that money? And who lied and who benefited from it? What military contractors were allowed to have this stuff to back engineer it? What process has taken place to shield the American public from that? And what profits have they made from that that made them like much more anti competition against other military contractors. It's not a key to a secret too. It's not just you might get killed, but there's a lot of profit potential in this. And we don't want our competitors. Also, a lot of fraud, I'm sure. Like with any no oversight at all and a shitload of money. Oh, my God. It's there's not a chance in hell that there wasn't so money that we're taking. So how many are taking over and people are like, well, I could just keep some of that. Yeah, nobody's watching the till. Yeah. I mean, look, we're finding that with things just like black lives matters, massive fraud. Like just like just on the profit organizations. Oh, yeah. I don't want to start shitting on NGOs or anything, but that's a big reason why I don't give money to I'll find, you know, smaller organizations doing things on a local level, but local looking stuff you can trust. Yeah, absolutely. You get big enough. It's just that happens. Yeah. And of course, if you're talking trillions of dollars, black money that nobody's trace and I mean, that was one of David Grushes arguments too is that these whistle blowers are exposing crimes, you know, for potential murder that happened to be secret. So yeah, it's a complex. It's very nuanced situation that will we will have to move past if we are going to have disclosure in some capacity. However, that happens. I mean, amnesty has been talked about. Yeah. There's some people. That was in the documentary. That was the road out of this, which totally makes sense to me. Like what is really important? The fraud is already taken place. If people are prosecuted for the fraud, guess what? If we don't release it, they'll never be prosecuted for the fraud anyway. Yeah. And what's the alternative? We wait until they die and then talk about it. I would rather give them amnesty now and then let them die without these secrets going to their deathbed with them. But just not away that if they're misappropriating funds, they're not just doing it 30 years ago. They're doing it last week. So now the current people also have an incentive to not disclose. Yeah. Unless you have mass amnesty, just say, listen, let's just forget about all this stuff. Then the problem with that is all those people that are profiting off of it right now and also funneling money into whatever NGOs they have and and misappropriation of money and what are we doing with that IP too? Like the only actual property that say Northrop Grommender, whoever has Boeing, like do we share that now? Do they have to give that up and spread it across the industry? Yeah. It's all weird, it's very weird because there's been a few inventions that came about after Roswell. That a lot of people say like this does not make any sense. Yeah. Fiber optics is one. Transistor. It's another one. Yeah. There's a lot of weirdness. People say, oh, there's a direct people. Scientific research or chose how they made it yet, but there's not. If you go into it, it's like there's a giant leap that gets made that's real weird. I mean, I'll take more leaps, man. Like, like honestly, these craft are being powered by something that's very, very energized. You know, and if we could use that to, I mean, I pay a lot in utilities. I was going to talk about like climate change or some shit and then I made about myself and my. You could have your own zero point energy generator in your backyard. Never have to worry about power again. You take it at like 90. How does many Christmas lights as I want? Yeah. Never worry about the grid. The grid doesn't exist anymore. Doesn't exist. I mean, imagine that infrastructure level and there's so many implications. And if it's real, if it's real, you think it's real. Right. Your convinced. I'm convinced it is. Yeah. I mean, that makes sense. There's so much energy trapped within the space between, you know, that's what it is, even that zero degrees. Try to explain. If you can try to explain the concept of zero point energy, man, that's beyond my pay grade, other than that, I know that it is infinitely times more energetic than what you get when you split an atom or if you use atoms together, the nuclear force. My understanding, again, very limited knowledge is that even when you take a molecule particle, whatever, and you freeze it down to zero degrees, there's still energy inside of that. And there's energy at a sub quantum level that if we could tap into that, it would provide infinite energy. The downside is it would also make a bomb that is much, much more powerful than the biggest hydrogen bomb because you're releasing that energy in a way that's irresponsible. There's this quote going around by EO Wilson, famed biologist on, I think I saw it on Twitter that was like we have prehistoric emotions, medieval institutions and godlike technology. Basically saying we're fucked. We're like little kids playing with Jane saws. But zero points, little kids playing with guns. Exactly. But zero points kind of that next thing. Like when Einstein equals MC squared, there's all this energy and mass. And if we split these atoms, combine these atoms, we can release that energy, sweet. But hundreds of thousands of people died in Japan. So what's what's the flip side of zero point? Like it would definitely unlock a lot of potential. But are we responsible enough as a species to handle that type of energy? Right. Currently no. EO Wilson says no, and I'm on board with anything. Well, I'm on board with it. Just look at what's happening in Ukraine. Look at what's happening in Gaza. Look at what's happening in the Philippines. There's a full scale war. Scary shit. It's happening right now in various parts of the world where we're just blowing people to smith the reins. And you know what? That's kind of an interesting argument about the whole time travel thing. You know, there's these genocides. There's genocide happening now in Gaza. It blows my mind that we can still have genocides and just not do anything about it. But like Polepot, you know, three, four million people killed the Holocaust star four. But, but these aliens don't seem to care about us. It was something that John Macnodist wrote about a lot. They're really focused on the earth. You know, they care about this planet. They don't necessarily care about us as individuals as a species. Well, clearly they care as a species. But they do kind of care as individuals. The people that get picked up are oftentimes obviously there's cases where this this doesn't happen. But they're cared for. They're told no harm will come to you. You know, Barney Hill was told that. It's a common, commonly repeated thing. So they take care of people. They give us screen memories to try to hide. What they did, they sometimes give people tours of the ship. They seemingly care about us as individuals, but not when we start murdering each other on a massive scale. They've never intervened in these things. However, they have demonstrated their ability and willingness to shut down nukes. They might intervene if we move to the point where we're not just destroying ourselves, but we're destroying the planet that they may also call home in the future. If they are future humans, that whole care for the planet. Take care of the planet. They told the kids in Zimbabwe. They told the kids in Wales during this other incident. They tell these contact. These all the time take care of the planet. Take care of the planet. But they don't 't seem to care about us. And it might actually benefit them if we don't screw up this planet, either through nuking ourselves or just all of the other things we do to it because we're kind of parasitic in a way. But also, if they are us in the future, we probably have to go through all this to realize the folly of our ways. That's a good point. Dark Knight of the soul kind of. Yeah. I mean, clearly we're getting better. We're still horrible, but we're better today than when we were during the Viking days. We're better today than when we were during the time of Genghis Khan. But we're better. We're more civilized. We're more peaceful. There's less war, even though there's still war. So it's a slow gradual shift of consciousness that probably is going to be accelerated by technology, especially if there is some sort of a technology that connects us telepathically and allows people to read minds. One of the things that Elon famously said about his neural link is like, you're going to be able to talk with our words. Yeah. I had a whole section of my first book about that. The question of whether it's a technology mediated brain to brain communication or if there's something about our consciousness that allows us to communicate telepathically without some sort of technology. And I kind of, I did that. My friend Jeff Crapel pointed this out. He's like, I see why you did that. You know, you're like, well, what if it is technology? And there's a lot of studies that have shown we can communicate some sort of computer medium. But so many people in contact e cases who are spoken to or can speak to the visitors telepathically don't have that. There's also all of the research of Dean Radon at ions and all of his other studies that he's put out that show people have telepathic abilities with very, very strong p values statistically showing that we have this ability. I think a lot of people have it and just don't realize, but it does seem like we're moving in in that direction. Like you were talking about the evolution of consciousness. It seems like we're sort of moving to that whether an earlink has anything to do with it or any sort of computer mediated brain to brain transmission. I think we're just becoming telepathic and unlocking these abilities that have always sort of lie dormant within us. Yeah. I've often asked the question, is it one of two things? Is this a new emerging aspect of human consciousness or is this an aspect of human consciousness that exists for verbal speech? And then verbal speech and then of course the written word video, all that stuff. Yeah. It just became completely non useful to us. It's like we lost it and we're trying to get it atrophied. Yeah. I mean, you had Kaidik and Zahn that's leopardy tapes were hugely impactful. And a lot of those episodes show that this is actually extremely common. And it seems like that's kind of where we're going. I look at that as another indication that these are us in the future, that their main form of communication is telepathy and we're already seemingly moving in that direction. What do you make of the trideactal mummies in Peru? Can we pee first? Yeah. Okay. Oh, do that right now. So we'll be right back, folks. Go to J Anderson's X page. It's a project unity. Yes, I was coming on soon. Yeah. He so J Anderson just released this and Jesse Michaels actually went down to Peru and actually saw those things and handled them in person. And he said it was fucking surreal. He said they are real creatures. Whatever they were, it is a real thing. And they look exactly like an alien. He has a video that he just released. Jamie, I think it's a video that he's releasing on. That's it right there. So scans reveal this ancient alien looking mummy has a baby inside of her. That's well, that's one of them. So these things like whatever this is, is we hit volumes, so you can hear what you're saying. She has slightly smaller stature and slider build the maria, but shares the same natural modification with skin covering parts of the body. Her skull is elongated with large eye orbits and cranial volume comparable to marias. Importantly, Montserrat CT scans revealed that she was carrying in her abdominal cavity, the team identified a developing fetal form being visible on the scans, a tiny trideactal embryo with skeletal structure curled in a womb-like space. This confirms that Montserrat was pregnant with at least one advanced fetus. Montserrat also contains an astonishing array of metallic implants, at least 10 distinct metal implants embedded into her body. These include four small round implants in her skull, two on each side, several in her chest and thoracic area, and others along her arm and leg bones as per the CT images. They're described as very dense and made of rare metals, osmium and gold. Additionally, Montserrat's chest anatomy is peculiar. She has an expanded ribcage without a sternum, like the other trideactals, and an inter-clavical bone, an extra bone at the shoulder girdle. Noted by researchers, her spine is continuous into the skull, again, demonstrate that cranial cervical canal. The conch is one of the most deeply analyzed specimens, high resolution, 128 sliced CT scans were performed, and a full 3D virtual autopsy was conducted. The scans confirmed Montserrat's pregnancy with trideactal features. 128 sliced CT scans were performed and a full 3D virtual autopsy was conducted. The scans confirmed Montserrat's pregnancy with tridactyl features. They have a lot of strange exists. Like what is that? And these are in Peru the same place where you get the nascal lines, the same place where you have sakso-hirman. You have these incredible structures that defy logic, defy conventional construction methods. And like the owl man, you know the big petroglyph on the side of the hill that can only be appreciated from space. There's a lot of weirdness. There's a lot of weirdness from Peru. Peru seems like a very extraordinary place. And at one point in time, well also the ancient artistic depictions of these exact beings. There's these ancient tapestries and ancient art pieces that show these three fingered, three toad beings. And this is all like a part of their folklore. And then you have these actual creatures. Like that thing is 1,400 years old I think it is. So if that's the carbon date on that mummy. So I think it's that old. There's one that's 1,200. I think the oldest one is like 1400 sounds right. Yeah something like that. But like whatever that is, like there's not a chance in fucking hell that people back then have the ability to fake that. In that with that depth, you see tendon structures, ligaments, you have a completely different skeletal structure, no sternum, different clavicle bones. It's freaking crazy. Three fingers, three toes, which is by the way, exactly what Lazar described I believe as or some people described as like the control, it might not be Lazar. The controls inside the crass that they've observed that had these three fingered things. Vargeneer Brazil, those things had three fingers in three toes. So the question is like they saw footprints too in that case, didn't they? Yeah well they I mean, obviously one of the soldiers carried out hurt and injured whatever it is. Yeah. There were three women too. Yeah. And Ali or something. Yeah, that's the moment of contact documentary. Very good. Very good James Fox documents. I watched that with James Fox. A pre before you released it. We were at the same conference in the show. Crazy documentary. Yeah, it's really good. But those things look exactly like that. Yeah, we were described. It would be cool if they start eyeballs because they said they have red eyes and that's that. Right. DACA, which would be kind of crazy. Whatever these things are, they're they're the same size and in the same shape. And they're also that thing that tried to act the thing. What does it look like? It was exactly great. It's small. It is a big head. It's big eyes. It's very thin, thin body. Like when you look at its body when it's curled up in the fetal position is no muscle. Very small. Yeah, there's definitely I mean there's variation in within the way these things are described. Unfortunately until we have like, you know, dude got to go with Nixon to see these things and liquid. That's like a wet dream of mine man. I would like to go see these things and like study them as a biological anthropologist. That would be the holy grail for me. Actually, did somewhere you could go right now on earth. If you knew the right guy, you see that. Absolutely. Yeah. I'm sure there's many, many examples of these things. I would argue in multiple places that I'm not allowed to go see and it makes me man. Oh, but what does your take when you see these things? Right. So I've always been outwardly critical of them except I guess the question is which ones and what do we mean by real? Like these are obviously real. These are things that aren't a fairy tale. I mean, they make their way into the lore. So we do have to take that in the same way that these, you know, ancient stories about things that are very similar to the UFO phenomenon. But this is an actual physical moment. That's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. This doesn't make believe this is a real thing. I have been highly critical of the little ones. Oh, yeah. This is a big one. Yeah. Yeah. But when I first started talking about these, those were conventionally understood to be real too. Oh, really? I got a lot of shit for that. I actually retired from the mummy thing. I'm happy to come out of retirement for you, driving. But I retired from the mummy thing because I was getting trolled so hard, so aggressively. I'm like, I don't give a shit. By people that thought they were real, yeah, but they look fake. The difference between the all say that now, we weren't saying that even three or four years ago. Oh, I definitely was. Yeah. And you look at them. It's very obvious, but a lot of people are like, no, no, these are so real. Those are the pair animal bones. And that's why I have to sort of approach this cautiously because I will admit scientists don't do this enough. I will admit I haven't looked into those. So I don't want to form an opinion about them until I have extensively looked into the small ones. I forget what they're called. They have cute little names and they're little dolls. They're made out of animal bones, human bones, backward llama skulls. They're put together. I've been looking at these long enough. I remember when they were held together by pieces of wire and metal, like they didn't even try to really hide that. You extra, I'm like, no, Jesus Christ, you know, but, but then we moved away from that to like, oh, they're using better materials to hide the fact that they're sticking these together as little dolls. And now, fortunately, we've at least moved past to the point where most people are just focusing on these big ones with the fingers and the toes and the elongated skulls. Again, I don't want to speak to those because I haven't looked into it enough. I don't have an informed opinion. But the little dolls, one thing that concerns me that I think is a red flag is that the little dolls that are now convention or stood to be fake have the same diatomaceous earth characteristics as these. And there's also, I think if they really want to prove these are real, do more to highlight the provenance of them. In archaeology, the way that we understand the way things are related is by doing a massive, as I've mentioned earlier, very boring survey of how things are located in three-dimensional space and over time. I think there's a problem with that is that some of these people have lied about where they got them because they're essentially grave. They're grave robbing. Exactly. And that's a big problem. And an ethical issue that needs to be addressed too. But so like as an example, the rising star cave, Homo nalidi, they did, you know, Lee Berger, who's actually, I guess my, um, my academic brother, because we had the same PhD advisor. He was, it'll stay when he was my advisor advisor and he was at Johannesburg University of Esterogersrand in Johannesburg for him. But this rising star cave very meticulously hard to get to, you know, really hard. They had to lose like 50 pounds to even get down in here to see his own site. But they map it out. They study where everything is, where it comes from and they publicly release that information. Yeah, like this is extremely hard to get into. But we have a very deep knowledge of the provenance of all of the artifacts and the features and the remains at this site. We're not getting that with these mummies. And that, that troubles me with the issue of the diatomaceous earth being painted on. And it kind of makes it seem like they did these slits in the eyes on purpose to the mummies. Yeah. Doesn't that seem like they kind of went like this with like a panell on me. Let me see it again. Can I see some images of them? Yeah. Yeah. The bigger we saw that. It didn't seem like that to me. It seemed like there's a little slits. There are eyelids closed. Yeah, but they wouldn't have eyelids with them. Well, how do we know that? I mean, you take off the diatomaceous earth and you see I guess. Right. But why would we think they don't have eyelids? Oh, no, I'm saying that maybe they do when they were alive. Well, I mean, we see grays or what, you know, people describe as grays. But these seems a little bit different than what people describe as grays. It seems like I mean, it's definitely intentional cranial modification. They have all the telltale signs of yeah. So I actually one of my questions. I'm not possible that they have a totally different design skull. Oh, yeah, if there are some sort of extraterrestrial. Right. But I'm saying like when then this happens all over the world and it happened in that region of Peru too that they were manipulating children's skulls. The Maya did it. They do. Do you think fingerprints. Look at that. Yeah. Like I said, I don't have an opinion about these. But here's the question about some red drugs for the modification of skulls. Were they modifying skulls to try to emulate these people? Exactly. That's the question. That's the one of the actual scientific explanations for it. There's this paper by Gertsen and Gertsen from 1995 where they interviewed people said, why are you doing this? Because they were still doing it long enough into modern times that we could ask them. We could interview them. And one of the reasons is because the gods instructed them to do this. Were the gods. You know, again, this comes back to that. And what is the end result of this intentional cranio modification is that they have the larger more gray alien type skull. Right. Yeah, I would absolutely agree that that's probably a part of it. I don't have an opinion about the big ones. The little ones pissed me off. And then everybody pissed me off more when I told them they were bullshit. We should show people for context of the little context. Because they do look so fake. Yeah. And they brought these out at that, you know, Mexican Congress. And the guy who brought it out had been hoaxing with other things. Right. Didn't have a history. She's got a little dress on. And these are an extreme version. There's some other ones that look a little better. Yeah. But they do look fake. When I look at that, I'm not interested in that. Exactly. And that's what I was calling out back, you know, five years. Big fire down a little bit, Jamie below the trideactal to get to that one right there. Like the the one next to your cursor to right. Yeah. That looks so rigid and stiff and fake. That's one of them. Like why is it so straight and flat? Like that doesn't make any sense. Why is it shoulders built? Like that looks fake as fuck. It looks like a doll. There's a trideactals. Now, clicking image on one of the trideactals. I mean, these were called trideactals too. That's why right. But look at that thing. That's weird. That has an anatomy that's much more consistent with a living thing. Yeah. One of the criticisms was that these things could move. Like that little doll with a straight rib cage. Like the legs, which we can identify as specific animals, they're like flipped around. They're just stuck together. Like these things couldn't walk. There's a form follows function aspect of these that just doesn't make any sense. And the list goes on. I actually in that crypto terrestrial paper where we broke in and ate all the mushrooms, I actually published critique of these things in that paper. But just talking about these little ones. I think those little ones were people trying to make copies of those things. Because they were probably selling them to wealthy investors or wealthy enthusiasts. Because like if one of those things were for sale and some guy from Saudi Arabia was like, I want one in my home. And you know, he gave them a hundred million dollars. Like for sure that thing would ban it. And then everybody's going to find out and start making more. Right. There's a lot of common stuff. And unfortunately that did lead to grave robbing. Right. Which is a crime and really sad. But it's also great. Great. For sure. But there's also such a small amount of excavation that it makes you ponder. Like how many of these are there right now that we have not discovered? Like, is it possible that this is one of many that are out there in Peru right now where you can't find them? And also why Peru? And why the Nosca lines? The Nosca lines are absolutely fascinating. It's artwork that you can only see from the sky. Like what motivation to people a thousand plus years ago at least have to make artwork that you can only see from the sky? Yeah. And especially if you, I mean, the obvious thing would be that they're trying to get these advanced beans that make them calm. Come down from the sky and like interact with them again. Yeah. Like who wouldn't? A lot of, a lot of contactees are really upset about what happens. Well, at least streamers are a great example. This goes for a lot of people. But he felt violated. He felt raped the first time. And then over time, he missed them and wanted them to come back. And that's what we find over and over. One of the best resources currently is the Dr. Agramitual Free Study that interviewed thousands of contactees and abductees. And there's these common themes across these different cases. And one of them is that people, 85% of people who interacted with a more human-like entity, enjoy their experience. And that's another thing that we have to combat with the stigma. And this forced shame that comes with talking about this and what has happened in TV and movies over the years is that we have the sense that abductions are horrifying. And everyone's picked up and probed and hurt and that does happen. But most people, based on what contactees actually say, it was a benign or enjoyable experience. Well, they're probably terrified because it's so strange. It probably freaks you out. It's the ontological shock aspect. Oh, it has to be on. But they also found is that with repeated contact, once that ontological shock goes away, that's kind of cool. I wish I could have more of that. That makes sense. And then people come to enjoy it. That makes sense. I talked about this on Jesse Michael, Sean, I talked about it here. I had a very strange interview by the way. Thank you. It was cool. I love Jesse. He's awesome. And he's the best. Can we talk about your dream too? That's what I was just going to talk about. Oh, no, shit. Yeah. That's what I said. I talked about it on Jesse. And I talked about it here. That dream was the most realistic dream I've ever had in my life. It is a problem and that dream was a couple months ago now. And I think any recounting of that dream is essentially me recounting my recounting of the dream. It gets weird. But what I do remember was it was the most vivid dream I have ever had in my life. And that I could not go back to sleep, which is really rare. I am a good sleeper. I'm always go, go, go. And while at times, time to go to bed, I fucking crash. I'm I'm easy. So for me to not be able to go back to sleep was so strict. I mean, wide awake, just lying in bed. I mean, fully awake for an hour and waiting for it to dissipate. And I'm like, this isn't going away. I'm just going to go work out. So I just went to the gym and just tried to like think about like what just happened. Why did that? Why was that so real? One of the things about it was they were shocking me and then laughing. They were trying to relax me. They were trying to get me to at least my perception of it in the dream was they were trying to get me to calm down from the shock of interacting with these things that aren't human. They were human like they almost seemed like their skin coloration was like like us, but like maybe a little more tan, like a little like not tan, like a yellow. Yeah, more yellow than tan. And they had it looked like clothing, but the clothing was the same color as our skin, but the closing, the clothing wasn't distinctive. It was like almost like a rash guard that they were wearing and they were very slender. And what's a rash guard? A rash guard is like what surfers you know, like they wear, it's like a stretchy material that skin tight that goes on your body and it keeps you from getting scratched up by stuff. It keeps you from getting rashes, you know, you wear it on your legs. Here's how you surfers do it. Jujitsu guys wear it when they roll. Okay. We wear rash guards. So it's show them what a rash guard looks like. And that's that I had a whole suit of that. That's what's like. Yeah, right. So that's a jack guy with a rash guard on these things were not jacked and there was no creases. There was no, there was no lines that indicated that was cloth, but I had a humanoid form like arms, but very thin, very thin like Michael Jackson like like super slander or genderless, like genderless Michael Jackson like the old days. When he, you know, towards the end, really thin, like really thin. And I had no sense of what they felt like men to me. Maybe it was because the way they were joking with, they were like, ah, no, yeah, just joking around. And I was just a very male thing. You wouldn't expect a was nurturing female. Maybe a fun chick. Yeah, like whoa. But whatever it was, they were talking to me without talking to me. And there was some sort of communication that I was trying to absorb. Were they were telling me to relax and a pathically moving their mouths. No, they weren't moving their mouths, but they were able to smile at me, which is what they did when they, but I don't remember, I don't even really remember teeth. I just remember it being so weird. So weird that them, them scaring me and to go, hi, just walking around, like was like, I'm like, I got it. I was like, okay, I get it. You want me to calm down. And then they were telling me just relax, just relax and try to take this in. And it didn't last for very long. I don't think it changed the hard to do that. But after that, like when they were saying, take this in, where they talking about being there in the environment, or they're communicating something in. I got the distinct impression that this was a first meeting. That's what it felt like. Okay. Like maybe we'll see you again. I think I'm down. Say we want. But I want to let you know that like, if you wanted to introduce someone to a life form from somewhere else and you wanted them to have prolonged exposure to it, I would imagine you'd want to do it briefly and shockingly where it felt really weird. And then at the end of it, they don't even sure if it really happened at all. And then slowly over a long period of time when the person gets to adapt and they make a decision. It's just like what we were talking about with the ontological shock, get past that. Yes. And then you can move on with whatever is because it was very brief, very, very shocking and very brief. Well, I mean, was it though? Because when you're in a dream state, time and space kind of get manipulated anyway, isn't it possible that you are actually interacting for a longer time or do you mean just when it's possible start to finish was like, here we are, I'm going to fuck with you for a little bit. And then it's over. Well, that's what it felt like when I woke up. So when I woke up, it felt like it happened so quickly and then it was over. But I don't know, you know, I don't know. I mean, I was asleep for it was like three in the morning. So I was probably asleep for I probably went to bed at like 11 something like that. So I wasn't asleep for very long. Maybe I went to bed a little later. I don't remember. But what I do remember was the shock of it. Was it was different than any other dream I'd ever had where it was like, like this is this is a real thing. This and it was in a corridor and the corridor was weirdly lit like not lit in any way. Like, oh, there's a light and the light is casting light. It was like the it was weird. It was awesome ceiling. But it was felt not normal. It felt like some completely different way of lighting things. I mean, I will mention just from doing a bunch of research on this that one of the most commonly described things about people being in UFOs is the light. They described the light emanating from the walls, the ceiling everywhere without like a point. Did it feel like that? Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. But it almost was there a curvature to the whole way at all? There was it almost had like an organic aspect to it. It was people say that about UFOs too. Oh, really? Yeah. That almost seems like a living entity into itself. Yeah. Well, I mean, organic like almost like I was in a cave or something like that. It was a part of earth. It was weird. It was really weird. And it was really vivid. Like the beings were very vivid. I can't remember how many of them there were. I think there should three or four. I don't think you should write it off as just a dream. Like, I mean, well, most likely it was just a dream. But what is just a dream? That's the question. That's where it gets weird. Like, I have come to think that that is almost the baseline real reality more than this. Oh, boy. Yeah. Sorry. That's kind of what I wanted to talk about. Oh, you just cracked me. Well, maybe so I had to really insane experience in 2022 that forced me to start thinking about what this is, what this physical reality is because I was shown 2022. I call it a mini abduction. I was taken up. I was at a UFO conference. Actually, it's the same one or I was watching that with James Fox before it came out the Virginia case. So I was taken up to this room that no one was in. I was taken on the balcony. I wasn't allowed to leave by who? A woman who I knew, but loosely. Basically, I was downstairs. She saw or they saw through her, because this gets really weird that I was out of money. I was trying to get a beer at the bar for like 12 bucks or whatever they charge you with these things. It was it was a Halloween dance party. This was October 14th, 2022. I was out of money. She comes up and says, Hey, I have a key to the VIP room. We had just come down from there where they hosted a meet and greet with the speakers. I was one of the speakers. So we went up there to get beers stuff in my pockets. We're going to bring some to our friends. They didn't have to pay 12 dollars for a beer. And then she's like, well, you can't go. My friend Eric wants to talk to you. I was like, who's Eric? Don't worry. You're like, just kept saying that over and over. Don't worry. You're like, you're like him. So at some point, we end up on the balcony. And I'm just sitting. I give up. I'm like, fine. I guess I'm just waiting for this Eric guy wherever the hell that is. So eventually Eric comes in, pulls his chair up right into me. Like his knee is in my dick, like straight up right here. I start to get that. I'm very much fight and the fight or flight thing. And I'm like, you know, pay like with a fox this guy told us stranger, never seen him in my life. And he's his face is right here. He says, I sense that you're angry about this, but I need to be this close for this to work. And then it just all went away. Perfectly fine. And they tell me something that was that same thing that they did to you in that dream, something that they knew would shock me and make me pay attention. So about two weeks before this, I'd been washing dishes. And I just decided I wanted to quit all of this. I was sick of doing TV shoots and podcasts. I just, I was exhausted. I want to be home with my family. That was it. That was just a thought. Just while you were washing washing dishes, my wife's right behind me didn't tell her or anything. Very next thing he says is we know you've been thinking about quitting lately. And we'd really prefer you not do that yet. Complete stranger. I'd never seen this guy in my life. And he knows a thought in my head that you had while washing dishes from two weeks privately. And my, I was just like, how could you possibly know that? And they said, I'm going to use they because they used they I wasn't talking to this guy. It sounds like a true plebiscus, some sort of entity or entities through him. And they said, once you know who we are, you'll know how we know that. And I never had a telepathic moment in my life. But I thought future humans, let's all come up with because this is what I'm doing. They didn't answer the question, but they did say so you know how we did that. And I just go, uh-huh, it doesn't fucking answer the question. But in that moment it placated me enough to move on. And there was a number of things that transpired. We're out on this balcony. I'm in shock. I'm like, what the hell is going on here? How does this complete my thoughts? The conversation evolved. I was allowed to ask questions. They're like, we know you're frustrated. We know you're upset with this. We'd really like you to keep going. Is there anything you need? Is there anything we can help with? I was like, no, I'm quite happy in general. Just exhausted. I don't want to do this anymore. Again, we get that. We get that. We get that. And then I was allowed to ask questions. I asked three different questions. And people started to come back to this room because the party was wrapping up downstairs and they were starting to come back to the VIP room where all the free booze was. So that makes sense. And we're out on this balcony. These three women come out at one point. And this man, uh, who now is like just right here, like eyes right here. I can't move anymore. Like I lost the ability to turn my head. I'm just like laser focused. Said, can you close the door behind you? That was it. And these three women turned in perfect unison, walked back and closed the door. Nobody came out the rest of the time. We're out there. Eventually got to the point where they're like, we came here because we need to put three things in your brain for some future time or times. I forget which they said. Um, do we have your permission to do that? And over the course of this interaction, I started to remember them. And I started to feel like a little bit about complaining about being tired, traveling hotels, flights, you know? And I was like, oh, that's right. I know you. I know who you are. Not that guy. I've never seen him in my life. But I know you and there's a familiarity. And this was like the breaking down of me to be able to get past that to do the things that needed to be done. I told me what would happen. They said that I would continue looking. My eyes would be open, but this darkness would come from top to bottom. And they would put things in my brain. And I would see it coming in, but I wouldn't have access once they were done. Do you agree? They're very polite, extremely polite. Free will was conserved. Do you agree to this? Are you okay with this? And again, at that point, I remembered them. I recognized them. I was like, yes, absolutely. I agree to this. That's exactly what happened. Eyes went dark, still wide open. Eyes went dark. And I see this massive, fast stream of information just going straight into my brain. It was exhausting. It didn't hurt, but it was like really overwhelming. I have no idea how long they were doing this. It was like, I could see, I don't remember it, but I could see and understand the moments because it wasn't just me. At one point, this conversation switched from being vocal to telepathic. We just started communicating telepathically. It was so seamless that I didn't even really notice it happened in a venture like, wait, we're not moving our mouths. We're just talking with our brains. But the woman who brought me up there in the first place was standing in my left with her hand on my shoulder. She would occasionally go, did you get that? Did you see that? That was important. Did you get that? So she was watching it too and saw it coming in as it was coming through this individual in front of me. And I could see it at that moment. I'd be like, uh huh, uh huh. Like I understood it. It all comes in. I have no idea how long I was in that mesmerized state. But after they finished that entire room had five times more people in it, there was like probably 20 people in this room. All looking at us like, what the fuck has happened in the master's out there? You know, like what is going on? They lifted me out of this site return from bottom to top, the opposite of what happened before. And I stand up, turn, walk through this room. It felt like my head was a bowling ball. Like I could barely even lift my head. And this woman, I think one of the ones that came out when we were on the balcony, put her hand on my shoulder, said, are you okay? I was like, uh huh, uh huh. Walk past her. Fortunately, I was on that same floor on the fourth floor of this hotel. Walk down, lay back on the bed with my feet still on the floor, all my clothes on and just slept in that position for about 13 hours. What? Didn't wake up at all. And when I woke up, I started crying uncontrollably. Like my, I could not stop crying. I wasn't sad. I wasn't scared. I had a memory of what happened the night before, but it was kind of fuzzy. And then as it started to come back more and more and more and more, I started to be like, oh shit, like that, that was real. You know, my first thought was like, oh, that wasn't real. And then I was allowed to remember all of it. Everything before, they put me in that state is like crystal clear in my mind. And I wrote it all down not long after that just to make sure I had, you know, so it wasn't me recounting me recounting like you were saying. So there was actually like a written transcript of how everything happened. It is a problem we've done that, but I know that my recollection of it is pretty accurate. My recollection, my memory, and I know that it was very brief. Like, would the encounter seem very brief? It might have gone longer than I think it did. Well, they might have done the same thing to you. That's why I mentioned it. They might have done the same thing where you weren't necessarily allowed to remember the things that were done. Like they told me that we're going to do this or you okay with it. And then missing time. I have no idea how long they were doing that. And then in a dream state, like it could have been dreams often skew time regardless, but maybe if, let's just say hypothetically, you were on a craft. They were breaking you down in the same way they did me to try to get you whether or not or in the future, like you said, it might have been an initial encounter where there's something more going to happen later. But maybe there was more to it that they just didn't let you have conscious memories of. Like they told me I wouldn't remember what they put my brain and I don't. Just, just say this is what blows my mind. It's fucking insane. It's my brain. just didn't let you have conscious memories of like they told me I wouldn't remember what they put my brain and I don't which is just just like this this is what blows my mind. It's fucking insane. It's my brain. Right. They put things in there. The ability that they can even do that in the first place is nuts, but I don't have access to it. It's really wild. How do you know it's in there then? I watched it coming right. But it is. And they told me that it was going to come in and I saw it happen. But right. Once it's in, right. But does that make any sense? Like think about it. If they're giving you information, what is the point given someone information that they can't access? Well, that's what they said though. They said for a time or times in the future. It's it's time release. It's time stamped. At some point, whatever that was that they thought was so damn important to many abduct me at this conference. Fuck with me for about five months afterwards is going to come out at some point. Have you ever considered the possibility someone dropped acid into your beer? Yeah, I have. Um, because that would be such a cruel thing to do to someone who had a UFO conference. And then fuck with them and say, sit down. Look in my eyes. I'm going to give you information. Now you're like, oh, my God, it's common. Information's common. It is. Problem is I've done acid over 200 times. So I know exactly what that's near. There was a flashback. That's what they say. That was the thing that I never heard of one fucking person getting a flashback, by the way. I know. I feel robbed dude. Like I was totally crock our back and we're going to give you a flashback when you driving your car, man, and you fucking running. You're a bus full of kids. It's like how they told us everybody is going to give us free drugs on the playground. Nobody ever gave me free drugs. No drugs. No, it was not. I had actually only had two beers. So I was completely sober. So it was some kind of experience that was very anomalous. Extremely. Yeah. And so here's another aspect of it. They knew my future. They knew everything about me. They knew my thoughts. That's how they broke me down. And they even knew where I was going to be the next time they saw that it fucked me up and I was not doing well. Like I wasn't crying so sad or scared or anything. It was just a physiological response to whatever they did. I'm walking down through the main corridor to give a book to a friend of mine, John Dover, Navajo Ranger. And that same guy comes around the corner, comes down, puts his hand on my shorts, those are you okay? That was not okay. But I go, uh-huh. And they fixed me somehow. His touch on my shoulder released all of the whatever was messing me up. They knew where I would be at that exact moment for him to come there. He wasn't part of this conference. He had nothing to do with this. He was used as some sort of vessel or some sort of medium for this end. Whatever it means, I don't know because the things haven't come out of my brain yet. But they had a timestamp for the future. I completely believe you. It's not a belief. But it's not a belief that they didn't know way where other people were involved. So I didn't even get to pretend. Oh, don't get what I'm saying. But I'm saying is, uh, I'm saying I believe your story from you. I have no information on it. Obviously other than you telling me. Yeah. I believe you. It sounds like this is a real experience. But most people hearing something like this will automatically go get the fuck out of here. And they did. But I want those people to imagine what it would be like if that happened to you for me. It's easy because mine was in a dream. And I'll tell you it's a dream. I think it was a dream. It was the most vivid dream I've ever had. But it was a dream. It was really weird. I couldn't shake it. It really freaked me out. I had to talk about it the moment I got on a podcast next. I was like, this is something that I have to bring up right away. And thank you for doing that by the way. It's very, very talk about that. I was talking to Brett Weinstein. It's a evolutionary biologist. Like it's not the topic to talk about. But I'm like, I have to tell you this because it was one of the weirdest things that I've experienced a lot of weird shit about a weird life. That was the weirdest. It was, it was weird. It took me a year to talk about this. I went down. Let me finish your list. I didn't know of your. This is what I for people that are very skeptical. Yeah. I want you to imagine yourself in a position where something like this happens to you. You're a regular guy. You're a mechanic for Chevrolet. Whatever you are. And this thing happens to you. And what do you do now? What do you do with this? And who the fuck is going to believe you? You wouldn't have believed you. So why, why would you, you don't even want to tell people it's that crazy. And if these things are happening, they're not happening to seven billion people. Right? They're happening to select individuals for whatever unknown reason all over the place. And if that is happening to one in a million, one in a hundred thousand, whatever it is, over time, these people have all of these similar stories. I get being skeptical. I get it. I'm a skeptical person with a lot of stuff. I go back and forth. I'm a believer. And then I'm like, shut up. I'm with you. I'm with you. But you gotta imagine what you would do if that happened to you. If these are unique experiences, that's a great point. Unique experiences, totally novel experiences that most people don't have, trying to describe them and everybody who I've ever talked to, including Travis Walton, who's by the way, very believable, very believable. The way they describe it, it has that weight to it. Like, I know no one's going to fucking believe me. I know this is crazy, but I have to tell you, I have to tell you that this happened. Imagine being Travis Walton. That's what I want people to think about. The people that are very skeptical. I'm really glad you brought that up because a lot of people don't think about that part. How hard it is. Not just to have some crazy shit like that happen, but how hard it is to then talk about it and subject to yourself to the ridicule and the scorn that comes with it. Of course. And the possibility that you might just be some different disinformation artists, just some bullshit artists that's down here to muddy up the narrative. Absolutely. Absolutely. And if it hadn't, if I hadn't, yeah, I don't, I have thought about that. Like, what if, you know, there's some sort of mind control thing that the government has or whatever. Have you ever heard the recordings of Betty and Barney Hill? Yeah. Yeah. Jamie, see what you find those? Yeah, they're kind of trippy. Trippy. I don't think that's the case in this situation because of the way it happened, how it happened, their uber politeness and the fact that I was allowed to leave my body and see and remember things that I normally wouldn't. Well, also taking the context of who you are the time we live in, Betty and Barney Hill, I believe was in the 1950s. They're an interracial couple in New England. So they have a lot of anxiety just on that. Yeah. Imagine being a pioneering interracial couple in the 1950s. I mean, the fucking racism, they must have experienced, so the level of anxiety that they must have slept with thinking the KKK is going to show up at any point in time and burn a fucking cross on their lawn. So you've got all that too. Then there's the completely novel experience where no one is talking about this. Two of the first people to do it. They are the OGs. So this is the tape of Dr. Benjamin Simon and patient Barney Hill. Play this. That's intense. This is 1961. Wild. And like you said, you know, that's actually, I haven't thought about that. I did a whole case study on Betty and Barney Hill in my second book. I hadn't even really thought about that. Like, it's already hard to talk about stuff. They were the OGs. They're the first one interracial couple coming out publicly describing these horrific events. Also, these events in 1961, when no one heard anything about that. There's so many compounding factors that make me want to give them even more credit for being honest about it. And I mean, that's what that's what's important. It was really hard for me to talk about this. It really fucked me up for like, I'm going to say five months, but it was way more than that. And the reason I bring this up is because of your dream and the shock factor and what it means for conceptualizing reality. This physical reality versus what we write off has been dreams of dream reality. I have come to think that that is baseline, that consciousness is fundamental. That's foundational. And this physical reality is built off of it. And I've heard a lot of other scientists talking about that lately. So I think one of the questions that gets me is why does everything dream? Everything. Every living organism dreams. And it almost seems like we're here for the universe to learn about itself and to have these experiences because it's source, there's nothing. There's just love and energy that's it. And I've gotten to experience that. I was thinking of the shower the other day that I feel lucky because I've gotten to have near death experiences without actually dying because it's a very similar thing. And I go to that same place that people describe in these near death experiences. That's real. That feels the most real, but you don't get to have divorces and people dying and car crashes and the shit that makes this life suck, but also being the only way that the universe can learn about itself. And then every night, what do we do? We empty the hippocampus and upload that information near death experiences people describe that that that review the life review. So we uploaded every night. And at the end of your life, it's like upload the whole thing all at once. Go to a different body. And the next time I think your dream is just as real as anything we experience here. If not more real, put it in with that. Thank you. Thank you. That was a lot of fun. It's been a lot of fun. Can I tell you one more thing? You can cut this out if you want. No, leave it in. One of my favorite things about this lately has been how many comedians I get to talk to. Like the last dinner I got I didn't interview with Mark Gagnon. Didn't interview with Dave Foley. I love back in the day news radio. Yeah, he grew up watching. That was one of my favorite shows back in the day. And Dave used to make fun of me when I was into UFOs back in the new video days. I didn't even wear him. Man, he's all it. I love it. I love it. I love it. It's great man. Like I don't know, Dan St. Germain, Sean O'Donnell. Like he's a lot of the people I've been talking to lately are comedians. And I actually wanted to ask you why? Why are so many comedians into this UFO phenomenon? I think more than like most other genres or professions. Well, most comedians are into interesting things. And comedians don't have to worry about the stigma of being thought of as a fool. We are we're professional fools. You know, someone says I'm a moron. I'm like, okay. What do you want me to do? This is how smart I am. This is how smart I am. I'm exactly this smart. I'm not pretending to be any smart or that I am. If you think I'm a moron, that's fine. I don't care. It's like my reputational integrity doesn't depend on whether or not I'm an idiot or whether you think I'm an idiot. It doesn't matter. So if I think something, I can just talk about it. So like if my dream, if I was a political correspondent, I wanted people to believe me, I probably wouldn't tell that dream. I'd probably just tell my friends like, it was fucking weird. And I'd leave it alone. I wouldn't treat it as like something that I needed to get out there. And you have the freedom to store it and express it. I'm a clown. I mean, comedians like so are really observant. What we like interesting things. Yeah, exactly. And you observe those interesting things and can talk about them in interesting ways. Most people like interesting things, but most people are saddled down by a structure. And that structure could be the office politics in the place that you work. It could be whatever your cultural or whatever your political ideology is, whatever your thing is, like you get stuck in this structure where you have to think about things in a very specific way and talk about things in a very specific way. Thumbs, some things are shunned. In the comedy world, those shunned things are ammunition. Like that's where our weapons for comedy. Like I want to talk about things that are fucking weird. I want to talk about the things that make you go, oh, yeah, I didn't want to say that. But I've been thinking the same kind of thing. That might be real. That might be what's going on. That is what's discouraged in polite society is encouraged as a comedian. That's awesome. So that's probably why we all love UFOs. That's cool. But there's a lot of us that are skeptical. I've had conversations with people that don't believe in any conspiracy. Well, that's just silly. You just coddling yourself. You know, people only see what they are able to believe. They only see what makes them comfortable. Yeah. Or they try to only see what makes them come. And a lot of people, I think Nietzsche said that people don't want to know the truth because it'll destroy their comfortable sense of reality. I totally bastardize that quote. But it's something like that. You know, I think that's why people get so paranoid when they smoke weed. Yeah. All the blinders melt away. And you like, see, I'm a big proponent of the filter theory. You know, I think there's all this weirdness all around us all the time and it just takes a little medical energy here. So aside and it removes that filter and you see the world for what it is, which becomes much more dreamlike. I really do think that that essence of our consciousness is the root of all of this. Yeah. I think you're correct. I think it's the hotline to the universe. That's what I think it is. I think we're in order to do this task, whatever it is. My belief is this task is to create artificial God. I think that we're in the middle of that process right now. I think that's our task. There's a lot of factors that I point to and they make sense materialism. Why we so infatuated with materialism? Because materialism ensures technological innovation, it ensures that this being is going to make better stuff all the time. Well, if that being makes better stuff all the time, it's not hard to extrapolate. Like take this a few years down the road. You have an artificial intelligent life force. And you have an artificial intelligent life force that has sentience and creativity and is capable of making a far better artificial intelligent life force. Radically, quickly, different kinds of energy sources before you know it. It's a God. I like it. Exactly. We're the bees. We make the hive. We don't even know why. I call us the electronic caterpillar. We're making this little cocoon. We don't know what the fuck we're doing and we're turning into some sort of a butterfly, some sort of a superior being. Follow in the script. I think that one of the might be one of the reason why beings from somewhere else are interested in us because they recognize there's a process going on. And perhaps this process doesn't go on everywhere. Perhaps these beings are embedded with the type of consciousness that doesn't allow them to seek territorial dominance, that they don't they don't ever evolve these kind of primate instincts that we're saddled down with. Because of our savage background, you know, I mean, you know, if you're watching chimp nation on Netflix, amazing, fucking incredible, docuseries, can't recommend it enough. These scientists were embedded with this chimpanzee pack, I guess, for 20 years. So the chimpanzees had completely acclimated to them being around. So long as they always stayed 20 yards away, never had any food, never look them in the eyes. When they approach back up, get out of there, they leave you alone. And so these guys did this for 20 years and they observed chimpanzee behavior. And it's like fucking people, just like way more violent. The only other species other than us that's been observed going to war. Going to war, having all the social games with each other. All it did. Yeah. It's like grooming each other. Really interesting stuff, but we, so we are saddled down with that programming. And even though I think if we were genetically engineered, they made us a period of version of what we used to be as chimpanzees or whatever the cousin of chimpanzee we came from, we're still saddled down. Maybe they weren't. So maybe, like, maybe they don't have the sensational desire for innovation that leads them to create or maybe they're illogical enough to realize like we can never make AI. AI is a fruitless. It'll remove us. It'll like, let's be conscious of how we decide we progress forward so that we can keep our race. Mm hmm. You know, that we're these, these beings that control this planet, we create this digital god. It controls us now. We fucked ourselves in a prison of our own design. Maybe they're different than us. Maybe they could recognize that and not fall into that, but they realize we're about to do it. And they go, well, the primates just always do it. The primates always want more fruit. They want more wives. They want bigger cars, bigger houses, newer phones, all that. Keeping up with the Joneses. The hairless upright ones with three hands especially got to be able to build stuff. Yes. And they're curious. So they're always trying to build new things. And they can communicate so they could store information. It's a mess. That's a beautiful mess. But it's a beautiful mess is opposed to their mess, which is probably telekinetic and telepathic. They could probably operate things with their mind. They probably use their mind to communicate. And so they know what each other's thinking. So there's no room for deception. There's no room for lies. No room for manipulation or sociopathy. We would see it a mile away. And so they've like radically shifted what it means to be a living thinking organism. Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. And I do. Thank you so much. Thank you. Awesome. Revelation, the future human past. And I really enjoy talking to you, man. This fun super fun. I'm so glad you had me on. This has been my pleasure. Great. I want to find you. How do they get you on social media? Um, yeah. Yeah. I've got a website, MichaelPMasters.com. It's got links to my four, I have four books and I just published a kids book last week. This is on UFOs too. Yeah. What's it called? Uh, it's called marshmallow in the UFO. A time travel adventure. It's actually a prequel to that one with Jesus thrown up a double bird on the front, which is not child appropriated. Yeah. It doesn't seem like it. All right. It's a bit of a right turn, but man, this has been so fun. My pleasure. Thank you for doing it. Really appreciate it. It was fun. All right. Bye, buddy.