About 20 years ago, a recent law school graduate called Tucker Max started posting his experiences that it tells of his dating life. On the internet, he became a sensation. He wrote a bunch of best-selling books sold millions of copies, the most famous of which was called, I hope they serve beer in hell. Not everyone likes Tucker Max. A lot of people hate it, Tucker Max, but nobody could deny that he was smart. He was a beautiful prose stylist, not something you normally find writing about hooking up with ladies and getting loaded. But he was. And then he retired around 2012. He stopped writing about that stuff and receded from public view. And then a few years ago, he reemerged as a very different person as someone whose entire life was devoted to his own family. At a level, most people can't relate to. He became a homesteader. What an interesting progression. We thought it'd be worth spending some time hearing how that happened and what it's like to truly prepare for the bad times on behalf of your family. Tucker Max joins us in studio now. Tucker Max, thank you so much. Thanks for having me. It's great to meet you. Yes, it too. So I just have to add, most of that one you hear about what you're doing now, but I just have to ask, how did you wind up? You went to University of Chicago undergrad, famously at the least fun school in America. It's earned its reputation. It's just for the reputation. And then you went to Duke Law School, which is a douche factory obviously. No, it is. I can't argue. But then you wrote these accounts of your life, which sounded like you were in a fraternity at Alabama. Like, how did this happen? Well, it's the benefit of going to the least fun undergrad is I didn't have any of my experiences in college when I was too young to appreciate how fun they were. And I kind of started having them in law school when, you know, because I got to law school. I graduated three years from Chicago. And the cool part about Chicago was I got to law school. And I basically already learned the, you know, the hard parts of law school. So I was like, well, this is easy. I don't need to go to class. Like, I know all of this. I know how to think all this of law schools supposed to teach you already learned. And then I had all my friends were dudes who went to state schools. They were the smart kids at state schools like Kansas or Pitt or UVA. And so I was like, and they knew how to party. And I'm like, oh, I didn't have anyone like you guys with me in undergrad. Let's go do this more. And then of course we were by UNC, which was all girls. It's not literally in all girls school, but it might as well be. Well, no, it is like 65% no dudes at UNC. Well, the dudes are just like the the iconic stereotype of the Foppish Southern frat boy types. Yeah. And so for me, it was like hunting at a petting zoo. It was so easy. And we go over there and be beautiful girls and these douchebag idiot guys. And it was like, oh, this is great. And so we had a great time. And then we all left law school, went to different cities. And I went to Florida and I hated it. Like this is to work in a firm. No, I got fired from a big law firm called femurkin West in Silicon Valley. I got fired about three weeks into being a summer associate actually, not even a full-time employee. And so I was essentially blacklisted. Oh, it's impossible to get fired. And I did it. I didn't three weeks. Basically, I was an unguided missile man. I was drunk at all the firm events. I did all that stuff. That actually wasn't the problem. The thing I did that that caused them to fire me and honestly, I'm not even mad at them. They did what I would have done if I would have been a partner there. One of the senior female partners propositioned me, you know, like, uh, wanted to hook up with me. She was married. Not that that meant anything to me at the time. Or to female lawyers, well, not to her. I don't know. I'm not going to say all that generalization here. To her. It didn't obviously mean anything. And for some reason, I turned her down and then told everyone about it, which is like, if I had slept with art, it didn't bulletproof. And if I just shut up, no one would have cared. But I kind of did the worst of all worlds. And so, you know, I was, I was a liability. You can't have someone asked about law firm would turn down a partner's advance and then tell others about it. I mean, that's, I mean, the bar association could get involved at that point. That is the violation of ethics. And intelligence, like, what's wrong with you? Why are you so dumb? There's a way to play this game and you're doing it totally wrong. And I was. And so, um, I then I did, okay. So even that wouldn't have blacklisted me from the legal profession. But I wrote two days before she propositioned me or before they fired me, uh, I had gotten drunk at a firm event and caused kind of a scene, although it was kind of funny. And so I wrote an email about it that was pretty funny. I sent it to my friend. What was the scene? We had like a charity auction. And, um, I got up and I took the mic from like the auctioneer. And I was yelling at this girl because she was bidding against me. And the price was high. I'm like, stop bidding. I can't afford this. And I need this to stay at the firm. And like, it was like kind of like a funny, like, uh, it was like, you know, like the funny drunken person in a corporate event. Like I really didn't go too far, but I went right up to that one. As a summer associate, the line is lower for you. Right. Exactly. Like they, they, even the managing partner thought it was hilarious. And so, uh, and I wrote an email about that, not about the female partner sent that to my friends. Like on a Tuesday and then like on Wednesday, I was fired. They didn't wait to Friday. I don't know when smart. Right. And so, of course, my friends are assholes. And so they sent that to all their friends and then it like went out from there. And so that like everyone in legal profession got that email that summer. Like I was, you know, they, you know, there's always legends about it. I was one of the legends that ended up turning it in. And was your plan at that point to spend your life in big law? Yeah, it was. It really was. I hate to say it. The God's honest truth is I was the worst kind of like, okay. So I was deciding out of undergrad whether to go to eye banking, management consulting or law, like, and I was that type of dude. I had that. No, I was seeking status without merit, which is what everyone in those professions is doing. Right. And that's just that. And I, you could not have convinced me that it was not a viable or valuable path for my soul to go make a bunch of money for bullshit, which is what you do in those professions. And, um, and I bought it, I bought the whole thing, hookline and sinker. And, um, so I was going after that. But I think there was obviously a part of me, like the whatever you want to call it. They drunk at the work event part who clearly did not want that. There was a part of me, you know, like, like some people, you know, like, it'll be mass murders who want to get caught. Of course. Well, I was, I wanted to get kick. I didn't have the truth. I love to make myself out to be hero. But the true story is I didn't have the courage to realize that it was a horrible, soulless path that I didn't want to go to. So I acted out until they fired me and kicked me out of the profession. So when that email went throughout the tiny and very inward looking legal world, what kind of response did you get? They almost didn't let me back come back from my senior year or my third year at Duke. No. Yeah. Like the, the, the, it got back to Duke. Oh, it got everyone. Like, I, if I had wanted to stay in the legal profession, I would have had to be like a public defender. Like there was no, I'm serious. No, no one was going to. Not that low. A divorce attorney. Maybe Jack, I might have been a lead to Jack off. That would have been it. What up? Like David French. There he is. Um, sorry. That's so. I love legal jokes. Um, so Duke was mad. So at this point, you realize like, I mean, the only reason she let me come back and finish my third year, I'm not really sure because she generally just don't know the, um, the, the, the, you know, Duke makes it the head of the, the, uh, I forget what her, uh, her, her exact title was, but the, the only reason she let me back was because I promised not to walk at graduation. Like I was going to graduate. And so it was like, she'd like, basically if I wasn't there, it grew up, which I didn't care about going to anyway, because I knew I was going to get a job in a legal profession. I just wanted to finish for two reasons. One is because I didn't want to quit and not have my degree, right? Which probably honestly would have been the best thing for me, but I was one of those where I like, now I want to actually have the, I don't want to say I went to do class school. I want to have the JD, which I do. But then also, um, I had such, it was like my party years. Like everyone else's party years are on undergrad, mind, more than loss. Had you been for turning in college? No. No. It's pretty funny. Yeah. I know, you invented this genre of fraternity literature. The, the other times that I invented freighter and I wasn't in a frat and I didn't write satire, it's memoir I wrote, but that's the New York Times, right? Like they're gonna, they know about genres anyway. They're going to get literally everything wrong. Of course they are. Yeah. So what did you decide to do with your life at this point? I mean, you're, you're kind of out of options. Yeah. It was, um, it was not a good situation for me because what where I was was I had enough courage to get drunk and ruin a future I didn't want, but not enough courage to recognize that that's what I was doing. So I was in like this tough situation. My dad owned some restaurants in Florida. And so, um, kind of the, like I was still kind of looking for the easy path, right? Like law, uh, law, you know, and I banking and management consulting even though you're working hundreds, something hour weeks, they really are the easy path. They are the soulless, easy, coward path. Yes. Um, it, and so the next coward path for me was the family business. And, um, uh, I kind of, I'd never really wanted to go into restaurants with the family business, but now I'm like, well, uh, this is, you know, the two things I've trained for, I, I wasn't good at. So I'm not allowed to anymore. So I kind of went that path and then, um, I got fired from the family business in like six months. It took me six months to set up through your existence. How'd you get fired from the family business? That's a long story. Basically, um, I was good at this. Now I was good. Cause restaurant business, right? And I'm smart now going and, and if you're smart now going, the restaurant business is denying for people who are who don't fit anywhere else, but are kind of smart and capable. And so I was good at it. The problem was, um, I assumed that my dad wanted to run a good business. I didn't realize the business existed for my dad's ego. And so I got in and realized, oh, there's all kinds of people here who suck who are stealing from him, who, uh, there's all these things we could be doing better. I mean, really basic stuff. Like why are we ordering from this company? They're charging twice as much as this company. Uh, it turns out that companies give my dad kickbacks. And then these people who are incompetent stealing from him, you know, uh, feed my dad's ego in a way that he values way more than what they're sealing. And so I essentially, but like a fool, just like I, you know, didn't sleep with a partner and told everyone, I went in, recognized these people were clowns and was like, oh, well, this is my dad and my name's on the door. So clearly the fact that I'm right is more than enough. I like, I told them that they sucked and that I was going to get them fired. And you know, they were smart enough and knew my dad well enough. They rallied kind of the troops and gotten up evidence against me that that, uh, my dad picked them over me and I got fired. Amazing. So now you're a graduate of two of the most prestigious schools in the country, but you're unemployed. You've washed out of it. And unemployable. So what do you do? Man, I was not in a good spot. Um, it was, it was a hard time for me. Uh, and I was basically like, you know, bartending, you know, work, like the kind of jobs that losers in their 20s get, that was me. Like I was a loser in my 20s early 20s. And then I was at the same time, I was writing emails to my friends from law school about all, you know, living in South Florida, which is a soulless horrible place. Cause I don't do drugs. And I'm not old. So there was no social niche for me in South Florida, right? Cause if you do Coke and you go to clubs, right, you're in South Florida's great. And if you're like 70 and, you know, play golf in the Boca country club, then it's great. But there's nothing else. And so I hated my life, but you know, I could drunk and hook up with girls anyway and get these horrible situations and write emails about it and send them my friends. And one of my friends, uh, a guy, a great, you actually might even, do you know Sean Trendy real clear polity? Yeah. Okay. So Sean went to law school with me and a good friend of mine is a great dude. And he actually called me up and he was getting the emails. And he's like, dude, listen, you're not good at law. You're not good at business clearly. But these emails are the funny things I've ever read. You need to go be a writer. And I was like, what the, what kind of bitch shit is this? What are you talking about Sean? This is the stupidest thing I've ever heard. And he's like, well, dude, look at, look at the evidence, right? And so, um, why is piece of advice that it was Sean that gave it to me? I'm a writer because of Sean Trendy. True. Like he said, yes, it's 100% true. And so, or I took that path because it's Sean, I was already writing. I just wasn't envisioning that as a profession from your doing that. And so, um, I ended up putting my stuff on the first actually. No, I took like the five emails that my friends saw were the funniest. I sent them to every publisher and every book agent in New York. Because at the time publishing was still on New York. And it was actually literally, this was 2000, 2001, 2002. There's a physical book of, um, like all the agents addresses and all like their query stuff. Like because you'll not remember this. Very well. I probably sent out 1000 query letters. Maybe five, between 500,000, I got zero positive, literally zero positive response. You know, like 90% nothing, right? And then probably got like 50 form letter rejections. And I even got like, I still have a couple of them, like some a couple personalized rejections were like, the editor was like, this is the worst thing I've ever read. You should never write even an email again. Like you have no place in publishing. But at the same time, I was sending my emails, like all the emails I'd forwarded to my friends would get like they would forward those. Like not just the ones that got me fired, but the funny ones after. And I was getting my emails forwarded back to me. Remember early in internet email chains? Yeah. Okay. So I was getting my own emails forwarded back to me from people in other social circles who didn't know I'd written them. Be like, dude, you should read this. This is so funny. And I'm like, all right. So clearly I'm good at this. Like Sean was right. These are funny to people who aren't friends. I'm like, all right. I mean, it is arrogant to think this, but all these people in publishing are wrong. Now, now I know publishing and like, of course they're all wrong. They're all idiots. Like pretty much everyone in publishing is there because they're a failed writer. It's not literally everyone, but almost I didn't know that at the time. But I was like, all right, well, I'm not good. They're not going to publish me. But then the internet was a thing at the time. This is 2002. And so I had to learn the program HTML. I put up a site on GeoCities, if you remember GeoCities. And it's like a, I got featured on like college humor and a few other, like those humor blogs that were really, really early. And it blew up. And MTV came and did a documentary about people who were dating on it because back when like dating on there and it was weird and creepy and all. And so they did a documentary about me and that blew up. And then all the publishing companies came back and they were like, yeah, we want to do your, we're at your books. And then that became, I hope they served here and how many books did you write? How many did you sell? I wrote four frat's higher books. One, I kind of gave away for free. So I didn't kind of, but three like were published. All three were, you know, New York Times, that sellers. I think I've sold about four and a half ish million of those books. Yeah. That's incredible. It was all, I mean, because especially because my audience were essentially people who don't read. I can't tell you how many dudes in my life. It's been tens of thousands have told me I've never finished a book, read a book or bought a book other than yours. I believe that. Like tens of thousands. So when why did you stop and when did you stop? Because my books were in my stories about doing all the dumb stuff guys and a lot of women also doing their 20s drinking, hooking up, partying, all that stuff. And then by the time, you know, I started writing at 27, but the time I got to about 33 34, I was like pretty tired of it. You know, like drinking and partying and you know, going out five nights a week is super fun when you're at a certain stage in life. And I was way past that stage of life. And it was becoming tedious and tiresome. And the cost of that lifestyle was really not just the physical cost, but the emotional cost was catching up to me. And honestly, man, like like everyone who goes to some people go through that phase for a week and some do it for a decade. I was more towards the decade side of it. But it was, I was feeling stuck, man. Like you can't move on at life if you have to be this person that is doing a thing at a certain phase. Right. And that's oh, dude, it was so depressing because all my fans would come to me. You know, I do public events all the time speeches, whatever. And they were all really upset if I wasn't the Tucker Max they envisioned in their right. And the time I would get really mad at them, like fuck you, I'm a whole person. But that was my own immaturity. Like they liked me because of my stories. And because of a certain attitude I had in a certain way I was in a certain part of my life. And some of them realized, oh, that's just part of his. And Jagger has to sing satisfaction in every show. Right. Yeah. And I wasn't going to sing satisfaction in my life. Like eventually, as I matured a little, I'm like, look, why am I doing getting mad at them? Like they even the dumb immature ones. Like the smart mature ones got it. They read the books out there were funny. Didn't expect me to be. But that was 20%. Right. Most people like they would come up in that, they have this multi year relationship with me that has nothing to do with me. Right. It's totally unilateral. And it's all about a projection in their mind of who I am based only on the books. And that was, it got really tiring after a while. And then instead of trying to fight it and getting mad at them, I'm like, all right, well, I just need to move on with my life. And so I wrote the last in the series was Asyl's finished first. And I put it like a retirement at the end, where I'm like, I'm not going to write this stuff, talk about it anymore. I've done with this part of my life. And then that kind of did set me free, although most people who know me know me from that stuff. And so even that broke for years afterwards, like I would be at Whole Foods. And a kid with like a younger kid or something would come up to me and be like, oh, you're tuck your max and why aren't you drunk screaming curses at people laying under a table? And I'm like, it's a 11 a.m. on a Thursday. Like what is wrong with you too? Even even now to this to this day, a lot of people, their impression of me, even after they meet me is still, how did you find a wisdom? I mean, so you've like laid bare your personal life. Yeah. And you sold four and a half million copies of books about hooking up with various women. Right. I told the truth about things most people learn. I would tell the truth for sure. Yes. So like what did that teach you about what you wanted in a wife? Well, I definitely showed me very much what I don't want. Because a lot of the, I mean, I was with a lot of women in that period. I was single, I was into women, I wrote about it. And then women who were at that stage, you know, the same stages meet came to me. And so there were a lot. And I realized, I mean, there's so much. The big thing, man, was I realized I needed a woman who was very smart, who was very sweet and empathic. But most importantly, I need a woman who really had her own thing in life, who really thought for herself, who really was her own person. Right. Because three or four years before I started, I retired. I would have been really happy with the hottest girl there was who was pretty sweet and basically a trophy wife. Right. I would have been totally cool with that. And then by the time I got to be about 32, 33, 34, I realized, oh, thank God I didn't get married. I would have been so miserable with that. I would have hated that. I would have been divorced within five, six years. I realized I needed a partner. And then I started to understand what a partner actually would look like for me at that point. That's the crazy thing, man. I think I had to go through whatever, hundreds or thousands of women to realize how lonely I was and how lonely that life is after a while. Yeah. You know, it's that metaphor I always use is imagine that like, because do don't get this, man, they don't understand women do. Most women understand what I mean when I talk about this. Because most guys have to go their whole life. It doesn't matter how good looking you are, how smart or how rich you are, you have to work for women. You have to have game. You have to talk to them. You have to be good in some way, at least connecting with a woman. But once you get famous, all that's out the window. Like you don't have to really do anything, but other than be famous. And there's a million examples of this of dudes who have no business being with any woman who are famous who get all kinds of women. And you can't understand what that's like as a dude, because you've spent your whole life like imagine living on like a desert island and you're scraping on existence and you have food but never enough. And then all of a sudden you get picked up off of that desert island and you get moved into a Chinese buffet and you live at the Chinese buffet. And you're going to gorge yourself for a while or the best Vegas buffet you can never golden corral forever. You're going to gorge yourself for a while. In fact, you're going to gorge yourself into your throw up a few times and then you're going to keep gorging yourself. And that was what my life was like. I would like, because women are always a scarcity for you as a dude. It doesn't matter how rich or you are or how good looking you are, how smart you are. There's still a scarcity until you become famous. And then there are an abundance. But for women, penises and abundance from the time that they probably pre-pewity for a lot of them. There's always dudes around. And so women can kind of understand that. I didn't understand that at all. And then I kind of had to revel in that abundance for a while and wallow in it until it became like all abundance, become sickening and you have to kind of like all abundance. That's right. And you've got a really, okay, I don't want everything. Here's the things. Here's what's healthy. Here's what I want. Let me figure out what that is. So in a lot of ways, the best, it's funny. People will say, your intro is really good. It seems like 180 degree turn around. And from where I sit having lived it, I couldn't have gotten to be a dedicated father and husband at home setter if I hadn't gone through that phase of unbridled abundance and hedonism. I needed that. It's just interesting that you had all the women you wanted, but you just wanted one in the end. Eventually, yes. I don't get me wrong. If my wife was cool with two or three, I might be all right with that too. But no, no, it was lots and lots of different women was not an effective way to fill the whole of all of this. Yes, that's right. For a while, I thought it worked, but it doesn't work long. No, it doesn't work. Yeah. But you could abundance doesn't work. You could not have convinced me of that with any words when I was 29. Right. There's no, it's an age thing. No, it's totally right. I've arrived at the same conclusion. But how did you get? Okay, so now you are not just a husband and a father, but that's basically your job. Yeah, I stole my company and it's all I do now. But what motivated your desire to make that your life? Like, and what is homesteading and what do you do? So it, what I didn't come up with this goal ahead of time and then do it. I discovered this path as I walked it. So after I retired from writing, the stories of drinking and hook it up, I retired from for satire. What ended up happening is I was still really well known author and a lot of people came to me to help them write their books. So I started a company called Scribe that we, you know, David Goggins, I'm sure we did his books in Tiffany Haddish and some other people like that. And we did about from the time I started until when I left, which was a 2022, like 2000 books. And so we were kind of the premier, like independent ghost writing publishing firm, right? And built a, you know, great company 500 employees, me and my co-founders, Zach, built a great company. And it was rewarding and I kind of went through the entrepreneurial phase of life before I thought I was an artist and that being an artist and running a business with employees are totally different things. Oh, I found out. Totally different things. And I did not understand that. I only do one of those things, not the other. Yeah. So, so it was, there was a lot rewarding with it. And started the business, I met my way first, then started the business. And as the business grew and developed, I saw a very clear path to a lot of money, big valuations, expansion, all this stuff. But at the same time, you know, my relationship, my wife and my kids and as my kids got older, even though my kids are still pretty young, I was like, and then I was in a lot of social groups and masterminds with pretty advanced and successful entrepreneurs who had way bigger companies than me and who were older and had older kids. And I saw kind of how miserable they were in a lot of ways. And like how much time they spent on their business, how little they spent with their families. And then I would like meet their kids and be like, hmm, something's off that not all of them. Some of them had great balance and some didn't. And I just kind of realized, man, that as much as I did, I liked business and I liked entrepreneurship. I love it. And I definitely didn't love it more than my wife or my kids. And I realized like, what, I don't know when I came to this realization. But I came to the realization that the only thing that matters in my life is the relationships with people I love and the things I do that mattered in that. And yeah, I mean, like having a company to make money is that's important. But above a certain level, like what am I doing? I'm just stealing from my children. I'm stealing my father from their children. I'm seeing my children's father from them, which is me. And I decided I wasn't going to do that. Like the 200 million or a billion dollars is not worth that. 20 million isn't even. It's not worth it. But most people have this realization to say, okay, we're going to spend a year in sale to New Zealand. But you decided to buy homestead in Texas and grow your own food, raise your own food. Why? Well, there were a couple reasons. So you were around 2020 and 2021. Yeah. So I don't have to describe all that. But well, how did it affect you? I mean, you weren't working in politics, right? Yeah. No, no, no. I wrote a piece on this on my blog about how I kind of, I thought I was awake to how the world worked. Because you know, I'd work in the entertainment business. You have to. You understand media entertainment. And if you work in that business, you see behind the curtain how messed up everything is. And I mean, I saw Evil Hollywood was long before all the me too stuff. And I knew like everyone in Hollywood knew the Weinstein was a rapist. And like I knew I thought I understood. But then 2020 happened. And the lockdowns happened and all this. And I was like, oh, it's way worse than I ever thought. Like I saw a little bit behind the curtain. But that was a public health emergency. Of course it was. Right. Of course. And did you think that for a moment? Did you think any of this was just like what did you get? So you grew up in this country. Tell us what you thought. So when I was watching the videos of people dying in the street in China, like early March of 2020, there was a window of about, for being honest, about six weeks, I was probably fooled. Three to six weeks. Yeah, me too. Right. This Gary, this might be legit. This would be an actual epidemic pandemic. This might be like whatever. And so that I was, you can actually look at my Twitter timeline. There's a, when South by was canceled in 2020, I was for that. I was like, oh, yeah, that was like March 15th to 2020. I was totally for that. But then by mid April, I'm like, hold on, like nothing about this seems right. And by May, I'm like, oh, well, this is fraud. Like this is clearly a fraud. And then the riots started. And it was like, I mean, the iconic photo of the, you know, the CNN with the Kairon, you know, mostly peaceful protestants fire in the back of us. Come on. Like I'm not uh, but if you're, I mean, if you, if you're riding for racial justice, you're not going to spread a deadly virus, right? Obviously, of course. And well, the, my favorite with people was like, well, racial justice is deadlier than or racial injustice is deadlier than COVID and like, you're racist. I'm just scarier than it. To stop. Right. And that's when I was like, okay, okay, so this is, Racial justice is deadlier than or racial injustice is deadlier than covid on my your racist Is scarier than it stopped right and that's what I was okay. Okay. So this is This is utter total bullshit and so then my wife and I always talked about getting on land We'd always wanted to hold on. Let me ask you to pause. What did you conclude from that? So it was obviously this was fraudulent. This was a total fraud, but like why? Well see I mean I went to To the you know all the big schools like I knew I woke wasn't a shock to me I saw that coming for years and in fact I mean I had a company that was 70% women and all creative So you think we would have been infected early. No, I saw it coming I kept it out of scribe for as long as I was there. I was able to keep it out It's really it's actually if you want to a really easy trick to keep woke people away from your organization There's a very simple way to do it you just Infosize make your primary value Responsibility and your second accountability and those people will go elsewhere. Is that a company? Not necessarily some of them are smart and capable. It's that the woke mind virus is about Placing your response the placing blame for your life on other people So if everything is about first about responsibility and accountability Those people will not come to your organization and so I was able to kind of shelter my world from that. Yeah, it works It works beautifully Um, I was able to shelter my world from them pretty well And so once I saw all this I just at the time we're talking about summer 2020 I'm like, okay, the woke mind virus is clearly infected media and these people are fools I didn't realize how Truly catastrophic corrupt government was until January 6th of 2021 that was when that was because you know my wife and I decided to buy land The summer 2020 and we bought our house in Tennessee that showed you that we talked about right and so because at the time I like I didn't really understand I didn't think America was at the state it was yet and you know the way I looked at preparation and emergency stuff was a bugout place Right and so we bought a beautiful house in the mountains isolated Because that that's where my level of consciousness and understanding was then January 21st happened and in real January 6th Sorry January 6th how January 6th of 2021 and I in real time I you just watched the feeds and I saw I mean because it wasn't hidden the capital police were letting people in and most of these people were just drunken buffoons and it was like obvious that this was nonsense that this was In no way shape or form anything approaching an right Interaction and then you would turn on cable news and in real time you'd see them form this narrative That's not just wrong, but literally totally contrary To what's going on and I can see I don't know why that moment But at that moment I realized that the republic had fallen. I don't think it fell at that moment it had fallen probably decades Maybe a century before But I did not truly internalize it until that moment when you watch them tell you what you were seeing wasn't real And it was something totally else like not Media is always wrong, but it just because they're wrong doesn't mean the opposite is true Right so you have to kind of look in the direction that they're wrong And in this case the narrative that they were pushing Was very clearly the narrative you push if you want to if you want to create a Fascist communist whatever some form of the tellings of police thing and I don't all the evidence was that you know like It's pretty common for you You'll deny reality until all the sudden the last piece of evidence clicks in and then all the other facts like oh shit I should I could have seen this Long time ago and I waited it was like that for me. I mean you can make a good argument that the the republic fell In America you can make an argument it fell during the whiskey rebellion Right you can make an argument several times the 18th century definitely during the civil war Lots of times in the 20th century. Yeah, like when they murder the president. Yeah, lots of times JfK I don't know when the American Republic fell but it became very clear on Deniably clear to me on January 6 2021 that we were not just an empire, but we were the late stages of empire like I Essentially missed the American understanding the American Empire wasn't empire and it has a go man And then once once I got that then I'm like oh now everything makes sense This is empire collapse and I understand empire collapse pretty well like I for I very like all dudes very Instantly the Roman history and Mongolian history and if you study the the both the transition from republic to empire in Rome and the transition from Genghis Khan to his sons because they were never republic but Under Genghis Khan it was the Mongolian empire was what we would consider a free place in a lot of ways for these Mongolians and the transition from that to his sons and and grandsons Let let's free Very different. Yeah, yeah It was empire collapse and I'm like this is exactly what's going on and then once I got that that was when my wife and I got serious about Like okay, we need to actually get ready For what's coming because it's gonna be I don't know what's coming but it's the the base line of what's coming is it gonna be chaos And we're gonna see a lot more of what we saw you know broken supply chains Riot's whatever right like that's kind of the best case scenario. It was just more of what we saw in 2020 and So I kind of dove deep into the the sort of Prepper world most of its nonsense most of it are clowns. I don't know what they're talking about Like did but there are a group groups of people who who I think are pretty sophisticated How long did it take for you to realize that you're bug out place in the North Carolina mountains? January 1st 2021 is that is that right? So that's not adequate Why that's not adequate because okay when Empire collapses the thing that matters most is community Who are you around? What skills do they have what skills do you have? How well are you can your group band together and endure the tumultuous chaos until some new state steady state arises and Having a cabin in the woods is the opposite of community Right that was that the old school American thought of prepping is really based on nuclear war and hiding the bunker and like it's just nonsense It's not really thought out But if you go study end of empire and you study people who've lived through intense chaos They all say the same thing right like there's a lot of window when the Roman Empire Not the republic when Empire fell there were lots of places that did great because You know, you can some warlord or the local Roman general would just say okay like We're we're gonna make this town my empire and the legions are gonna marry local girls And this is our area and those became I mean you can name them No, it's a god so loud No chaos Lots of parts of golf thrive for thousands of years hundreds if not thousands of years after Because they had local rule all the sorts of things that work now the Roman Empire fell but for a lot of people In the aftermath of that did really well if they had great community right same with Mongolia same with same with the a lot Always the British Empire though British Empire was a little different is a more modern empire but the point is My cabin in the woods had no community and so my wife and I will look like how do we where can we go to find community How do we build the community and he starts by not a cabin in the woods but by by Rolling raising your own food kicking responsibility for water power and food but in the context of where a lot of other people are doing the same and so we we knew We wanted to say in Texas for a few reasons and We ended up picking dripping springs It's not the there's a lot of like kind of towns in Texas that are doing things like this Dripping's not the only one is the one that we like the best for a couple different reasons So we bought a homestead We actually we bought a place a beautiful ranch was not a homestead We've had it converted to a homestead But whatever and then we started to school and Incers it so what's difference between a ranch in a homestead Well Generally speaking a ranch is where you just like sort of raised livestock, but what we bought was Because I didn't know right? I didn't really understand land. I bought a place that this older guy this boomer Had kind of carved out of nothing and it was beautiful Beautiful oak trees and rolling pasture, but it was dead like and I mean literally dead the soil was dead Everything was dead because the way he dealt with the land was very 20th century kind of mentality. It was Pestas pesticides kill the bugs herbicides kill the weeds fertilizer raises the grass Like that doesn't really work well. It works. It can work sort of for a while in certain circumstances But if you want to actually have a living thriving ecosystem I kind of went deep in the permaculture and regenerative agriculture Worlds and I realized that those people had figured out and so what we had to do was stop all came I had to fire all the people he had that were working there the landscapers or whatever You know everything was irrigated. It was he had seen Augustine grass which requires like 130 inches of rainy year in Texas Right like so you're not getting 130 inches of rain and but he was irrigating But nonetheless, it's like what what are we doing? This doesn't make sense with our land And where we are and so the last two years I've spent essentially Turning it into living soil and regenerating the land and doing management practices that make sense for dripping spring Texas for 30 inches of rainy year and you know like and now we have like it's it's not where it's gonna be in three Four or five years, but it's good man. We've got Big flock of sheep bees. We have meat chickens Egg chickens, you know like we have you know garden Started putting all kinds of stuff and so work totally independent water totally independent meat Totally independent. We can be totally independent power. We're hooked on the grid because why would we end up being independent before you have to be? But We have a system where we can endure a lot of chaos and be totally fine and we're surrounded by people in our community who are For the most part in the same position are very similar Similar values similar approach to the world You know, we that's why we started we started a world our school literally three minutes from over here So for a year or something like with Waldorf. What is that so there's lots of different educational philosophies? Acting Monastery public school Waldorf is a philosophy it started in Germany like 150 years ago And I think it is by far of the educational philosophies. It's by far the best It is the one that kind of feeds emotional side It kind of it's like a renaissance style right where it kind of tries to help the whole child Create the whole child of the educational styles. I think it's the best Um that being said, I'm still not sure if organized schooling is right for kids or not because right now We have one kid on home schooling because he doesn't have enough kids in his class for For the Waldorf like there's just aren't kids here and I'm a class there But the other two are Waldorf. I'll learn of the best by far if you're gonna go to a school I'm on the fence about which is better. So all of your children are out of the public schools Oh never went into public schools. My man. I wouldn't I don't hate my kids. I'm never gonna send them to public schools And I want to put this to the president of the United States With the message. I think it's relevant to you Which is that those are not your kids actually here he is Rebecca put a teacher's creed into words when she said there's no such thing as someone else's child No such thing as someone else's child Our nation's children are all our children So your kids are really his kids. He owns your kids It's like when people say you know, I'm coming to take your guns like we'll stack up Stack up and come get them same with kids. No, those are my kids and my those children are mine in my wife's now I will say Let's give it a very judicious Interpretation if what he means and I don't think this is what he means, but if what he means is I Don't own my children like their chaville or slaves that they are independent beings and my job is to steward them totally agree totally Unbore yes, and no way shape or form. Do I think my kids should live their lives? Based on what I want. They should live it on what they want Totally on board. I see my job is to help them become full people. Yes, and find the lives they want I don't think that's what he means. I think what he means is a very Typical bureaucratic really it's a really a communist Marxist idea that children are the property of the state That the citizens are the property of the state that is and you disagree with that I Disagreement is not strong enough Song of term. Yeah, like I there's just no chance. That's going to exist in my words Yeah, just not so I always thought I mean of course I vehemently agree with you But the number of parents who presumably love their kids more than their own lives most parents do They think who are willing to let not just Alzheimer's patients posing as president But any represent of the state just kind of come in do whatever they want to their kids Sexualize their kids basically like kitty-portant shit with their kids and they allow it Why it's a good question? I don't know because I like clearly I would never in a million years allow anything like that I think most people can only give their kids what they got and most people were raised by people who went to public schools and they went to public schools and they were rate public schools are designed to create obedience Employees like that's the most charitable right That's sort of interpretation maintains the Sheriff class. That's the pandas that is that it and I'm not saying this This isn't like a conspiracy theory or metaphor like yeah, there's a guy John Taylor got a who wrote a couple great books about this The literal stated goal Horace man almost people who invented the the the American public educational system their stated goal is to create subservient employees who know how to be good citizens and Like that's just I didn't I didn't have children for that reason to serve some other man or woman or some Faceless bureaucratic entity no and so if someone Was raised by people who went to public school who were just employees and that's who they are It's hard I mean this like not judgmentally I can imagine it'd be really hard for that person to understand well this is where I went this was good enough for me They're supposed to be experts. Why wouldn't they know better? You know, um I can understand how A lot of people would get to that spot now the good news is all this nonsense lunacy with trans and other crap in schools Sexualizing little children is a lot of people starting to wake up and realize what I mean I knew this I had never had any plan to send my kids to public school Like that was never I went to public schools mostly and I realized how Nonsense they were when I was there my parents weren't very good, but they weirdly they gave me a great a gift They weren't they were not good parents. They they weren't bad people. They were just bad parents And but but their bad parenting gave me a gift. They didn't pretend that they cared Like they didn't mix a lot of us seriously People lot, but I'm telling you man So many people that was the that was the upside of my bad My parents didn't pretend they cared so many people's parents or caregivers mixed love with abuse And so so many people see those two things together My parents didn't really pretend they cared much and so like I never Mixed love and abuse and also they didn't really show up much for me And so I realized that a young age of the adults weren't coming Yeah, and the adults were the most part didn't know what the hell they were doing They didn't ever pretend they were experts or knew what they were doing Or had the right answers, right? And so it's like they were so bad that in a way that they were good They set me up to see the reality Yeah, I mean it's true of your attitude about your childhood. That's a wonderful attitude to have well I got there after a lot of emotional work a lot of therapy a lot of psychedelic medicine a lot of work I was not always like that. I was angry for a while It's pointless to be mad about the past Anger can serve a purpose for a period if it gets you out of shame or or other sort of Essentially anti-life emotions angers a powerful motivating emotion, but if you say stuck there It's not good. I was stuck there. Is your wife totally on board with these attitudes 100% oh yeah My wife I would not be married to her if she wasn't if we didn't share these We we were very aligned and a lot of stuff We met and we've she's done a lot of her own emotional therapeutic work as well And we both have grown so much together over the last 10 years in parallel ways I've seen people who Who split in the last three four years because their values just went different like they were the split was already there, but this kind of forced it So you you've organized your life around Surviving what you think is coming in protecting what's here What's not what's here now? So what do you think and then what might come? What do you think might come like what does that look like? I have no idea right the range of outcomes I think is extremely wide but you're working to mitigate against those eventualities or those possibilities you can't prevent everything right like if an asteroid hits You know Florida Nothing I'm doing is probably gonna make any difference right like where it's it's 95% of people are gonna die It's gonna be horrible. It's gonna be Armageddon and and in my You know having a flock of sheeps not just but I aside Holding aside really truly catastrophic You know Noah's are type situations I think the range of possibilities are basically We're good if we're seeing collapse of Empire American Empire, which I think we are not I'm not saying the collapse of the American state, but the collapse of the American Empire I think the lot my whole life basically the American consumerist experience has been based on essentially free or low-cost goods in everything whether it's food or housing or everything was really cheap or really easy to get And I think it's just that period is ending and nothing else Then we're in for a major shock Culturally a major shock. There may be a lot of the rest of the world isn't we are now on top of that Unfortunately in sad, excuse me I think World War three whatever you want to call it is inevitable I think the US without going too deep in this rabbit hole The US debt has gotten to the point where a war is necessary I mean, it's all when empires Rack up too much debt the only thing left For them to do to save it usually is war and then that doesn't save it that that goes out. It's decline Right exactly there was a point where the US debt was totally safe Definitely during the Clinton administration and maybe even as recently as the Obama administration If the Fed had refinance All of that are a huge amount of national debt when the interest was essentially zero We'd be in a very different situation, but they didn't and so that plus the massive Stimulus bill stimulus bills What they were was graft That plus the response to covid The war passed the point in overtime and so what happens when government defaults War And then a lot of other consequences from that so I don't know the details. No one does because I think there's a lot of ways to play out I just want to ensure Regardless of what happens up to a certain point That me and my family and my community can endure that because I don't think it's going to last forever D disasters and emergencies don't last forever. There's another side. I actually think America is really well set up To come out the other end of that in a really positive place. It's just going to be painful to get there You know so here's one potential Mid-disrupt term outcome which is that we continue pushing for war through on yes Apparently doesn't yet have nuclear weapons We do as real does the whole coalition arrayed against Iran has them. They don't so how do they respond? Well Maybe this unplug the United States Maybe a cyber attack or EMP attack Totally possible our digital life totally possible so that would you know I can't even know what to think about what that would look like but Where that leave you on your homestead Are you living a life that could Wasted that I'm not a huge believer in how you have to be off grid and you got to be living like the Amish First off, I'm off grid doesn't exist even the Amish aren't off grid if you think about it Like they don't mind their own or and they don't smelt it right so not you know Disparaging the Amish like believe me. I'd like them man. These dudes had some stuff figured out. I didn't realize you're pro Amish for the record Maybe pro certain things About Amish, but um, no, I don't think off grid exists and I'm not a believer in oh you if you're not doing everything Hand it doesn't work. I don't I don't want to make my life hard for no reason That's not I just want to make sure that there is a lot of coming political and social opinion There's a lot of political and social people now It's already happening and I think it's gonna get worse and I want to make sure That I'm in the best place possible to survive that I'm not trying to To go you know be the unabomber and live only off the land and only have things that you know like Ancient men have like that's if you want to do that cool. I I like the electricity, but you're not making your own bombs like you do I like electricity. I like air conditioning. I live in Texas. I really like air conditioning. It's pretty crucial for us I like modern conveniences I want to continue using those as much as possible and that makes sense, but I also If I had to say the big shift I've made in my mindset man is that I was like when I was in college You don't go work for Goldman Sachs or go to law school unless you are deep in the consumerist mindset I think one of the major Psychological shifts I've made is I've gotten out of the consumerist mindset to more of a Like a shepherd mindset right and and I think it's one of the travesties that can you just flush it out of it But what when you say consumerist mindset? What do you mean? Consumerist mindset means I live to consume Resources and status and like my what are basically our most of our parents were I Want this house in the suburbs? You know, I'm gonna have these vacations. I'm gonna go to these places I'm gonna have this rank in my society. It's it's an externally Created identity right that consumer because what do you even know what to consume right? It's what your screen what your media tells you is important and what you should be consuming Where's your status come from where you know what matters what cars cool or not what clothes are cool or not? That's a consumerist mindset right I Of course I was I'm American so I was deeply enmeshed and immersed in that growing up But the more One of the great travices I think of the last 30 years is that the conservation movement in the environmental movement Won't one in the same they were kind of enemies for a long time And I think though now you're starting to see the permaculturists and the Regenerative agriculture and the hunters and the conservationists really come together and realize we're all on the same side Right and I I'm a big believer like I mean like your studio right like I Really want to live in harmony with not just my family and my community But my my D environment around me the soil around the grass nature And everyone says that but like not many people actually do that They live a very a life that is divorced from the actual soil around them and the trees around them and the animals around them And the last two years I if you'd asked me two years ago If I live in harmony with nature I'd be like yeah, I like to think I do I didn't at all And I had no idea what it even meant to live in harmony with nature And having a homestead what's so awesome about having a homestead is that it has forced me To live in reality You can you can have your phone And consumers minds that you can live in abstraction Everything is abstract But when you live with it having a homestead or a ranch or farm or hunting you have to actually pay attention to reality or nothing works Nothing Right and it is grounded me in a way that I thought I was grounded but I wasn't And that's a huge reason why I wanted to get on land my wife and I wanted to get on land is because we craved that in our lives As we did emotional work and dealt with our issues We felt the divorce from the world and wanted to get more integrated into the natural world But then also wanted to raise our kids that way So that they never had to be divorced from that and had to find their way back to it Right like I thought the whole point of public school is to separate the child from the family And orient them in bureaucratic or protest consumer society And I mean like I'm kind of torn because like I like electricity And I like cool stuff and I'm not like you know I'm not shooting with a bow and air. I'm not hunting with a bow and arrow But at the same time I don't want I don't want all of the negative nonsense that comes with that I want my children to grow up on land with their hands and dirt Understanding first self-knowledge above all things And that is the opposite of what you learn in public everything public school is Coming from ex-experts obey do what you're told here's how life works the way our children grow up First and foremost your body your rules second it like literally every Their body their rules. That's like my kid at any point can basically stop anything going on saying Not my body my rules. I don't want to go. I don't want to do that And if it's not unsafe right then I'm like okay all right We got a food and so basic things like that man I just I wasn't thinking about until two three four five years ago But having kids and getting on land I I didn't realize how poisoned and how toxic almost everything in our culture is not just American The world like the way humans relate to each other. It's just yeah Give me an example when you say poisonous. What do you mean? Food you want to talk about food. Yeah, all right, so Virtually everything you find in a grocery store is At best unhealthy at worst literal poison like my favorite example Most people in America now For cooking use seed oils can all oil can all oil is literally invented as a an Alubricant for machines Okay, it was used I forget the exact history of it But it is machine lubricant It is so toxic and horrible for the body and it's in every thing now A huge reason that we wanted a homestead into razor-owned meat and our own vegetables is because it's really hard to get healthy food anywhere Even at flowers market sometimes it's hard to get it But like go find something in a grocery store that doesn't have a seed oil in it It's almost impossible even at Whole Foods Unless you're on the outer rim right unless you're taking ahead of lettuce or something like that It's almost impossible. Even at Whole Foods, unless you're on the outer rim, right? Unless you're taking ahead of lettuce or something like that. If it's in a package, something like, I forget 70 plus percent of stuff in packages and Whole Foods has seed oil in. It's poison. It's absolute poison. And do you feel the difference having gotten off it? I mean, I'm 48 years old. Just two days ago, some friends of mine were looking at one of my book covers and the dude was like, what do you evamper? You look like you have an age. I'm like, no, I've aged. But unlike most people in our society, I have been healthy for the last 20 years. And most people, like, you look, I can't, I'm 48. Most 48-year-olds are, 48-year-olds men are minimum of 30 pounds overweight. Can barely do push-ups or pull-ups? Are close to death? Metabolically are prediabetes, right? Are horribly unhealthy. I don't even think I'm in that great a shape. I just don't eat the poisonous stuff. I just paid, I'm like, okay, I'm going to try and only eat meat for my home set. And like, I, you know, I'm metabolically, if you look at all the markers, like my genetic age is like in the 20s. I don't, I don't, I don't do anything that special, man. I'm not like, out, you know, working out six hours a day or any nonsense. Like that, I just eat healthy. And healthy means like, I know where all my meat comes from. All the lamb and chicken I eat, born on my ranch, raised on my ranch, killed on my ranch, processed on my ranch, butchered on my ranch, eaten on my ranch. It's as, it's as God intended. What goes in it is grass and water or bugs if it's chickens. That's it? You mentioned God, offhandedly, as your view of the eternal change, radically, really radically. So at 20s, I think at a certain point in your life, if you, if you are educated and you believe in God, this is going to be controversial. I don't mean it bad. I think you're stupid. If you're not atheists at some point early on in your life, because you can, I don't believe you can reason your way to God. Yeah, I know. St. Augustine, I love whatever. I'm with you in Thomas Moore. Okay, fine. I don't, but I just don't think you get to God from reason. And so I was atheist my whole life because I never made sense if you think logically he grew up. I grew up actually in the Episcopal church. Like I was an act like me, but you know, Episcopal church is like a social club. It's not, you don't, yes, I'm very familiar. I literally thought we went to church to eat donuts and socialize. I didn't know anyone believed that because it was preposterous to me. If you look at it reasonably and rationally. And then it was about four years ago. I, you know, it's funny, I had never done, I drank a lot, never done any drugs in my life ever until I found part of my therapeutic protocols I did a psychedelic medicine, right? Like MDMA, LSD mushrooms, but psychic like with a guide and not recreational. I don't know how you do that. People take LSD and go to concerts. I, I took LSD and cried and found God. And it was the experience for me was not like talking to God. It was, I felt the oneness of all things. And I felt the connection to all things. And I felt um, I understood like I knew Jesus is in Buddhist teachings academically. But then I was like, it was one very specific experience. Uh, it was, LSD. And I remember thinking, Oh, fact, the kingdom of heaven is within now. I know what Jesus was talking about. Like, and, and, you know, if you meet a Buddha on the road, kill him like, Oh, I know, I know a Buddha was talking about. And I have a really good friend who's Mormon. And he's the type of Mormon that like, you know, you meet some Christians and they just have that energy and glow and you're like, yeah, all Christians were like this. Like, I don't know what you're into, but I want to know more. Yeah. He's one of those guys. And I, I called him two days after my thing. And I'm like, Ben, you put, when you say you have a relationship with God, you mean that literally like, it's an experience for you. He goes, bro, I've been trying to tell you this for a decade. And I'm like, I thought you were stupid. I thought you were fooled. I thought you just read the words and got fooled by them. What you have is the actual spiritual connection. He's like, yeah. And I did not understand religion. I understood. I didn't understand spirituality or belief in God until I had the experience. And for me, I had to get there on psychedelics. I don't really feel like I do now. The psychedelics were important to open me up. But now I think I can, I have enough of a connection to source to God, whatever you want to call it. I'm very, very much a God guy, but not in the way most God guys are, like not a religious way. Like I think religious dogma, some people need it. And they like it. And that's cool. I don't need dogma. I think dogma gets in the way. And I think if you actually look at the teachings of Christ and definitely the teachings of Buddha, they say the same thing that the dogma is not the thing. And it's the fact in the way. Although Buddha will say, he says that, but he's like, you know, I'll give you the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the path and all that to help you. But then you shed it when it's time. Does is your wife in the same place you were? I think pretty much how has it changed your life? That's like, because that's like in a different way of seeing it in every single way. I, I got past consumerism because of this. Because once you once you realize, not realizing, actually, once you feel the one and some people can get there like a church, some people get there with yoga. I'm not, I'm not saying my way is better or worse. It's just the way, once I felt the oneness of all things, all of the frivolities and the nonsense and the lies of the modern narrative fellow. And then for me, it was like, oh, of course, of course, being connected to land matters were all energy, we're all part of the same system. I'm not different than this land or this chicken or this sheep. Yeah, I'm a human. And it's the chicken, right? The world part, world parts of the same system, world parts of God. And if that, if you want to call a system, God, I'm on board. And, and if that's true, then my entire approach before that's what's toxic, seeing myself as separate from the system as different than the system. Now, that's just not true. Do you think I don't know, maybe I'm imagining it, but it does seem like the people in charge do a lot to discourage these kinds of thoughts, these conversations, people coming together to have these conversations. They're very against religious faith. Everything I just said is absolutely, completely, catastrophically counter to all things, government, in all ways, shapes and forms. I don't think it's an accident that the reigning governmental power at the time, kill Jesus, I don't think it's an accident that anyone who preaches anything like this comes cross ways of power because most organized power tells you, however they frame the message, the message from organized power is you need, you need me. That's right. And the message from Jesus and from God, just stick with Christianity, is you don't need them. I knew I'd never met you before. Yeah, we've now. And I, and I, and I have a ton of daughters. So, and I did when you were writing your books and, you know, whatever I wasn't living that kind of life, but I could tell you were a deep person. Even even reading, I hope they serve beer and hell. Not too brag. I turned out to be right. Tucker Max, thank you for spending all this time. That was nice. Thank you for having me, man. I appreciate it. Free speech is bigger than any one person or any one organization societies are defined by what they will not. What will watch it is the total inversion of virtue. Hey, it's Tucker Carlson. The internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter. On TCN, we attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter and a lot of them. Interviews, long form and short videos, documentaries. You can find all of it on Tucker Carlson.com, and we hope you will.