Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. It's all ready. It's a hell of a fucking bell pump. What is that? What's going on there? So this one is for a horse I have called Maverick Buzz the Tower that won Reserve at the Fitturity. And they give you a bell buckle if you win? A bell buckle and money. That's a dope bell buckle. Expensive bell buckle. So guys like you that understand horses, if you saw someone with one of those, you would know exactly what that is right away. Oh yeah. And that year, depending on the year, I'm going to know the horse. Like you and fighter, it's a cute fighters. I guess. I guess it's probably similar. Yeah. But that's the guy I won the thing in 2012. We fought so and so and that's the same with the an horse. It's always so interesting to me how these, there's these different sort of categories of interest that people have that, you know, one person might not know anything, I don't know anything about horses, but you're like fucking balls deep. You know, everything about it's crazy. It's such an interesting like pool of knowledge. The people that are really into horses and they start explaining, oh, this is not as simple as, oh, that's a horse and that's a horse too. Like the genetic lines and there's certain tendencies, certain horses will actually pass onto their offspring. Oh yeah. Oh, it's crazy stuff. There's a stallion and I really like him. I've got a number of horses by this stallion. His name's Spooks Gotta Wiz and they're just incredibly balanced, real feel a very, very quick foot at big stoppers, but they see dead people, they see ghosts. So like what? Once every three months for no reason, this thing's gonna fucking check out. And I mean check out just the side. It's not safe here. We're going back to the barn. You can come with me or I'm gonna buck your S off or I'm gonna flip over no he just loses his mind. Whoa. And you never know when it's gonna happen. And his children have this as well? Yeah. Whoa. Just a little quirk. And that's, but other than that, they're fucking automatic. That's a big quirk. That's like if you have a Corvette and it decides to drive home. Yeah. A little bit. Most of the time you could go to the store. We all deal with it because they're worth it. I guess. That seems so crazy. The horsey, do you really think it sees ghosts? He, I don't know what he sees. Some kind of boogeyman. There's a lot of them are deaf. So really? Yeah. Why? Yeah. There's a gene. Typically if you see a horse with a white face and the white goes above the eyes, typically that horse is deaf. Wow. And so they can't hear, but they can feel the vibrations. So like that, that could set one of those horses off. Just anything pounding on the ground that might be something chasing it. Yeah. I mean they're prey animals. Right. Right. Right. So. Wow. The deaf thing's crazy. Which way they could sort of tune out distractions. You know, I would imagine if a horse is at a rodeo. Yes. 100% because, you know, this crowds of screaming and yelling is not going to bother him. Now if they start stomping their feet, I was going to show this one horse a mine and I'm about to run in the pen and all these guys are cheering for this Italian rider and they're all beating on the side of the arena. My horse checked the fuck out. He took a whole herd of elephants. Oh yeah. Wow. I could have matched a weird that is for the horse. Yeah. Like it's being told to do something, but it's instinct to like, no, we gotta get the fuck out of here. I can't hear anything. That's nuts. Yeah. The hearing thing, there's a famous pool player. His name is Shane Van Bowning. He's like one of the greatest pool players of all time, if not the greatest. And he's deaf. And he has hearing aids. And when he plays, he shuts him off. He just goes click and goes into this world. He's his own. Just balls and geometry. And just doesn't mess. Just his horrifying person to play. Really? Because the fact that he's got that extra sense shot off, like the hearing he could shut it off, it's not just that. I mean that he's also obsessive. He practices 10 hours a day. And he's all time wizard. Like he's won the US Open, which is the hardest tournament to win in all pool. He's won it five times. Which is just not, it's only one other guy in history, Earl Strickland. It's won it five times. He plays pool like everybody, a little. But then the levels to the game, like you start getting a professional pool player. And they're playing a totally different game. It's a totally different. Just watching it, you realize like, oh my god, what am I doing? I'm hitting the ball way too hard. I don't know what I'm doing. My angles are all fucked up. This guy's playing that with English. I would just hit it straight. You want to spin up the bats then it hits over here. It's the control of the ball. They're a part of the stick is the part of their body. The stick in the ball, they're all connected in space and time. And they know where that ball is going within millimeters. It's nuts to watch. Like, as soon as these guys hit a ball and it'll travel, it's a nine foot table. It'll travel all the fuck away around the test. Like a 12 foot distance and it'll go in a two inch spot. And you just go fuck me. It's great. And then if you do that, and you're deaf too, like you don't even hear the cheers. and you're just still in the zone. Just hyper focus. Yeah. Just hyper focused. Autism probably helps too. Yeah. You have that. Yeah. A lot of little. Oh yeah. I got a little I think. I think anybody's good at anything. Anybody's good at anything. Is either ADHD or autistic? Yeah. Now they try to give me medicine for the ADHD. Did they? Yeah. I'm like, fuck no. How old were you when they tried to give it to you? Oh, well, they did give it to me when I was a kid. Really? Yeah. But whatever you're a little bottomized. Right? And then fuck. And so I stopped taking it just because I was not here. So my parents were like fuck it. Just let them run around. My neighbors kid, they gave it to him when I lived in California. It was such a bummer. He was just wild little kid. And they gave it to him and also he was flat. Yep. And I was like, oh. And the lady was like, oh, he's on medication now because he's hyper active. I'm like, oh my god. Not my kid. Not my place. I'm not saying nothing. I just go to work. I was single back then. And I was like 28 or 29. And I was just so confused how you could do it. And then I kept thinking somebody did that to me when I was a kid. For sure I would have been on drugs. Yeah. If my parents knew about those options, they could shut me the fuck up. If I had the wrong parent, my parents wouldn't have done it. But if I had the wrong parents, 100% I had all the traits that would have allowed me to get on brittle and or whatever. Fuck in the super power. If you understand it. Exactly. It's a super power. You find something you love. People say how in the world can you write a script? They write all these things. It's not that hard. Once I know what it is, I can sit. You could sit me in an airport around 1,000 people. I won't hear them. And I can sit there for 12 hours straight. Because you love it. I just get hyper focused. But if somebody wants you to pay attention to the history of pop tarts or something, I can't. I can't. I can't. I can't. I can't. I can't. You'd find something you love and focus on it. But the way our education system is designed is so ass backwards. You take kids that are so energetic and they have so much life and you just squeeze out of them. Just sit still. Stay put. Listen to boring shit. And all day they're just fighting this desire to scream and just run out of the building and go do something fun. It wasn't the essentially what we call the modern public education system founded by the Rockefeller's as a means to create workers. Yep. Yep. That's it. You're compliant workers and soldiers. Conform. Just one of the reasons why this side of it is start school so early for kids is the early you can start them. The more you can get them to do whatever you want them to do. The more you can get them to pledge allegiance and get really excited about this, that or the other thing. All the trans stuff that you see in school, all the pride stuff and teachers are working with preschool kids and they're talking about sexuality and genuinely like they're fucking six. Like they don't know what you're talking like why are you even talking to them about that because you can get them early and you can program those thoughts into their mind that this is a good cause and it could be anything. It could be your religion. It could be your political ideology. It could be being a Christian, being a Muslim. Whatever. If you get kids young enough, you can talk them into doing almost anything. That's why they have child suicide bombers. They don't try to get guys in their 40s with a family to strap a vest on. They try to get kids. And you know what a really bake a couple of noodles is if you look at it because all these things are funded, all these nonprofits and NGOs, they're off a board, the money come from. And when you look at where the money comes from and you realize, oh wait a minute and it's been coming for 40, 50 years from these places. Qatar, for example, obviously Russia, China. All these are enemies donated money to all of these various groups to divide, to just eat away from the inside. Russia's been doing it since the 70s. 60s. 60s. Yeah. That Yuri Besmanoff, I'm sure you've seen that video. Anybody who hasn't, please watch it. It's Yuri Besmanoff and it's in 1984 and this guy is essentially describing what America is going to look like eventually and he's dead on. Just dead on. Dead on with the communism, the Marxism, the stuff in the universities, just completely poison their mind, push out any ideas of patriotism being a virtue, all the hate for America that you have, like all the division, all of it engineered. Yeah. And it's wild. Just look at who it benefits. Yeah. That's it. It's real simple. Yeah. You're just looking to see who it benefits. Because a lot of people in this country is well, unfortunately. There's a lot of people that really love division and they can profit off of it and they can work, work an angle. You know, we're with you. This is a big part of the problem with the whole idea of nonprofits. Because nonprofits in theory are awesome. It's a great thing that people willing to donate their money. Like wealthy people who are doing well say, you know what? I think my money could be best suited helping out other people. It's beautiful. One of the most amazing notions about people when they can be charitable and they don't have to be, they do it because they want to and they really want to help. Then you find out what's really going on and that the majority of the money is going to overhead and employees. Well, think about this. If I create a nonprofit to go solve, well, LA is a perfect example. We can look at the homeless suggestions that they have there and all of these NGOs that are getting all of this money. And the problem is getting worse. It's not getting better. Right. But if I form an NGO and that's my cause and I solve the problem, what do I do with my NGO? Exactly. Now, there's no reason to give me money. So they don't create them to solve problems. The insight to cultivate the problem. Make the problem worse. Make it longer, make it bigger, look how big the problem is, we need more money. Some kind of was doing a breakdown of the people that work in the homeless industry, I say in air quotes, in California. Because that's really what it is. They spent $24 billion on the homeless problem. And no one can account for it. And they tried to get an accounting of it. They tried to do an audit of it. And knew some vetoed it. Vee-toted it. Like, why would you want to know? Let's stop all that nonsense and build this fucking train track to know where this never gets built. Well, they have a mile of it. They have a mile of that train. So we cost $100 billion. Relax. Things take time. That's a fucking mile. And they're what we're trying to choose the path. Right beside the I-5. How about that? How about right next to the flat fucking highway? Everything they do sucks. How about that stupid fucking road over the highway to make sure the mountain lines are safe? Yeah. It's like over $100 million still not done. And they have them, by the way, that's not a new concept. They have those throughout the West. Yeah. And they don't cost shit. They don't cost much money at all. They fix them quick. They do it quick. That's just, yeah, they're done in a couple of months. Yeah, poor some cement. Put some sod down, plant some fucking grass, and where you go? Well, where you go? But we're applying logic to a state that doesn't use that. It's like it is as goofy as it gets. And then you think it's as goofy as it gets. And then you hear that Portland just the OK. So this is going to be on the ballot in November. It got enough votes to be on the ballot. And this is some law that's under the guise of stop animal cruelty. Well, who doesn't want to stop animal cruelty? I certainly want to stop animal cruelty. Let's stop animal cruelty. So what does it mean? It means no hunting, no fishing, no ranching, no agriculture, no animals that get harmed in any way, no killing chickens for Kentucky fried chicken, nothing. No animals die. And this is a city ordinance. The talking vote or again is voting on this in November. Fishing, no fishing. What are you saying? Are you fucking high? And no hunting, no ranching. Ranching, you can't ranch. You're going to kill cow? What are you crazy? That's illegal in Oregon. And that's probably sounds like a good idea to one of those people. But here's my question. All right, so let's do it. Let's just say, let's just outlaw ranching. Let's just say, fuck it. Well, there's 91 million cattle in the country. So what will we do with them? You just leave them alone. Let nature take its course. Yeah, but there's no nature to take its course. It's 91 million head of fucking cattle. And I can promise you this, if you outlaw me feeding them and taking care of them, I'm not going to, then they're wandering the highway. Yeah. And then the bulls are out. Yeah. So you're going to keep the bulls contained? No. So the bulls are going to kill people. Yeah. And make more cattle. Yeah. And make more cattle. So now we have 900 million cattle in three decades. Yeah, and fuck all your fences. Bulls are going to smash them. The bulls are going to eat your grass. Well, bills are going to stomp your dog. Like, what are you talking about? I can't. But it's not supposed to be logical. It's all just a thigh man. And it's not even a well thought out one. But the problem is you don't have to be well thought out to get on the ballot. You just have to appeal to certain sensibilities. And then all of a sudden people are like, oh, that would be good. Let's start animal cruelty. And they're probably on SSRIs anyway. It'll probably pass. Yeah. Down open to pass. According to this New York Times article, it was a guy, one guy. One guy. He got 135,000 signatures and got it passed to that level. I wonder how many of them are homeless people? He moved to Portland from Denver, from Southern California, where I'm trying to find one. Do we have a photo of this dude? I want to see what this guy looks like. Show him what it looks like. Of course he's from Southern California. Of course he is. Is it vegan? Oh, that's weird. I would have never guessed. It's his teacher. Oh, so it's too teacher. He keeps getting better. He's an owner. I lost it. What else? That's all it was saying. I didn't think I'm very well. Well, they shouldn't. It's a crazy idea. There you go, Mickelson. Yeah. So it's a two teacher vegan and petitions organizer. It's to have a system where we're not killing or hurting animals anymore. I love how he said a system. What are you talking about? What does that mean? What's a system? Are you talking about nature? What are you talking about? Like, they're going to kill each other stupid. Like, what the fuck are you talking about? Is it somehow another less cruel when a mountain lion gets into a pan of sheep and tears them apart? Yeah. You figured the chance of meeting another gay vegan were better and Portland. He's probably not wrong. Yeah. It's probably good bet. Yeah. Solid bet. Yeah. Jesus, he was sitting there going, Midland, Texas, Portland, Oregon, where are my... Yeah, he got a chance of a Portland bro vegan. Go to Portland and take some medication. Just fucking have a good time. There he is. There we go. Hey, fella. He's already gotten too much attention from us. Yeah. There's a lot of silly people in the world. And, you know, like we were talking about with young people. If you get young people indoctrinated early enough to think that these silly ideas make sense, which is one of the reasons why I love that Kevin Costner moment on your show when he had explained to that vegan lady. Oh, yeah. Such a good moment. How cute does it have to be before you care if a fucking lives? Yeah. And what the actual, like what life gets killed when you're just talking about farming? Just food. Plowing a field. Just plowing a field. Or go build a road. Right. You want to destroy some fucking organisms. Go build a road. Yeah. And if you ride none of those roads, you're in that system. And then there's the bees. Like the amount of bees that die every year so we could have avocados as bananas. Yeah. By the billions. By the billions. And they die bees. And then on top of the, so it's avocados and almonds. Those are the two big ones, right? Yeah. Almonds, you know what's fascinating. And I'm going to, we can look at almonds. The amount it's something like 19 gallons of water is what you have to give to get one almond. Is that real? Yeah. Yeah. We got a weekend. Yeah. It's fucking bananas. You know, let me, all of them are going to be good for you. Well, you know, it's, he said they're okay for you. He said, but you know, there was a time in the Mediterranean where they were, they were poisonous. They've strict dynam. And it's one of the first domesticated plants and what people realized, whoever Homo sapiens or Neanderthals, whoever's wandering around, they're like the squirrels are eating those poisonous nuts from that tree. Huh. They're okay from this one. Not okay from that one. So they started cutting down and uprooting all the ones where the squirrels wouldn't eat. Oh, interesting. Yeah. And so that's, so the almond originally. This episode is brought to you by Wild Pastures. Here's a deal, folks. Wild Pastures delivers 100% grass fed and finished beef, pasture raised pork and chicken, even wild caught seafood right to your door. I love the rib eyes. Just an excellent cut of meat. I had them last week. It's great stuff. It's high quality meat from animals that are raised the way nature intended outdoors on lush green pastures, no cages, no crates, no feed lots. Wild Pastures only works with small family run regenerative farms here in the USA. So you're supporting American farmers and the land itself because regenerative farming, restore soil, improves ecosystems and protects biodiversity. What's more, Wild Pastures nutrient dense zero junk high quality meat is around 25 to 40% less than you pay for the same quality in store. And right now you can save even more with 20% off every wild pastures box and free shipping for life plus $15 off your first box at wildpastures.com slash. Rogan that's wild pastures dot com slash. Rogan relatively water intensive crop each. 19 hundred gallons of water per pound. That's so crazy. And then my God here's here's my news like look, I'm a writer right so words matter to me and when we when we misuse them in our society, it just bothers me. So all these things that we're calling milk, like almond milk. Right. And I'm just determined to call it almond juice because that's what it fucking is. It's not even almond juice. It's not like we're extremely tea almost. We're taking almonds pulverizing them and brining them in water essentially leaching out the flavor of the almond and then adding a bunch of shit to it and sugar and water. Aladdin lost sugar. My friend Duncan was like, dude almond milk is good for you. I go, you're looking how much sugar is in there and he we were on the phone and he goes, holy shit. I go, yeah man, that's why it tastes good. But my doctor told me I had oxalates in my diet in my blood test. He said you're oxalates are kind of high. It was you eating almonds. And I said, yeah, I get eat almonds all the time. I was like, yeah, cut back. He goes, that's where it's from. Really. Yeah. So you find out how much, how much oxalates are in almonds. I just listened to them. And also it's a lot of like a lot of that gluten free flower stuff. You buy a lot of that stuff. It's like almond flour, a lot of the times. Right. Almonds are a high oxalate food. Eating them can raise oxalate levels that circulate, get filtered by the kidneys and appear in urine which may increase kidney stone risk and susceptible people. Yeah. Almonds contain about 296 milligrams of oxalate per 100 grams, roughly 4 milligrams per nut, putting them in the high oxalate category. Yeah. Yeah, he said they're not bad if you just have them every now and then he goes, but don't do it on a regular basis. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of stuff that is high oxalates. People don't think about it. They can really fuck you up. Cale for instance. Like I used to drink kale smoothies all the time until another doctor told me you really should cook the kale. Cook it and then filter out whatever the water's in it. And I go, really? I go, why? He goes, oxalates. He goes, you want to cook the oxalates to other. Really? Yeah. And that's apparently what causes a lot of kidney stones with some folks. They drink a lot of those green smoothies, which I used to do every day. I used to take a bunch of kale, throw in a bunch of apples and some ginger and some garlic and blend it all up and drink at the beginning of the day. I thought I was doing a good thing. And he was like, you're just blasting your system with oxalates. And I was like, oh, why? Yeah, I know. He's some fucking eggs bro. He said, how bacon? Have some bacon. I'm like, fucking bacon's better for you. That my journey of figuring out what to eat was a long one. It was a long one. And thank God I got this podcast because if I hadn't had all those conversations with people where I realized, oh, so we're like, now the food pyramid's completely flipped, which is hilarious. But it's like I've had enough conversations where I realized, oh, all these people don't know what the fuck they're talking about. And they're giving advice. And it's weird. It's weird how much bad advice there is for food and for health and for fucking filling the blank. And then we're going in our society. Food pyramid was created by Johnson and Johnson. Yeah. Or catalogs or jobs. Yeah. So how do we get people to eat our shit in the morning and then again at lunch? And then well, the one thing that we can't control, and they talk about the one thing that we do not have is this massive industrialized meat production because there's no economic way to do it. They do it if they could. Fresh ranch, which you've probably seen off I-5 in California, the closest version of that. But what is this is a feed yard, right? Where you get them together and feed cattle for 90 to 150 days before you go send them off and slaughter them. That's the closest thing there is to an industrialized beef industry. Because it's in a very inefficient way, way better to farm, right? It's more efficient to farm than it is Grace cattle. So you only want to graze cattle somewhere that you can't farm at the end of the day. You want to graze cattle or great at taking protein from poor protein sources and metabolizing it, right? So graze them in real rocky terrain with native grasses that you can't farm, can't tell it, you just can't. And it needs to be eaten by something or weeds will overtake it, right? Yeah. Because grass grows better when it's being grazed. And so there's no way to industrialize that or centralize it. The most centralized it is is at the packing house, right? Where you've got four packing, major packing houses that control 90-something percent of the beef industry. And that's starting to change. COVID was extremely helpful for the smaller farmer and rancher to sit there and get their product out, right? And find small, they start popping up. People have opened these USDA facilities that don't process 800 head of cattle an hour. They maybe do 50 or 50 a day. And now people can go there because they're a USDA facility. They can buy beef directly from them, buy it from the rancher, right? And you can control where your food's coming from as opposed to what was happening, where you'd get a bunch of if you're going to go get a burger, you're eating some Australian killer bull, right? For the most part or something from Brazil. You're not eating something that you want to eat, right? When you go to a nice steakhouse, the steaks there are, they're going to come from most likely Texas, Iowa, Nebraska, Montana. There's select areas where people are spending that kind of attention and time to raise that kind of quality of beef, right? And it's being done by smaller ranchers. It may be a big ranch, but it's still operated by relatively few people. You know, 4, 6 is 300,000 acres, but there's 12 cowboys for 12 cowboys for 300,000 acres, nuts. How do they keep track of everything? We break it down into pastures, and then the pastures fall under the terminologies this. Say, oh, if you're in Guthrie, there's a camp, and we call it South Camp, because it's in the South, and it's responsible for 50,000 acres, right? We just broken down into multiple pastures that are between seven and 10,000 acres. There's one big pasture in that camp. It's like 14,000 acres. And so then you have North Camp, you have what we call, then we have camps around the town, the little town of Guthrie. So you break it down into the responsibility of each cowboys, or somewhere between 35 and 50,000 acres. Wow. That's a hell of a responsibility. Yeah. It's a lot of work, man. A lot of work. You know what's really interesting about your shows, particularly Yellowstone. It got people like really attracted to the idea of brutal hard work as being romantic. Yeah. You know, people like really identified with those guys on Yellowstone that were just like so dedicated to that ranch, so dedicated to busting their ass and working all day, hard, fucking work. And then just hanging out together afterwards. And there's something about that life that's so simplistic and romantic to people that it just really resonated with so many people. They didn't even know that they liked that. It's uniquely American. And the amount of freedom that is, so we move somebody out the South Camp. And we go, okay, so here you are. There's your house in South Camp. See you in a week or so. Go figure shit out. Keep track of the cattle. And you give them a string of horses and they work their horses and they ride that property. They know every inch of it. And you don't ever, we don't have weekly corporate meetings. How do they get supplies? Is the house stocked in advance? Yeah, go to town. You know, towns, which is an endeavor, right? Towns nine miles away. So you go to town once a week, right? Stock up. Stock up. Go back. Wow. Yeah. Crazy life. And people in current, not every, this isn't true of every cowboy. There's plenty of cowboys that typically they grow up on that ranch. And that's the life that they know and that's what they want to do, right? But they still go off to college. Like almost every one of my cowboys has a ranch management degree. Like they went to school. Wow. To study. What's a good school if you want to be a cowboy? I mean, there's quite a few of them, Texas Tech. I mean, that's a phenomenal ranch management program. A bunch of the guys on the sixes went there. T.C. U.S. a ranch management program, a good one, Texas A&M. You know, we have vets that live on the ranch. Obviously we breed a ton of horses. And so our vets, there's Colorado States of excellent veterinary school for large animal vets. Obviously Texas A&M, so phenomenal school, Texas Tech as well. Those are. Dude, how the fuck do you pay attention to everything? You're running a gigantic ranch and you have about 48 TV shows. How the fuck do you do it? I don't understand it. Every time a new Taylor Sheridan show pops up, I say to my wife, I go, how the fuck is he doing this? Like where does he have this time? Part of it is if you think about it. So my crew, my core crew is the same crew I made Wind River with. Like, wind. Like where does he have this time? Part of it is if you think about it. So my crew my core crew is the same crew I made Wind River with like when we had no money I remember one time I'm on the top of a mountain with me and my first day to me and my DP Ben Richardson and there's not a produced we haven't seen anybody in a week And I looked at were freezing our asses off at 7 below 0 in northern Utah, and I'm like guys You know we could just fuck off to Hawaii and nobody would know for a while We have we have their we have their money and they don't know they don't actually know where we are They're just trusting that we're gonna make this movie which we did And it was incredibly difficult, but that's the same team that went over and did Yellowstone Which is then the same team that went up and did Mayor Kingstown with me and then 1883 23 lioness landman all of them and We've promoted from within I've got PAs that are now first a D's I've got Camera operators that are now directors So we've promoted from within so everyone understands the way we do it and it's so friggin efficient We don't ever have and you know because you've been in this industry forever These people will have meetings upon meeting upon meeting they'll have a they'll have a tone meeting where a whole bunch of people are gonna Sit around and try and talk about the tone of the script What did you read the fucking thing? You should we have to have a meeting about it. How about we don't have a meeting about it and then they'll have a They'll have a and this is also networks. They love this shit so that they can have a reason for their existence Right right middle management people and they want to do a prop show and tell where someone's gonna come show them all the props that we're gonna use Really well we don't do that shit because I'm like I need your permission to use which which big lighter I'm gonna use in this fucking scene. How about I just make the decision? And how about we use the same big lighter in all these fucking shows and I don't ever have to pick a big lighter again How about that? So we just streamlined it and made it to it so efficient Typically a TV show will start up and they'll prep for 12 weeks before they start filming Wait, we're doing four Wow Well, that makes sense it makes sense it's streamlined because I've been on shows when they first start out and it's chaos And there's a lot of network involvement and there's a lot of bullshit But then once it gets going they go oh you guys know what you're doing. Yeah, leave me alone. Yeah, yeah We're there from the beginning now. That's beautiful. We haven't missed if you don't miss right Well, it's like you don't miss like you don't miss with a writing. You don't miss with the storylines like you don't have any Duds, man, which is incredible. It's an incredible accomplishment to have that many fucking shows and all of them be good and All of them be you know like very addictive in the land man so addictive It's that show It's about something very serious and then I can just throw shit at it. Yeah, let's just take a bunch of old people to a strip club Billy Bob is fucking awesome. He's a genius. I love that guy. He's so good on that show. It's like it was made for him It was made for him. I mean he's done so many things. I went to Billy Bob before I wrote a word and I told them I said if you don't do this, I'm not gonna do it because I'm not gonna chase my tail He goes, well, what is it? I said I want to do I said basically I want to take your character from bad Santa and put him in West Texas and run a little company He goes you want the guy from bad Santa to run an old company. I said that's what I want. He goes. That sounds fucking awesome Well, it's it's educational too. I mean a lot of people like have no idea how the oil business works And you watch that show you they're like Jesus Christ what a crazy job It's an insane job and and and the other thing about it is We're so completely dependent upon petroleum in every single aspect of our lives So completely dependent upon it and we can debate how bad it is or isn't and and or not debate it The reality is we don't have an alternative like it does not exist. It simply doesn't exist And we could sit there and say well when did this know you sit down with any climatologist and any engineer They're gonna tell you our best hope for a replacement of petroleum fuels is cold fusion and we're 30 40 years from it Being something that we can rely upon and reduce little nuclear reactors like 80 biddies Like yeah the size of this coffee car. That's what they're talking about They're talking about like individual reactors if people have in their homes like how long does it take before this disasters? That sounds funny Having a really good nuclear power plant for a city is an awesome idea Having everyone have their own nuclear power plant sounds fucking crazy You know how many assholes are gonna cut into that thing? Well people still put fucking metal in microwaves. So I don't think we should be giving Yeah, I've done it. I'm like well back in a really big There's people that leave their fucking gas on so that someone can die in the house. No, we don't we don't know People are nuts. If you literally have consumer level nuclear power plants Not with these monkeys. That's what not with the human beings that we are today are our current form. We're not enlightened enough to have Personal nuclear power plants in our house Oh fuck yeah, so we're dependent upon it We're in a round right now Also because of Israel, but being we're we're in Iran. I mean the whole thing about it is the oil The Strait of Hormuz is like I think it's 40% of the world's oil supply passes through there Yeah, correct. No, that's and and and I think also China mm-hmm. It's a big play against it's a chess piece against China That's what I think yeah, all this fucking terrifying what uh and I'm not saying We should have or we shouldn't have I'm not commenting politically, but What those guys those SF guys did in Venezuela was fucking Gangster it's crazy whether I'm not saying they should or shouldn't I'm just saying right the team was sent and Then the team I mean can you imagine if I wrote it in a movie people will go that's fucking ridiculous Taylor Right, we don't know you're gonna fly a bunch of SF dudes drop them off on the roof of this high-rise surrounded by The fucking Cuban special forces and they're gonna kill all of them and then they're gonna fucking snatch him and his wife Go back to the roof and just fucking fly away That's what they did and they're gonna do it with sound They're gonna disable everyone with a sound weapon like what Like there was you remember when they first started talking about that Havana syndrome. Yeah, we're dismissing him This is horseshit this bullshit. Yeah, like no, they're talking about people that are in Havana that they've been targeted Something zapped them low level frequency made them nauseous. Yeah, and I think that is a fraction of whatever they unleashed in Venezuela Who knows? The discombobulated that's what it's called classified secret weapon System president Donald Trump claimed US forces used during the January 3rd operation to capture Venezuelan president Nicholas Maduro He stated that the weapon successfully disabled enemy equipment and air defenses Preventing them from firing back So it's both it Disables the people and it disables their weapon system What that's amazing. What the fuck are we doing? Official silence would ask for specific technical or operational details about how the device functions Trump famously told New York Post. I'm not allowed to talk about it Hmm It says they press buttons. He claimed the defense forces press buttons and nothing worked disabling both Russian and Chinese-made Rockets and radar If weapon affected both mechanical equipment and personnel He also referred to it at you also referred to a sonic weapon being used against Maduro's Cuban security detail inside a heavily fortified fortress Fuck an aim man. I would love to see what that looks like You know, I bet they have video too I'm sure yeah, all we're in GoPros. I'd love to go into a skiff to show you the video. I won't say no I want to see what it looks like a small watch What's a good something gets zapped by sound and gets fully disabled like apparently they just fell to the ground in agony They couldn't move. Yeah, and they just went in and shot it. I'm freaking SF snipers. Yeah, freaking on top of that Just raining down on them. It's crazy like that guy thought he was safe Crazy and there's a famous video of him saying come and get me. Oh, yeah, bro. Yeah, be careful What bear you poke yeah, also it's like we none of us know what the tip of the spear Technology and weapon systems is available right now. We don't know they don't tell us they don't tell us obviously No one knew this fucking discombobulated thing existed This is science fiction. Yeah, right? If this was 20 years ago. You'd be like that's not a real thing Now you're like oh shit they used it. It's not and not just a concept. They fucking used it What else what do they what are they cooking out in the desert in the middle of Nevada? Who knows? Yeah, I think about this for that to be used There's something for generations past that 100% they're playing with now. Yeah 100% You know this whole UAP world Stuff like when they start talking about UAPs all of my bullshit alarms go off all of them It's like I don't believe if you knew things you would tell us So I don't believe you're telling us the truth I think they have some special access programs that they've been working on for decades and decades and some super high-level shit that involves some sort of novel propulsion system And they have that stuff flying around in the sky and I think that's what a lot of people are saying That's a lot of people are saying that doesn't discount the idea that there's something else out there because I think there is But I think there's a giant chunk of the shit that people are seeing that's ours. Yeah testing Yeah testing if doing stuff with it if there was an intelligent life form that had stumbled upon our barbaric asses Why would they not go hate guys fire up that fucking missile and take we found this blue planet We got to get rid of this thing. Well, I think maybe every Intelligent species that's tribal and territorial has to go through an adolescent period of their evolution and if you look at Human history, you know, I was reading about Vlad the impaler last night Jesus crying how many the Ottoman Turks that got killed and his famous methods of Putting people on posts and separating them down the line on the road so that as these poor guys are traveling to go and fight him They just see the enemy stuck on skewers in in geometric patterns and shitty would do them in like stars and stuff Just it was a vicious motherfucker and he's the motivation behind or the you know the inspiration behind Dracula And I was reading about that guy. I'm like fuck people have always been awful They've always been awful, but they just like as time goes on they get a little less awful A little less like we're a little less awful now than we were during Nazi Germany not Totally great not collectively right certain We're still willing to do genocide some of us are but it's less less approved It's less More people are horrified at it. It's like human beings are getting a little bit better It's not as quick as we'd like. I think if I was an alien lifeform I would say you have to wait this out So like if you have a kid you gotta let the kid fall down and stumble you gotta let him get hurt You got to let him you know things happen you gotta let him fuck up and figure it out himself You got to figure this out make it right you fuck this up you got to give him a chance to become better Right. I think as a civilization I would think the same thing would apply you have to give this civilization time to evolve and adapt and get past where it's at Right now and I don't think that you do that by intervening and like grabbing us by the hand and showing us the way I think what you do is you Hang back and make sure that we don't nuke each other and just sort of pay attention to all the different International ongoing and just let human beings slowly but surely evolve Yeah, that's what I would do if I was an intelligent lifeform observing people the interesting thing that were as a civilization facing now and and it's always happened in some capacity when a society gets Wealthy really wealthy and people start to question Wealth and how can we be more equitable and it comes across that compassion But it really comes down to a debate of What is more valuable to a society is self-determination more valuable or is equity more valuable and by equity? What I mean is Everyone gets exactly the same shit Everyone so you take them off them. We're not on a monetary society anymore now You're working for the collective and you're hearing that word thrown around a lot These days the problem with working for the collective is Who decides who picks up the trash and who decides who gets to Go represent your nation at the Olympics who gets to decide who gets to Um If someone gonna let me go Make TV shows which by the way, I wouldn't do for free. It's too fucking hard So now I don't want to do it Well, then you got to go do do this. Well, I want to do that either And that's the problem and then they force you to do things Yeah, and then so then so then so still the You either have self-determination or in your attempts to be Collective you have to surrender that and then you're surrendering it to who and Now you have a dictatorship no matter what the fuck you thought you had yeah, it always comes back to that it always you can you can look at Marxism and Leninism and what Lenin was talking about his hopes whether they were his hopes or not But it it devolved into a an authoritarian regime very very quickly and and You know communism socialism fascism Not toism they're all very very similar The differences are superficial. I think in rans said that they're just superficial Variations between the exact same thing which is the evil of the collective The evil of collective and human beings desire to control their people. Yeah, they love to they and any time Give them a chance where they could feel righteous about controlling people they jump at it and they can they have an opportunity Classify people there's good people and bad people in the bad people you can do whatever you want to them The other and that that happens with every every time groups get into power like that And tell you what you can and can't do and you're seeing that being embraced Shockingly more and more all over the world people are embracing more government power and more government control And it's really crazy. It's really crazy to say. It's unique. I think that number one I think in 30 years when they look back like we are still suffering from a society From COVID like still and not so much from the disease itself but from Our faith in the institutions around us whether it's government whether it's the media whether it's pharmaceutical companies and The the way that it was manipulated to gain power for a political group and it was effective and So-and-so-and-so things effective than people just keep doing the same thing until it's no longer effective, right? We did that in our military with the wind's hearts and minds. All right, so that was all that all comes from Japan Right, we're gonna win the hearts and minds of Japanese well the Japanese surrendered Like their emperor who they looked at as a god he Told the people of Japan after we dropped too frickin nuclear bombs on him Hey, we are gonna endure the unageable. We are going to surrender. It's the only way that we can salvage our nation So they willfully surrendered and then our government goes look how great this hearts and minds. That's working It's not working It's not working at all And then they tried it in Vietnam didn't work Tried it everywhere else that we've had a conflict. We tried it and it hasn't worked yet because what it was based on Was flawed, right? Because they they chose to be subjugated at that time and and making that choice kept them an independent nation so our Our government are in it. It's so dangerous. What we're seeing You can like Trump or not like Trump. It doesn't People are gonna like presidents and dislike presidents, but now it Defying the rule of law because he happens to be The head of the federal government and openly defying the federal government the repercussions of that are gonna be Okay, fine. You you can't stand this man. You think he's a terrible president and you're not gonna follow his laws But that's the new normal now. So when a president gets in that you do support Then the other side because we've established this president. They're just not gonna follow his laws either And now we've eroded the rule of law and Yeah, and then then what happens the slippery slope is very dangerous It's I mean I was saying that when the ice raids were going on because I was like okay I am not in favor of illegal criminals being in this country However, we're setting a very alarming precedent where you have masked militarized police with no ID That are running around the cities Snatching people up like this this could set a precedent that could be used by the left if they get into power For something different than this being than just for ice We've already accepted the idea of militarized police on our streets And that people with seven weeks training You're just sending them out to snatch up people and a lot of American citizens are getting caught up in that trap too Unfortunately, and then they have to get released Like that that could be bad if The next party gets in so if the Democrats get in next and they decide like maybe there's a new that a new covid Strange happened some new pandemic happens whatever the fuck if you don't get the vaccine they're gonna rescue and then they start the same Yes, we saw it in I think it was Minnesota Whoever they had the National Guard on the streets But they had people enforcing lockdowns and so they had people walking on the streets with fucking guns Yelling at people to get in your house over a cold Like this these kind of slippery slopes you might think no, we're just trying to get rid of the bad immigrants I get it. I'm with you. I agree However the way they're doing it doing it. I don't know. I'm not even saying there's another way or a better way I'm just saying you want to get them out all at once. Yeah, that's the way to do it You want to get them out quick. That's the way to do it because they got them in quick You're right. They open the fucking border. They help people get in but now that they're in though if you're gonna get them out that way You're setting a weird precedent You're setting a precedent that could be used in other ways. Yeah, that's the the challenge is Okay We're gonna we need to enforce the law Right or don't have them right. They've they've enacted no new laws These are the same immigration laws that were on the books when no bomb was president and crime was president the same right the same rules. It's the it's the methodology and and You gotta You gotta sit there and wait the pros and cons about okay the pros of Trying to eradicate this issue. You can't give it a deadline. Yeah, right It's slippery it is slippery and and again it's what's good for the goose is good for the gander and and These politicians right now who are doing all of us a tremendous disservice in Washington. I feel are elected officials because They're they're not thinking beyond this next election and maybe they never have they never have right But they were better at hiding it maybe I think there's no internet, but we'll true I think that's what it is. There was no social media, but I think we've reached a point as they as they as politicians talk about eliminating the electoral college they talk about Eliminating the filibuster eliminate packing courts all these things because their side's not in power And so we're just gonna take the structure of the government and totally rework it to benefit us temporarily But then those same benefits that you have now will be used against you. Yeah, they will 100% be used against you I think The most important legislation that we can pass right now is term limit. I think I think 12 years tops in Congress, and I think probably 12 years in the Senate two six year terms in the Senate More than enough time. Yeah, that's a lot of fucking time. That's enough. We don't we don't need any anyone else I mean, I don't know how it's become How the fuck is Nancy Pelosi with four hundred million dollars? How the fuck why no? Yeah, she gets in on all these fucking IPOs exactly right She's gonna pass the legislation that allows visa to go public and then she's gonna get a big chunk of it And then when she's confronted about it look a reporter dead in the eye and fucking line of women Mm-hmm. What you're talking about. I didn't do that. No, it's public We know you did it. We could look at how much stock you own. Yeah, fucking liar. They all do it. Yes. They get people are calling out Rochon on Twitter to that fucking rich everyone's getting rich. Yeah, they get paid 175 grand a year and they're all fucking millionaires Super millionaires. They're all like and like she's intensely wealthy. That's a that's a that's a half a billion dollars That's nuts as a public servant. That's nuts. Yeah, it's it's insanity and it's um, you know That's what we're used to we're just we just we know it's bad And we just accept it and people are busy and they have families and mortgages and shit to deal with and so they complained and they keep on trucking Yeah, I mean I have as we discussed. I have other jobs I don't have a pile of time to dedicate to gets tough for me to talk Politics because I don't have hours in my day to sift through what's real and not real on Instagram or social Whatever I'm not on that shit, but but I can't hard to form an opinion because man I don't know what I don't know where to go to get honest news. I'm not the news. I know that I Can't turn on the fucking news because they fucking malign to us I They they stopped being in I don't know if they were ever impartial. Oh, but but I know I know that um I remember there was a guy I was a kid he was running for president His name was Jack Kemp. I remember Jack and I want to say it was Dan Rather it may not have been it may have been some other Newscaster and there's a debate amongst all these different potential candidates for president and As he's introducing all of these various politicians he's saying so and so Harvard graduate and law professor from here in this Former Senator in this and that and the other and this person here and they get to Jack Kemp And he goes back up quarterback and born again Christian Jack Kemp Wow, you just sunk that dude Everyone else you gave what their jobs were and and talked about their accomplishments of this you just said he didn't start at quarterback And he's you call that as religion dude, and that's the first time I ever remember I'm like I know your opinion. I'm not supposed to know your opinion. You're supposed to be you're supposed to be giving me news right you're supposed to be giving me Honest unbiased information so I can make a decision and you're making a decision for me or trying to yeah And they've gotten so as news became entertainment. I mean CNN's a worst thing that ever happened to news because it's 24 hours and now all of a sudden There's not 24 hours worth of news all the time right there is during a war right you can show us news You know war footage the whole time and talk about the war and why war and why no war but when there's not you got to make some shit up Or push an opinion and that's where we've gotten with news now now. It's News is Piss him off and scare the shit out of him. Yeah, that's how we keep him watching That's the business model. It is now and it's also piss him off and scare the shit out of him But ignore certain things that your sponsors wouldn't like you to talk about. No. Yeah, this is why you know Tulsi Gabbard and her final act as Director of National Intelligence that she's leaving She had that she gave that press conference about pauchy and she talked about how he lied in front of Congress and that He absolutely used American tax funds to fund gain a function research through eco-health Alliance and to the Wuhan lab and Wuhan China and You know no one's covering it This episode is brought to you by visible how many of you are currently listening to this podcast on your phone If you are Chronically online like most of us are these days your wireless network should be too with visible you get unlimited 5G N unlimited hotspot all powered by Verizon's 5G network the perks of big wireless for half the cost Visible isn't just a wireless plan. It's unlimited wireless designed to keep you connected and no Contract holding you back switch today at visible.com plan start at just $25 a month or get our premium Visible plus pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use promo code Rogan an exclusive offer for podcast listeners. No, and by the way Didn't we all know that already? Well, we knew it, but my parents didn't People that just like just read the newspapers and watch TV. They don't know. I've never seen anything as flagrantly obvious as As COVID coming from the Wuhan lab studying COVID right? I've never You've got fucking news anchors keeping a straight facing it came from the wet market Did you ever see John Stewart spit on it? No on the Colbert show no you never saw it. No, we need to play it Let's play it because it's so funny because Colbert tries to like stop him from dealing it and push back and John He's a great comic he just gets up from his chair and gets louder and just plows through it Over Colbert's like trying to cock block his bit He's like it's a funny bit and he's getting in the way I'd like to see if you have information on that I'd like to see it and he just keeps going he keeps plowing away It's very funny and it's in the middle of it right? He was a this was a courageous step because he was doing this when Calling it out and saying that it came from a lab in Wuhan China was somehow or another Conflated with racism. Remember that. Yeah, if you said it came from Wuhan China from a lab your racist Like what how did you pull that off? Like how did it? Don't say anything it's racist It's from fucking China and it seems like eco-health Alliance funded and it seems like we funded eco-health Alliance Yes, a lot of fucking paperwork and by the way there's studies on the fucking disease Yeah, that they've been doing that are posted on the CDC website They're posted on the fuck. My favorite was when you catch all this shit about ivermectin and literally when when that happened. I went oh fuck look that up Look up ivermectin and Studies with ivermectin and a study pops up on the on the CDC website While people are telling us to not take that shit And it talks about the efficacy of ivermectin and anti-viral properties Specifically covid 19. Yeah, so it's on the government website that the fucking drug works While they're telling everyone to not take it and they're mocking me for taking a worsty rumor watch this. This is great Now you know you stop because he still wants to put out that establishment position I'd like to see any evidence if you've got any evidence Yeah, well while times in the news because I think from then on That sort of sent a shockwave through the majority of the population where just whatever trust they had in the news just got Severely eroded. Yeah, and if we don't have good news if we don't have trust in the news Then we're kind of adrift and then you get locked in the fucking conspiracy theories and eco chambers online And you can get trapped in them too, and that's not good either Yeah, then then there's nowhere to go get information has anybody in NBC CBS CNN if any of those people picked up on that Tulsi Gabbard speech about Fauci and had any sort of a reaction to it I'd like to know that because from what I was reading online no none of them had But this was as of yesterday. I don't know whether or not that's changed I don't know like they were preparing an article and they wanted to make sure that they got all their ducks in a row I would think pretty much anytime The head of an institute is begging Did they go to all their ducks in a row? I would think pretty much any time the head of an institute is begging for a pardon when he hasn't been charged with any crime. It's pretty good indicator. You might want to look and see if there's been a crime committee. Does he begging for a pardon? I mean he got... Yeah, Fauci, Fauci was like he had a turnies in part of that deal. That attorney is reaching out to Biden's camp the last day when he got the pardon. Jesus. The very last day. Jesus. It's just a preemptive pardon as nuts, especially when Rand Paul's questioning him and he's talking to him about specifically about what defines gain of function research and by all account, by every definition it's gain of function research. Fauci's still saying you do not know what you are talking about with all due respect. Even though he's a doctor. Yeah. Rand Paul's a fucking doctor and then they said well you're an high doctor. Well that's my specialty but before I became an high doctor I became a general doctor which means I studied all the same shit that Fauci studied. Yeah. You had to go through medical school before you go pick a specialty. So four years of studying the entire body before you specialize in whatever you're going and specialize in. Well it's also then if you read RFK Jr's book The Real Anthony Fauci you find out he ran this exact same playbook during the AIDS pandemic. It was the exact same playbook. That's what the Dallas buyers club is about. The Dallas buyers club that McConaughey movie about AIDS, the fucking villain is Anthony Fauci. He's the guy that's stopping them from getting alternative medications. That's the guy that wanted everybody to take AZT. You know why? Because AZT had already been approved. They were already used that as a cancer medication. It was a chemotherapy medication that they stopped using because it was too deadly. It was killing people quicker than cancer was killing them. So the first medication the gay people when they had an immune system that was compromised was a chemotherapy medication that was killing people. And they were giving it to people that were asymptomatic. They were giving it to people that tested HIV positive and then you know about the PCR testing. So the PTR says, carry mollus the guy who invented PCR testing. It's not publicly about Fauci. It is not know what the fuck he's talking about. I don't think he said fuck, but it is not nobody's talking about. And then it's not supposed to be used to detect a disease in a person's body. And then if you ramp up the cycles long enough, just like they did with COVID where we got some by some estimations 80% false positives because of the PCR method because they were ramping them up so high. And so they cut it back quite significantly and that reduced the amount of false positives they had. a lot of people that got tested as HIV positive that probably weren't. And they put those fucking people on AZT and AZT kills you. Wow. Yeah nuts. Most mainstream outlets are treating it as a serious but unproven political bombshell. The reporting that Gabbard alleges what Gabbard alleges stressing the documents are disputed and under review and highlighting how polarized the reaction is. mainstream print Jerusalem Post money control Newsweek summarize her accusations emphasized that COVID's origins remain unresolved and note that the claims about Fauci's sparking COVID or lying under oath are heavily contested not yet legally validated. Many stories frame this as reigniting a long running fight over lab league versus natural origin. Let's that fight is over kids. That fights over. if you're saying if you are in the news and you are saying that there's still a long running controversy as to whether it's a lab league or natural origin. Shut your fucking dirty whore mouth because it's not. There's the fights over. It's a fucking lab league. They say the new documents will need independent scrutiny from Congress investigators and scientists before any firm conclusions can be drawn. Right leaning media highlight her file dump as vindication for critics focus on the cover up narrative and give prominent space to Republicans like ramp up. Why is it more centrist or mainstream outlets presented as a straighter news tone often pairing Gabbard's and GOP's quotes with Fauci's past the Niles and nothing there is so far no judicial finding a perjury or criminal conduct. What I've never understood is how this became a left or right so stupid when when Fauci who used a career bureaucrat right through I mean when all this started there was a Republican president. Yep. Right and then he's he served that Republican president. He served the Democratic president before that and before that and then he served a Republican and he's been there for fucking 50 years. Yeah. This dude. It's not political. Yeah. It shouldn't be political. There shouldn't be a right left side to this. It's hey a career bureaucrat. Fuck in lied to us. He used the exact same language when he was talking about AZT as a medication for HIV that he used for the COVID vaccine. The reason why it's the only medication is because it is both safe and effective. Guys a monster. Yeah. He's one of those guys like throughout history where you're going to look back over time and you go, holy shit, this one guy's lies. As one guy's aspirations, this one guy's career fucked so many people over. Yeah. And I don't and I don't understand why Democrats would want to fall in that sort of there's no reason to align because people are stupid and they just decide that because a Republicans are president and the anything their Republicans are pushing has to be bad. And that that stupid fucking division. It's so it's so silly. It's so silly. It really is because the same people during the pandemic. During Trump's presidency were openly saying, are you going to trust a vaccine that's created under Trump? They were all saying it. Kamala Harris said it a bunch of joy reads that they all said it. And then they bet their entire political livelihoods on it. We deserve better. We really do or we don't. Maybe we don't. We fucking think they're good. We're so silly. Such a fucking silly group of human beings. Yeah. That's fucking wild. Not all of us though. You know, I think less of us now are think it's going to be way harder to divide people the way they divided everybody in 2020. It'll be way harder now. I think most people are just not buying it. And as long as people wake up to this left versus right nonsense is really just a big fucking hustle to keep you fighting with each other. Oh, for sure. Oh, for sure. Most of it. Even the ice stuff that we're talking about. Hey folks, do you think it's a coincidence that the biggest fucking ice protest were all going on in the same place where they found all that fraud? Do you think the current, the current, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, these organized massive protests were all occurring in the same place where that Nick Shirley cat found. Yeah. Fuck in billions of dollars in fraud. Yeah. Shocker kind of crazy. Didn't they pass? Didn't California pass a law. And they surely lost to prevent that, that specifically that guy from fucking poking around California? Yes. Yes. I mean, they've even referred to it as the Nick Shirley law. The idea is to keep people from investigating fraud, which is outlandish. That is outrageous. That is a crazy thing to emphasize. And the things, well, you know, these people are showing up at daycare or some looking in right. They shouldn't. You're right. 100% and people random people from the internet should not be showing up at daycare is with cameras. I agree. When there's no one in that daycare for years and years and years and they can prove that fucking millions of dollars are being earned by that daycare. And there's no one in there because little is not there. Isn't there a, is it there a fully passed into law not yet? Isn't there a video of that kid like walking up to one of these and these dudes get out and like drive off and they're fucking Bentley's I don't know if those are real. There's a bunch of fake videos that were made by people afterwards that were just capitalizing on people wanting to click on something like that. And so they were just engagement farming by pretending. And like the guy would show up and they'd go, what are you talking about? I have no idea what is bad acting and they get in a Rolls Royce. Like, it's just bullshit. It's seeing my bullshit to me. I mean, I'm sure a bunch of those guys made a bunch of money. And I'm sure there is a lot of fraud. Just like they're admitting it. Minisho does admitting it. They knew what was going on forever. You know, and then how about the fact that there's certain politicians that voted against this idea. So one of those ladies that was killed, like there was a lady in her husband that were murdered in Minnesota. And she was one of the few people that voted against providing Medicare for illegals. They were trying to pass some bill involving Medicare and illegals. And she was one of the ones that voted against it. And she was killed. The guy who killed her said that Tim Waltz sent him to kill them. Now, I don't know if he's full of shit. He easily could be. He's a fucking crazy person. He's a murderer. He showed up at their house and they mask on and fucking shot them dead and shot a couple other people too. So like, he's, you know, obviously he's fucking cracked out. But kind of weird, kind of weird that the lady who wants to vote against this obvious fraud, this money that's being somehow another funneled around through Medicare, like one of the things that Elon said when he was on the podcast is that Medicaid and Medicare fraud is one of the biggest fucking problems. And he was looking into a doge. He goes, I almost don't want to talk about it because I don't want to get killed. He goes, it's that bad. And this was before all this. And they're surely shit. And now you're seeing it. And you're like, Oh, now I get it. These hospices that they have, these fake hospices in California. And then these all the Somali daycare centers and all the different things that like these people are just made autism. The autism diagnosis is went through the fucking roof because now they can have these autism centers. So they just diagnose their kids as autistic. And then they're raking in all this money for treatment. It's crazy how much fraud there is hundreds of billions of billions of dollars. And just what a shocker that that's the place where the big ice protest broke out. People forget that when Obama was president, he made a big public statement about going after government fraud. They were aware of it then. I mean, they've been aware of it for it's always take a place. But on the scale and he tried and he caught resistance to the point that he wasn't able to do his version of a doge, right, which was, which was his intention. He gave a big public speech about it and tried to look into it. And he's if you're stealing hundreds of billions of dollars, hundreds of billions of dollars, what wouldn't you do to protect that? Exactly. And that was Elon's point. Yeah. And also that money for sure makes its way into democratic coffers and probably Republican too. And whoever the fuck is going to be whoever's who ever is enabled to throw. Who's ever going to who's ever going to help out? Whoever wants a piece of this pie is a juicy as pie. It's a hundred billion dollar pie. Come get some. That'll almost bill you a real system in California. You get a mile attract or a second Google bridge fucking car sales. But have you had that guy on? No, he wants to be on. He talks a lot of shit about me. First, he was saying Joe wrote his own fan of me, but I'm a big fan of him. He was like saying all this doesn't he have his own podcast? Yeah. Because that's that state is running so well. He like governor does it. Got a lot of free time. It's so smooth. If you ask him, he'll tell you how awesome. He'll give you stats. He gets the stats. The stats are definitely people are moving there and record numbers. Yeah. No, not true. It's not true. So it's the all the stats, the positive stats they were already going on before he was the governor. It's it's California is an awesome place. The fucking weather is perfect. San Francisco has always been an incredible tech hub of geniuses. There's always been a bunch of super wizards up there that are creating some of the best technology in the world. And that has nothing to do with him has zero to do with him. And all these problems that they're in, government has caused because that's the real problem with him as a governor. It's a real problem with Karen Bass as a mayor. It's a real problem with whatever the fuck happened in San Francisco. It's bad. Government. It's not upholding the rule of the law, not keeping people safe, being empathetic to people that are shooting up on the street over people that are trying to walk their fucking kids to school. Yeah. Like what you're doing is bad for society. It's bad. And it seems to me that for the most part, for the most part, if you are the mayor of the city. And when I was writing Yellowstone, the governor of Montana at the time, who was the Democrat? I called him and asked him. I said, hey, guys, talking about what it's like to be a governor. What did you think it would be and what did it turn out to be? And what he said was Steve Bullock, who's this name? He said, well, I thought I was going to make all these changes into this and shepherd this. And I learned that I am the CEO of a state and that my job as the CEO of the state is take care of the people who live in the state, the employees of the state, attract business here, attract tourism here and try to make the state make more money and make lives better. That's my job infrastructure and city management and people management and tourism. That's my job. And to a even more acutely to a mayor, you're really the president of a city, you're the CEO of the city. And your job is keep the lights on, pick up the trash, put out the fires, deal with the sewage, keep it safe. Like that's it. There's no social anything secondary, possibly, but run the schools, like run the city. And you have in a lot of these big urban areas where they're so agenda driven, and they're pushing a social agenda and then are running the cities. They're not running them at all. And so they're running into the ground. And it's tragic to see because San Francisco, like you said, it's a beautiful city. LA used to be in a faggy place where you could go and make your dreams come true. San Francisco was awesome 10 years ago, just 10 years ago. I filmed my special triggered in the film more in San Francisco in 2016. What's great? No problems. Well, it was not it was almost people everywhere. It was normal. It was normal San Francisco. Go to a cool restaurant. People are cool. Oh, he's been like a smart city. Interesting architecture. I always been a great city. I lived there from the time I was seven to 11. Right. Yeah. I loved San Francisco. Unrecognizable now. Ten years. That's it. Ten years of fucking asinine government. And also this homeless thing when you realize that it's an industry, when the homelessness is valuable, having homeless people on the streets is valuable because you can get more money to deal with this obvious homeless problem. The more obvious the problem is the more money they're going to throw on it. They don't have to face it. Well, there's no there's no intention to fix it. Right. They're giving out free needles here. Yeah. Get high here. It's and I was I was just somewhere where my first experience seeing the homeless in this magnitude. And the one thing that's evident instantly is they're all so completely strung out on drugs. Like this fentanyl thing is no fucking joke. Like the zombies leaning against every corner of it. And and to me it's cruel. Right. Yeah. Like if someone's to that point and you want to help them, don't give them a fucking iPhone and some more needles. How about you pick them up off the street and you take them somewhere and go, look, there's a curfew here and you ain't doing no drugs. We're going to clean you out. And and some aren't going to want that. They're going to want to go back on the street and do drugs. And and the addiction and the consequences of drugs that are that I had surgery, they had put me on fentanyl. Next surgery and they put me on fentanyl. There's high. Then there's that shit. And that was done by an anesthesiologist. I wasn't self medicating on a fucking parking lot. Right. Would you get done? You're neck C67. Fusion. No, no, no, no, no, no. I had the dissect. The disc. Just cut some of it down. It's okay now. Yeah. How long ago did you get that done? Maybe three years ago. Two years. Now three years ago. Is that ever happens again? Don't do that. Don't know. Well, it'll happen. It is. Yeah. I'm sure it will. There's other ways. There's way. Yeah, there's PRP can help it. Regenikine help mine. I had a pretty bad bulging disc in my neck. What's regenikines? Regenikine is they used to have to go to Germany to do it. I know paint manning went there. Kobe Bryant went there and Dana White actually flew to Germany to get it done. It is. It's like an advanced form of platelet rich plasma where they take your blood. They there's a process to it. Pull it up, Jamie, because I can't remember what the process is. But they spin in a centrifuge for like 10 hours and then you come back the next day and they inject it and it makes this very potent anti-inflammatory and they inject it around wherever the injury is to the disc. And it provides like within weeks. Amazing relief. And for me, it completely cured it. I had a point when my fingers were going now. Yeah, that's what German go back up back to where. Yeah. So German physician, Dr. Peter Welling, the treatment focus on blocking a specific inflammatory protein interleukin one. So they take the blood out. They draw your blood and then the blood is heated to body temperature to trigger the production of a natural anti-inflammatory protein called IL1RA. And then they spin into a centrifuge separating out the protein rich serum. The serum is then injected directly into the painful joint or tissue. Dude is remarkable for me for knee injuries. I did it a bunch of times. I used to do it at the, they moved it. You used to have to go to Germany and then Santa Monica, they opened up an office. It's lifestyle medicine. That's what it's called, right? And then that's where I had it done. And you, it's incredible. Like it, I had it done my entire back. Like there's a picture of me on the, on Instagram with a bunch of these fucking tubes. And that's me right there. A bunch of those tubes in my hairy ass back. And it was incredible. I mean, it really fixed so many problems that I had. It's really great for specifically for back injuries, knee injuries, stuff like that. There's a lot of good biological options. There's also decompression. It's very important. I have a harness that I attached to a pull up bar and it straps under my chin. And I just like let my weight drop down and decompress my weight on my neck. I do that every day. And I also have this thing called a Dex three. Zadex two or Dex three. You, you hang forward. It's like Teter makes it, you know, that company makes those decompression tables. But this one's even better because you just hinge from the hip. So you're not supporting it at all with your legs. And it's just your back. It just goes like pop, pop, pop. Like you could feel it. One of those. I'll show it to you. We have one out here. We have two of them out here actually. Right out. Yeah. And the gym, it's there. There's a shit. I have one at home. I don't, I will not not have one. I have to have one. It's so good for just decompressing your back. You need to decompress the neck too. Anytime you're doing anything, if you're dead lifting or squat, obviously, you're lifting a lot of heavy weights. If any time you're lifting, where you got to think of all that, or all that pressures on your back, all that squashing down and you got to do some, this stretch it out. Yep. Stretch it back out. But there's ways to heal it now without taking away the disc. So the problem is every time they cut away a piece of your disc, you got less disc. Yeah. Yeah. Less disc. Yeah. So the good news is there's some treatments that they're doing now where they're actually injecting some sort of a hydro gel. I heard about this. Yeah. Into the disc itself. So I asked Brigham from ways to well about that and they're looking into it. And they're trying to, but apparently this is not being done widely yet. This is like, this is just experimental. But they think they're going to be able to do that. There's also some places like CPI, cellular performance Institute, down at Tijuana, they've successfully been injecting stem cells into people's discs. And it causes a disc to regenerate tissue and get thicker and healthier. Really? Yeah. Shane Dorian, my friend, he's a pro surfer and big wave surfer and bow hunter. He went down there and he said it was remarkable. He said within a couple of months, like a 30 to 40% increase in range of motion, decrease in pain. Yeah, you could feel it. It's kind of an annoying process because once you do it, you can't only do shit for like six weeks. Like once you, I think it's six. Yes. Well, that's what's the same with the surgery. You're not doing shit for six weeks after that. But you can't lift weights. You could walk. You can walk. You know, it's a whole thing. It's like let everything take like let it take, let it heal up. Don't do anything stupid. Don't re-endure it. Don't aggravate it. Like give it a chance to actually do its magic. Yeah. I'll look into that for sure. But any neck injury or back injury, such a motherfucker. Anytime you back goes, I like everything you do is like, it's so hard to do anything. It's like you realize like how nice it is to be healthy when, you know, whenever you get hurt. Yeah. No back pain. That's that's what killed my stuff. Back pain. They just get on pills. Yeah. Yeah. I have a friend in the family that did that. Yeah. He was in, I remember one time we were fishing up in Wyoming and, and he just was like, I can't do it backwards to bed. He went in and had a surgery and that made it worse, which is, yeah, we chose a real, real risk when you start messing around with the spine. Right. And so yeah, and then it was, you know, those are serious pain. Now we're talking oxy. Yeah, now you're in just now. You're on a clock. Yeah. And you can only do that chip for so long. Yeah. Now you're on a clock. Oxy's are fucking terrifying. They're so terrifying. So terrifying how readily they were handing them out to forever. Yeah. Do you ever see painkiller that the Peterburg thing that he did for Netflix? No, I didn't fucking great. Man. So Matthew Broderick placed such a great creep. Oh, he played the Sackler brother, the Sackler really? Yeah. The head of the family that started this whole opiate problem that we have in this country. It's fucking terrifying because it's all real. And those fucking people never went to jail. Who knows how many people are dead because of them? Yeah. Yeah. They generated fucking billions and billions of dollars, killed a bunch of people. Brooned countless lives. How many lives people that were connected, your dad gets hooked on that shit, ruins your relationship with your, your family. You, you wind up being all fucked up because you grew up with a dad who was thrown on a pills. And ma'am. No. Generation. Yeah. Generation of damage. Oh, God. Yeah. And these guys put their feet up. Yeah. They go to a fucking nice country club and have the lobster. Yeah. Cocksuckers. There's so many of them in this world. There's like, that's genuinely evil. Yes. This is real demons. This is that's a real demon. Like people want to think demons live in hell and you know, that's, that's kind of maybe may or may not be real. Well, I know they're on earth. Yeah. Just demons are right here. Yeah. And they justify it. They figure out a way to justify it. And they're around a bunch of other people who justify it too. And they can just immediately dismiss any pain or suffering because they got a huge amount of profit from it. Yeah. Yep. Those are the fuckers. Those are the fuckers. Yeah. They're out there. And it doesn't take many of them to create like real carnage. I mean, think about that. Think about the opiate issue in this. And it's still going. It was the gateway to fentanyl. Right. If you think about it. Yeah. It was the gateway to fentanyl. And it was, uh, it was also, it's like they were doing those pain management centers down in Florida where they just, all they prescribed his pills. So you would go and like, I'm in pain. They're like, Oh, Taylor, we've got the solutions right next door. And you go right next door to their pharmacy and all their pharmacy has, like, they don't have Ben gay over there. And they have toothbrushes. Foxy. Yeah. I got to ask you. Go buddy. This is the solution. Yeah. Fuck. Yep. Yep. That's the real drug trade. Mm hmm. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I mean, the cartel is basically getting the scraps. They're making trillions of dollars off scraps. We'll think about this. Did you even know what fentanyl was 15 years ago? I never heard of it. No. I don't even remember when we first heard about it, but when we first heard about it on a podcast, we were talking about it. We found the amount that's lethal. And they showed it next to a penny. You know, like what? That can kill you. And people are taking that and they're mixing that and cocaine. Holy fuck. And they are bent over zombies on the side of the road. Yeah. Philadelphia is bad too. There's a bunch of cities that are just real bad with it. And it doesn't have to be that way. And what's interesting is this eye beginning initiative that Rick Perry and Brian Hubbard are pushing in Texas and that I went to the White House to get Trump to be involved in and they're trying to make this so that it's, uh, you have a right to use or right. I think they call it right to use or right to try for people that are addicted and they're trying to make it more readily available and accessible to veterans. That's the thing that could help all these people. What is it now? I begame. Do you don't know what that is? No. I begame is a, uh, it comes from the obogatory in Africa. And it is this very potent psychedelic that has no recreational use at all. It's not fun. Nobody likes it. It's not like a trip. You see zombies and fucking hang out with the aliens. Uh-uh. You go into this very dark experience for like 24 hours where it like replays your life to you in a very uncomfortable way and also somehow or another rewires addiction in your brain. And for a large percentage of people, just one dose is good enough to get them off of everything, whatever they're on, whether it's alcohol, gambling, Coke, whatever the fuck it is. But for two doses, when they do it twice, it's significantly better. And it doesn't just do that. Rick Perry, who was the Republican former governor of Texas, was staunchly anti drugs. He's said this is his main focus in life now is to promote this. This is his goal in life because he did it. And he had an incredible reaction to it. And he knows so many veterans who have done it. It's incredible for PTSD. Somehow or another, it has neural regenerative properties where he went there and they said he went to his doctor before and you know, Dr. did a whole scan of his body and he said, look, you've got a certain amount of age-related brain atrophy. It's like it's fine. But you know, normal that you're 73 years old or 74 years old. So he goes and does the Ibogaine. Seizes doctor a short time afterwards and the doctor says it's 25% less atrophy than when you got the last scan. And he explains to him the whole Ibogaine thing. He goes back six months later. It's all gone. He has no brain atrophy anymore, which is bananas. So it's regenerating brain tissue. It's making his brain work better. And it's just a pharmaceutical company's haircut on that shit out. Well, they didn't like it. They didn't like that I bypass them and went straight to Trump and told them about the betrump was very open to it. He said, what are you looking for? You're looking for FDA approval? Like, let's do it. Like, that's literally what he said. And then a week later, we were at the White House and he was signing it. So it's incredible. But if so many veterans have had to go over to mostly Mexico, but Costa Rica, there's a bunch of different places that they go where they can have these Ibogaine retreats. And these guys have had incredible results. Marcus Lattrell, he had an incredible result from it. He had a real problem drinking. You know, obviously he's the guy that alone survivor, the movies based on his experiences over in Afghanistan. So this guy, you know, he's he's done it. He's gotten over it because of that. Like there's a long, long, Sean Ryan, long list of guys who have had this experience and they completely changed them. Wow. Dakota Meyer did it. So many of these guys did it. And because of those, their stories, because all these veterans, then it like kind of opened up the idea to a lot more right wing people that would maybe be like more hesitant to accept something like this. Then on top of it, no recreational use. Like no one's like, boy, can't wait to do that again. Everybody's like, holy shit, this sucked. I diarrhea. I threw up. I felt. Except something like this. Then on top of it, no recreational use. Like no one's like boy, can't wait to do that again. Everybody's like, holy shit, this sucked. I diarrhea. I threw up. I felt I was horrified for fucking 12 hours. Apparently it just takes you through every aspect of your life. Like review like a movie. All the times you've ever hurt people. You see it from their perspective. Like yeah, it's like very it's a very dark experience for a lot of people. Especially a lot of people have fucked up a lot of their life. You know? Wow. Yeah. But if those people had access to Obgane, all these homeless people, then you see strung out. If instead of just giving them needles in an iPhone and like profiting off of it, if somehow or another, these assholes can figure out a way to profit off of these centers where you could bring people in and give them Ibogame retreats. Maybe that would be a nice little fucking exit strategy for all these grifters that have been profiting off of the homeless industrial complex or so long. Yeah. They're not trying to solve problems. No. No, they're trying to make money. That's what I was saying earlier when we were talking about charities. That's the saddest thing that I have come to the realization that most non-profits are fucking scams. Like most of them. Most of them. And this guy was like reading off like the average amount that these people that are in charge of the homeless program in LA are making is it's extraordinary amount of money. It's a great living. They're not doing it because it's like some sort of very charitable thing that they really want to save the world and help you. No, they're making tons of money. They're performative entrepreneurs. If you think about it, come up with a problem, then go pitch some version of care and solution to a government and take the fucking money and never solve the problem. Because as soon as you solve the problem, and if you do somehow accidentally solve it, then go find another one. Yeah. And I think that's one of the reasons why shows like Yellowstone in particular that show like people that are proud to work hard and really get like deep satisfaction out of that life. And there's something about that that really like resonates with people. Like there's a better way than just bullshitting people. There's a better way than fraud and nonsense and all this political horseshit that's pumped down your throat every day. No, how about a fucking just a sleeping bag and the stars? How about that? Just lying there with your horse tied to a tree? Isn't that really what everybody wants? Isn't it? Doesn't really everyone to cook their dinner over a fire and laugh with all their because that's what they really want. That's just really something simple. Something real. It's not that simple because it's hard to do all that shit, but there's something about it that's pure. It's pure. There's no advanced or butts. You spend a lot of time outside. And the entire thing's an endeavor. If you go on, you go bow hunting, you're going to practice, prepare before you go, then you're going to hike your S in somewhere. You're going to have to set up a camp. And all of these are tasks before you even go on to do the thing you went there to do, which is going to be another task. But the completion of them is the reward. And the fact that you're doing it yourself, everything done yourself. I think that's and that's why people are so attracted to the life. That's where I've got, you know, third generation cowboys that went and got a degree in ranch management to come back and make, you know, $3,000 a month and couldn't be happier. It's wild, isn't it? It's really wild. We think about it. It's wild what people actually gravitate towards. Because they say that if you've ever seen that Werner Herzog documentary, Happy People. No. It's called Happy People Life in the Tiger. And it's all about these trappers that live on the Tiger River in Siberia. And all these people do is trap and hunt and fish. They don't have any other way to make a living. That's all they do. And they're so fucking happy. And they're all laughing together and drinking together and hanging out with their dogs and their dogs or sled dogs. And so they're on snowmobiles and the dogs are chasing behind them and the dogs hunt with them. And these fucking people have like zero mental illness. And when they're talking to them, they're talking in Russian. So it's all translated. But what they're talking about, like the way they talk, it's like that this is how you're supposed to live. This is real life. And they're all happy. There's a guy. I'm going to get his name wrong. It's like premature, something like that. And he in the 60s. Dick Premikin. Premikin, that's it. Yeah. Yeah. The guy lived in Alaska. Yeah. Yeah. Went up, said bucket. Yeah. Went up into the way into the wild and built by hand, a cabin and lived there and in document that brought us a little super great camera, whatever, film the whole thing. Yeah. And films himself. I mean, he lived for 35 years. He was 80 something years old when he finally was too old to get through another winter when he came down. And he just built this cabin and just lived on the fish, grew potatoes. There it is. Yes. Brenneki, Proneki, that's how you say his name. P-R-O-E-E. If you have a watch that documentary, it is fascinating. It's amazing. Yeah. Look at the different. What is it? Oh, they know this. They've, but why they show this 2023. This guy, when he documented all of it, you know, it's so attractive. There's something about the way he's living. He's by himself, which is also wild. Like, how do you not get lonely? No, there's that. I mean, I'd lose my fucking marbles. I need people. I need to talk to somebody. I don't think I'd be liking that. But I don't know. But it's so attractive. But the notion of that kind of self-reliance. Yeah. No, there's something about it. It's like deeply ingrained in our DNA. It's not just that. It's like, it's a healthy interaction with the wild world. There he is. Look at that guy. Made all that shed himself. That's what's crazy. Yeah. The whole, the whole thing. I mean, he made his own tools. He made his own. It's really why. I think he was, oh, wasn't he a lumberman or something like that? I can't remember if he was. Look at fucking pretty. That is my God. This is right in front of his house. He just built a house out there. Alaska is amazing, man. I mean, the winners can suck at dick, but the just the actual being there in the place and the people are, they're clearly like extraordinary people. Like, when you go, it just even hanging out on a bar in Anchorage, like you guys are different. They're like more reliable. You know, the matter's dirty or people. No matter where you live in Alaska, you're going to have to be tough. Yeah. You have to be. And they were laughing about some guy who got stomped to death by a moose because he was throwing snowballs out in town. Like, that's something you guys have to think about. You might get stomped to death in front of the ATM machine. Or maybe maybe don't throw a fucking snowball at a thousand pound animal. Yeah. Well, you can catch a cow with their calves and she'll stomp. Oh, yeah. So it's a book. Prennicki says he turned his back on a tedious on tedious 50 hour work weeks and moved to Alaska to do a thing to completion. He built the cabin when he was 51 and lived there for more than 30 years. Wow. Wow. Where is that area? The Twin Lakes in Lake Clark National Park. There's another guy that lives up there that lives near the Arctic Circle. Vice guy to travel did a piece on him years ago. It's the same kind of deal. He lives in a cabin and he's been up in that cabin since the 1970s. He didn't he never saw 9-11. He saw photograph of it years later. He's just been up there in the woods. All he does is he hunts caribou and he has them all like hanging up like frozen because it's frozen outside like that's outside is his cooler. And while they're there, grizzly tries to steal a stash and he has to shoot the grizzly. It's like it's crazy. Really. What's that called? It's called a vice guy to travel and it's Heinmose Arctic adventure is the video series. And what's interesting, this is like the early days of vice when vice was really cool. And they get this fucking nerd with glasses probably from like Williamsburg who flies out to Alaska to hang out with this guy. And the guy, they say like these journalists were like hardcore. These young kids were they knew they were doing something kind of crazy. And they would go to war zones like that's how Tim Poole started out. These guys would go to the fucking war zones and get shot at it. They had bulletproof vests on it shit. They'd be doing investigate like real investigative reporting. And so this guy did just really went up there and hung out with this dude in Alaska for like a week and was talking to him. It's like what's what's so great about this. And he's a very intelligent guy. He's not the guy who's this guy Heinmose. See if you find that. Did you find it? I was looking around. I mean, there's still posting stuff. There's a Alaska Alaska. Excuse me. The last Alaskans. Oh, he's still posting stuff. They have a YouTube channel. Oh, wow. Heimoh and Edna. Oh, wow. He looks older now. If they're talking about podcasts here a second ago. Uh, interesting. They're talking about podcasts. Our podcast. Oh, because we talked about him. I don't know. I'm just like this. Your picture popped up. That's it. That's me talking about him. Yeah. See if you could find the vice guy to travel because that's where I found out about him. So this guy's he's like one of the last people that's allowed to live up there. He has like a notice posted on his his cabin because he's grandfathered in. I don't think you could build a cabin up there anymore. That's not this is afterwards 15 years ago. He might be it. But I think it's called Heinmose Arctic Adventure. Yeah. Heimoh. Heimoh. Chaimo's Arctic Refuge. That's the article. The vice website isn't really one of the most well kept things on the internet these days. Um, put in Arctic adventure. I'm guessing that the article was the first thing and then they went and followed up to make a video. And that's what this is. Yeah. I don't know. Yeah. Maybe that's it. Yeah. See, it's it's presents Heimoh's Arctic Refuge. Right. That's probably it could have just changed name on YouTube. I think they did or maybe I remember it wrong. Either way, this guy's premise is that this is really how you should live. This is how people. Yeah. That's the guy. So he's looking nerdy cat. Is hanging out. He looks so out of place. Yep. This is it. And he's got this caribou that he shot and they're hanging frozen and he just saws off a piece. And throws the frozen stakes onto the grill, cooks it over wood. And this is how this guy lives. And that's all he eats. He's just eating caribou and salmon. And he lives up there all year round, man. And it's I mean, he's just very happy. And that this is the weird part about it is how happy people who live like this are. So I think that's, you know, a brain. That's how we're designed to exist with nature. Yeah. Designed to be hunter gatherers. You know, we still have the same DNA as people who live tens of thousands of years ago. And you know, cities started what maybe 10,000 years ago in some form. Right. Yeah. Depending on who you ask, you know, I think we're a little wrong with that too. I think they're starting to change their perspective of when actual civilization emerged because of stuff like go backly, tapi and turkey. They found these immense structures that are 11,800 years old that were buried. That this guy who was like, I think it was a sheep herder in the 90s found it. Yeah. I found like a stone that was like sticking out of the ground weird and he kicked it with his boots like knock it some dirt off and then he brought in some archaeologists and then they discovered this massive complex. These like huge circles of giant stone columns of 3D animals carved in them. And they carbon dated the ground and it was intentionally covered up somewhere around 11,000 plus years ago. So they're like, really? Yeah. So like, what the fuck is this? Like they didn't even know like what the civilization was like, why did they build this? What's the purpose of it? There's a lot of people that debate whether or not what's depicted on it is a calendar. Is it a marking of an event? Does it show the flood? Like what is this? It's weird stuff, man. Like really weird stuff. And I think there's more of that than you'd like to that makes people comfortable. And archaeologists are very hesitant to accept it. But that hold that whole deal, right? Like your relevance being upon you discovered this thing. Yeah. When they found the the Clovis point and so then we're dating everything off of that and anyone finding anything else is going to render that guy's discovery less important. Yeah. And you know, there was at one point we thought there was this logical evolution of man from Homo erectus into Homo sapiens. And now we know that there were at least four, maybe five, species of humanoid living at the same time. It just fucking, at least five. Not only that, it's like really difficult to make a fossil. Most people are going to die and their bones are going to be gone within a hundred years. Yeah. It's just what we've been able to find and we're basing an entire science upon incredibly incomplete discoveries. We're basing entire science on a very limited number that can even possibly exist. Like I think if you take into account how many dinosaur bones they've found and then how many dinosaurs existed? And for how many hundreds of millions of years dinosaurs existed? And you realize like, oh, like most shit doesn't make a fossil. So we don't even know how many different dinosaurs that we've even, I mean, they just discovered a new one recently. We don't even know how many existed that we never found fossilized. Yeah. If they didn't run through some lava pit or tarpet or something, how would you know? And every so often some new form of ancient human pops up and we're like, oh, what's this one? What the fuck is this one? This is weird ones. They're all over the place. It's a fucking ton of them. The Dennis Olvins, the one in, I believe it was in China, the big-headed people. They're quite a bit larger. These are in Texas. Yeah, that's good. Dinosaur Valley State Park. Wow. It's Glen Rose, Texas. That's crazy. How crazy is that? Look at those footprint. That's so nuts. That is so nuts. The dinosaur left those. How long ago 113 million year old dinosaur tracks? What the fuck man? And you know, we're just lucky. So what is he, what, that thing and how much did it fucking way to imprint into that, which is now granite, right? But at the time, it's probably some mixture of mud and ash from a volcano that came together. Right, probably some version of that. Right. I wonder what the animal was. Do they know which dinosaur it was? I'm not sure one here. I don't know if it's the one, I guess that's the one they assumed was there. God, those footprints are so dope. That's so wild. One of who the first guy I found that was. It was discovered after a drought. So that's even cooler. So it was underneath the water the whole time. And then they're like, oh, the river dried up completely in most locations live for more tracks to be uncovered here in the park. Wow. That's sick. That's the animal. Believe to be, I don't know yet. They wouldn't know for sure. Belonged the two types of dinos, including aqua can can't throw sores. Yeah. I don't think they've found any fossils or anything to be for the record. That's even just crazy. Right. All you find is the feet. Think about how many died there. Think about how many just got eaten by other animals and shit out and I mean, most stuff that lives, I mean, you know as well as anybody. You very rarely find skeletons in the woods. No, the mice are going to eat them. Yeah. Something's going to eat most of what you find in the woods within a couple of years. Everything's gone. But like most of the last time, it'll give you a hunter good luck finding a dead mountain line. They must die. They must die. I don't know anybody's found a dead one. I never found one. I never seen one. Those thousands of them. Big die. Where are they? Fucking nature takes care of everything. And that's what would happen to most fossils. That's why most fossils don't happen. I mean, when people die, they don't get fossils. Because a 1908 local school boy found some of these. Wow. Look at the size of those next to that dude. That's crazy. Imagine you ran home and tried to tell your parents. They would even know what dinosaurs really were at that back then. Well, there's a lot of people today that don't even think dinosaurs are real, which is hilarious. There's so many knuckleheads online. But I mean, we don't, we have a very limited amount of information that we're basing our entire history. Or plan what do you describe that as a 1910 three toad giant lizard? I don't even know how would you even be sure that that was a footprint. I'm looking at this. Then you got to tell everybody else in the town to come follow you out there to find it. Right. In 1910, did they even have drawings of dinosaurs? Well, I would think they would have found some of the bones. I'm sure. I think we figured that out. I think we talked about that. Didn't they first start finding them in the 1800s? Isn't that what it was? But yeah, it's not. I mean, if you think about how many different things died and just were absorbed by the earth, just get eaten, shit out, swallowed up, just destroyed by time and erosion and never became fossils. We're basing the entire history of the planet on a limited amount of information. And that information, it never gets younger. It always gets older. The more stuff they found, like they found a modern version of human beings that pushes the timeline of humans back another three or 400,000 years. And that keeps happening. Well, they thought that people crossed the Bering Land Bridge 12,000, 14,000 years ago. And now they've pushed that back 10,000 years. Yeah, they found those footprints in White Sands, New Mexico. And those are 22,000 years old. took a giant flood to come wash away layers of sediment. That's what somebody around it, I guess. Wow. And then they started digging. That's fucking cool. That is so cool. And this is in 1952, they did that. No, no, 1908. Nine to eight. Pictures are from 1952. Okay. It must have just kept maybe it flooded again 50 years later. Flooded to happen here fast. When did they first figure dinosaurs? Like what was the first year a dinosaur bone was discovered? On your ranch, do you find like a lot of like arrowheads and like Native American stuff? The one I grew up on everywhere. Yeah. Every time I did rain, you'd find these points. That's it. It thralls me. It's so fascinating. You pick up some arrow. I found one in Nevada while I was on a mule deer hunt. I was in the high desert. We found this little tiny thing. I looked down. I go, oh my God, it's a fucking head. And you just think, some dude who knows how many hundreds of years ago shot thousands of years. We found a bunch and my mother took him to Fort Worth to the museum and they dated them and some of them. And they could look at them and they'd know various styles. Right? And they go, oh, this was made by this is 2,200 years old. It's sure thousands of years old. This is when they started doing this. We have one here. I have one here somewhere. It's a big one too. 1677 was when the first scientifically recorded dinosaur bone was described. Although it says they've been digging people have been digging them up for thousands of years. But they didn't know what the fuck it was. This one that he says he even thought it belonged to a giant human. And then this was one for me. Yeah. Look at that. Yeah, friend of mine got that off of his ranch. I've read me warrant told me that's probably one they used for fishing because it was so big interesting. Yeah, I thought so too. It was like, that's interesting. Because I guess when you're dealing with old bows that didn't have a whole lot of power, they really wouldn't want a big wide cut because you wouldn't get enough penetration to get through the rib cage unless you're really close. This would be more in a spear. No, it would be an arrow. It would just be something that you shot at a fish because it's easier to penetrate than like say a buffalo. Right. Where they would use a smaller head. They're just trying to get penetration. That's fascinating. I have some just amazing thing. You're finding just this piece of ancient history where people had no internet, no books, no nothing. Just flint napping and using tendons. Yeah. And then trying to practice with those bows. Figuring how to do it while you're on horseback too. That's amazing. Wow. So when you grew up on the ranch, you grew up. You'd find them all the time. All the time. What was the oldest shit you found? I can't remember, but I remember it being thousands of years old, a few thousand years old. But we had, my mother had this wicker basket that was like this big and it was full of arrows. Wow. You'd find them just toss them in there. That's crazy. It just makes you think like how long did people live on that land? How many hundreds, thousands of years did people live on that land? Yeah. Yeah. And or pass through or have battles or fucking knows. Yeah. Or when you find them like we found them, I mean, every single time it rained, there was this stock tank behind our house and maybe it's half mile up to the stock tank. We walked that road and you could find four or five. So was that a trading depot? Was that some place where people went to trade? And then I always think like, how do you lose? As hard as they must be to make? Right. You'd think once you've shot that arrow, you're going to go look for the arrow. Yeah. Because you spent hours making this. They must have shot so many for so long. They might, I mean, they probably shoot them every day. They probably had somebody back at camp making them every day. Yeah, it's probably some guy that that's his skill. Yeah. Maybe that maybe when people got older, they couldn't, couldn't, couldn't run. Right. You know, maybe they set back and right. Yeah. And that guy makes the arrows and maybe somebody else makes the bows and this guy's going out and shooting the deer and bringing them back. When you're doing a show like 1823, how much research did you have to do to try to get that right? Because that was, in my opinion, one of the best theatrical things that I ever watched movie or television show that I feel like nailed what it must have been like to try to travel across the country, to be a civilized person living in the city, and try to make your way across the country and just experience the wild shit those people saw. Well, there's a few things. So a lot of research. But interestingly, I had my family had come one side of my family had come from Kentucky to Texas in the 1840s and whatever great great grandmother, journaled. Wow. It's a hit the journal. A holy shit. And then I started finding other journals. There wasn't, you know, some were published and reading about, you know, just how fucking dangerous it was. If you think about it, rivers were the most terrifying thing crossing rivers because no one swam, no one could swim. And most of the most of the people who came into either the port of New Orleans or Galveston, they were European. They were German, a lot of Germans. There were a lot of Central Europeans that came and they were promised free land, right? There would be travel agencies that they would arrange the entire trip with before they've even left Germany or Croatia or wherever they were. And so by the time that they landed in Galveston, they would meet up with their group and the group would, you know, they have chipped in all this amount of money and they've got guides and they would have already arranged for mules or horses and wagons and off they go. And they had no idea. A lot of men never fucking ridden a horse in their life. Much less fired a gun, much less, you know, they're in a completely foreign area. Like they don't, and they landed in Texas. Most of them heading to Oregon because that area was the most similar to where they were from in Central Europe. And then, you know, for whatever reason, they didn't, some didn't get that far. Some maybe never got past Waco or Fort Worth or wherever. And then off they went. And the dangers were from obviously rivers and sun exposure, disease. Obviously there were issues with bandits and the Native American tribes, depending on the time of year, the era, right, by the 80s that was largely not an issue, the 1880s. But bandits share a real issue. Because there's no rule of law. Right. Right. And we can look at, there's plenty of bad people doing awful shit today. And we got all sorts of laws. Now imagine if those people had the wherewithal to go to a place to where there's no laws. No law and no enforcement, no help, no nothing. You're on your own. You're on your fucking own. And there was a bunch of people that had been living like that for decades, just fucking people up waiting for you. Just waiting for you. Waiting for you. Here they come. Let's get them. And that was what their thing was. Yeah. No, so river crossings were incredibly dangerous. And then trying to, if you didn't have an experienced guide, you're fucked. Truly fucked. Because you could pick the wrong way and run out of water, go wander around on the circle. You get up there on the great plains to where it's flat and there's and you don't know how to read the sun. You don't know where you're going. People go out there and make giant circles. Yeah. I was reading something about that the other day that people tend to, for whatever reason, always walk in a counterclockwise direction when they get lost. And that even if they're left footed or right-handed or left-handed, it doesn't seem to matter. Humans when they walk, if they get lost, like in the woods, they walk in circles and they almost always walk in a counterclockwise direction. And so it's article was explaining that if you find yourself lost and you think you're running into the same places, most likely you should veer towards the right because you're most likely looping towards the left for whatever reason. People tend to do that. One of this is like a scientific explanation. If you put that in perplexity, see why people move in a counterclockwise? I didn't. I didn't. I didn't understand. I didn't understand where you are. But you know, but I never understood getting lost. Well, you must have learned how to use a compass early. Yeah, or the sun. If the sun comes up in the morning and you're facing it, right? Then behind you is west. So your left is north to your right is south. Some people have zero experience in the woods, though. People tend to loop off in counterclockwise when lost because small errors in our internal sense of straight ahead accumulate. And humans also have a subtle left turn counterclockwise bias whose exact cause is still unclear. Isn't that weird? Wow. That's so weird. In lab and field experiments, blindfolded people tend to walk straight without landmarks. Almost always end up curving into large loops instead of moving in a straight line. People told rather to walk straight without landmarks. Wow. This happens because without internal clues, or external clues like the sun, distant objects, or visible path, small random errors in balance and body feedback build up into. Happens because without internal clues, or external clues like the sun, distant objects, or visible path, small random errors in balance and body feedback build up until the path bends enough to close into a circle. Wow. That's got to be so disheartening, even walking for days. And then you pass the same dead tree, and you're like, oh my God, we walked in a fucking circle. Pedestrians everywhere exhibit a counterclockwise bias. Wired to walk counterclockwise. During COVID, scientists studying social distancing noticed people seem to prefer moving counterclockwise. That's so weird. Tendency is fundamentally individual rather than a collective. What does that mean? So every individual does it, I guess, rather than a group of people just following the leader. Pretty wild. So when people get lost, but some people have just zero experience being in the woods at all. And they just don't know where to go. They're just, they're just fucking freak out. And then they panic, because they think what's out there? Oh my God, I wanna die. Yeah. And you realize that once you're out there, the nature does give a fuck if you make it. No, it doesn't care at all. No. It's heartless, completely oblivious to your desire to stay alive. It's not interested in what you want to do at all. Nope. Nope, not at all. It's ambivalent. But that's also part of the beauty of it, right? Yeah. When you're out there, especially if you take yourself seriously. Yeah. You're out there, you're like, oh, I ain't shit. It'll test you. Yeah. When you're writing a thing like 1823, like you're doing all this research and you read the diaries from, you said your great-grandmother, great-great-great-grandmother. Did you, did you ever think like putting some of those letters online so other people can read them? No. There's plenty of, there's any number of published books of very similar journals. I don't, but if you kind of dope for people to read about your great-great-grandmother. Yeah, nothing happened, right? It's so interesting. It's so interesting. We've had freaking whatever weird shit they had for dinner that night and so-and-so was rude. And it was, that is, and we stopped in this beautiful valley and it was hard to get across the river and I was scared. But no attacks, no, it was pretty uneventful. They got lucky. It's interesting, just as a window into time. Yes. Well, what's interesting really is how well-written the journal was. Because everyone was very educated. Was better educated. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And yeah, that's weird, right? When you read like civil war letters, they're like, why are these guys all fucking smart? I've letters from my grandfather, who died in World War II, love letters from him to his, to my grandmother, years of them. Because, you know, he, they listed in 1941. And then went off and became a, they flew a, I guess it was the B19, so a bomber. And yeah, and wrote all these letters to her. Yeah, and I have all those and they're just magnificent. Just the way that people would just be so eloquent in a letter to, you know, your wife. Yeah, might be love it. They were in different things like that. Yeah. Is weird, like the deterioration of our ability to express ourselves, the common person's ability to express themselves. Like you wouldn't have expected that back then, I bet. If you could tell people about the future, oh, you're going to have the answer to any question on your phone. You have a small device in your pocket. It's also access a flashlight. You're going to be able to pick that thing up and ask in anything you want. And instantaneously, it's going to give you a result. But, oh, people must be brilliant. No, no, they're half retarded. Because they didn't learn anything, right? You can ask a machine, the machines don't all the learning. You just get an answer that you didn't earn, right? That's the word, earn. Yeah. Yeah. Just like equity. The problem with equity is you didn't earn it. Yeah. The problem with having the same results as everybody else when you don't put the same effort. People in the 1800s often spend blocks of time, typically one to three hours at a stretch on letter writing. And heavy correspondence, because easily spend several hours most days. Wow. Most people treated correspondence as a regular daily or weekly task, similar to a modern email block, accepting that it would be take a significant chunk of their time. Wow. I mean, how important was the fucking mailman back then? Everything. Guy was everything. Everything. Some dude on a horse with a fucking bag of letters for a quarter. I mean, how much did they charge? A quarter was a lot of money back then. Probably was less than that. Yeah. It's probably half a penny or something if they had a, well, they did have a half penny. How much do you enjoy writing that kind of a show versus writing a show like Lioness or like landman? Like, what is your, do you have a favorite or do you like all of them? No, I can't say I have a, I have a favorite necessarily. You know, the fun thing about lioness, which is sort of, I can't say it's ripped from the headlines because I don't, I've tried to be, um, I've tried to guess what's going to happen politically and then fictionalize that. Um, and the fact that I've managed to be right, it's a pretty fucking file. I thought surely in season two when I, when I said that the cartels had been listed as terrorist organizations, I'm like, this, this could be my 18 month cancel vacation coming. Um, and then it fucking happened. And then it came out, you know, the show came out within weeks of that and, and I looked, I looked really like a suit there. Um, so that it, it's a lot of fun because it's so political and it's not, it doesn't choose a political side. It just looks at the trade craft of espionage and, and how it's, it's intermingles with our military and, and it's just fascinating shit to me. Just fascinating. But there's so many different things that you have to be aware of to write the shit that you write. You know, like, um, is the Harrison Ford one 1923? That one is fascinating too. Because you got the guy who goes off to Africa and, you know, and he comes back and you got all these people that are trying to steal land. So it's not totally lawless, but it's on the border of lawlessness. Yeah. You're, you're watching, you know, Montana in the 20s was fascinating. It was a fascinating place because you've got the 20th century, the industrial revolution in full swing. You have washing machines and refrigerators and telephones and electricity and then you still, you're still traveling my horseback. Yeah. So it, it very, very interesting. And so, so that, that's a really fun thing to explore. That was the evil rich guy on that show. Oh, yeah. I killed Tim Bolton. Oh my God. That's right. Tim Dalton, who was bond at one point. Yeah. Yeah. Crazy. Yes. But, but, oh, it's twisted. So good. Yeah. I forgot it was Tim Dalton. That's how good it was. Yeah. My wife watched that and looked at me like, how do you think that's shit up, dude? Like, I got the side eye for a couple of scenes where she's like, bro. What are you thinking? Yeah. This is a couple of scenes I wondered myself. Yeah. I was like, this is rough. Like, that's evil. Some of the SNM stuff is like, she's twisted. She's gross. She twisted. But there's people like that in the world. 100%. Yeah. I had to re, I'll tell you what, my computer, I just assume that the CIA and FBI have like a whole team because the shit I look up when I'm researching. I'm like, how to make a bomb. SNM practice. CIA hot regions in the Middle East and it's all at once, right? Yeah. Yeah. There's no way you're not looking at your phone. Oh, they're looking at it going. Yeah. Taylor's writing something new. Look at this. I think anybody that has an influence, they probably look at your phone. It's a influence, they probably look at your shit no matter what. Which is also dark. Like, we don't even know how much actual real spying on people is occurring. Which is guessing. No, we don't have any idea. I think within the world of tradecraft a tremendous amount. Oh, yeah. I think within the world of, I mean, within that world, I think. When you're writing that, how difficult is it to really keep your finger on the pulse of what's actually going on with espionage and what tools they actually have available? You making some up? No. I mean, I'm sure there is some extremely high tech tradecraft going on, right? For sure. Tracking devices and various things, satellite imagery, facial recognition, all of these things. But a lot of it's also very low tech by design because it's harder to trade. space, right? And it's a lot of leverage and manipulation. You're either bribing someone with money or black milling them. And that's typically those are the two tools that are being used the most in tradecraft and the spy game, right? That's really, it's leveraging individuals. And they're all doing it. Everybody, right? Every single. And then if you look at some of the, and again, I'm not getting on any completely apolitical. But from a tradecraft standpoint, what the Mossad was able to do with all those fucking cell phones and pagers and shit? Not. You want to talk about play the long game, like build this dummy company, sell all these get all these devices to all of these people who are your enemy. And start setting them off years later. Create that, Nate. Insanity. It means genius. It really is. Insanity. Not endorsing it. No, but if you, the actual act of doing it to look incredibly, the patience and the planning and the risks and that they were able to execute that is shocking. When you saw that in the news, did you think if I wrote that, no one fucking buy it? Dude, I do that all the time for news. The Maduro rate, if I'd written that. Right. Right. They were like, that's too simple to fuck out of here. Somehow it goes down. Even the button had been a lot and ready to helicopter crashed. Yeah. Yeah. The fact that they were able to, and I know it wasn't as smooth as it was led on to be, but the fact that no one died, not an American invading the Venezuelan military base in the middle of karaka, it's fucking insane. It seems like it went pretty smooth. Do you think it went less smooth than they're saying? I'm sure that there's elements of like, I'm sure. Right. I don't know how, the one thing I've learned with all my research into the military is any of these operations. There's actually a line in the upcoming line is where someone says that it goes smooth and the guy says, well smooth as these things go. Right. Because just by the very nature, you start sticking a bunch of people in helicopters with guns and, you know, shit's going to happen. Right. But the fact that there were no casualties that no one was killed, no American was killed is incredible. Yeah, it is incredible. It's pretty groundbreaking. This is a new benchmark for what could be possible in terms of an invasion, at least of a third world country. It's just shocking to difference in the technology that the United States possessed versus them. And whether or not they were even available, that's no new rather that stuff was available. Yeah. So, it's a very, very quickly with drones, AI and drones are going to alter the landscape of war. We're getting real close to some Terminator shit. Yeah. And I'm not saying that like it's a good thing. No. It's a very, very, you talk about adolescence of us as a species. We're seeing an adolescence in the teenage years of new type of warfare. And when it grows up, it is going to be a beast. A beast. And I just think about it. You can, you know, now they've got drones that are the size of airplanes. They can have a payload that is devastating, right? Beyond just simply a predator drone that's got a couple of health armistles or whatever it may have. And someone sitting in a conax in the desert in Nevada can fly that thing halfway around the world or don't have anyone fly it pre-programmed and the thing flies itself. And that's, you give, give the drone a mission and send the drone off to do the mission and it's fully automated. Yeah. And that's some terrifying shit. I bet a lot, that's a lot of what this UAP shit is too. I bet it's experimenting with that type of technology with some sort of a novel propulsion system. Because they were working on novel propulsion systems way back in the 50s and the 60s. They were working on anti-gravity in the 60s. I don't think we're there. I don't know. I don't think we're there. I don't know. I don't know where we're at. I don't know where we're at, but I'm not convinced. I'm not convinced that they haven't done something. In fact, Eric Weinstein makes some really interesting connections between there's a college in upstate New York University in upstate New York that has a very overqualified physics department and it's connected to a hedge fund that does bigger than Bernie made off type numbers. And he's like the whole thing stinks to high heaven. And he goes, and I have a feeling that there's some sort of an undisclosed or a top secret above, you know, top secret access program that's going on. Oh, I can promise you. There's something. Yeah. I always thought a possible solution to petroleum as far as transportation goes. And I wonder why they've never tried it is using magnetic force. Right? If you have a positive and negative charge, you're going to come together. But if you take a positive and positive or negative negative, they're going to, I'm no fucking scientist, but you know, it's going to repel. Right? We're taking magnets and they push each other away. How can we not use that if you had a vehicle and the base of it is essentially a positive charge or a negative, whatever it takes to make the magnets repel. And then your road base was essentially the similarly charged metal. Wouldn't that make it some Mitch? Wouldn't you have to redo all the roads to make something like that? Or put it in the road? Yeah, maybe. And it certainly could be a potential source of transportation for the future. But I think the things that they're doing now probably relates to some sort of anti-gravity propulsion system. And then there was that, you know, I'm sure you're aware of this. All those scientists that went missing or want to be murdered. Yeah. How fucking sketchy is that? All of its coincidence. From Los Alamos all there at the nuclear. Yeah. Coincidence. Yeah. Who knows? I mean, who knows what the fuck those people are working on? And whether or not they made breakthroughs and they don't want other people to know or whether or not they want to stop the breakthrough because they're aligned with whatever the conventional propulsion systems are and they don't want to lose money. This thing makes them obsolete. They get set back the science for a few years. Or is it trade craft? Is it Russian or Chinese or Iran? It's very correct. Yeah. Oh, sure. I think that Weinstein was saying is like it's really shocking how little these incredibly important scientists are protected. Yeah. That is fucking driving their Volvo to the university and working on top secret shit. Yeah. And no one's making sure they don't get whacked by China. Yeah. Yeah. I'd be curious. And when they look into that, what was it? 11 of them in a year? 15 over a course of a few years. And some of them people are not there going out. This could be coincidence. But there's a few of them where it's like, okay, these people like this lady was specifically working on spacecraft metallurgy. This guy was specifically working on cold fusion. This guy was specifically like there's a bunch of them where you go, okay, something's weird, something's weird here. Yeah. But enough to the fact that the government's looking into it, okay, there might be something here. So justice departments investigating it and trying to figure out what the connection is and what could have happened. But it's hard after the fact to try to figure out who did something, especially if somebody got hired from another country, like they're not going to tell you, like, how are you going to know? You didn't catch them? Did you not catch them when they killed the guy? Okay, well, you're probably fucked. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's 15. Yeah. And they're all from that area. Aren't they Los Alamos around? I don't know. I'm not sure. I think that's part of the problem. It's like there's whenever you have a thing like this where people start looking for connections, they can make some connections that aren't necessarily valid. And so let's say if there's 15, let's say 10 of them. 10 of them are bullshit. Yeah. That means five aren't bullshit. If, you know, if that's true, that's a lot. It's five super fucking brilliant people that got whacked. Yeah. And it's interesting that you'd have that many in this specific field in this period of time. Yeah. And they're not, you know, I would think of a scientist as being pretty fucking healthy. Right. And I don't know about that. I think a lot of them are just in their own head. You know, and they're probably not even paying attention to their body. Did they all disappear? Different people died from different things. And one of the one of the weirder ones was this one lady who was, I think she's the metallurgy lady where she was hiking with her friend. And they were just hiking together and the friend turned around to talk to her and she was gone. And she was just behind her like 30 seconds before they couldn't find her. They brought in gidabra dogs. They brought in search parties never found her. And they think they might have found her body recently. See, they found, I think there was a report a few days ago that they might have found her body. I'd be looking real close at the friend. Just as just me. That's just me. That's a guy right script. Hey, sir. So me and Joe would for a hike. I turned around the fuckers gone. Hey, I don't know why you looked everywhere before. I mean, I swear, I had just talked to him 30 seconds ago. And he's just not there. No sign of struggle. It's weird. Yeah. Yeah. Like a husband and wife go hiking and the lady falls off the cliff. They're like, hey, buddy. Yeah. What the fuck happened? You guys arguing? Can I see your text messages? Yeah. Yeah. Or the one that just fell off the boat. Oh, what happened there? I don't want to say it wrong. But I think she, I think she was out in the Bahamas. I read about it. She was a cruise ship one. No, no, no. Him and his lady and they're out on a sailboat or something. Oh, she would. The thing was the side. Yeah. He had to, yeah, something weird. Well, cause they're not buying it. It goes on way back to the Natalie Wood story. You ever look into that one? Oh, yeah. That's right. Her and walking and rubber Wagner on the. Yeah. And Robert Wagner and her had a big fight apparently. And then she just. Whoops. Yeah. Not the same person as the metallurgy. Which one is this lady? But she was one of the scientists. Correct. I believe she was one of the missing scientists. Which one was she? I don't know which ones are. What was her specialty? Does it just miss a lot? Does it say what she worked on? No. Administrative assistant. Yeah, I remember this lady. Yeah. The other one was her name is Resa. And the Resa one, that lady, she was the one that has the. So she serves as director of NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. And she was in the materials process. She's specialized in burn resistant high strength metal alloys and rocker propulsion metals. It wasn't she one that had like some weird videos. Was she had made? No. Anyway, oh, thanks for previous. Wow. She was hiking in the Angelies National Force. Yeah. Outside of Pasadena. Yeah. That could actually be a fucking mountain line. It could be. You know, or it could be a lady who's working on top secret rocket propulsion, bucking metals. Yeah. And like this lady's a problem. Was there some some town. I want to say it's Arcadia in California. They the the the mayor of that city. Yeah. Arcadia. Yeah. She's a Chinese spy. I would have to think if you're if you've heard how many people of you recruited that you finally go, well, fuck it. Let's try and get the mayor of Arcadia. We got everybody else. Yeah. They probably like worked her into position to run as mayor, you know, I mean. And then and then with the hopes of she was relatively young, right? Maybe you go run for a state wrap in the Congress and be the fucking president. There was there was a thing in the 70s called ab scam. Do you remember this? Yeah. Where there were all of these politicians, a few congressmen, some state reps. And they were all like Russian spies or or at least on the take, right, right. Yeah. So we had so we had spies. Did you ever see that show the Americans? Uh huh. I didn't either. What I heard it was great. It was all about sleep or sell Russian family that was pretending to be normal. Yeah. That's fascinating. Yeah. That's real. They did that. They really had Russian agents pretending to be American citizens. Oh, I wouldn't say had. I would say have. Oh, yeah. No. Yeah. I think you're right. Yeah. And Chinese. Yeah. For sure. For sure. 100%. Yeah. No, plenty of them. 100%. Yeah. Well, how many Israeli agents are in Hezbollah or in Hamas? Like probably or in the IRGC? Yeah. Probably. They probably got a bunch of those guys in that. 100%. Yeah. This is wild. Yeah. I can. It's tradecraft band. Yeah. Talkin' a whole other thing. How hard is it to write about that stuff and like get it right to get it accurate? Yeah. I mean, you, you, I don't know. You speculate a lot and you look at the past, right? Because there's been enough. It's funny because when they get caught, it's never that big deal. Like there are always some. It doesn't, for whatever reason, the news doesn't. We could pull it up. There's been any number of Chinese scientists over here and they were stealing this and they were like, oh yeah, we're doing this and it happens all the time. See the ones that got caught trying to bring in bio, they were trying to bring in, what were they trying to bring in diseases or something? Something was looking, there's another one in Vegas recently, but it's like they have these bio labs that are like being run out of like an apartment or something. CCP linked bio labs in American soil exposes major bio security gaps, policymakers, mucks act, improve oversight and biological research activity. Wasn't there a guy that got busted that was an Israeli agent and he got released and he took it up? I think it was in Vegas. Yeah. That's the one in Vegas. Yeah, so this guy, he had all these fucking diseases and it's garaged. 1,200 samples. Conclusion of the FBI lab that the community could not be harmed by what was contained in that lab. What? It's impossible biological laboratory in a garage inside investigators found refrigerators with vials containing unknown liquids. Police said in the immediate aftermath, the home is also operated as an unlicensed short-term rental. What is this fucking guy doing? So the question is, the question is, why do someone have these materials in a private resident, not a doctor, not a lab, not a licensed medical facility of any sort? And then homeboy got released. Yeah, but check out the names on some of the vials. Oh boy, they located pathogen labeled containers with labels such as Dengue fever, HIV and malaria along with a thousand mice or according to a federal report. Federal government never tested the items and the CDC only made its determination based on the labeling. What? What the fuck? So in that case, Chinese citizen David He faces federal charges for allegedly manufacturing and distributing misbranded medical devices. He does not face charges connected to the Las Vegas raid and a trial in California was scheduled for April. What the fuck? Just a bunch of vials of HIV and AIDS and fucking Dengue fever and malaria. No worries. Jesus. Normal. So what was the Israeli guy? The guy who owned the lab, there was like an Israeli guy who they caught who owned and then they released him and he went back to Israel and everybody's like, Hey, what? That's the same case I think. It says that feds drop case against man arrested and Las Vegas biolab investigation. What's his name? Ori Solomon. Oh, Ori. What were you doing? Ori. Ori, why do you have the HIV? Ori. There he is. It's drop case against man arrested and Las Vegas biolab investigation. Yeah. I mean, why investigate? Let it go guys. No big deal. Yeah, he's only charged with illegal possession of a firearm in the battle. His immigration status precluded him from owning or possessing a gun. Well, listen, if he doesn't have a gun, how the fuck is he going to defend all his malaria? People try to steal malaria, bro. He's going to be careful. Oh, boy. Yeah, this doesn't. Seems like someone made that go. There's too much fucking shit in the world to pay attention to and too much of it is so disheartening. The more you look into it, you more like, is it all fucked? Is the whole world fucked? Like what is going on? And my guess is because there are so many different two things. Right? There's so many different, there's no secrets with the internet and social media and phones and shit's getting out. But it's also getting out at such a volume that none of it seems to have an impact. Right. Right. Right. It's just so much. Right. Think about that in the 1990s. Right. They're talking about that on night line and this and that and meet the press and try to spy. That's sort of Israeli got there. You know? Uh-huh. That's news. But now it's just another. The news cycles of flood. It's like you drop a rose petal in the river while flood's going by. Like it's gone. Yeah. It's here. It's gone. And it's a sensory overload and people are tuning it all out. They're tuning it all out also because nothing ever gets done. Nothing happens. The more people like that get released, the more people like they throw their hands in there. They'd rather just watch sports. Yeah. Yeah. Just forget about it. Yeah. Well, I can't believe some issues should have been seen through my book. Yeah. I don't know what happened. But I'll listen to it on audio tape. I'm glad you did the audio tape, though. Yeah. That's important. Pull up the, you're going to fucking love it. It's oddly entertaining and informative. How did you have the time to write a book? So you're writing 150 different TV shows. So you know what it is. Do you know anything about it? No. Pull what I just wanted. I'm going to try and, I don't want to tell you what it's called. I just want you to see this. Okay. How did not die in prison? I told you you're gonna like it. So here's the, so here's the deal. So what I lived in LA, there was a gem on Beverly Boulevard. Write it like Beverly and Sweets or everybody called it buns on Beverly because they had all the, the treadmills kind of write up there and all the girls are there. Beverly Boulevard. Ride it like Beverly and Sweetser. Everybody called it Buns on Beverly because they had all the treadmills kind of right up there and all the girls are there. If you get stuck in traffic or staring at all their asses, that was my gem. So me and a buddy of mine shared an apartment together and we jogged down their work out every day. And there was this dude that showed up and started working out in there and this dude was jacked. But different than like the West Hollywood fit. this fucker was yoked and had all these crazy tattoos on them. And we became kind of like friendly and ended up kind of becoming friends. And his name is Tom Nelson. And one day I'm like, I said, wow, what have you been doing? Well, you know, I'm going to start a personal trend and start personal training here. I was working over at the vitamin shop. Guys, I can use 40s. Like, or in vitamin shop in your 40s. That's kind of weird. I said, yeah. Have you always lived in California? I said, well, I've been here 19 years, 20 years. Yeah. Yeah. I said, where are you from somewhere in the southeast? I said, you always live in LA. He goes, well, no, I just got to tell like, see, I've been in prison. I said, oh, how long? 17 years. I said, oh, I didn't ask anything else. He does become a personal trainer. And I'd see him over one day we have lunch and we're bullshitting. And then I'm like, tell me the deal. He's like, oh, I was a fucking criminal dude, like a criminal, like a real criminal, like a biggest drug dealer in Hollywood and armed robbery and ran over a DEA agent. Like I was a fucking criminal. But now, you know, when I was in, I discovered, you know, fitness. I started working out and I'm like, when I get out, I'm, you know, he got himself in good shape. I'm going to start. This is my passion. I'm going to do this. So he was a trainer there for a while and then he opened his own personal training gym. And, and I would go work out over there and hang out. I think he was a cool fucking dude. And, and it became the biggest private training gym in, in, independent in Hollywood. So I go off and I, you know, I start writing and I'm shooting Yellowstone. And he reaches out and he goes, hey, I wrote a movie about my life. I'm a synod to you. So he sends it to me and I read it and it's actually pretty good. But it's sort of a fun 90s kind of, they don't make movies like this anymore. It's like, it's the rock, but we're celebrating the, you know, the guy for the fucking criminal. But it was, but it was good. I said, hey, I'll pass it on to some producers, but nothing ever happened with it. Anyway, so COVID happens. I'm stuck up on this ranch in Montana and I call him and I say, Tom, where do you get your gym equipment from? I need to build a gym because we can't go to a gym. I can't leave the ranch. COVID restrictions, the whole fucking cast is stuck on that ranch. And, and he said, they shut my gym down, dude. So, I mean, I'll sell you anything you want. So I sent a flatbed trailer to LA and picked up a pile of gym equipment from it. And didn't hear from him again. He calls me maybe 18 months ago, two years. And I, and I answer and he's like, hey, man, I'm in a bad way. I'm like, what's the deal? I'm fucking, I got a single father, I got a five year old kid. I got fucking colon cancer. I'm fucking dying. And I don't, I'm, I'm tapped out, dude, I'm a fucking 60 year old fell and I can't get a job. I can't do anything. Is there any work on your movies or, or anything that I could do? And I said, well, first colon cancer, how bad? Like what stage, what's this is? I don't know. They saw it on the next rain, diagnosed me. And I said, well, let's deal with that shit first. So I fly him to Texas where I know people and I get him in and he sees a doctor. And fortunately the mass wasn't cancer. So they, they help him out. Do the surgery, get that done. And then I say, well, I mean, I get you a job on a movie, but it doesn't pay very good. And the hours are shit. And you've got a five year old daughter. I mean, you know, to just be a production assistant or something is not going to pay enough to off. It's not a great, that's not a plan, right? I guess you think you could like just spot me for a few months while I try and figure shit out. And I said, I have a hundred percent failure rate of learning money to friends. It doesn't work, right? I'm not a bank and buying you 90 days ain't go fucking out. So, but let me think, let me think of something. And so it doesn't take me very long. And I'm thinking, here is a guy who's been 17 years in prison. And you know what? I've never read. I've never read a how to not fucking die. I've a travel guy to prison. So I call him back and I go, I got it, Tom. We're going to write a book about my life. Kinda. We're going to write a travel guy to prison for the accidental inmate, right? Somebody fucks up and they end up and they don't know how to navigate this place. He goes to travel guy. I said, I'm going to send you. So I bought a bunch of lonely planted travel guy to Thailand in Mexico. And I said, look at these, right? It breaks it down. It tells you an overview of the country. Then it gives you a glossary of the terms. They teach you the language. They talk about the food. They talk about where you stay. They talk about navigating the country. We're going to do that for prison. And he goes, I'm in. I said, great. I'm going to write all the intros. I'll build the structure and walk you through it. And you're going to, so it's literally a travel guide to the country. travel guide to prison. And it walks you through day one, how to navigate the yard being processed in, the food, the commissary, the gangs, the diseases, prison riots, how to get a job in there, how to fucking make a shiv, how to do everything. It's a bit as a tour guide to prison. How many pages? A couple hundred. Sounds awesome. It's the crisis. I hope I never need it. No. Well, I must be able to read it. I hope they never need it. I'm going to guess 99% of the people who do read it. The one thing it'll do is tell you, you don't ever want to fucking go there. That's for sure. Right? And typically if someone's going there, I even say in the intro, I'm like, if you're buying this book because you're going to prison, finish the book before you get to prison. Do not bring this book with you to prison. Or you'll die on fucking day one. So leave the book at home. But yeah. So then we did. I took the, we wrote three chapters of it. I took it out. And Simon Schuster read it, flipped. And me and Tom got a book deal. That's awesome. So he, you know, he was able to sit with me and we wrote it. And he was able to take care of his kid. That's very cool. Yeah. Good for you, man, for doing that. That's really awesome. He did that. Yeah. Because I know you're busy shit. Like you having another project on your plate, not, not fun probably. That's awesome. That one was a lot of fun. Right. Yeah, but not fun to take something else on. I mean, I'm sure you. Yeah. But it was, it was a very entertaining diversion from, you know, from my other, you know, I can bitch about my other job, right? Bitch about something on land man or whatever. And then, you know, I'm going to sit down and oh, we're writing about smallpox today. Okay. There's, there's some perspective. It's not, it's not quite so bad that Billy Bob is an hourly torque, which he's never will an hourly torque, but you get my point. Yeah. Yeah. So bring thing. It's, it's, it's a, that's a broken system. You want to talk about a broken fucking system? Yeah. The prison system is broken. The government is a broken solution on the other guy who did that documentary on Alabama prison system. It's fucking heartbreaking man. Heartbreaking. I used to be roommates with the guy that edited all of those locked up. He would go and film those locked up. Remember those? Yeah. Go to fall some and the core Corinne and all these prisons. It's, it's, it's tough rough and not designed to rehabilitate. Right. And all, it's an institution that guarantees your criminal when you come out. That's what you'll be. If you weren't a criminal when you went in, which you clearly committed a crime and got convicted, but you're going to be a fucking criminal when you come out. Like the people, the guys like Tom, who, I mean, there's an 80 something percent recidivism rate in the US. So for a guy to get out of prison and not go back to prison, the odds are fucking four to one against you. Like it's dead least. Yeah. It's probably higher than that, right? I think it's 80 something, 80 something percent, 86. Yeah. Fuck. Yeah. It's brutal. It's brutal. Well, I'm glad you wrote it. Yeah. I promise. Listen to it. I listen to it in the sauna. There you go. Thanks for everything, man. Thanks for all the awesome shows. It's been great watching them. Thanks for watching. You're the man. I appreciate you. I appreciate the guy that's... You have time to talk about one more thing. Sure. That UFC 250. Oh, man. Yeah. Just in case you did. Yeah, I just had him on. Yeah, I know. Yeah, I know. I'm so incredible. I saw him. Remember when I bumped into you at that fight in Vegas? That's the first time I'd seen him live. And I got a bunch of prize fights. I love boxing. And I'm watching that guy. If he had decided to be a professional boxer, he would... His striking is that level. That dude... He went to work. Yeah. The guy. Now, he's a... Oh, man. I'm glad he's a MMA fighter because he started out as an all-American wrestler and Division 1. He's like, very... He's just a great athlete across the board. And just his particular style of aggression is so well-suited for MMA. Oh, yeah. It's just a shocking that he's that good a striker and he was a wrestler. I know. He's just a wild motherfucker across the board. But for him to pull that off the way he did at the White House was nuts. I mean, some books had him at 6 to 1 under. No. And Iliad Tapore is so fucking good. He's so good. And he had him in sick trouble in that second round. But I watched it again yesterday. Second round was brutal. I mean, Iliad was just destroying his liver. Yeah. He almost put him down. Yeah. But even in the second round, Justin is still bloody dealier up. His face was busted up. Like, he was getting the most damaged Iliad's face. And that was a giant factor in the fight. Because I don't know what the accuracy of these reports are, but what's being reported is that he had two broken orbital bones and a broken nose. So both his eyes were broken and his nose was broken. And Justin was here a couple days later and he looked great. It's just nuts. He's very deceptively good at rolling with shots. And he's fucking durable as hell. And just very clever and how he sets things up and where he finds openings. One of the things he kept getting off is he doesn't call her time in an upper cut. off multiple shots. He did that with Fizziv too. He's really good with that move. And he's a beast, man. I'm just so happy for him. I'm a giant Iliad to pour a fan as well. And I think he'll be back better than ever. And I think sometimes a loss is one of the most important things a fighter can ever have. Because they realize like you can be beat. And you need to know that you're a human. You need to know that you can't just throw caution to the wind sometimes. You just engage in these wild scraps. Sometimes you have to be a little bit more tactical. And sometimes you've got to realize like you can't take everybody out. And that's the case with Justin. They couldn't take him out. And he almost did in the second round. I'm real fucking close. Real close. But that freaking Justin, he can time that transfer a power to hit the end of the punch. And just his hands are so heavy. Yeah, everybody says that too. Everybody who he's fought said he's one of the hardest guys that's ever hit them. Including Kabib, who's one of the old time greats. Said Justin hit him harder than anybody. Yeah. He's fucking animal. Yeah. It was impressive. And the fight was like to be there at the White House while that was going on and to have Justin so happy. Like there's something about a guy winning who's an underdog that is just so fucking inspiring. He didn't look like an underdog that night. No, he did not after the second round. Especially the third. Once the third roll around, he dropped him. And then he got ahead of an arm and snatched him down to the ground. He's like, holy shit, man. He's fucking dominating him. This is crazy. Yeah. It was wild. Wild watch. It was wild. It was awesome. No. It was fantastic. Should have been their life. Man, that would have been a good one. Oh, it was crazy. It was crazy to be their life. It just felt surreal. I mean, they had a fly over. That's so much that. Hey, jets come shooting over. Bro, they were like separated by that far from each other. It's I don't know how the fuck those guys do that. It was incredible. Incredible. Incredible. Yeah. That was awesome. Thanks, brother. Once again, the book is called How to Not Die in Prison. Yeah. And available now, audiobook, everything. Yeah. Thank you. Awesome. Thank you. Bye, buddy.