Oh, we are rolling. Beautiful. Like you mean jujitsu rolling or just rolling? No, not jujitsu rolling. Just regular rolling. Maybe later we'll do some jujitsu rolling. I got to bring my mat over here, though. Maybe you can smoke DMT and then you guys can roll. Can you imagine? Can you imagine? It wouldn't be much of a roll. I mean, he'd like play with me like some [ __ ] cat toy or something. I think that's regardless. Well, Dan Hardy, right? The MMA fighter, he used to talk about his usage of psychedelics in fighting. Who? Dan Hardy was his name? I don't know who that is. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. He was a famous Yeah, he was a famous UFC fighter. Really? Yeah, and he used to talk about how he used to get in the cage on mushrooms. And he said, "I could see the future." He said, like, "I can see the Well, you know, they do that they give that to to war fighters now. That thing Remember that article I sent you last night? Yeah, but that's They're giving people in Ukraine They're giving Ukrainian soldiers ibogaine and [ __ ] like that. And psychedelics. Psychedelic mushrooms are do DARPA's doing this study that's fund They're funding people at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, I think to study the use of psychedelics like ibogaine and even psilocybin on soldiers and on the battlefield On the battlefield? On the battlefield for like for like edge detection cuz they I guess it enhances healing like Well, not just that, but to be more optimal with a [ __ ] gun. Ibogaine? I guess. That I The story you sent me looked like they I just saw the title cuz it was in the middle of the night. But But the title seemed to have implied have been implying that it's for healing. Like a trauma. I think part of it's for the trauma and part of it is also your trauma so you can go back to battle. Also a huge part of it is for optimizing battlefield. Like like soldiers on the battlefield. That's what it says in that story. Yes. That's insane. Yes. Maybe it's not that cool, then. To make them more accurate like shooting I mean, that's insane. That's the wrong usage of the time. I can see what LSD definitely would be. LSD, that's what they thought. I I yeah. MK Ultra, all that stuff, that's what they thought, right? Yeah, I mean, look, the government's been weaponizing drugs since the beginning of time, right? If they're going to use if they are studying drugs, they're going to figure out a way to weaponize them, Mhm. you know? I mean, that that you would think it sounds like it should be an obvious thing for us, and yet I think that the the problem is that it's an obvious thing for us. Yeah. Like that should not be the attitude of humanity as a whole. Mhm. Like this idea that it's always a zero-sum game just needs to go away, basically. Yeah. Otherwise, there's just no chance. Because you're going to get bigger and bigger weapons. Mhm. You're going to be able to go wham, and you're going to destroy more things. So, the attitude of the monkey is the only thing that becomes that actually matters. Well, there is that meme, you know, that people who run the government, those people never took mushrooms, and the people who took mushroom know why this is a problem. Yes. Yep. Yeah, exactly, right? Oh, man. Well, it's great to have you guys here today. Danny Gouler, you're back. We had a fantastic episode talking all about the DMT laser experiment you did, and I'm sure we're going to talk more about that today and some of the new stuff you've been doing with it. I had a blast. And Zoltan, it's awesome to meet you, brother. We had a [ __ ] wild conversation last night at dinner. You you are like a Renaissance man. Born in Hungary, correct? That's correct. Soviet-controlled Hungary. Yes. Uh double black belt, jujitsu, judo, and you're founder of the band Five Finger Death Punch. That will end some music, yeah. You do everything. What the [ __ ] don't you do? And so, that's pretty much it, you know, like you have a check mark on life that these are the things I need to do, and I just I just check them. That's pretty much what it is. Yeah. So, how did you guys get together? How did you guys first meet? We met through a mutual friend, who I don't I'm not I'm never sure if he necessarily wants to always be mentioned in every context, but we met through a mutual friend, very good friend, and um we basically met at the at an event that event that Zoltan is now the founder of as well, which is the PGF. It's a Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu Would you call it a league? Was that Yes, it's a professional grappling federation, and we have Jiu-Jitsu competitions. Oh, okay. I was invited to come help with the event, just kind of shoot stuff and all that good stuff. And then me and Zoltan were I was invited to Zoltan's house to shoot some actually a podcast. We just do a little setup. And I had to stay for another day because we were, you know, we were kind of be rolling behind. So, then he was like, "Hey, can you stay overnight?" I'm like, "Sure." That evening we sit down, start talking. He starts talking about some profound that, you know, always kind of the conversation drifts towards. Yeah, yeah. And then I I remember I The shortest version of the story is that I asked him some question about something that he was describing in the psychedelic space. And then he kind of threw me a glance. And he goes, "Okay." And then he kept on talking. And then I asked him another question. Then he goes, "Wait a second." And he goes, "What's your name?" I go cuz we didn't really I go, "Danny." And then he looks back at our mutual friend. He goes, "Wait." "This is DMT Danny." I go, "What?" Yeah. He goes, "Bro, I've been following you." I'm like, "What?" Yeah. I was like, first of all, I didn't know my name was DMT Danny. Second of all, and he's like, "Bro." I'm like, I've, you know, and then and then later Zoltan was saying that the reason he looked at me is because he knew that the question I asked him, which I wish we would remember what it was, but I asked him something that he knew that only somebody who went really deep in the space kind of would know that kind of stuff. Cuz it's very specific. Yeah. And that's And then from that moment on we just literally became best friends. Like we're just like two, you know, butt heads just sitting there and like talking till 5:00 a.m. about all kinds of He stays a week. I stayed a week. He was started a conversation, it it lasted a week. at your house a week. Yeah, because you know, that's the kind of thing where, you know, somehow people who are in this space usually find each other, you know. I always joke about it. There's no secret society. What it is everybody's underwater and you pop your head out and look around and whoever whoever is out, you can see them kind of, you know. Like you you always we kind of have this network. We all sort of know each other or eventually we we find each other. And I heard about him. Like that was his nickname, DMT Danny. And you know, I kept hearing the stories and I was I was aware of the laser and I was aware of Pappy, the the guy who was making the lasers for me. So, so I I knew of him, Yeah. right? And I had sort of a spiritual conversation. People were asking questions and I was talking and I look up and I see like there's this circle around me. Everybody pulled up their chair. I'm like, oh, it it became a lecture sort of, right? And that's what what Danny said. He asked me a question and the reason I looked at him like, okay, he he cannot possibly know that. The I wish I remember what you asked me. I don't remember it. But there's no way for you to know that if you haven't been there, Mhm. right? And then he asked the second question and that's when I'm like, okay, hold on for a second. Are you Danny? You knew it. One thing I can say that was kind of surprising to me is because a lot of people in the just in the psychedelic space in general, they have this way of exploring these spaces that is very loose, so to speak. So, people go into these spaces and they have their experiences and then they exchange notes, but ultimately, it's always a very it's a very shifty ground that people trying to describe to one another, right? So, people come to a conclusion about particular things like beings or spaces and things like this, but with Zoltan, it was so obvious that not just that he exploited very deeply, but also, I mean, you know, his reputation kind of runs in front of him. So, like, it's not like So, Zoltan loves stories. He has a lot of stories. But, at the same time, there's the execution level is so high. Like, every single thing he touches. I call him like a master pattern recognizer. Yeah. The martial arts, the music. He was never taught to play the guitar. So, it's like he just understands what patterns work. It go like he he just started like what I started telling you like he started building this uh property he got, and then he was like, "Well, maybe I'll get into like understanding some things about architecture." Pools one of the one of the most reputable architect in Vegas back from retirement brings him into the project. The reason I started telling you the story is because we met the guy when he was already finishing the project. Yeah. He told us, completely unsolicited, he said, "Zoltan is the most is the most talented architect he's ever worked with in his life." And I said, "Wait, are you an Are you an architect?" Zoltan goes, "No. I just I just understand what works." So, he gave him ideas that he never thought about. So, like, it's he just he has this one of these minds that just understands what works in terms of functionality and outcome. And this is what Yeah. And this is why when he started talking about the space, usually it's a conversation between two guys like, "Dude, I went to that space and did this thing. Oh my god, it was crazy. Blew my mind." Yeah. But, it doesn't usually come from someone like Zoltan, who's like on the other hand, you know, like has all these responsibilities and serious stuff and all these businesses riding on his shoulders that I can't he has to make like serious decisions. Mhm. And somehow it all works. And Zoltan always If you hang out with Zoltan like just one-on-one, it always looks like he's just hanging out. Like, there's no like there's no effort whatsoever. And I I had this moment I'm I'm I'm going to just going to do share this one small anecdote. I had this moment we were sitting with Aaron, the director of the film. Again, shout out to Aaron Vandend We were at the at um Zoltan's uh show. We went to see Five Finger Death Punch. And we're sitting there and Zoltan is sitting and talking to everybody after the show. Security, other people, like all this stuff happening, right? And Aaron and and Zoltan are sitting and Zoltan is telling him a story. And then later me we spoke to Aaron and and it goes like, "Dude, how does he have time to talk and and talk to us?" And I go like, "I don't know." But I'm like, "Do you understand that everything around us right now, the arena, the security, the the everything that is happening right now, this is a machine that he built. Like the buses here, everything. Now obviously there's other people involved and they're obviously they're doing their jobs and everything, but the mind to put everything together in a way so it's like it works like this lubricated machine, that's all Zoltan. So somehow put it in a way that now you can just sit and enjoy and not worry about too many things. Like I said, he he travels with a posse of all black belts in Brazilian Jiu Jitsu and a full dojo just so he gets to also train. So he kind of he thought of every single many black belts do you travel with on your tour? The last tour we had seven. Seven of them? Seven. And you guys just what? Drop a mat out in the out in the driveway and just carrying my mats and then pretty much I have two video guys two video guys, both of them black belts, the rigger, light guys are black belt. And you video the sessions? Sometimes, yeah. Sometimes, but it's just that super helpful. So I can train basically. Yeah. But that's that's the case for the last, you know, like 19, 20 years. I always had at least one and as as we, you know, we're progressing and more crew we can afford, everybody I would hire I would hire people who have a skill set and also martial artist. Mhm. You can expect more from a person who's a martial artist. It's because martial arts restructure your mind. You You start thinking differently, right? Because, you know, I started when I was a kid. I was 9 years old. And um and it develops rewiring your mind, meaning like it develops a personality that otherwise you won't. And that doesn't mean that you have to start when you're really young. You can start right now. It still will do the same thing, right? Because there is There are these moments where, okay, you have to go on the mat and fight this other guy. So, what happens there? Procrastination. Can you push this fight back? No. This is happening right now, right? So, you have to You have to accept the inevitable. Like, this is going to happen right now, you like it or not, comfortable or not. This This going to happen. So, you have to accept those things and if you parallel that to life, right? Things happens and you have to deal with that. Then, second, nobody can jump in. This is not a group effort. This going to be you and the other guy. So, So, nobody going to save you. So, you have to be responsible for everything that's going to happen, right? So, there's a teaching in that. And then as a martial artist, you start to let's say that the fight starts or the the match starts. And then, you know, you have to figure this out, right? Again, in life, difficult things are happening and you have to figure it out. You get caught in uncomfortable situations and you have to know when to fight your way out or where tap and fight another day, right? So, that's a skill that you will have to understand in life. But, you know, and and a skill that my natural reaction is to figure out a way. I have to problem solve when both mentally and physically I'm being pressured, basically, right? That's It's because it's a human chess game. So, it's both mentally and physically intensive, right? And then as you master this, you start to realize that, wait a minute, I can also use your motion against you, right? And so, the uncomfortable situation will will will turn into, you know, advantages. And it's the same thing in life. That's what crisis management is. Like you look at a crisis like, "Wait a minute. I can use this." Right? This is maybe a great PR moment when it looks like a crisis, but I'm going to turn this around. So, you start to see that in martial arts, you know, what we do, it will develop traits in you that you can parallel to your career, to your life because these these are the same things. But most importantly, it becomes a reflex. Like when you have some kind of adversity, I don't think about adversity. I'm imme- immediately go to the solution. I don't even think about it. So, it's that that that element is not there anymore. Like, "Oh my god." Right. Like, "Oh my god, what do we do now?" That doesn't happen. It's like the situation happens and immediately I I I automatically go into solution and automatically go into "How do I use this?" Whatever it is that's happening. How do I use it as an advantage? Just any becomes automatic. If you start to live your life that way, it's it's a game now. Mhm. It's the whole thing is a game. It's a chess game. So, life becomes this chess game of of uh basically strategy. And then it becomes fun. Right. And then once you walk on a once you do it for a while, you walk on a mat, you don't you not scared. Doesn't matter how big the other guy is. It's like, "Okay, he's like 350 lbs. Can I beat him?" Right? I'm not thinking like, "Oh my god, I might die." No. It's like, "Can I beat him? Can Is there a way?" How am I going to beat him? Yeah. So, I mean and and so that becomes your personality. Mhm. And then that, you know, that I think that's one of the reason I became successful because obstacles. Because it's yeah. Yeah. And it's it's That's the thing. You um you know, you looking at uh you looking at a a situation and and you look at it it's a it's a problem, right? It's March, which means spring travel plans are in full swing. Don't be caught off guard while you're away from home and be sure to pack your travel-friendly medical emergency kit from The Wellness Company. No need to deal with the hassle of sickness because this compact blue case is your portable urgent care stocked with Ivermectin, Z-Pak, amoxicillin, and six other essential prescription medications right at your fingertips. With The Wellness Company's medical emergency kit, you can tackle serious health concerns without worrying about urgent care. This kit cuts through the red tape by allowing you to control your health versus being reactive and inconvenienced. You don't need a gatekeeper because their medical board created a guidebook that outlines common treatments for UTIs, strep throat, bacterial infections, respiratory illnesses, and lots more. All it takes is filling out a digital intake form and your kit arrives at your doorstep in 1 to 2 weeks. Order your kit now by heading to twc.health/danny and use the code danny to save up to $30 off plus free shipping. That's twc.health/danny and use the code danny for up to $30 off plus free shipping. Kits available to US residents only. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. In life, like, "Ooh, there's a you know, there's a there's a problem." I I I look at it like, "Oh, it's it's an obstacle I have to jump over. It's fun." Yes. Yesterday when we were sitting and having dinner, you asked Zultan a question that I kind of chuckled at. You asked, "What do you do in your Like, what do you What do you do? Like, what do you do on a day-to-day What do you do every day? Yeah, yeah. Like, what's your routine? And that's a really funny question if you actually get to hang out with him for a little bit because I've seen I've I've seen the switch. So, like, yesterday you just experienced like us just talking and exchanging stories and all of that stuff. I saw the switch happen with Zultan when somebody walked in the room and said something to him, one of these like, you know, in the movie moments where somebody kind of whispers something in his ear like something happened. And you see like this immediate switch in his face. He goes He just gets up. He get like like uh I'll be right back. Walked outside. Comes back and something just happened, right? Something he just he just solved some kind of a problem. And you never felt it as the guest. Like he just walked outside. You saw something was going on. Somebody asked something. He had to like give input, serious input. He comes back out. Hey, and you just continue with the conversation of like Right. Whoa, holy [ __ ] So there's like there's this immediate switch of like oh, we got to go into a different mode now. Okay. The warrior kind of wakes up. And then you you see it in real time. It's very interesting. It's also why I realized that nothing that he does, at least with my interaction with with you so far, is unintentional. So when we just sit and hang out, it's like yeah, that's my free time. I'm going to talk about whatever is close to my heart and I want to talk about. But he never does a thing that is unintentional. And because of that when he told me okay, he recently just decided to come on my podcast, which is not even that huge yet. So there was a very intentional decision. He's like no, I think this is important to talk about now because I never he never spoke about this publicly ever before because there was no reason for it. It was just, you know. And now he felt like it's important enough. And I took that also as well, first of all, it's kind of like a check mark of like okay, we're on the right path here. But also there's an understanding that something, even if we don't fully understand what it is, not of us, uh there's something very major that is going on that needs attention. And that attention needs to be put on in the right way. Not just, you know, like uh I see a lot of people kind of like in a lot of different communities from spiritual communities of the awakening, UAP communities, disclosure, the rising of AGI in the tech world. All of these things seem to be like types of crescendos that are arriving. And we're all in some relationship to them. The mapping of the human mind, Neuralink, all of these things, right? Yeah. And it seems like and we the truth is that none of us actually knows what the, you know, what the real thing is and my discovery, but I don't think it's coincidence. I don't think it's a coincidence. I think all of this is almost like the universe goes like, "Hey, Right. pay attention." Mhm. Yeah, there's end of childhood. Yeah, we we're this conversation is going to get very meta for lack of a better term. And we're going to talk about a lot of deep philosophical ideas and and But also on practical things, by the way. Practical stuff, the DMT. I want to get into the DMT laser stuff. But before we do that, I'm I'm really interested in hearing your origin story and where you come from and how you grew up and and how you ended up here. Origin. So, like you Adam and Eve or the Yes, exactly. The snake in the garden. So, so basically I grew up in Hungary. That was at the time it was a a communist country. So, so I grew up in Hungary and set out to be a scientist. Mhm. Um the the communists had this, you know, this idea of separating people into various castes of like they come to the kindergarten, which by the way we walked to in the snow when I was, I don't know, 4 years old, 5 years old. That's completely normal. The snow is taller than me and the and the kindergarten is like 3, 4 miles away and your parents just put you out in the cold. So, all right, kid. Don't die. It's that way. Don't get lost and you know, and then see you later. That's it. That was completely normal. Anyway, so we have a pretty different upbringing, you know, like okay, here's a spear, you go and fight for your food. You know, it's Sparta. And and so they come to the schools and they pick out the kids and they're like, okay, you're good at this, we're going to put you in a special school. You pick you could you do good at, let's say, athleticism and then you go to a school that is specifically for sports. Mhm. And so they picked me out and they're like, okay, you're mad science, you know, and and we're going to put you in a special school. So, I had like two or three math classes every day and that was my jam. I was going to be a particle scientist. That was I was interested in a moment I could read that, you know, instead of reading, you know, books about cowboys and Indians and everybody did them like deep down in the tectonic systems of the of the planet and, you know, and particle science and that was my jam and and um and then somewhere around when I was 12 years old I had a because we're sitting here, so I'm going to contact this story. I had an out-of-body experience. I had an accident and at the time I didn't understand what happened, but I definitely I didn't look at my own body. I I hit a truck with my little bicycle. And I but I had the sensation of whatever I wanted to look at, wherever I wanted to go, I was just there. And I honestly like, "Whoa, something's bizarre. Something's weird." And I, you know, I got up, eventually I sit up. I was in a pool of blood with a circle of people around me and I just grabbed my bicycle, went home. You know, my mother as communist country, you know, what it's like how it works. Like, "Kid, I'm bleeding out of my head." It's like, "Kid, don't get it on the carpet." That's it. That's it. You know, you can have a sword sticking out your head and like, "Oh, probably should go to the hospital." But you got to walk because I'm busy. So, you know, and that's pretty much how this this worked. And so, I went to the library and I started to search. And at the time the Google search of the times were like um you reading the books and then you have footnotes and you just simply find where the, you know, where those excerpts coming from. So, I I dug down on the path of eventually I found books about life after death and eventually find the Eastern philosophy. So, by the time I was like 14, 15, I was knee-deep into Kriya Yoga and meditation and you know, and all that. And so and I also had issues with science. So, I had a moment where I I was about 15, I started to battle my professors about about theoretical math. I disagreed with a lot of things and there are issues of of of practical math and theoretical math. So I had a conflict there while I'm researching and and experiencing um early days of wasn't psychedelics so to speak, but I'm down on that path. Yoga, meditation, it's it's a science, breathing techniques, various techniques that Because that seemed to be connected to what you were the idea that you were searching for with that near-death experience you had. I I understood very early the question that wow, we have, you know, scientists like, you know, Higgs and Einstein and you know, this is important. This is very important. Their work is really important. Science is really important. I was going to be a scientist, but ultimately the most important question, all these things science is subservient of the most important question. The most important question, what the hell is going on? Mhm. What What's going on? Why are we here? Who we are? Why? What is this, right? So if you look at science, why we looking for science? In one way, yeah, we want to, you know, we want to make ourselves comfortable. We invent things and build things to make ourselves less dependent on physical labor, right? That's one reason for science. But the ultimate reason is like the explanation of what the hell is happening. And I felt like yoga and and and these mental sciences are on the same path. This is then try to answer the question. And later in life, psychedelics. Mhm. To me it's the same exact thing, trying to figure out the ultimate question of what the hell is going on. What is this perception? How am I alive? How am How am I perceiving? Not even Not even how I'm alive, but just the perception itself. And why? And why are we here? So that's the most important question. And so while I was having clashes with with with uh certain scientific ideas, I was also battling down this path of of of yoga and mental sciences and trying to figure this out. And so and in the same time, I was playing music, which is you know, I was very interested in the music and and again, as somebody who's scientifically oriented, I started to understand like, wait a minute. Music, everything is is is a vibration and and as a musician, I'm playing with the source code. Basically, I am playing with harmonies, melodies, and their correlation. And if you think about the whole entire universe is basically cymatic patterns, right? And so, I kind of I I I understood that at at that age that okay, so as a musician, right? I am playing with the source code and also with music, I can affect you as a human. Like, just give a very short example, you know, I can give you a guitar riff and I put a drum beat to it. I'm going to make this drum beat a little bit uh shuffled, meaning that the snare will not come mathematically where it's supposed to. It's going to be a little bit late. Barely audible, right? You're going to It's going to give you a feeling that, oh man, we're cruising. Yeah, this feels good, right? It's, you know, island time. Yeah, right? Now, I take the same guitar riff. I'm going to put a drum beat on it. I quantize it. So, it's exactly on time. It's going to be like, oh man, let's go to war. Bam, bam. It just feels like, let's go. Or I take the same snare and I push it a little bit. Again, it's not really audible. You can only feel it. And so, now snare comes a little bit early. I'm giving you anxiety, physically giving you anxiety, right? You're like, whoa, yeah, go, right? So, imagine if I start to just mix those patterns within a song. I give you a anxious verse and I release it in the chorus. Was there a moment you can remember that inspired you to start look at like start practicing music and learning it? Uh you know, there's the obviously [ __ ] that music kind of uh chose you, right? So, I don't really have a mo- I was always interested, you know? I wanted to be a guitar player, so could not afford it. I got a jigsaw and my parents' coffee table. I'm like, "Yeah, this looks good. All right." And I just made myself my first unplayable, but very heavy metal guitar, you know? So, I you know, you had to you had to make, you know, Eastern philosophy and Eastern life is like what we have and how far we can go with that versus our wish list of what I need to accomplish. So, I made my first guitar. Right. I wanted to be a guitar player. I wanted to, you know, I was interested, but I don't have a specific moment that ignited like, "Oh, yeah, that's what it is." And What kind of music were you listening to at that age? So, I started with the British punk. Okay. You know, like it was just like the voice of the rebellion in a communist country again, you know? And then eventually switched into heavy metal. And it was a purpose. The purpose was really like it was not, you know, it was not that it wasn't wasn't illegal, but it was frowned upon, right? So, it was like a little kid, what can you do when you're 12 years old? You're not going to, you know, steal your grandfather's AK-47 hidden in the Second World War in the backyard. You're going to not going to start a revolution. You need some kind of an outlet like, "How do I oppose this the system?" And you know, the heavy metal felt like, "Well, this is the rebellion," you know? So, it's It was also, you know, loaded, so to speak, for me. That was kind of like a um of of Western culture seeping in and also, if you think about the rock music was sort of a voice of the rebellion even in the West. It was, you know, it was countering social, you know, social standards that they disagreed with, right? So, you know, so so for me it was both interesting as in playing with the source code, understanding that with playing with the source code I can physiologically even affect how you feel. Yeah. And I've just talked about rhythm, you know, and now there are major and minor scales. Minor scales are sad, major scales are happy. So, I can manipulate how you feel. And I thought that's fascinating, right? Then understanding how there is a there's a math involved with music. This is these are mathematical corre- correlation. And then beyond that it's also geometrical corre- correlations. I see patterns on the guitar versus learning a scale. I I see patterns. Mhm. Right? So, I thought that was amazing. And it was a vehicle for rebellion. So, I'm like, "Oh, this is perfect." So, I was doing that. Yeah. Right? I've doing visual art in the same time. So, I went to school for that, too. Like I have a, you know, commercial art and design degree. And uh and I'm barreling down on the path of, you know, yoga and and trying to understand what's happening. And and eventually science start to sort of a phased out of my life. Like I I always going to have that scientific things, but but it kind of was phased out because I felt like science is a loose explanation. Mhm. A collection of ideas that try to explain what's going on. And there's a difference between experiencing what's going on or trying to explain it. Right. Right? Because I, you know, I I I look at it there's there are four kind of people when it, you know, the reason that then he said that I I finally said like, "Okay, you know what? I'm going to step out and I'm going to start talking about it." What we talk about, you know, the the the cycle of space. I been involved with that for decades. There was no reason to talk about it. Cuz I it's not like I needed the attention. And um and I felt like the world is not ready. Mhm. We just not there yet. To talk about it. But something's changing. There is a end of childhood from a spiritual perspective for this planet. People growing up spiritually. And um and the the four cast of people people. Like there are the the flower child. The flower child that the joker and tree huggers, right? And they're the they're modern hippies who jump into the place and it's a playground. Then there's the explorers. The explorers are people who also jump into the psychedelic world, but with a scientific mind trying to explore that there is something more here, something tangible, something real because our experiences correlate and we can verify that this happened to me. I saw this. Did this happen to you? You saw this too. So then we can verify each other's experiences. So something is real here, right? Then there is the observers, the scientists who watch this thing, but they want to stay outside. They're more of a they try to measure and and figure out without being part of it. Right. And then there are the civilians who have no idea. They just NPCs. They have no clue that this is happening. I know about NPCs. Yeah. Well, yeah, but you know, there's different functions, right? And I feel like that today we we arrived to this moment where you know, when there are enough attention on it and the observer class, the scientists who generally held highly as their scientist are are getting take taking on notice and more and more attention going on. That's why also the laser comes in. That's where these tangible things where okay, something is going on here. And then is it not that our job is to figure out what's going on, our function in life, Mhm. our existence, figure out what's going on. And when this this space is opening, even though it takes a substance to get there, but it's verifiable real verifiable real, then we need to explore that. Feeling your best starts with a great product, and that's why I'm excited to have Via sponsor this episode. There's a good reason Via is trusted by over half a million happy customers. Via is changing the game in natural wellness. They blend powerful hemp-derived ingredients to deliver real tangible benefits. Whether you're looking to sleep better, have better libido, improve focus, recovery, or simply relax, Via has a tailored solution for your situation. Via lets you fully customize your experience to fit your needs with products that range from zero to high in cannabinoid levels. Whether you're looking to support your daily routine, enhance focus and clarity, or unwind with a deep relaxation, Via has you covered. I take their gummies, and they're so good. I'm always breaking them up in a little pieces and giving them out to all my friends. The focus gummies are amazing for doing long podcasts, and the relaxation gummies are the best for unwinding at the end of a long day. From their award-winning gummies to premium THCA flowers and calming drops, every Via product is made with lab-tested hemp sourced from trusted American-owned farms. And it ships legally across the entire USA right to your door. No medical card required and backed by a guarantee. Not sure where to start? Take Via's product finder quiz to get recommendations tailored to your needs in less than 60 seconds. So, if you're 21-plus, check out the link to Via in our description, and use the code Danny to receive 15% off, free shipping on orders over $100, and if you're new to Via, get a free gift of your choice. After you purchase, they're going to ask you where you heard about them, and please support our show by telling them we sent you. Again, use the code Danny, d a n n y, at viahemp.com. That's spelled v i i a h e m p dot com. Enhance your everyday with Via. And we there. And then so not to make the full arch where I came from growing up in the country and eventually coming here, but How is How hard was it to get out of of there and get to the US? How old were you? Took Took a revolution. I mean, yeah. communism had to collapse. There were a lot of history. Yeah, we didn't have We didn't have passports. We couldn't go to our countries that are Western countries. We were completely aware of, you know, our Western culture. Mhm. But, we were just not participating. So, we were sort of in a in a in a pit. Life was, you know, the race cars were going, and we were just sitting in a pit watching the race. We were not part of it. So, while we were completely aware of Western culture and we can AB the system, right? Oh, like that that's That's pretty cool, and this sucks. Right? Yeah, right. So, so we wanted to get out of there, but, you know, there's a minefield, like an actual minefield on the border with trigger-happy border patrol. You can't get out, and you don't have passports. And, you know, if the system was great, then then you don't have to lock us in. We would have stayed, obviously. They all wanted to get the hell out of there. And, um And in '89, it started to cave in. It started in Poland, actually. The dock workers started to strike. That was the first crack in the system. Like, "Oh, wait Wait a minute. You can try it. I remember a moment when I was fairly very young, actually. And, um we were watching TV, and um the one TV channel we had, black and white, one TV channel, communist propaganda, does not work on Monday, no TV on Monday, and stops at midnight. That was life. And so, and I remember that uh there is a transportation industry in America was striking. And then, you know, these guys were gleefully like, "Oh my god, you know, the capitalist system is crumbling. The bourgeois have fallen. You know, the communism will succeed." That that was the propaganda on TV. And they were showing how the Americans were out on the street with their little signs. And I'm looking at my dad. I'm like, "Well, hold on for a second. So, in America, I can go on the street with a sign and yell that I'm not happy, and nobody's shooting me. Nobody's arresting me, and I don't disappear. That's how that works. I need to get the hell out of here. Right? And the bewildering part, was he didn't understand what I was asking. Right. Because they were so they were born into that fear-based system. Yes. Like they were telling me like, "Kid, shut up. You we're going to get arrested. We'll disappear." Like hyper-normalization for them. Well, that was completely normal to them. So, they they were broken souls born into this system. They never knew anything else. Right? So, they were they were that the experiment, the fleas in the jar that can't jump out. You know, I don't know if you know that experiment. You put fleas in the jar and put a lid on it and they try to jump out and keep hitting the lid. And after that, you take off the lid and they will never jump out. Right. Cuz they learn that that's the lid. And so, it's kind of like that. Broken souls that couldn't even imagine when I was telling to people like, "Oh, I'm going to America and I'm going to play rock music. I'm going to tour the world." People thought that you're crazy. Like that was ridiculous to them. Like, "What? You're insane. That's not possible. We don't have passports. That's just not a thing." Right? So, I never had a doubt doubt that I'm going to do it. And well, I was just proven that I did. But, you know, but that was basically growing up there in '89-ish when it's started crumble and eventually collapsed. And once we had passports, then it was like everybody's like, "Okay, let's go." Wow. Yeah, yeah. And then you you said you spent a lot of time practicing Buddhism with actual monks? Yes. So, how did that happen? So, once I was in America, I came here without speaking a word of English. So, I could say like, "Yeah, beer." That's it. Is it true that the Hungarian language is like not connected to any any of the other languages around that area? The closest Yeah, the closest would be Finnish, but we have maybe a 30 words 50 30 40 50 words. I don't know that rooted in the same, you know, word, but not really. Like so, we basically nomads like Attila the Hun, the first wave and then the second wave was Arpad. That was his name, Arpad. Mhm. Uh the the leader who Arpad? Arpad, yeah. Okay. Um so basically it's in North China, Mongolia, that area. Mhm. The nomads were coming over to Right. to Europe. And so that's how the Huns, Hungarians, the Huns came. So we're barbarians. Right. And then then, you know, they picked the current territory of Hungary as their home base. So you we not, you know, so we the European languages we not connected to that. Right. There's like probably like 12, 13 million Hungarians in the world who speak that language. It's a very different language. Logistically it's absolutely different how it's built, you know? And um yeah, I didn't speak English. So I had to learn that where where I was I was staying in this place where somebody left a book, Shashank Redemption. And I had a Hungarian English dictionary and I translated this book word by word. Wow. Without any understanding of, you know, grammar or anything. So I had to translate it. Probably read the book like 30 times because I always started it over because it started to make sense. And I would watch TV. I had a little black and white TV in the room. And I put on the closed caption and um I could recognize the words and their pronunciation. Mhm. And once I could understand English, I would live in Barnes and Noble's and bookstores cuz they let me just sit there with a tea. That was the cheapest version. I couldn't afford anything else, right? So I would have a tea and I would sit in the Barnes and Noble's and just read. Just anything I could devour because I had a sudden I had this library of Eastern philosophy, Mesoamerican philosophy, you know, I read Carlos Castaneda's entire, you know, work three times at least, you know, and then all the books that I could never get in, you know, Mhm. in Hungary. So that was my just devouring that, you know? And and I I a seeker. So I would seek out yogis and people that I would hear about that could do things allegedly that are superhuman. And then I met people and I saw things that I can verify that okay, I saw that this happened. This is not in our current set of understanding that what can physically happen. Right? So, I would I would go and and meditate and and then I found this uh Sri Lankan monks that I spent a lot of times with, you know? So, that was parallel to everything else I was doing. That's fascinating. Yeah, and you last night we were talking about the the monk who lit himself on fire during that protest. Thích Quảng Đức. Yes, and in Vietnam. And you were saying that that was a recruiting call. That was not sort of a protest based on the gasoline exports or anything like that. So, if you if you if you understand, you know, if you understand the the way they think, the Buddhist monks, and it's very very similar to the the the shaman's or the the man of knowledge, so to speak, if Can you pull up that photo, Steve? of um you know, Mesoamerican history, right? When the Spaniards came and and what happened there, they have a very similar um way they relate to to um oppression. Because you know, the the the smooth seas won't make great sailors sort of idea. That spiritual or or physical oppression will lead to your most rapid development as a person, right? And so, if you if you if you know that they understand that concept, right? If you know that understand that concept, then you know that they're not going to get involved in in political the polit- the motivation is not political. And if you read the Dhammapada or you any of the the teachings, right? It's always the the meaning of those teachings is is dynamic. It's It's almost like you will understand what you capable of understanding at the moment. And you read that same thing a couple of years from now and it will mean something else. And that's the brilliance of that, right? And so there are so many of these teachings and these anecdotes that you read it and it might mean one thing and then later you realize like, "Oh, there was a that's just a seed and there is some amazing things in that." So if you understand how they think and how they operate, then then you know that it's um that there's a different motivation. So So things that what what you see in face value is usually not what it is. Right? And And that particular picture that we talking about, you know, it's a To me that was a light tower moment. What I call a light tower moment is when when you look at something and you know in face value this is a political protest. And as a As a political protest this this picture was one of the most famous picture most famous picture in in in in the time. I think it's 1962 when this happens. Can you find out, Steve? I think 62. Pull up like the Wikipedia page about it. And And so, you know, so this triggered this this this major event of, you know, human rights and and so So So the picture was published everywhere and it was a very well-known picture because how the world related to this. Like the shocking element of like you see this monk motionless. [ __ ] Right? Just burning to the the absolute most horrible death without flinching. Yeah. Quang Duc Duc Dai. I think Quang Duc Dai. 19 1963, June 11th. 63. Okay, there you go. So 63. So Kennedy was president, right? So Go back, Steve. Look at the date again. Well, 63. So I think Kennedy was president at the time. And June Yeah, he was still president, yeah. Right. So So this picture this moment, right? Because of of the nature of that picture, because because how shocking that is, right? This became sort of a a And And even if you read Wikipedia, it's probably still to this day going to relate to why this happened as a political event. Mhm. Right? And again, go back to how monks and how the how these guys actually think and operate. If you intimately understand that, then then you know that this is the face value, but there is more to this. And what I meant by a light tower moment, that this was a perfect vehicle for the whole world to see this. Cuz this picture was everywhere. And some of us, a small percent, but some of us saw this picture, and my question wasn't political. My question is like, "Hold on for a second. If this monk can sit there, burned to death without a blink of an eye, whatever power this human attained, I need to know and obtain." That's That's incredible, right? So, some of us looked at it like, "Oh, I need to I need to investigate this. I need to get into meditation, Buddhism, da da da da da." Right? Because I need to understand. This is This is superhuman. Yes. Right? So, so it's a light tower moment because I wasn't the only one who thought of this. A pretty large amount of people saw it as Most of the people saw it as a political issue. But a a pretty large amount of people also saw it as I saw it. Like, "Hold on for a second. How is this possible? Mhm. There's a miracle is happening right there. A miracle is happening right in front of us. If this monk came out and says, "Check it out, guys. I'm going to light myself on fire. I'm going to perform a miracle." Nobody would have believed him. Everybody would question like, "Oh, maybe there was some kind of an ointment." Or Everybody would have questioned that this is real. But because it was sort of a a a um presented as a political thing. It just kind of went through the system without being questioned but those of us who see the world differently, those of us saw uh superhuman powers. But if this humanly possible, I need to know how. I need to know how to calm my mind and how to put myself in that position that I can do this. And now if you think about it, at the time Buddhism was kind of getting eradicated and and the knowledge that these guys were were, you know, the libraries were burnt and that the knowledge that they obtained and and and put in libraries were being eradicated. So, this picture probably recruited more people to Buddhism and to this path. And I don't even like to use the word Buddhism because it's an ism. But more people was recruited for this path than probably anything else they could have done. Yeah. Right? Wow. Because even though there is a small percent of people who saw it as as as an incredible human feat, right? That's still a huge number because the whole planet was exposed to this picture. Can't even imagine them watching this. in real time. It's just Yeah, I'm just sure I think there's a video there's video of it and it's it's f- I'm just I keep trying to imagine what it's like to like stand there. the immolation does that the name of the picture? The immolation? And you know, and again, right there you see something that's humanly should not be possible. No. Humanly I should be So, so right there, this is this picture should trigger you. Mhm. And start you on a path that I need to know this. Mhm. This is this is this is absolute control. Like this is when when your mind has full control. And and that is the point of of of meditation. That is the point of the whole path that you obtain that power. When you, you know, you have this incredible computer in in your in your head, right? Yes. This this mind of us, right? And then it and and the train of thought never stops. So, this is a constant you you know, this always moving, right? Steve, don't you you you can play it for us, but don't show it um on the actual podcast cuz it'll get us [ __ ] copy. Cop- no, not copywritten, but it'll get it'll get banned. No, this isn't the same thing, is it? This is different. this is it. This is really it? I think so. This is the same guy. It looks That were a couple of So, this wasn't the only one. It's put put could be a movie or or there were a couple of more. So, this is he did it to himself on the original one. He did, yeah. Yeah, yeah. He put put the yeah. I mean, his students were there, but Right, right. So, Oh, his Those were his students. Yeah, around him, yes. Oh, [ __ ] I didn't even realize that. Yeah. So, uh you know, ultimately the the point of meditation that you have this this train of thought completely uncultivated running free, right? And there's this idea of mindfulness. If you at all time, you're completely conscious of what your mind is doing. Think about it, you drive home and I ask you like what did you see on the way home? What roads you took? I probably don't remember. You just autopilot, all right? Automatic, yeah. So, that means like there's a simple proof of you were like took your half an hour let's say to drive home. For half an hour you were not completely conscious of where your mind was and what it was doing. Or you're saying like, "Hey, you know what? This this this idea popped in my mind." Well, it didn't just pop in your mind. Something triggered that idea. You saw something something triggered it. And before this idea popped in your mind, your mind was doing something else. And you're not aware of what it was doing. Mhm. So, the the ultimate way of existence is that you're all times completely and fully aware what your mind is doing and thinking, and you're in control of that. Could Can you be depressed if you if you're in control? No. No. Can you have a suicidal thought? No. Can you you know, can you have crazy thoughts? No. You're in control. And so we are not fully in control with our mind. And And so the the point of that meditation and what this technique achieved is that absolute control. Wow. So, that is that picture right there has so many things in there. It's like a fractal. Yeah, there's so many things in there. Like you see a man in absolute control of his body and his mind. Yeah. And it seems superhuman. Mhm. There's a lot packed in there. And so some of us saw that as a light tower. That's why I called it the light tower even. Even when you see this and you go, "Okay, I need to understand this. I need to learn this. I need to I need to be barreling down that road, that path." And how So, when you started practicing this and and learning more about it, you mentioned last night that there's um there's something something you can achieve, like a certain level you can achieve in the practice of this stuff and of this meditation where you can basically like tap in to this for lack of a better term, DMT state automatically, like at the by the flip of a switch? Yes. It It's a you know, there's a there's a So, there that's yoga is a science and there's there's a physical elements to it all that, you know, the kundalini which which is basically a spinal fluid moves up on your spine and how it it triggers certain things. But But so there's a there's an actual physical exercise. But, you know, yoga has seven different paths and there are kriya yoga and there's various forms, but it all goes to the same spot, right? You have a You have a narrator, right? And this narrator is back by is basically explaining to you the world as you're moving around or, you know, it's like, "Did I close the garage door? That's technically a voice in your head talking to you. Okay. So, if the voices in your head is talking to you, that is bound by it's it's in a prison of the language. That voice will never say anything to you that's not been already spoken, invented. Sure. Because it is using a language. Mhm. And it's your a prisoner of that language that you're speaking. And because everything And so this voice will talk to you in that language. That's That's one issue. The other issue that we have a built-in automatic filter. An automatic filter is that you have the the base thing operate the base operating system is the survival of the individual, then the survival of species, and so forth so on. Right. And there is a hierarchy of what's important, right? And so the most important part is you to survive. That's the That's the the red telephone of like, "Hey, you're in danger. Run or fight." Right? So there are those things, but in everything else, there's like almost like there's an equalizer in what's important what's not important. So, let's say you're sitting on an airport and there's a million people talking. You don't hear anything, just noise. And I was some somebody's going to say the word podcast. You'll hear that word. Mhm. Because it's important to you. Mhm. Right? But you didn't hear any of the other words. Right? If you bought a new car, you'd start driving it around and you start to notice like, "Man, everybody has a car." Well, the number of those cars didn't change. It just wasn't important to you. So So what what it means that your mind actually deletes information that is seemingly not important to you. Mhm. Right? You perceived it, but it just deletes it. Save energy, right? Correct. And it's just a lot of data. Yeah. It's it it finds it not important. Now, here's here's a problem. So, you have two elements here. One, the voice that's processes processing everything is is in English for you, right? So so you're prisoner of that language and the boundaries of the language. And then there's also a filtration system that you're not even aware of. You don't even know what was deleted. You drove home and a lot of things happened that you didn't see. Because you saw it I shouldn't say you didn't see. You saw it but you didn't register it. It's like I noticed sometimes like if you were there's if there's ever like a route you are used to driving like on a daily routine and you're driving from here to there whatever and then one day you decide to walk the same route. All of a sudden it's a whole new world. Right. Like I never saw this building here before. You know what I mean? Now the question there is that okay. So I have the filtration system that takes out information that might have been important but I didn't notice. Right? And everything that is is described to me my mind is kind of speaking to me in English. How do I get out of this? And that is the science of yoga that is the meditation. Let's get out of the filter. Let's get ahead of the filter. Yes. And let's do nonverbal communication versus verbal communication. Right? And a way I could prove that to you I could point out certain things in this room. And if I ask you to tell me what I'm pointing at. Right? Literally we can do that. So go for it. Microphone. Danny. Cup. So what's going to happen I'm going to outrun you. Right? Yes. Okay. You still saw what I point at and you knew what it was but you didn't have time to formulate the word. Right. Right? Cuz that takes some microsecond. You have to reach in to the library grab the word. Your hard drive has a speed. Right? And but your attention moved faster. So So your attention moved faster than your language could possibly move. So is it possible to see and perceive things faster than you can form formulate the word? Yes. And you knew what I was show I was showing. You perceived it. You just couldn't say the word. Right. So with that imagine if you meditate and then you're um your language you know like your mind is speaking to you. Mhm. That whole idea to outrun that. You can't engage. You have to kind of like do your Mayweather boxing style, like you just you just stepping away from the punches. You're it's trying to talk to you and you're stepping away. It becomes a game. Over there mind is trying to talk to you and you're not engaging and eventually you achieve that silence when it stops talking. Right? And then the first step of be spiritual realization is the self-realization when when you have this moment when you realize that the witness you're watching your you're the witness and you're watching your mind trying to talk to you. And then all of a sudden there's that moment of hold on for a second. If I'm watching my mind, then I'm not the mind and who am I? And that's a very profound moment of one of the major steps in spiritual you know process is when you realize that like whoa, I I can watch my own mind processes from a different perspective. Then who is the watcher? Sleep quality declines in people as early as 30. Chances are when you were younger, your body was creating a good amount of sleep regulating hormones. As you get older, your body's ability to produce these hormones declines, making it harder to fall asleep and stay asleep. I've tried everything under the sun to improve my sleep quality from avoiding screens 3 hours before bed, eating far earlier, and even taking melatonin and other sleep supplements. But nothing has moved the needle as much as Evening by Vresso. After 3 years of perfecting the formula, they created a melatonin-free drink mix with clinically studied patented ingredients. It's formulated to calm an active mind, help you fall asleep faster, stay asleep longer, and improve deep and REM sleep. All without creating dependencies or causing morning grogginess. I look forward to drinking Evening by Vresso every night. Not only because it stops my mind from racing and I fall asleep faster, but I wake up less throughout the night and I wake up with more energy and in a way better mood than with any other sleep supplement I've ever tried. And it tastes so good, which is why it's become my go-to nightcap. Click the link in the description or head on over to vero.so/danny and use the coupon code danny at checkout to save 15% off your first order. Again, that's vero.so/danny and use the coupon code danny to save 15% off your first order. Thank you to Vero for sponsoring this episode. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. Right. Right? And so, these are the two So, that's one step. Like, I I was ahead of the language. Separating yourself from your mind. Yes. And I was out of that And then so, there are techniques. There are physical techniques, there are mental techniques, you know, the mantras, you know, songs or or mandalas, very complicated pictures that you look at. There's various techniques and tools that, you know, that various Yeah. people use to achieve this. But, you can play piano or do jujitsu. Because you're not thinking. Why are you doing jujitsu? Are you Are you playing guitar? I'm not thinking like, "Did I left the stove on?" Right. My mind is kind of in a flow state. So, that can be also meditation. That's kind of the base of tantric meditation, tantric Buddhism, where anything can be a meditation as long as your mind shuts up, as long as not Right. So, that's one. Second is that getting ahead of that filter. Getting into that mindset when you perceive all and you get to decide what's important versus the routine of you drove home. You don't even remember You don't even remember. Right? The filter was done. You If I didn't tell you to watch the red cars, you don't know how many there were. But, when I when I told you, "Watch the red cars." Now, you're aware. Right? So, we are in charge with that. Mhm. So, these are all uh practices. And then comes psychedelics. So, how how do you, without psychedelics turn that filter off? That's basically the process of meditation. The first step of the process is stopping the language. The language first. first. Like you have to stop. part of it. Got it. Okay, I understand. Because once the language is there, right? Then your communication is verbal. Now you're inside the box. Now you, you know, now you can't Well, and here's the thing. Like about composing music, painting pictures, right? Mhm. Um doing any sculpture. I'm going to give you a really good example with that. Because you can't make mistakes there. So, okay. So, if I, you know, if I like everything I see the view that everything is possible. And when I'm talking about everything is possible is there's a potential. How to make a light bulb work. That that potential was the same billion years ago than it is now. We just didn't have the technology or the need or the, you know, But how it works is same. If time travel exist, that exist right now. We don't know how to do it. That doesn't mean that there's no answer to that. There's a way to do that. Right. If you need, you know, nuclear fusion on a room temperature, if it's possible, it's possible right now. We just don't know how to do it, but it's possible, right? And it's the same thing with art, sculptures, painting, music, right? All that. So, I'm not really um inventing anything. I'm just reaching and I'm more like discovering. Or I just bring something into this space and manifest it, right? Mhm. And I would say this exercise of like if I give you a pencil and say, "Okay, draw a straight line." You can execute that. Mhm. Uh draw a circle. You can execute that as as perfect as you can. Okay, a triangle, square, a sine wave. Sine wave, everything. Okay, cool. Mona Lisa. I'd rather the Mona Lisa. Everything that needed for that you executed. You All the elements that it's made of you executed and I can see that you have full control over the pencil. Yeah. Right? And so there should not be a problem to draw anything. To paint anything. Right? And what that is it's it's about you getting into this flow state. Making that connection with the potential. Like the muse. Creating a bridge, right? And holding that vision. Like you're not painting the Mona Lisa. And it would be to the most obvious when you're making a sculpture. When you're making a sculpture, if you made a mistake that piece of stone is gone. You can't glue that back. Right. Okay, so you have to have a full vision of what you're about to do. Mhm. Right? And so that is the process. Like getting into those flow states when you can create this bridge. And the reason I'm bringing this example cuz that's kind of what happens in meditation. Right? That I'm I get into this flow state when I have a bridge to the ultimate potential. And I'm just giving you the example of how it happens when I compose music. I have to hear all the instruments in my head to write the song. I have to be able to do that. I have to create that bridge. If I'm making a sculpture, I have to see that sculpture in my head and hold that vision in order to make that. Yeah. So I'm copying what's in my mind. And what's in my mind is not mine. Exactly. Right? So I created the bridge. I am making a sculpture. I can't make a mistake because I hit the wrong I chipped the wrong thing. It's no longer going to be possible to make this sculpture. And so that's that's the thing that you're trying to strengthen in meditation. Like, how do I make my connection to this universal soup of consciousness as solid as possible? Have you ever heard of the book called the I think it's called the War of Art by a guy named Steven Pressfield? Art of War, yes. Art of War, yeah. Of course you've heard of that one. There's another one called the War of Art. He's a guy named Steven Pressfield. He's a writer and he talks about the idea of tapping into this muse, which is similar to what your idea is of universal consciousness. Where like he uh every day he basically follows the same protocol where whether he feels like it or not he sits down at his desk at the same time every day and forces himself to write for an hour, two hours, three hours, whatever it is. And he says sometimes he doesn't want to [ __ ] do it. It's the last thing he wants to do, but he forces himself to just start [ __ ] writing for the first hour. And then eventually, with no distractions, locked in a room with just his pen and paper, the muse will start flowing through him and take over, right? And then this this this creativity, this magic will start flowing through his hand. So, what he is doing I could equate that to well, that's meditation. That is the process, right? So So, the difference I guess is that we we are very specific. When I'm talking about the reason I used, let's say the an idea of sculpture because it's so permanent. If I made a mistake, that's a permanent mistake. Not even like drawing when I can use an eraser. That that piece of stone was chipped off of that rock, it's gone. Right. So, that that demonstrate like how strong your vision has to be. And I can also parallel that to your your life because that's just that's just what I do as an artist. But I do the same thing with my life. So, when we talked about like, "Okay, you do all these things." Well, that's how it happens. I wanted to race monster truck. Okay, I'm going to race monster truck. I wanted to work for the space industry. I have worked for the space industry for years, right? I wanted to be a musician. Yes, I am a musician. I wanted to the [ __ ] space industry? Yeah. Yeah. Jesus Christ. Doing what? We can't just gloss over this. He was the guitar He was the guitar player for the space I I mean we were explaining to him with the zero-G guitar solos. No, it's like look Oh my god. started with to not to take a a big side road there, but yeah, for few years I was a consultant for space industry. I have been on a conversation with Anousheh Ansari was up on the you know With who? Anousheh Ansari, she's a Iranian uh uh astronaut basically. Okay. And she was on the space station. We were on the phone while I'm on the tour bus. My band is hanging from the chandelier throwing bananas at each other and I started to scream at them like, "Guys, shut the [ __ ] up. I have 14 minutes to be on this phone call because then it's out of out of range." Oh my god. Everybody looked at me They were like, "What?" Why did they want you to consult with the space astronauts? Okay, I I designed her space suit and her mission patch and all that. So, I was a designer originally that I was doing, you know, 3D movies and the short you know, that's the story to compress the story. Started with, you know, uh scientists were and you know engineers were looking at looking for somebody who can make their visions into 3D animations so they can build certain things or get funding for certain things. So, that's where it started. Then a friend of mine who was working on a flying flying car which eventually became a flying motorcycle which flew and in the Smithsonian Museum came to me like, "Hey, can you help me engineer or, you know, at least do the the the representation 3D movies of this?" And I do have understanding of engineering so I started to build this thing for them and I'm like, "Okay, this is not going to work, right? Like I can see this is not going to work. How about move this here, move that there?" So, they some modification and that made it patentable. Right? So, I I'm one of the inventors on the flying, you know, motorcycle. And we got the patent and it flew and all that. So, that's was the origin of this and then and then eventually kind of sucked me into that world because they needed somebody who has the the design abilities, right? I could do 3D animation and all that. I can design all kind of stuff and understanding of of engineering. So, I'm not going to do something crazy that's something unfeasible. So, that's how I kind of got built in. And then I also did user interface design for various, you know, electronics and whatnot. It just means like if you pick up your phone, if you think about how it works, it's already wrong. I have to be able to guide you. I have to give you a a user interface that that is obvious. That's the magic that you should not be thinking about how to use a VCR. It should be obvious. Right? To to to give you an example, you know, the arrows that's pretty obvious probably ancient times. If you, you know, draw an arrow, you kind of know like look that way or go that way. Where where, you know, let's say a a stop sign is learned. A stop sign is the color red is is is ancient because you will recognize color red warning. Right? So, that's sort of it's it's in our genetic history now. But the stop sign itself, the shape of it is learned. So, there's a science of what is learned and what is, you know, for example, something in between. If you see if you look at poster, if somebody's looking to the you know, this way or that way in a poster. Right? If you're looking in this way, right? Then it feels like you're looking to the future because of the motion of the clock. If you look the other way in a poster, it feels like you're looking back to the past. And these subliminal stuff that you know, that's just there. And some of them is learned, some of them is is inherited almost genetically. Like how the birds know which you know, which uh a snake is poisonous. They have one one trial. Yeah. get it wrong once, right? So So if that was the case, all birds would be dead by now, right? By chance, right? So somehow the birds know which snake not to mess with, right? So there's a genetic history. So So you a good user interface designer knows this, that what are the things that are naturally, you know, almost a genetic history, and what are the things that are society taught you. Right. And how much of that you can use. And so anyway, so I was involved in that the I went to school for that. the spaceship the space suit? Uh yeah, well, just that's just a design. That's like That's what's almost fashion. It's not like Yeah, yeah, yeah, no. not like the functional functionality. the functionality. But you know, but I was involved with a lot of stuff that um that were technical. But I'm not a airframe engineer. I work with them, but I'm not, you know. So anyway, but I was a consultant on for them for various things and Wow. Yeah. And so I just I just I think I just of meditation, the way I see it is you basically learn how to uh quiet your immediate field to get access to the bigger field where there's more information. Yes. And most people are just like in the immediate instance constantly splashing the pond of their immediate field. They're like all the time. Like the stuff that's right in front of them. Right in front of them. So then it's the That's the immediate language you interact with, the words you say. That's why everybody sounds so repetitive all the time. And because you constantly excited, that's where you believe the boundaries are. That's my mind. Right. But if you learn different forms of meditation, what you learn is to every time it tries to get excited, it's like asking you. It's like, "Hey, excite me again." And usually you just tap, right? Right. But then you learn to not tap. You just wait. And then eventually quiets enough and you start seeing the further parts of the mind where there's like more interconnected information. And it's actually easier to acquire a some form of genius in a lot of different things because you all of a sudden see, "Oh. Oh, I didn't realize that's like connected. Oh." Then you start like connecting all these things. Right. And essentially the ultimate path, the Buddha's path, is to stay not excited forever. Basically to to to the moment that the full dissolution of the form just happens. Yeah. But the degree to which you can do that, that's the degree to which you how far you can see into the mind space, so to speak. Well, you create or recreate. Meaning What do you mean by that? Meaning that, you know, like you you if you're on a human play plane, we have a language, we use all the same words, same phrases, same and I'm looking around and I take things and I combine them and and I recreate, regurgitate, recycle things that already are here. Yes. Yeah. Versus if I can get beyond that, if I can shut down my language center, if I shut down the chatter, right? And then I also manage to even the field filter system of filtration, which basically what we travel to the spaces. What some of the psychologs do is is just jump over that. Take a shortcut. Just shortcut. Boom. You just ride that. shoots you through the yeah. Yeah. So So technically a little bit of a cheat, but you know, we we jump over that. But you end up in the same space where, okay, I'm not bound by the language. Mhm. And I'm not bound by, you know, by the filter system. So all of a sudden I have access to things that still you didn't create it because you just bring over the potential. Mhm. You you just bring over what can be. But but you outside of this regurgitated sort of recycled human space. You're not reusing existing stuff. You have a space now to bring things over and have original thoughts. I'm doing it in an air quote because, you know, it's just my personal belief that you're just an antenna, right? And But let's say you bring it for the first time here. But yeah. That's the innovation. Manifest it. Meaning like, you know, we're living in this three-dimensional universe that we accepted as a agreed-upon reality. And and by having these meat puppets, these exoskeletons of of meat puppets, I guess I can call it, that can interact with this perceived physical world, I can create things. That sculpture exists because it was somebody's idea. And then that was a a non-tangible, just an idea. It's energy, sure, but it was non-tangible, right? So that was an idea. We we could argue about it like, you know, what what an idea is. Well, yeah, that's a good question. What is an idea? is an idea? It's energy, but yeah, but it's a conscious energy. So so that was first, and then somebody through the exoskeleton that we can control, the meat puppet, we're physically capable of bringing that into this world. The same way that I need this body and an instrument to create a guitar. Yes. piece of music, right? But but the idea, the melodies and all those things, the idea itself, we could argue about what that is and where it is from, you know. My my my personal belief that is the number of beings in the universe is one. There's one field of consciousness, and we have a capacity to capture some of it. Yeah, can you explain, I thought it was fascinating how you explained last night, you had the cup, and you were explaining there's a lid on the cup, and through these practices, whether it be meditation or whether it be smoking DMT, you can basically lift up the lid a little bit Right. and access that stream of consciousness or poke your head up above the water. Right. And um you explained, I guess you had one experience with like 5-MeO-DMT where the lid just flew away. So yeah, basically it's a think about the jar has a, you know, has a top, and you know, we we can so you're compartmentalized. You contain, and you have access to a certain amount of processing power. Yes. Right? So, so processing power meaning there's a general field of consciousness. You can call it the phenomena, you can call it God, you can call it whatever, but it's just one giant consciousness and and that's all there is. Right? And then we as these beings have a certain capacity to to capture certain amount of that. So, we have capacity to to contain or use or channel a certain amount of this energy or this conscious energy. And um And so, basically that was the idea like, you know, like you are the container. We have these physical bodies at least perceived, right? And you know, and I put my hand on the cup and look at that's all you got. And then certain meditation techniques or psychedelics started create some cracks on that cup. So, now all of a sudden you are connected to this universal consciousness and and if I was to take my, you know, hand off that cup, then you are connected. So, so somehow you almost like you you delete the membrane. Can you fill the cup up more and retain some of that and save some of it? You could grow your capacity. So, you grow your capacity of of how much of that you can access on channel or or on contain. Kind of like building a muscle? You're growing the cup. Growing the cup. Growing the cup. Yeah. So, you have a you know, and again, this is we're talking about something that we are using a language that these words and these concepts were not concepts were not really used or often used. Right? So, basically we're forcing ourselves to describe certain things that you know, there are not really words and concepts for. sure. so we're using a very rudimentary tool Mhm. when we when we talk about these things. That's why it's amazing when, you know, when we when we go into the space and we can talk about things. We both describe using language. We describe certain things that we saw or happened or experienced, right? And and that's the amazing part that you know, we we're giving you an 8-bit version of a, you know, a a 256-bit experience, right? So, it's like it's a, you know, it's a crypto punk of a Right. of what actually happened, right? So, so that's generally the the the issue that when we're talking about these things I'm using words and concepts that I'm kind of forcing They don't do it justice. Yeah, it it it Yeah, they don't, but but for the lack of a better explanation or, you know, I could say that that the point is to crack that lid open or take that lid off and, you know, the worst part of actually coming back from that space is understanding like I'm getting dumber by the second. saying. Right. Like I feel it like, man, I understand everything. I'm right here. And then you have to come back and then you're getting dumber by the second. Because as you're losing that that connection or you're losing that access is is like Well, I I've never met anybody dumb who's done a lot of DMT. Everybody I've ever talked to who does a lot of DMT, they're super [ __ ] smart. Right. Well, it's relative. I'm dumb compared to what, you know, and it's It's one of those things. But I think in general with the all contemplative practices from meditation to psychedelics, any seeking beyond the immediate space that we're familiar with, the best part of it is the practice. Like in the difference the main difference between the eastern way of doing things and the western way of doing things is that in the eastern way of doing things, the emphasis is fully on the practice and the experience of it versus the theory and the the stuff that you believe about it, right? The dogma, whatever it is. You might believe all the stuff about Jesus, but be nothing like Jesus. Yes. And you might believe nothing about Jesus, but be exactly like Jesus. Just by understanding certain things about life, about experience. And the point of you know, well, in Vipassana, for example, the main the main point is to keep your lid open as long as you possibly can, and you don't resist, and you don't push. And then what you watch happening is that all these little wiggles that trying to convince you that something is important right now. Eventually, when enough time passes, and that thing expresses itself fully, you realize it wasn't. And then there's only so many times this can happen to you before you realize, oh. just wait. What Say that again? all the little wiggles Yeah, so the little wiggles, what I mean is that all these little things that all the little convictions you have of like what you {quote} and {unquote} must do right now, right? You're like you sit there, we can make it specific. You sit there, you just basically, you know, you scan your body in a particular way. You're trying to do that, and thoughts constantly interrupt, right? Like, oh, I got to itch this place. So, that's a that's a simple one, right? Like, everybody's familiar with that. Okay, well, what happens if you don't itch? So, the conviction in the immediate moment, the mind goes like, oh, the world's like, I got to itch. Like, that's not a what if. Like, no, we got to itch right now, okay? And then you practice slowly, okay, well, then let's stay 5 more seconds. And then you wait. And then eventually, that itch goes away like it never existed. And that feeling of complete conviction that you have to itch goes away with it. So, this So, this sounds like, oh, that's just like an itch. Well, everything is like this. The thought is like, oh, whoa, I got to call this person right now. Cuz I don't know, like, they're going to get upset, or like, all these stories you have, right? Okay. If I mean, listen, if it's important, and you know, they need to get in your house to fix something, okay, I get it. But you don't need to panic about it. But usually most things are not as important as we believe they are. Yeah. And the point is that the stress that is created in our bodies because we are convinced that we have to do X or Y are actually a much bigger problem than any X or Y. So basically what you practice is how do you let things go literally? Not in terms of how do you not push, not pull? If something is pleasant, how do you not get attached to it like well, I want more of that. Or if something unpleasant happens, how do you not immediately recoil and try and push it away versus like hey, you can fix it if it's uncomfortable, but you don't need to like freak out about it. It's like okay, how do I just stay with it for a second? That's really the main practice. Now, from that from that simple practice, you start understanding that really it's the concentric circles, the the fractal of life. Everything is like this. So, when you try and get to like a solution of to something complicated under pressure you can be more or less successful in it, but you will for sure be more successful in it more more of the times if you can have a more quiet mind. A mind that is not constantly trying to compete with a million ideas of what's important, what's not important. If you know how to quiet that pond the right ideas find you immediately. It's like it's almost like it's obvious as I just got to pick up this cup. Yeah. Versus all these competition that happens in your mind. So, I think that ultimately when you're looking at all the practices meditative practices and the psychedelics the laid part is just the realization that your immediate space is not everything and most of the time you don't have to make as much effort to achieve things as you think you do. It's more of just your neuros- neurosi- I don't even know how to pronounce that word. How do you say it in your How do you say that word? What what is the word? Neurosis? Neur- Neur- Any neurosis? Neurosis. Neurosis. There you go. There you neurosis. The Hungarian guy Yeah, as the Hungarian guy. Yeah, correct. neurosis So your neurosis is basically the thing that really convinces you that something is wrong. When in reality you could have just relaxed and not say anything. So this is like this is actually a perfect example right now, right? So it's making you like basically this is basically you're comparing something like myopia of the mind to Perfect example. forest for the trees. I was I just want to say this was a super interesting for me. I'm watching you guys talk and every single thing you guys are saying is so fascinating to me and I'm like and I'm like oh yeah I have like I want to I want to say this thing about it, right? And then I was like okay, but then you just wait a second and then oh it was it was expressed. I was like oh perfect. But but imagine how much this happens in life, right? Where you just like kind of like oh I got to I got to I got to do this. I was like well what was your goal your goal was that that idea would be expressed? Well, it was just expressed. So don't worry about it. Right. Yeah, just relax. Just relax. But that is very difficult to do because we always want the the the self-expression. And we want to in some in some way to existence is already implying you there. And if you can be comfortable with not being implied the degree to which you can be comfortable with not being implied is the exact degree to which you're free. Because if you are okay with to be completely to dissolve into the background that's essentially nirvana. You just it doesn't matter. You just kind of float there. Now I given that's a that's a very difficult thing to achieve because you know, but that's really that that is the ultimate seat of the ultimate path where there's really you can enjoy whatever happens and you can you know, you can go through very difficult times when they do happen. But this the extra suffering on top of it with all the inner struggle of the mind doesn't actually have to be there and you can just let it go. It It almost It seems so counterintuitive to the way civilization is going, right? Because like everything we do, like everyone is just in such a rush to get [ __ ] done. You know? And it's like what to what end? That's what makes technology advance. That's what makes things more convenient. That That makes more money. And like that's what's pushed our society so far like to where it is now to where we literally have self-driving cars and headsets where you can [ __ ] [ __ ] other people across the world on and like all this crazy [ __ ] But but that's a great example. Like in a company, there's never even when they say uh uh you know, they they have an upward driven trend, right? But when like a company cannot stand the idea that there is a downwards trend of some sort. Like there's a flux in everything, right? So if over 20 years the company always makes money, but some years it goes a little down. The year that it goes a little down, everybody are losing their minds. Why? You know what I mean? Like it's just part of a natural flow. Like if if if if the company is constantly losing money, it's just not working. Okay, that's a different story. But if you can have like you said, the the myopic nature of it is a perfect perfect way of describing it. It's if you can just relax around the down downwards trends, which is literally in everything. You can't escape it in stock market, in in in in natural processes, in your life, in every Sell sell sell sell sell Buy buy buy buy buy And again, it's okay. Dude, I'm online. Exactly. No, and this is why I keep saying, you know, I'm like I'm I love technology, but it's absolutely true that if we don't if we have everything and yet we still can't enjoy it, what's the point of every everything? Right. Yeah, it's finding that balance basically. So, I think that's what we were talking about is is the end of childhood. For end of spiritual spiritual childhood for this planet is coming. That's why these conversations and especially exploring these spaces we we talk about psychedelics and DMT is is coming because because what you guys right now talk about we're talking about is this chaos. What's happening on this planet? This this chaos comes comes from a a very simple place. Again, none of us know what the hell is going on. What is our purpose? Why are we here? What is it we supposed to do? Yes. And in that chaos of not knowing what we supposed to do is where all this happens. Let's build this. Let's build that. Like there are obvious things that we as humans we trying to get away as far possible let's say physical labor and difficulties. So, we build machines and we we build help that alleviate that that necessity. Now, eventually we going there when when human labor will be completely eliminated, right? Um or most of it will be eliminated. AI and technology and robots will do most of those things and and when that happens that will be a a massive change how this planet behaves because once human labor is unnecessary that that will crush completely the financial systems because you if you don't work, how do you afford the things that are being produced? And so that will completely change how money and finances and everything works and how society works. Also, it will give you the freedom that now you can do really whatever the hell you wanted to do because you your physical labor is not necessary. Also, the exploitation of that will has to end because we don't need you to you know, see them and and harvest those, you know, I don't know, rice crops or whatever the hell. Or you don't need to go and mine because robots are doing that, right? So, that that is coming. That is definitely coming. And but there's the spiritual side of that that that we're going back to the times where, you know, the the great philosophers from from ancient times when we they had the time to sit around and think about what the hell is going on. Yeah. Right? Yeah. And so so I think our society or species, I should say, is going back to that point where we we will what we're doing and core is what what what we're talking about, what our connection is like me and Danny, you know, and a a bunch of people who are in this space talking about is like, "Okay, there are answers in that space." And and and humanity, the entire species, needs to figure this out. The Because again, there is science. Is science important? Yeah, but what science is is is basically looking for answers for the same question. Why are we here? What's going on? Mhm. Or if you just think about uh if if science is looking for explanations, well, thanks. You explained how it works, but that doesn't give me the answer why am I here still. Right. Right? So, if you can scientifically explain how I exist or scientifically explain the processes in my biology and all that stuff, cute. Awesome. Uh yay, right? But still did not answer the ultimate question. Mhm. What the hell is going on? Why are we here? Why this is happening? Mhm. The way that science is done now, I feel like it basically decided that there's one modality to understand the world. Yes. So, the original question was always, "What is going on?" Right? And then people came about went about it in different ways through religious uh religion, philosophy, fill in the blank. Science came along and it was another way of coming at what's going on. Yeah. But it produced a certain amount of tangible goods through that method that kind of verified it on a different level because it made something that everybody can see regardless to their, you know, inner seeking. So like they just like, "Oh, it made a camera. It made this. It made that." Yeah. And it is a very very strong tool. Mhm. But I think what the confusion became then is that that is the ultimate modality, where of course it isn't. So like I always say that Science? Yeah, well, capital S science for me in the grand scheme of things has to be just the enterprise of human understanding. That's it. Which should include all the inner science, which is like the what it's like to be you, what it's like to be a society. It has to do with everything that is contained within what we call existence, including experience and everything else. So contemplative science is part of science, capital S science. Mhm. And it's only when we're going to start understanding that it's one project and bringing it together. So like the technical stuff, but also the hard problem of consciousness. Like what is actually the connection between consciousness and all the technical stuff and how it works. And what Zoltan was alluding to is that I we just started the Code of Reality Inc. So I guess it it will it's just in its infancy and I asked Zoltan to be on the board of directors just to kind of help guide the process. He has a lot of experience both in, you know, building things, understanding what works. Mhm. And our ultimate goal is to basically bring as many smart people from all the possible domains together to work on this problem without feeling the pressure of either being ridiculed or like we want to create a coherent picture of what it's like to have what we call capital S science. So like the human the enterprise of human understanding. No, well, not institutionalized. More like how do you create a container for people to come together? There's there's already thing By the way, this is not necessarily that So there's a, you know, there are scientific endeavors that are doing it in that way or starting to do it in that way. Um um Santa Fe Institute are doing that that's a known thing. They bring interdisciplinary um minds onto a project. So, like if they have a problem in engineering, yeah, they would still bring philosophers or even musicians to think about the problem together because there's certain understandings from other domains that are much more holistic if you if you approach it that way. Now, and that those are very important things. And we want to create something that will put even a bigger emphasis on the fact that, "Hey, you're bringing your scientist, a physicist, uh a really like experienced psychonaut Yeah. work together to understand cuz I keep hearing these like people think that somehow domains shouldn't be talking to each other. They'll say like, "Why are you talking about your experience with DMT from the perspective of physics?" I'm like, "What do you mean? Like what Why wouldn't I?" Like, "It's part of whatever's going on." Right? Like, "Yeah, but that that's something has to do with the mind." I'm like, "Wait a second. Is whatever the mind not somehow related to everything else that is physical?" And this is super smart people. And they they keep there's this there's this confusion that somehow there's this separation because of the domains that we've created in our minds. "No, that's biology. It has nothing to do with physics." What are you talking about? Of course it has to do with physics. We just don't understand that connection. So, we want to create a container for people to express themselves in that environment in a way that will build towards a common goal versus just having like a patchy kind of interaction online that sometimes maybe somebody will stumble upon some information somebody else did in a different domain. We want to bring it together. And there's also it's also by nature this thing you can't really study this thing with the scientific method. Which one specifically? With the DMT. With the DMT experience. With the laser. Like it's Well, I mean Gallimore's doing that right? Define science, right? Right. Like the science, like the the reductive uh method of solving a pro- or figuring out what the [ __ ] is going on here, right? Like I don't agree. I think it's just broader. So, I think it's just like how wide the ontology you include. So, right now, if we're you can't actually put it in a [ __ ] on a on a scale and weigh it, you know what I mean? You're right. But you're talking about science when we look at science from that observation point of I measure. I measure and I verify processes and and see if it's repeatable, right? Yes, exactly. But here's the thing, is it repeatable? Yes, because we are going regardless of the method, regardless of what way, and it is a chemical process. So, this is scientific. Something happens that a molecule gets introduced to your mind and all of a sudden it switch something on that I can access spaces that otherwise unaccessible to me. And when another person, and many of us, you know, doing the same thing, and then we can talk about verifiably the same thing, that you see the same things in that place, right? Even if you if even as a scientist you will well, you guys all hallucinating. It is pretty strange if you're hallucinating the same things. So, it needs to be explored, right? So, you know, at what the science look at things like it's science if it's repeatable and verifiable. Well, you know, we you can talk about a lot of psychonauts and they're going to tell you draw you the same, let's say, beings that they saw, the same places that they saw, right? So, it's verifiably verifiably we have similar experiences. So, that means we absolutely as as a species we need to explore this, right? Beside, you know, your body generally is the empty, right? So, your lungs and your your mind is manufacturing this to begin with, crazy. right? So, you know, so so needs to be. Now, if if I just go from the individual perspective and I say, "Okay, um I'm in the space and I I seeing structures, incredible structures, like like incredible complicated cathedral-like structures, right? When the Notre Dame is child's toy compared to what I'm seeing. Okay. Then, you know, let's say if let's say I'm I'm hallucinating. All right. Let's go with that route. If I am, then clearly my mind is capable of of creating such complicated structures that was before unknown to me. If my mind can imagine these incredible things on its own, that means I need to step out of the way and let this mind roam and create and bring these things here. Yeah. Or I am going to something that exist, something that is tangible. And this is when, you know, the scientist drop off. Like, "Oh, you know, we don't But if I can go back to the same places, which I can. I've been mapping this for over a decade and going to same places, have familiar places, and then we have conversations with people who also going into the space. That That's what I mean, like childhood ends. This conversation is now out in the open. I haven't been talking about this, but I am because now a lot of people start to understand, so we have common references. If 15 years ago I told you or told anyone this, they would look at me like, "You're crazy." We have to have a common reference. Not enough people being in this place when we have common references. There's a common library. Even words that we use. People talk about the machine elves. Yeah. And everybody knows what you're talking about. Whoever been in that place. It came from Terence, right? Right. But But the thing is like when you have many many many people saying the same thing, then it's like, "Okay, there's something to this, obviously, right?" So, if that's the case, then then these places we're going to are more likely to exist than not. And what would fulfill the scientific, you know, question here? That if we can talk about the same place completely independently, describe it to each other, many of us, and it aligns, is parallels, then the absolutely we need to explore this. So, I think I think it's it's an absolute necessity. That's why I said there's four casts. There are child that the flower child that jump into the space and like, "Woohoo! Colors and explosions, awesome." There's that. Then there's the scientific minds, the the explorers like us who go into this place and like, "Okay, what's happening here? We're going in there with a purpose and a question and and and explore. And then there's the the scientist who would like to measure things and looking from the outside. And there are research on this, right? But they're not researching it with using the molecule. So, you cannot have the experience. So, that's that's, you know, it's like that's a difficult that that's the barrier right there. And there are the unaware who have no idea To be fair, the MTX is doing that, but I would say they are one facet of a much larger attempt at this, and it shouldn't be limited to the way they're doing it. And I I think the main difference to what you said about that it's I guess you can't quantify it, that's because you didn't have a wide enough of a sample Right. of it. So, it was repeatable, but not repeatable enough, right? Now it's repeatable enough because you have more people doing it more often, and they can actually So, you had Dennis on, right? The legendary Dennis McKenna. Yeah. What a what a wonderful book uh the that that he wrote about Brotherhood from the Screaming Abyss. Incredible book. Um and here's the thing, what happened to him was particularly interesting to me because he was the one experiencing this incredible opening of whatever happened to them in La Chorrera, and it is also the thing that made him recoil and go a different route into science. And then somehow through science he acquired this this separation factor that I feel that that when you trained in proper science, it happens because you basically are trained to be less and less fooled by your own uh inadequacies and thoughts and all of that stuff. But it's almost like you're now being convinced that there is no place to your convictions and all the stuff that you're experiencing. And the truth is that everything we do is just conviction in the aggregate. Everything we do as like I always say, especially in neuroscience, is some consensus between what we can see that the brain is doing at the time that somebody's reporting something. Yeah. And then we just collect that data over many, many individuals. But that's Right. value is from somebody reporting something to you, right? So if you have enough of a sample, and this is where things like the code actually come into play because they're repeatable enough for you to potentially try and actually probe in a way that you would anything else in science. It's not like when you go and see the beings, like, "Well, describe to me the being." Well, "Uh it was a big spider." Wait, was it purple? No, it was black. Interesting. Okay, but you saw purple one? Yeah. Hmm. I wonder how many years it would take us to get reach any kind of consensus this way, especially cuz we know that the worst kind of data point on the planet is hearsay by a witness, right? So it's like, "Okay, you have to be able to record directly from the brain, right?" Mhm. But if you have something as concrete as the code you can potentially do like perturbations to it, see if actually something changes. Now, it might pan out to different degree and not pan out to other degrees, but that gives you the that gives you the freedom to actually exploit it in that way. Now, to be fair, again, you know, specifically with the code people like Gallamore, in a very good faith way, from a scientific standpoint, say, "Well, you know, I do think that with all my expertise I'm saying that yes, there are hallucinations that should be able to be mapped on this perfectly as you're describing. Fair enough, let's explore that proposition. There must be ways The question should never be like, can you explain it away with science? It should be, okay, is there a counterpoint to what I'm saying? Yes, great. Let's explore how we can discern then whether it is what A or B. We should come up with experiments to make the discernment versus saying, can science explain it? In the way that we perceive it currently? Sure, but we should explore how it explains it. And maybe what we should question is certain assumptions that science makes about the world. Because I think at this point it's pretty clear that at least physicalism as it's perceived in the most uh, you know, naive way of it, which is like there's just physical matter and then there's just arising from physical matter. I think that's pretty clearly out. So, I think it was really interesting what Gallimore said on that video where he was explaining um, what you explained in the podcast was this term called objecthood. Yeah. So, it's like this idea of, and correct me if I'm [ __ ] this up, but like you you see I see this can, right? And I know it's a can because I've seen this a million times before, right? And I know it's on the table because I've seen this table a million times before, blah blah blah blah. But if I'm it's the first time I'm seeing this can, I'm going to be like, whoa. Like it's going to like freak I'm not going to know what to think of it because I don't have any sort of frame of reference for this can, right? To know that it's real and it's sitting here on this table. It just a small correction I think matters. It wouldn't be the can, it would be a can that is of a completely different gestalt. So, you have what's called gestalt. So, they're they're basically frames, right? So, you have this is the way we perceive the world at the moment. You can think of this level of qualia for each and every one of us as a gestalt. So, it's like a okay, that it has a quality to it that I recognize that I never think about cuz this is the water I swim in. But this can is part of the gestalt. It's like it's I know. So, if another can appears with a different writing on it, you're not going to freak out. You're like, why does it say you know, this these letters? Right. what happens in DMT, which is why it's so interesting to so many people, Mhm. that there's no argument about that. The reason it's so unique is because it's a completely different gestalt. Like, it's a completely different thing that you've never experienced before if you've never done it before. That would be equivalent to that Kenny is describing. Mhm. But even in that space, uh and this is where it gets kind of dicey because on the one hand, Gallimore's point is the reason that DMT is so interesting from a neuroscientific perspective is that it seems to be extremely coherent. And we know the brain is not just receiving like a camera, but it basically does a lot of guesswork according to what it already knows to happen. So, it's projecting from the inside. So, if something immediately became uh comes to you that you've never seen before, of a completely different flavor, and it's super coherent, well, that's difficult to explain in neurological terms because the brain is not just again receiving like a camera. They usually have some some form of uh inner representation of it. With the case of the code, and this is why it's very unsatisfying because you kind of have to see it to really understand that point. There's when you project the laser on the surface, the reason that it's very difficult to postulate that it's somehow the result of the light hitting that particular surface in a particular way combined with a really psychedelic substance because whatever you see is not even on the surface. Mhm. It's like it's almost like you're now seeing a subspace that is hovering Yeah. within our space, and it goes infinitely into the Z axis with extreme coherence, and it doesn't kind of dissipate as you would expect of a random pattern to be. It just It It's a completely coherent framework. It's its own gestalt, and it's completely coherent on its own right. eyes are open once you It's not So, correct if I'm wrong, I've only done DMT once. Yeah. So, when you see stuff, is it typically in 3D space when your eyes are open? Or is most of the stuff you see with your eyes closed? You mean in DMT or in general? Yeah. It depends what you do with your Yeah. Like remember when you saw you saw this console? it's a choice. You can choose. It's a choice. Yeah, you can choose both. So some of it would be This is why it's dicey because some of it would be mapped on as a result of the extreme condition your brain is under and in that way your brain might be transforming some things you already see and transforming it into something else. Okay. But the claim that we're making is there's other things that are not the result of that. They actually exist and you become aware of them. So now the question is how do you discern? How do you make that discernment? Yeah. Which is where the the conversation around the word objecthood comes in. Yeah. Gallimore's correction, just to be super fair to what I said on your latest podcast, was that uh Anil Seth is using the word objecthood not to describe some objective component of what real objects would would have. Mhm. Now, I it's not actually what I was saying, but I understand his correction because maybe it came across as if I was saying that. So I'm not saying that objecthood, that quality that Anil Seth is talking about, is somehow an objective component and this is how we can discern what's real and what's not real. Right. But it is a good enough of a parameter to use to triangulate what might be more that thing that just exists and we become aware of versus the thing that is like a hallucination where it's just a something your brain saw that is now incorporating into a larger cognitive structure that it's making it's by itself. Because for all intents and purposes, the one point that is constantly being missed, what is physical matter? Because in the end of the day, even if it's all mind, even if it's idealism and you know, mind is the most fundamental thing, whatever you picture about the world, something is regular enough that you can't walk through the wall. Right. And I actually asked this when we when I was out with Galmo, we were like meeting face-to-face and I asked him like, "But what is in the in the context of everything you know, right? How would you define what's out there? Like what is this physical thing?" And he goes like "The multi-billion dollar question, man. Like that is the question because even if you do believe that everything is spiritual stuff ultimately, something is happening that prevents you from going through the wall." Yeah. And that part that there's a rule set. And that part is constantly being overlooked by modern neuroscientists, it seems, that they're saying, "No, but it's all you know, it's all mind." I'm like, "Sure, but we have to talk about what is it that gives it this quality of being physical because there's clearly a difference between that and what I'm like there's a reason why it's so difficult to manipulate the physical stuff and it's so much easier to manipulate the mind stuff, right? There's a there's a lack of malleability there that needs to be talked about. This is why physics has to enter the picture and you have to combine our understanding of physics because there yes, they are abstractions, nobody has ever seen an atom and all of that jazz. Sure, that's true. However, these abstractions help us to understand certain functionalities that we can make predictions on and it checks out. So like the reason we can build complicated things is because we understand something about these processes. So how do these processes then connect to what we call consciousness? Not just from a philosophical perspective because where DMT is is exactly this margin. It is the event horizon between the physical and the non-physical because it is so profoundly real Mhm. and at the same time not physical. So it kind of you know, like the event horizon is like that's where quantum physics and and classical physics meet because it's such a extreme condition. Extreme conditions allow us to investigate the deeper parts of nature. Right. DMT is an extreme condition that allows us to probe into that question. What is the connection between the physical and the non-physical? Like look at your dreams. You can have a a dream where your eyes are closed, but you're dreaming on of the beach. Mhm. There's light on the beach, right? Your eyes are closed, but you're experiencing in your dream a full color, the smell, the feel, and you can have even a lucid dream that you wake up from and not even sure at the moment when you wake up like, "Oh, was that real? Oh my god." You're still almost physically affected by the dream. What happened there? Right? How real is that? And what's the difference between right now and the dream? Right. Right? And there's so there's this idea that not proven yet, but the idea is that DMT is the reason that that's the fuel for the dreams. for the dreams. Mhm. Right? That's the fuel fuel from the dream dreams. And so, when we talk about that event horizon, right? And you look at the the dreams and how real is that and how real is this, right? Uh the only difference is when you talking about the the mind's work, it's the same. The only difference is that that in this reality that we perceive, if I move this cup and I wake up tomorrow, it will be still there, right? So, wherever it is, tomorrow I come back and it will be there. So, there is some kind of a permanence of of this. When we And the code has that. Right. That's what I meant by the code code has object code. It's clear to you it's there. Yeah. Just by observing it. So, now it's very difficult in linguistic terms to So, to give you the, you know, people now email me all the time obviously with like billion theories, right? And there are as many theories as there are people, right? That's the easy part. You can come up with all kinds of theories. What I'm personally interested in is what is it that we can postulate about the world along the lines of what we're talking about here with like the connection between consciousness and physicality that is actionable, repeatable, testable. Most of it will not pan out, just like in everything else in science. But my point is it should squarely fall within the purview of what mainstream science is, and it should stop being this mar- margin thing that we're doing, because it is the central substance of what, in fact, is going on. We have to be able to say something concretely about what it is, instead of keep relying on very vague general statements like, "Well, the brain is a very powerful machine." Like, okay, well, you said nothing, cuz like, sure, you just said I have a magic wand that can do anything. That didn't explain nothing. So, like, what is it that that magic wand is doing specifically to make A or B or C happen, and how it relates to what we can actually probe? What you know, I'm I'm in the habit of talking some about some of my ideas, but only to illustrate that there are concrete ways along which we're thinking about this. They might not pan out, but here are propositions. What I'm trying to do is to encourage more smart people to think about this in these terms, in serious terms. I think the holographic principle is exactly correct. And there is a way to map. So, the holographic principle is a principle in physics. I think we talked about it a little bit last time. But essentially, I want to see if we can map onto what is happening with the laser and us and the universe in term in terms of a hologram. What is each component in the in the in the setup of a hologram that maps onto what our real world is? Cuz the holographic principle is one of the most promising frames in physics at the moment. So, I think it's exactly correct, which is that we are a holographic projection from a two-dimensional filament. I think we're a three-dimensional projection from a from a four-dimensional Sorry, four-dimensional projection from a three-dimensional filament, but that will take us far afield. But, I think that in in a hologram, you have the source light coming in. It's being split by a beam splitter. Each beam goes its separate ways. This one goes through a set of two mirrors or one mirror. This one goes through a set of two mirrors or one mirror. And then this one goes to an object, hits a screen. Okay? That screen records the information that the beam hit after it already passed the object. So, if the the the first beam comes from here, hits the mic, from the mic it goes to a screen, the screen records the information, just like in a photo. Yeah. Okay? Now, the difference between a photo and a hologram is that the second beam that was split from the original beam comes through the set of mirrors from the side now, and it meets this first beam here right before it hits the surface. So, stereoscopic. Essentially, it it measures not just the amplitude, but also the the phase shift. And that gives you this ability to basically measure more information about from all directions of the whatever it hit, the mic in this case, instead of just hitting the two-dimensional imprint of the mic, okay? Yeah. So, what I think Here's one proposition of the how to think about this problem, and we'll see if it checks out. I think that we, our consciousness, whatever it is, is the ref- This is called the reference light, the one that comes from here. So, I think we are the reference light, literally. Our consciousness is a form of light. It's a reference light that hits the source light that came from here, and where they meet, the source light and the and the reference light, Where's the source light coming from? Big question. So, that might be the source, God, whatever you want to call it, okay? There's if you want to use the esoteric terms. I don't know what the source is. I have no idea. Whatever started it all, okay? But, where they meet at the sheet, which in our case I would say it's the bulk, which is space-time, okay? The the sheet that registers everything is the substrate of the whatever physical matter is, whatever space-time is, okay? So, when the reference light and the source light meet, that instance, together with the bulk, they create the the triangle that creates conscious moment. Conscious moment, conscious moment. It's the information being registered in real time. And I call it the pistons of consciousness. Like it's that of like instances of actual consciousness. Now, this sounds super theoretical, esoteric. Cool. I think there's a way to map this in a way that is testable. Because we can say, "Okay, if this is the reference light and this is the so If we are the reference light, certain things would be true and other things would not be true." Like What are they? Uh for example, there would be an related angle to perception, specifically with light, so diffraction for example, that would yield a certain kind of observation, the second we get to the details of it, and wouldn't yield other kinds of observations. So, if I make the turn 30 30°, it would create a certain coherence of the image, and if I go 50°, it might not create the same amount of Now, we have to get to the details of of that, and I need a lot smarter people than myself to actually like think about that because there's a lot of math involved. Yeah. But, here's an example of how you can think about this specifically. You have to come up with a theoretical framework that would lend itself perfectly for experimentation, and then you have to run the tests. Ah, we tried 30°. Didn't work. That must have been wrong. Mhm. As Feynman famously said, "If it disagrees with experiment, it's wrong." That's the part that I feel that is missing. You either have people that are so far deep into the experiential side that they simply don't care about experiment, they just want to keep everything being whatever they think it is, and you have the other side the extreme on the other side which you have you have this form of rigidity where people just go like no it's only what can we can verify with external tools. Yes. That's another component of it I agree but it is not the whole picture. There's certain things that we as the collectors of data that we are can experience that at the moment other instruments can't and that should be taken into account. Mhm. It complicates things I agree because people have aspirations ideas confabulations we're not a perfect you know thing. But even though it complicates things it's the only way to go. Mhm. You have to include what we're experiencing if we see that we can you know recruit the right kind of people that are interested in finding out what's true instead of you know constantly just believing whatever it is. So you have to kind of bring it to a central point where you both take into account the hard experiments but you also take into account our uh agreements of what we think is going on in that Yeah. instance and then somewhat to get But this is just an example I'm not saying it will necessarily pan out but there are ways to think about these things Yes. in concrete ways and I want to encourage more of that and I and I do think that actually explains quite a bit. So for example if you look at a hologram from the side like a regular hologram right if you can envision it. If you notice the third the reason I'm saying we're four-dimensional hologram and not a third-dimensional hologram is because the hologram on a on a when you look at it it's actually three-dimensional only in it's implied. Because it's a two-dimensional sheet. The third dimension is implied. The fact that it looks like it has depth right? But there's no actual degree of freedom if you would be that hologram you you can't actually move in the third direction. You just it's just implied. But you can move in two do it the degrees of freedom. You can't you can't walk around it and and see it from all angles. you would be that hologram you can't right? But we can move in three dimensions which means that we can't possibly the third one is not implied. The third one is actual, which means so there has to be one more dimension that is implied, and I'm claiming that's time. The reason we cannot move in time on our whim because time is implied. It seems to be there. This the the the change from moment to moment that we experience seems to be there just like the third dimension is implied in a hologram. But we have three degrees of freedom. So we're a four-dimensional hologram projected from on a two-dimensional sheet, which is the bulk, which is space-time itself. Now you can say, "Well, the bulk is actually four-dimensional." I'm saying that time is actually implied. The bulk is the surface of it is three-dimensional. And again, this actually lends itself to real experimentation. Like is there ways to curve the surface in a way that we can see that if we do that, then time would appear to move slower or faster depending on our perception of it, which we know to actually happen, right? And again, This is what we can do forward or we can do forward time travel. Like that's been proven. Well, at least your perception of it is, right? Like you use it's like the somebody charges you $50 to move a 50 minutes in the future, and then you just go in there. It's like, "Okay, it'll take you 50 minutes to move 50 minutes in time." You have to somehow explain what appears to us to be the case in terms of what we think the larger structure is, which is what the business that physics is in, right? It's just that it's constantly omitting the first-person experience. And I'm saying you cannot omit it anymore. You have to somehow explain the fact that we're experiencing things a certain way. It's part of existence. And neuroscience will tell you, "Well, you know, these perceptions, these apparent time changes in your perception, they're just in your perception." Fair enough. But is there a way to test for that? Is there Is it possible that time for you is actually moving slower just like physically it's moved slower closer to a mass in physics. Is it possible that it's actually your brain is taking less computational steps? Is it possible that it's actually moving slower because of whatever happens in your mind? I don't know, but I'm I'm claiming there's a there's a way to discern these things and it needs to be entertained more seriously in that way. Whoa. I'm I'm going to pretend like I understood everything you just said. And then you can ask a question about time. Is there such thing? Yeah. Just the perception of it. Yeah. Well, that's that's an interesting idea, right? The the perception of time and and time being a dimension. Um and like how does how does the dimension of time specifically relate to DMT? I don't I don't know. I One one thing before you jump into that, I do want to say it cuz it's important. We just conducted the first official magnets experiment that for all intents and purposes, I think I think most likely is actually bunk. Like I think it actually doesn't work. Okay. But here's an example of us actually trying something. Okay. I doesn't see something happened there one time actually with my fiance weirdly enough. All the subjects including myself we couldn't see any difference. So the experiment was we put a magnet behind the surface, we projected the laser on the surface from the other side, we smoked DMT, we look at it. And I thought we're going to see some change because of the if magnet is powerful enough in the back. Behind the surface. So if I if I just have a sheet of paper, I put a magnet here so you can't see it from here, right? And then you project the laser from this side. Yep. And then I'm smoking DMT and I'm seeing the code. I thought that if the magnet is powerful enough, I would be be to see some kind of a change from this side that will tell me where the magnet is even though I can't see the magnet. You understand? Understand, yeah. I couldn't. Nothing, no change. So far for us, no. However, there was one instance where we have to we had a camera from above that sees like like almost like sees both sides at the same time. Um my fiance, she just kind of jumped in and she just like uh we probably Aaron got very mad. He's like, "We can't use this for the like, okay." But for the experiments, like might be viable. She she saw well, she didn't see, but she I guess guessed five times in a row where the magnet was, exactly. Mhm. So that was strange because I have to admit I didn't see any difference. Okay. So either there's some other component here we don't understand or she just got super lucky. I don't know. We have to look through the data. But I just I I just want to emphasize this because this is how it should be. This is how people should go about this. They should try whatever it is they think that might work. I don't know I don't know why we didn't think of actually putting cuz we had not that powerful magnets, but they were pretty powerful, like 100-lb magnets. And we should have used more of them like also on the laser itself to see if anything and we had the my good friend Pablo was an engineer. He helped us create the rotating magnets experiment by Persinger. Uh he created helped us create a device who by the way was suggested by John Chavez. Shout out to John. Who also by the way invested in our film quite a bit, so thank you, John. And basically, the rotating magnets is something we can maybe put the laser in between and rotating the magnets and see if that does a difference. We didn't do that. We're learning. The point the larger point is there should be more of that. We should just test this in this way and if it doesn't pan out, doesn't pan out, but we're going to keep trying. Mhm. And I want to encourage more of that. This insistence that the I where I feel that I mostly depart with the way that Andrew uh chooses to go about this. Again, I have tremendous respect for him and I you know, we had since then really great conversations. But where I would openly disagree with him is that there's this insistence that DMT is so crazy that there's no way anytime soon we will ever be able to make sense of it. I'm saying that attitude actually shoots you in the foot cuz if you decided that, of course you're not going to make progress. You have to believe that it's possible to actually discern certain things. Yeah. And maybe even he does think that in other ways maybe he just disagrees with the specific way which which I'm doing it. But this is the way I choose to go about it and I want to encourage more people to do that and not to get caught up in what they want to be true. If it doesn't work out, say it doesn't work. So we can proceed to the next thing. So we can try another thing. So we can all think about it together. Well, here I think I and one of the things that he said which struck me was um or one of the questions that he asked was what makes this code any more real than anything else that you see in DMT world, right? Like for example, to what It's closer to what this is. It appears to be what this table is. So it's it's it's it's it's always the same thing no matter who it is. it's as real I'm claiming it's as real as Jupiter is there. That's what makes it different. Huh. So like when you explained that console thing that you saw, you you explained that sitting in 3D space that was anchored Yeah, it's just existing in real to the floor. You could walk around it and see all around this whole thing that was there. So it was similar to that. it all the time. So that would be the equivalent of Oh, you still see it all the time. 100% of the time. Every time I smoke. Every time you smoke you see the console? Oh, yeah. Holy [ __ ] I I Did I send you the the uh our Laszlo, our VR guy, what is he's much more than a VR guy, but he's also a VR guy. Uh-huh. Uh he created a like a fully immersive environment with the representation of the console in it. And it really delivers how real it is. Now, this is like uh Zoltan says an eight-bit version of the real thing. Cuz so, but it delivers how real that is for me. But that's just me. The reason the console is much less impactful is because I can't I don't know what to do to make other people see the console. Oh, right. Okay, I see. But I can show you the code. you don't use any sort of external devices like the laser to see the console. The console just appears. No, it just appear It's as It's as real as this mic for me. By the way, the console is a small anecdote and unrelated to not going to be that interesting probably, but the console was doing something when we were shooting that experiment that it never did before. Usually the console opens up and has a lot of sections all over the room. And only the very small sliver of menus come in like follows me, but the rest of the console just kind of hovers in the room. It's almost like the body of the console, right? It has different sections. Mhm. One of the sections, the more physical sections, the the one that is just always there. Yeah. Came out and started scanning the people who were looking at the laser. I've never seen that before. Yeah, it was like a plate that came off it and it started It was scanning them. Like it was interested in what we were doing. I've never seen that before. Again, this is one of these like, you know, trip report. I don't know what to do with that. It's It's not a People say, "Hey, can you release the next video of the console cuz I'm working on mine." I'm like, "Dude, I I need to have some information there that I didn't have the first time and I don't have that yet. I want to I want to say something new. I don't want to just keep repeating, you know, what we've already said. And if I'm not sure, I'm not sure. Zoltan, how many times have you seen this code? So, maybe four. Four times? Four times. But, you know, the the idea is that eventually this will reach a critical mass. Um, you know, there was a time when we had an idea of what geocentric, you know, universe, right? And who thought that was geocentric? The scientists. It was It wasn't the the workers in the field. You know, it was a scientist who agreed to and, you know, so there's a scientific class agreed to something that wasn't the case. And then came, you know, Copernicus, Galileo. They were They were people who thought, well, I don't think that's the case, right? And at the time that was the craziest idea. It almost cost their lives. It definitely cost their freedom. Right? And it had to reach a critical mass where where it it flips. People start to be interested in this deeper because there's a critical mass of people, right? And that's what So, that's that's kind of what's happening that, you know, like what what what Danny was explaining is a He's actually approaching it in a very scientific way, right? Of, you know, a scientific mind will get into this space and will try to uh analyze it and and and that's the point of these experiments that is there a scientific way to uh prove beyond anecdotes that there's a code. We all saw it, right? That's That's an anecdote and how do you physically prove that? But, eventually there going to be enough people to see this code. That's what I mean by a critical mass will happen or enough people venturing this space. That's why I said end of childhood spiritually that more and more people venture in this space and our anecdotes start to, you know, be parallel. Right. When it's just simply not, you know, I'm coming from a pragmatic more of a spiritual direction than a scientific direction, but I'm just pragmatically saying like, you know, when 10,000 people say that, "Hey, man, I saw this." And our our experiences are verifiable in a way that there's a there's a mass of people that saw this, right? Then it's it's not it's not possible to ignore anymore. It It is asking for the um it is asking for the scientific community to like, "Well, we got to look at this." Mhm. Right? And the whole idea of basically creating the encoded the DMT TED Talks, the you know, that uh uh uh a community that can start comparing notes. And then there is enough data just alone by witnesses, right? Then is is it tangible evidence? Well, it's you know, when 100 people saw you rob the bank, you probably robbed the bank. Mhm. You know what I mean? It's just one of those things. Mhm. So By the way, did I tell you that we might have figured out a way to see the code without the molecule? No. What? Yeah. So, David Carter, the other board member, uh who approached me a few months ago uh with the opening line, "You don't know me, but I've been following you for a while." Which is uh What is it? And this concerning line Stalker. I get that a lot. Yeah. No, no, he's he's is incredible. Uh Carter's incredible. So, he basically I guess the best way to describe is uh who he is is a large He would say is a uh organizational expert, but I think he's a large-scale problem solver. So, basically, he worked from everything from government projects, software development, he's big into crypto and AI now. He understands what makes big processes work. He even worked on some classified uh um you know, projects. And he said, "Look, uh about a year ago, back then when he reached out to me, I ordered the laser. I saw the code. I never reached out to you, but I started basically talking about it in my circles. And because I have a certain reputation, people listen to me." He said, "When I would go to these conferences, I would like when we're were the end of the whatever, you know, conference we are, I would like whip out the laser and start showing them. And I said, "Wait, what were you showing them?" He's like, "Well, here's the thing. I have a certain kind of reputation. So, this was a prop. I was removing one more step for them to venture into. So, like instead of me telling them there's this laser, I'm like, "Oh, here's the laser." And I would just turn it on. It's It's just a simple diffracted laser, but I I was telling them like I've tried this. I've seen the code. And I'm explaining where you would see it. And people got so interested because they are looking for this like next step of like understanding. So, David recently told me that I haven't seen it myself yet, but he is, you know, there's a certain uh well, reputation that he has with like being accurate with what he's saying. He said he thinks he figured out a way to see a some uh visibility of the code with these old sensors of Sony cameras that had this night capability. And if we string a bunch of them together, I think we'll be able to see it much more coherently. Now, if it's true, that will automatically change the conversation the conversation entirely. And there's also a team from Japan that uh apparently from 2014 was collecting data from light coming from stars. And they discovered that they can actually discern statistically at this point pretty concretely that there's information in there. There's some kind of a code. There's some kind of glyphs running in there that is not pareidolia. That they can actually discern that now with machine learning. what? Pareidolia, which uh the your tendency of your brain to just make shapes out of nothing because your brain is really good at creating um uh patterns. Yeah. So, they can discern that this is not it. That it's actually real information of some sort. So, all of these things are kind of converging, but I just wanted to mention that because Zoltan keeps referring to the end of childhood of humanity. Yes. The It's It I really think that all of the stuff that I mentioned before, the these crescendos that are all arising at the same time, the reason that you have all these like very animated conversation here about, you know, God and like what are these the disclosure and all of this stuff, is because something is happening that is bigger than us, but not in an esoteric sense, but in an actual sense. It's actually happening. Mhm. And whatever it is and the reason that I guess there's maybe urgency is the wrong word, but maybe more of an attention needed on this than currently is being allocated to it. That is an important component. We can no longer pretend that it's just a 9:00 to 5:00, we go to work, everything is normal. Even the people that think of it more in terms of like the, you know, the I think the UAP community, the disclosure is a good example is because I've had the conversations with people from that community. And when I ask the question, have you ever considered what you're going to do the day after the disclosure? There's always silence. Yeah. Because that's really the important part. Okay, disclosure, now what? Like what do you think how do you envision yourself being a moment after? Yeah, you have to you have to find a new dragon to chase. That's exactly it. So, It's interesting that you said about the light out of the stars because in that space I did have that experience that it's it's much more than just light. And I saw this this this scientific paper were talking about like, well, the electromagnetic processes within a star are much more complicated and much more than the processes in our brains. So, is that possible that they have consciousness? Theoretically, yes. Yeah. Yeah. That's kind of insane. You know, but what we doing end of chapter? Like, look, if if humanity, right? Realizes its purpose. Like if that question gets answered. Of why are we here, what we are doing. Yeah. Right? That would be such event. That probably the most monumental one. And it sounds to me that you're going to most likely find that answer or get closer to that answer in that space, not in the scientific explanation of how processes work. Mhm. The processes are just a result of the much deeper space. Right. I was going to I was going to ask when you're studying this stuff and when like you try to help more people become more aware of like the only way to study this is to have obviously lots of people look at it. If you have a million people look at this thing and 900,000 see it and 100,000 don't. Or to see a way to substantiate it on a screen. Or to send the information directly into some kind of a chat GPT. But at the same time when you're saying like we're seeing this code Mhm. like how do you eliminate this confirmation bias that they're expecting this to see something? You know what I mean? Cuz isn't that isn't that a way to that people would attack this? Say look, you're these people are expecting this and they're already seeing something that's like it's not double blind. So that's So that's two separate things. One is the people attacking it, which they will. It's just natural. That's that's how you make stuff stronger. That's fine. That's fine. The the So that's a non non point for me. They people can attack it all day. If it's real, like I always say as Terence used to say, it can take the pressure. I don't mind that. Exactly. The second part of your question is even Gallimore, you haven't watched the full video yet, but at the end he says it I watched I finished it last night. Oh, you finished. Okay. So you know how he says, which is actually a self-contradicting point, which I alluded to in my response video, which is he says that um priming doesn't have this longevity that people attribute it to it with the code. And yet he himself somehow Priming doesn't have So okay. It doesn't have this longevity. So priming is if I give you a cold drink to to hold, if if you don't know me and I ask you general questions, most people would have more negative kind of things to say about the person. The same thing with a warm drink in the other way, okay? That's priming. I'm priming a certain state that makes certain general occurrences more likely. Priming does not work with specific content, hyper-specific content that I would kind of convince you. If I say So, here's we This is easily testable. If the if people think it's priming, take a group of people that you know for sure didn't hear about this, right? Sure. And then tell them about elephants. Inject it subliminally, talk to them about Do all of that. Then show them the laser. If they still tell you they see Japanese letters, can we then agree that this is not it, right? So, that's easily testable. The other point that people make, which is like, "Oh, but which by the way I've done I've told people something else and they came back and said, 'I didn't say what you told me, but I saw these weird' They said Chinese letters. Like me, I saw the gears. The gears that you see in the beginning, yeah. But it's it's just the way it appears. So, but the other point of like, "Yeah, but if you do make it big enough." I was like, "Okay, hold on. So, you're telling me that you believe that if one guy can say something convincingly enough, you can then convince the entire Earth that something is there? Well, then I think that's a whole phenomena all by itself we should study then." Because what are you talking about? People go to the DMT space all the time, right? Mhm. How do you know about the machine elves? Cuz I've listened to you talk about it all the time. Yeah. So, are are we saying, "Oh, we shouldn't talk about machine elves because if we're going to keep talking about it, it's going to be confirmational bias and then how do we know if they're real or not?" Well, the only difference here is that I'm claiming that this is actually real, which was already in the zeitgeist, already in the conversation. I think it's the level of emphasis that I'm giving it that people are uncomfortable with. They're uncomfortable with the amount of certainty I have about it. Mhm. Which I get, right? Which I get, but at a certain point you have to admit when you do know what you know. So, the reason that I'm saying things with this amount of conviction the things that I am saying I'm knowing with conviction. Again, to re- remind everybody, the only thing I'm saying that I know for sure is that whatever it is people say, "Why are you calling it the code of reality?" I don't know, it's a placeholder. It kind of looks like a self-executing code. Do I know it codes for all the environment and everything? Of course not. Here's what I know for sure. Whatever that is exists on its own side even when you're not looking. It's a real thing. Or, if you want to say, "Yeah, but everything is mine." Okay, even within that frame, whatever it is that you mean to say the external environment within within the perception that everything is mind, okay? However you want to play the language game, it is an external thing to you as you are perceiving yourself right now. That's a real thing. That's all I'm claiming. Mhm. Why I know this with an absolute amount of certainty? Well there's a certain long process I went through personally over years and years and years before I even spoke about this publicly. Mhm. Where I actually never assumed anything about it. I just allowed it to unfold. I just kind of looked at it for what it is. I didn't really land on any conclusion or anything. And eventually, with a lot of hammering into me, with like insistence from the other space to say, "Yo what else do we need to show you?" And I'm like, "Wait, so you tell me." They're like, "Yes. Yes, it's what this is." I was like, "Oh." They're like, "Thank you." So, then eventually you go, "Okay, I know this is real." I no longer feel the obligation to pretend to think that maybe I don't think that maybe. I know for sure. Does that mean that everybody has to have this amount of conviction? Of course not. Mhm. But I'm I don't feel apologetic for the amount of conviction I have because at a certain point there is such a state of the brain of the mind called knowing. It's a very limited knowing. It's a very small portion. I'm not claiming to know all ultimate secrets of the universe. but I know I can't walk through the wall. Do I know this? Yes, I know this. Do you know this? Yes. And anybody who insists otherwise is just playing a weird language game, right? You know you can't walk through the wall. Let's not be silly. Okay, I know that the code is there as much as I know that I can't walk through the wall. So, at a certain point, I have every right to have the conviction that I have, and I can defend these convictions, and every anybody else has the right to criticize my convictions, which is exactly the situation we're in. The The move that the other side sometimes makes is like, "If you would just have less conviction, I would be more comfortable with it." Well, that's not that's you. That's not how this works. That's fine, but we're going to have the conversation with the amount of conviction we're going to have for both ends about it. And the only thing that would substantiate it ultimately is if something comes from it. If something that can actually comes to fruition from it. Up until this point, the main criticism was "Well, if these things are real to any degree, how come they always so elusive? How come they don't really leave any mark or like real information behind?" Well, here it is. Here's the thing. Let's start playing with it. And now people push the horizon even further. Do you ever get the the feeling that maybe this stuff wasn't meant to be studied in scientific Why is it discoverable then? That's That seems to be an arbitrary point. Maybe maybe maybe it just wasn't meant to be known by everybody. Maybe this thing wasn't Maybe this thing isn't meant to change humanity, right? Maybe it's not meant to help humanity mature or evolve. Maybe it's just for specific people to discover on their own, and it's not There Are you familiar with this study? There was this John Hopkins study that went on. I just had this journalist on here named Travis Kitchens who was a part of a John Hopkins psychedelic study research study in like the '90s or early 2000s. Um with a couple with a What was the gentleman's names who were started that study? Like the guys that were like the pioneers of the psychedelic renaissance were a part of this study. And it was this study where they brought in a bunch of people from different religious part bunch of different religions. Like they brought in a Buddhist a a Jewish a Jewish person, Christians, people like the heads of all the faiths, right? Who had different um religious beliefs. Put them on psychedelics and tried to find out what the common theme was behind all of their experiences and how they projected their own religious frameworks onto it, right? Mhm. And they had this hypothesis that of this idea called perennialism. I don't know if you ever heard of perennialism, but it's perennialism is this idea that all religions came from one common source. Like they're all drawing from one source, which is goes back to like some of the stuff that Brian Muraresku talks about is like the Eleusinian mysteries and the Greeks were experiencing this psychedelic They they were going into this DMT state of the psychedelic state where they were seeing God, right? Or they were they were experiencing these things that eventually got translated into different religions, right? For different reasons. Mhm. Which, you know, religions kind of like Christianity spiraled out of control and became, you know, this thing that we know of today. And like it's like the ultimate goal of this was trying to find one common core to all religions and to to all human belief and the core of human consciousness almost, right? Mhm. But it's like to me and what Travis pointed out great was like I don't think I don't think it really matters that much, right? Like if you're a Christian or Or you're a Buddhist or if you're a UFO person, or if you're a psychonaut who thinks that, you know, whatever you believe as long as your belief makes you a better person, more power to you. I I tell you why it doesn't map on to the way I see it. Because the answer to your question is it possible that it's not meant to be interpreted by everybody and it's not supposed to help us at The answer is of course maybe yeah maybe sure maybe you're right. That's a lot of maybes, right? The the more reasonable way to to proceed I would say is to look at how any other big understanding in human history ever happened. Which is always a correction of the map. The reason that in some domains it might be might be okay to hold opposing views about different things. But in other domains it isn't. I forget who gave that example, but it's a perfect example. The example is if you think you're in a ship and you go out and you just open the window crack the window cuz you want some more air. But you happen to be on the submarine and you get confused. It really matters. Now forget about the fact that you can't really open the window in a submarine, but let's say you could. The point is if you don't understand the situation you're in you might make moves that can be detrimental. So making the map match the territory is a very important it's a very important endeavor. And just notice that whenever people sailed outside of the domain of the current conviction of society either intellectually or physically into the ocean you're going to fall off the face of the earth. What if just stay here. What if we say hey wolves are going to come to the village. Either you like it or not. You have to understand always the larger environment you're in. It's just the nature of the game. And if then you want to say well look I understand the game is worked this way so far, but maybe this is it. This is the limit. Well that's an arbitrary limit. This this thing too can be connected though. You can connect these two the conversation you you were saying about the various religions, right? Mhm. And what Danny just said. So, there's like actually a connecting element here. One is starting with every single religion, right? Is in the realm of verbal communication. Yeah. What we talked about originally the filters and beyond the filters. And so, it's in a box of language. Mhm. Right? So, whatever religion that is, that the search is the same ultimately. The question is the same, what are we, where we came from? Right. Is there a entity that created us or how does this operate, right? And all that happens in the verbal realm. Yes. Because regardless of the religion, they use a set of a language. Be it Sanskrit, being Hebrew, being English, being whatever it is, right? You're operating in that box. Mhm. And everything that you can talk about is a a loose description of something. So, you have to move outside of the box, outside of the language, and move beyond that point where it becomes an experience. When it's an experience, I'm pretty sure the experience is exactly the same to every in quote religion. That that the split comes from the different culture and language that you're explaining or talk about the things. But, if you go to the experiment part, which is outside of language, which is below before the filters, right? Mhm. That takes out information, then it's probably exactly the same. It's your description of your experience is what difference, right? Yeah. And then what Danny was talking about the functionality of of yes, it is our purpose maybe to go and experience and figure out things and and and have answers to this ultimate question. What are we doing here? Why are we doing it? Now, you equate it to the submarine that you might open a window that you shouldn't be opening, right? This this could be true that we could be barreling down in paths that, you know, that are not exactly optimal or even detrimental, right? But if we just say we stay with the pragmatic absolute pragmatic basics, then the experiments the experience of it, right? When it's non-verbal, it's most likely the same. So, this is the language that and the descriptions that separates it into different buckets of religion. And the question always going to be the same. Why? Mhm. Why? Right. What is the purpose? Right. So, that is a fundamental question of all. Everything as everything as is a subset of that. Yeah. The ultimate question is what is happening? Why is it happening? What is our purpose? Why? That's it. And I think that's part of the human brain's operating system is to ask that question, why? Because right because everything comes from something, right? We can't both came from our parents who came from our grandparents. A plant or a tree comes from a seed planted in the ground. But like where did the first one come from? The very very first one. It's only by us being able to have the gift of reason is to find is to believe in a god. I don't think it's human. It's it's like it's general, right? I think in any other species, any other species exist in this universe will have the same questions. The same exact questions. Doesn't matter that you grew up in a different solar system in different circumstances. The question will be the same. And it it would be asked on the level that you can attain. So, if we're an amoeba, the form of the question would be how can I be more comfortable? Oh, this is too hot. I'm going to move to the shade. Mhm. But the question always drives the process. That's a completely natural thing in existence itself. Yeah. So to to then put a an arbitrary stop to it because of other things we think we understand. Because notice that everything you described they're also conceptual frameworks. Mhm. Right. They're also other things that people claim to understand. So it's just a competition between the frames of understanding. Yeah. So the the the example with the submarine more illustrates what if there's something you're supposed to do and you're not going to do because you didn't understand where you are. Mhm. Is there a cliff there and you thought it was just a two-dimensional shape, but there it's more than that. So you have to understand that you're on that path, right? And so the answer to most times like should you know almost in every instance it's yes. It's always better to know and then to do something about it versus not know. There are some limited cases that I would say like if a meteor is hurling down towards us and then we have three weeks to live, is it better to know? In this limited instance, maybe not because in three weeks we're just going to panic and it's not going to be better. Right. But these cases are much more rare than all the other cases. Like is it good for us to know how to synthesize polio or to build the atom bomb? Well, it's good for us to know that that's a possibility and then kind of work around it because to say we shouldn't have never discovered it, that's just postponing the moment in which it will be discovered someday. You it's always better to know something and then to do something about it properly. And this is why I'm saying the attitude of the monkey is we keep pointing to these external things as the blame. But it's like if if we can get our act together then we can stop pointing. Right. There I can drop a paradox on top on this. Please. I can drop a massive paradox. Okay. So because because it makes sense, right? That we should know. But knowing knowing that we shouldn't know is also knowing. I'm going to give it to you. I'm going to give you into actual experience that I personally had in the space, deep in the space. I've been there hundreds and hundreds of times and there are different levels and I'll give you an actual example when it's nonverbal communication data comes to you just know. And it independent of time. So, meaning when you're in that space, you just out of a sudden know something. And it's almost it didn't really take time. So, it's not like there's a book of knowledge and it takes time to absorb that. It just oh, I understand. And it's instant, right? And so there was this moment where um I realized that we are in being in that space and when you reach this this idea that you know, like what is that the Buddhist talk about it? Very what is pets are talking about this oneness. When we took off my hands from the cup and then you you realize like oh, there's this one consciousness. Right? And there's the obvious question like why are we compartmentalized? Well, in that one consciousness that this it's absolute. There is nothing else. Just this one consciousness. And in that state, if you can absorb that for a second is the loneliest existent that it can be. It has no companion because there is nothing else but it. That's it. Right? Just one. Just one. But that one this universal consciousness, this soup of everything is one coherent consciousness. And it is for a lack of better word is it's the absolute loneliness cuz it has no companion. However, in a second you're compartmentalized. Now, in a cup you're a sub process, right? Then you're not in that absolute consciousness. You're surrounded by others. Correct. So, either suddenly there are processes and there is noise, there are there are experiences can be can exist, right? And so, I had this perception of of the job our purpose is is that every possibility can be experienced. And it's almost like your function. And this it will take away some sort of a some sort of a an anxiety of human existence. Because am I doing my purpose? Yes. We all do. Our purpose is to experience, live this life. There there's no way out. You were born into this life and absolutely have to live it until you're not living, right? There's no way out. That's the process. And the process is that you're living at one set of possibilities. It's your possibility. Your possibility and your experience is not going to be anywhere near to anyone else's. It's very unique to you. Mhm. Right? And so, this set of data was fed to the absolute consciousness. This experience, yours yours was fed and yours was an and all of ours. So, so this the phenomena, God, the whatever you want to call it, experiences all the possibilities, the infinite possibilities. And you are that subroutine that experienced this one. So, whatever it is you're doing, you're doing your job. You're living your life, you're experiencing and you're feeding the the data. Now, you do have free will and you can choose what you're going to experience. You actually do have that power. But the process is you are living your life and and feeding the data. Right? Um and in that um in that particular moment I had this understanding of if I'm searching if I'm out of the pen searching for that consciousness, searching for God, searching for those things. Mhm. If I was meant to understand, meant to know, it wouldn't be hidden. But, it wouldn't also not be findable. Don't you think? It is It is findable. It If I'm meant to Well, here's That's the paradox. be findable even in principle. Well, but that's the paradox that you can experience that, but immediately the experiences don't look for this. Mhm. Do your job, which is experience life, go and live, experience, and and have that feed that feed that to the Akashic records or whatever you want to call that. Mhm. Right? That's If you understand that then it takes away some kind of a some kind of an anxiety. Now, it works for me. This experience that you've had, some people call it the void. I've had it. Um Michael Pollan talks about it actually on the Joe Rogan Experience where he's he was so grateful when he came back that it was content. He was like Right. Oh my goodness. Strassman also talk about this? It's an It's a It happens to a lot of people. I don't know if he specifically talked about it. he said he was on 5-MeO-DMT and he went to like a white room. Yeah, the whiteout or the void. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So, the thing to me, I'm hearing this and I've had this and Zoltan is absolutely right. It is the most gutting feeling you can possibly have. But, I always say I think there's still something to be said about the fact that you're experiencing it from still from some unitary perspective. You're still an ego experiencing the ultimate just loneliness, right? So, that's why it's so gutting. But, um because on the other hand you have other people that are talking about like, you know, when you experience that, it's just the biggest bliss of like the fullest freedom. Mhm. Um, but I would say that specifically with the code, not necessarily with this, because with this I am open to interpretation and all of that. There might be a um, a balanced place. I agree with that. With the code in particular, something else jumps at me, which is the fact that it is recognizable on a level of a human. Because it if this is some kind of a thing that codes for, you know, the function of reality, it could have easily been been just the the wiggles, just the the signals. Why does it appear as a language? That is discernable to creatures like us. Right. That is the question that makes me feel like that's a breadcrumb versus And the fact that it was I didn't it wasn't hepastence. It it wasn't like a laser was on and I smoked some and I saw something. I was like, "What is that?" That's not how it happened. I aimed there for years and something was giving me hints. Mhm. So, all of these things together and it didn't feel like one of these like, you know, that to to the degree that I can discern energies, the energy of whatever that was guiding, it was like a it was light. It was it was like a blissful energy. It wasn't like the the other thing, right? So, in that sense, can it mean that we now have to come and face something that is difficult to face? Maybe. But that means that we were led to that and that was part of what we need to go through in the next step of evolution. This this part of the conversation, whenever I get to it, I'm very careful because I don't really know what is unfolding, like Zoltan said. But my strong intuition is that it is unavoidable and we're going to experience it in different ways either way. Like we all going to experience this in some form, this transitional moment. And it is it's shrouded with so much speculation that I'm not sure that I think that more words confuse people than than do any good. But the most general thing I can say about it is that everybody kind of feel that something is happening and either you are a person, you know, some kind of a aboriginal person in the somewhere that that you have zero technology, it's going to communicate to you with as much coherence that it needs to in the way that you understand as to anybody else who's living with a super advanced technology. This might be just our version of how it's trying to express itself. And I know it sounds super esoteric, but I my intuition is that whatever it is, it's not we don't people talk about 2050, 2040, singularity. My feeling is we have maybe 2 years. Like this is not a like in 20 years from now. This is now. It's now. It's happening. So like it's no longer a drill. And the degree to which some of us can understand it and help become part of the process they're trying to unfold, which a lot of is actually letting go. Letting go of the self-control, letting go of what we think we understand. I'm this is a very big practice for me at the moment because the more I talk about it, the more the weight of certain kinds of responsibilities kind of dawns on me. And then the only thing I can do that keeps me sane is to constantly drop into the space of like feeling what it feels like to be the unit that is doing this, talking about this. If I start telling you something and inside I have this like very strong impulse of like uh I'm like okay. Maybe I'm not supposed to talk about that. So there's like maybe not right now. So I'm constantly aware of that. Is it anything more than some ideas I have in my psychology and and maybe nothing more? Maybe. Maybe. Completely open to that. But we have to stand somewhere to make some assumptions with certain amount of certainty. You will never get to a place You surf, right? Yes. Great. In any activity that has real outcomes in real time, there's certain things that become super clear. You have to have a certain amount of One of those things is you have to have a certain amount of conviction about your ability to do something to be able to do it. Mhm. The more you second-guess it, and so there's way less chances you're going to enter flow or any state in which you can actually execute a task. How it exactly happened when you were on the wave perfectly, every single muscle of the body maneuver, you might not be aware of. But, how to drop into that space is the thing you become better and better at the more you do it, right? But, notice that there has to be some level of conviction. The more you second-guess it, the chances you're going to crash are way higher. Mhm. And that's with everything. If you want to entertain a scientific idea, you have a certain amount of You have to have a certain amount of conviction that it might work. Not to I'm not talking about biases. It's like you have to know that there's a there's maybe a cash value there. Okay, then you proceed. If you second-guess it to a degree where you're not even going to like, "Well, it can be infinite million other things." You're not going to have enough of a drive to even act on it, right? So, that's where I'm coming from. I I'm going to entertain this frame, see if something comes out of it. I am in full liberty after a certain amount of time go, "You know what? We tried it. Didn't work. Let's go back to the old frame." It's a legitimate move. There's no problem with that. And I think what most people don't recognize is that we're always doing that. Like even the our current conviction of the scientific zeitgeist, this is also a form of a thing we we agreed upon that's a good way to do this so far. It's going to take a lot to a lot to replace it if we ever going to replace it. Fine. But, you have to have a certain amount of conviction to kind of go in the face of it, but not even resist it. Just like how do we I always say whatever it is that we're going to find has to also match everything else we already understand. It's never going to replace everything. That's not how it works. So I guess my bottom line is there's a there's a certain fluidity and a certain amount of rigidity that we have to constantly play with that can help us find our our place in this unfolding. And I'm fully aware that this kind of talk immediately sounds more like a you know, like a like a sage would be talking, right? It's like oh you have to but I don't think it has to be. I think we can talk about things um that may be unfolding that are greater than our current ability to understand in a way that makes sense to us collectively and personally without constantly asking one another to pay a penalty for describing it in that way or another way. If I'm if I'm if I'm understanding what you're trying to do I'm not going to waste energy or try and correct every single word you say. I'm just I'm I I feel you. Like I okay, I understand what you're trying to say to me. And if you're struggling with saying it, I might even help you say it, right? That should be more of the attitude. Right. And that also holds the seed in all human endeavor. In science and in politics and everything. If we have a little bit more charity towards one another, it's like what are you really trying to say? Oh okay, I get it. And again, it sounds I'm aware that what I'm saying right now sounds like bro, what are you talking about? You were just talking about science. Now you're talking about some kind of a human interaction. It's part of it. If everything in science is done we have the scientific method. Awesome. Let's go with it. We don't have to be dicks about it. Right. Like scientists don't have to be dicks to one another to achieve an accolade. That's part of it. If you're going to work together on something major wouldn't it be better if we also feel comfortable and safe to do that in a way we can explore it's like oh that didn't pan out. But we don't have to make you feel like [ __ ] about it. And I'm I personally don't care because I'm not in that world really and I have all the love that I need in the world, but I am noticing that it's a big pain point for scientists. I have Oh, yeah. I have two physicists who are totally on board to help out, but they said, "I have to be consulting. I can't put my name on it. I'm going to lose everything." Right. Right. That's crazy. That's crazy. Back to Galileo, man. Like there there there that was the scientific community that held the rigidly that idea. And you know, we can play the what aboutism aboutism all day long. So, the conviction of the experience, that's what you're talking about. Like you have an experience and you have a conviction that I experienced this. I'm looking at a code or I experienced this particular thing, then you know, I could jump in there and start questioning like, "Well, what is existence?" That's what aboutism. How about that? How you know, you can you know, at one point you have to drop anchor. And the anchor is I have seen that code. I have experienced this. I got to anchor myself in those like, "Well, it happened to me." And I saw it and I perceived it. And if it happened to me, I can't care less about 8 billion people saying otherwise cuz everything that was ever invented or discovered at one point, the person who discovered it or invented it had to have a spine and the shoulders strong enough to carry the weight of nobody else on this planet. In this moment, believes in what you're saying or what you invented, right? It's falls on you because you invented it or you saw what you saw. Mhm. Right? And so, the truth is not by consensus. Right. And it's my truth. I saw it. And that's that's to me is unquestionable because because we can play the what aboutism like, "Yeah, but are you really here? And is this world really exist?" We can play this all day long. At one point you have to put down the the bricks of like, "Okay, well, I am going through this life. I am experiencing this life. I feel like I am here. There are processes and logical processes and feelings and and ideas that hovering inside my head and I regardless of I myself could pull this to apart. Like my perception and what is really happening and are we really here and is this just a hologram? We can play that all day long. The truth is not in consensus is very powerful. Yeah, but at one point I got to drop on anchoring something. I you know, I have to have a solid point. Right now my solid point is like this. I know. No Nobody in this room. And nobody outside this room has a [ __ ] idea of what's going on. Not one. There's not a person on this planet that knows what the hell is going on. Not one. Nobody knows. Everybody's guessing. Everybody just have ideas. There's no absolute. Nobody knows. I know that and that itself is absolute. That I at least know that nobody knows. Right. There are things are unknown and there are things are unknowable. And then you can logically come to some conclusion that certain things are unknowable. Mhm. Right? But I think that the human mind can't really deal with infinity and that those ideas. Like we already know that we can't. But at one point you still have to drop on anchor. So if you have these experiences, if you saw that, if that's your conviction, you got to put down that brick and say, "I'm defending this brick. This is my experience and there's nobody alive on this planet that can that can not just question it, but attack that in any shape and way. This is my experience." Right. Your universe is your universe. It's my experience and I'm sticking to this because I have experienced this. So I'm going to put an anchor in this. And if you don't do that, there's then there's nothing. There's no starting point. There's nothing that you can possibly build. There has to be something. And but but the small thing to add to that is that in order for that to be to hold water, you first have to acquire the ability to have a certain level of discernment, which is important. You did a certain amount of work on yourself that you trust your own experience in a way that not for everybody uh it it's it's that solidified. I have that to some degree. You have that to a larger degree, but it's also because you have more of I guess what you would call external accolades to rest on to say I tried things my way, they worked out. So now whenever I walk in a room and somebody starts yapping business advice at me, I'll let them yap, but I'm like the you you do you. Right. I did it my way. Look around you. That's what I've achieved. What did you achieve? So that that gives you a certain amount of confidence in your convictions. And I have some of that in other domains. Some people I realized don't always have that because they are never really dropping an anchor ever or for whatever other reason and they never really land on something that pans out. So from that perspective, it's very difficult to trust yourself and to trust your convictions. And I I do I do appreciate that because some it was pointed out to me in the in one of my daily lives. It was pointed out to me. And I and I never thought about that. And and it has to do with a certain ability to uh track what is going on to a degree and if it pans out enough times, well, it's almost like check marks. It's like, okay. Yeah, yeah. So but but the second you achieve that and this is the thing that that it's funny when people say think that I've kind of like went with the first idea I had and just kind of ran with it. Couldn't be the literally the opposite of that. I I've experienced the space thousands of times and so much that I'm like, okay. I think I have a say in what I think each thing in there is because I simply visited it so often. So, I have some discernment that I trust. Would it be just that thing and also nothing else like even just a console, let's say? Would I be speaking about this with that amount of conviction now? Right. I don't know. I I think that it's because something came out of it that I can show other people or at least to substantial number of people that basically gave me that check mark of like something is there and it doesn't matter what you say until you don't address the exact direct thing that I'm seeing. You can say whatever you want. I don't They're like, "Have you considered this?" I don't need to consider it. I have the direct experience of it. Yeah, that's That would be the difference there. you talk about that the you know, the patterns within the agreed upon reality, right? That you repeat certain patterns and you know, we can play this game of like, "Okay, I I do this or you do this or that and and then keep repeating and you recognize a pattern. Mhm. That that this is possible in a So, you you can almost establish like, "Okay, this So, this is the truth of in this uh agreed upon reality because in this agreed upon reality I repeated a pattern and we can all verify that that happened." Let's say in business or it doesn't matter if I'm going to snowboard, play guitar, or do business, or paint, or sculpt. The The There's a pattern in there in all those activities that are the same. That essentially they There's a pattern. So, it doesn't matter what I'm going to put my mind to, I will excel in that because I understand the pattern that underlies. And then once you do that enough times, then you can say, "Okay, in the agreed upon reality I demonstrated that I can repeat this pattern in whatever shape and way and it will succeed." But in the not agreed upon reality, I reserve the right to be absolutely insane. Yes. be a schizophrenic person will be convinced that somebody's sitting over there, right? That doesn't mean that we just call this person schizophrenic, right? It doesn't mean he's wrong. It just we don't see what this person sees. It does It's And that's what I mean, like the truth is not by consensus. Right? So, because we have much less people who see ghosts and spirits and and people that we perceiving that they're not there, we we consider them insane. That's not necessarily the case. It's just because we are the majority, we're going to say, "Oh, yeah, he's insane. He's seeing things." It doesn't mean he's wrong. We just don't see what this person sees. So, you know, so as reserve the right to be insane. Yes. But this is why I'm saying that to me to me the the bottom question, at least at the moment, is what is the relationship between the mind and matter? Because matter seems to have this universal to us universal democratic thing where doesn't matter how crazy you are, you walk through the you try to walk through the wall, you ain't doing it. That is an important point. What is that? Why is that that way? You know? So so ultimately to me the encouragement again is to just broaden the spectrum of entertainment of how many things we entertain and we want to include in the ontology that we're building on without getting lost. It's It's a fine line. I'm trying to push the ontology just slightly out saying, "Hey, the thing that we want to consider seriously is a little bit right outside of what we currently do. Can Can we just push it out? I think it will solve a lot of problems. That's really That's really all I'm saying." What I want to talk about um We talked about it last night. What do you think happened when you got You said you got kicked out of the DMT space. Right. Was that Was that the same experience when you experienced this oneness, this one conscious loneliness? No, it's uh different. Is that Is that your gum, by the way, before I Uh no, I have some. Do you want some? Sure, I'll have it. Yeah, I'll go get you a gum in here. I feel like I don't want more coffee. I feel like it's going to fly me to the moon. Have you tried your gum before? Yeah. Is it good? Yeah, it is. It is whatever. It's a gum that supposedly does something and I don't know. It's like when no, I'll So here's the thing. I'm I'm already Here's the thing. I'm already doing 200 miles an hour. So when I go 201 miles an hour because I'm the mayor of Gotham, it will not make a difference, okay? So So it would only matter if if I was you know, a mentally a turtle and you know, so I don't know. It's It's a percentage game. So yeah, that's So that that are the the getting kicked out experience. If you If you Google this, this happens to you a lot of people actually, right? And so which also underlines that again, there is something that happened this this physically happened to me. So So I can verify it in my physical concrete existence the our agreed upon existence. This is our agreed upon existence. In a second I go into that space, we're no longer in the agreed upon reality because we can't verify those rule sets that Danny talks about like I can't walk through the wall, right? Is now applying to all of us, right? So we have an agreed upon reality. An agreement is that I can't walk through that wall. Now in a second I'm in that space, right? The the the rule set is not yet established. There is a rule set, but we just don't know that rule set yet. So we have a hard time to agree upon the reality of that space. It has a reality. It has a rule set. And there are sometimes something happens that I can verify that like getting kicked out, right? So that happened to me that I got kicked out. I can tell you the whole story why and how how happened, but the the the the physical proof of that is number one, research it, getting kicked out of DMT and you're going to see See if you can Google hundreds of people will talk about like they got kicked out for various reasons and for various period of time. And what happens, once I got kicked out, I couldn't get back in. My friend got forcibly kicked out of hyperspace. you know, it's I'm pretty sure that you're going to find hundreds and hundreds of these recants. Reddit probably a bunch. Yeah. So, but yeah, I would search be like like uh banned from DMT uh space or something. So, so what's the importance of it? The importance of it that you're going to find that some, you know, hundreds of people will verify the same experience that has happened to them, right? Mhm. And and when it happens to you, you can compare it to the agreed upon reality. And the normal agreed upon reality, all right, there you go. The DMT itself was banned. Right. That's funny. He was banned from outer space. So, Right. So, so what's the implication? What's the importance of it? So, when you get kicked out of that space and hundreds of people will verify that it happened to them, then you we can we're discussing that event in our agreed upon reality, right here. And the agreement is that they got kicked out, trying to get back and they cannot. Mhm. They can smoke as much DMT as they want and they cannot get back in. Almost like some kind of receptor that is open to, you know, access that space is now shut. The door is shut and no matter how many times you hit that cartridge, you cannot get back in. And so, if you're going to read that, you're going to probably find that hundreds and hundreds of people talking about this. So, whatever happens in a DMT space, where we don't have an agreement of the rules yet, trychrome right here, we do have an agreement of the rules, right? And the agreement is that you got kicked out, you hit that cartridge, you can't get back in. And every single person will recount the same thing. So, something happened that we can all verify. Mhm. That alone is very interesting because it affects the agreed-upon reality that we can talk about. It's with its rules of can't walk through the wall, can't do this, can't do that, can't fly, can't get back into the empty. That's now part of can't get back into the empty space is now part of because it happens right here, right? Right. So, if that's verifiable, and then I say, "Okay, before you got kicked out, what did you do? What happened?" Mhm. And then you're going to find similar stories. See what I mean? So, so in some way this is what I'm talking about. Like there're going to be a critical mass when we have enough data and enough anecdotes at first because that's all we got, Yeah. right? Anecdotes at first that that are parallel. And eventually, when there is enough of that, then the scientific community has to, you know, mobilize and go like, "Well, this is this is too weird. This is too much, too too many to to to ignore that this the these stories are the same. So, whatever reason, whatever reason they are saying the same stories, right? And so, for the story why I got kicked out, I popped into a space where there was an entity. Generally, my my um my personal experiences are usually, I don't know, you want to read it? listen, even if you don't find a hundreds of accounts, this is like actually a perfect moment because will, but yeah. But we can make a prediction because I'm I can tell you from my daily lives, I do have quite a few like dozens of people that told me that they had a similar experience. Oh, yeah, we'll come. Right. Right. So, to to to tell you what what happened, you know, I ventured in this space hundreds and hundreds of times, right? And and and I I my personal experience actually is everybody's is different. I don't have many interactions with entities. I have a different cerebral experience when I'm in there, but I I do have and I did have encounters or non-verbal communications. Some of them are I could call a miracle because it had physical effects that affected me later in this agreed-upon reality, but just to go to this example, I popped into a space where there was an entity. And this entity was startled by me popping into its space, right? And so in a second that happens, usually what happens with these entities, you have these these non-non-verbal bridge, like sort of like I can read your thoughts, you can read mine. We are connected immediately. And so I popped in and I know I startled this this creature because it got annoyed with me. So the the description that I can give is that the feeling of annoyance, like what what are you doing here? What you know. And in a second that happened, I could because I knew that this creature was annoyed the creature also realized that I know. And it almost felt like it corrected itself. Oh, okay, so we have a bridge. So I hear your thoughts, so you have to behave. There was that kind of exchange, right? Now, so the first was a startling, you know. And the second was like, oh, okay, so we are connected. I I can hear your thoughts, sort of you can hear mine, so there is a there's a bridge. And it this creature was again, it's non-verbal, so you just know this this this this was the question if I paraphrase of like, okay, well you hear what what you want to know. And I had this very quick process and it's In in that space your your mind is like a million times faster. Sorry Sorry to interrupt. What did it look like? Um you would you would equate this to almost like the drawings that we see. This this creature was tall and uh tall a long long face. So, it's a wearing wearing some kind of a a robe. Uh when you jump in this place, the reason I'm saying that that I'm hesitant of explaining because I thought of this that that's might be the process of my human interpretation of something. Right. Right? So, when I say like how something looks like there is a possibility that there's an entity and I am it's my mind that draws the creature, if that makes any sense, right? Because you know, we have a we are bound by our visuals data set that we have really difficult time to, you know, what you never seen before can't imagine. It's almost like you can't, you know, see. So, so when I describe this is was a tall creature looked like had some kind of a robe. I was in a white space similar arches as um the Colosseum would have. Okay. Very very white foggy place. And again, when we when we talk about visuals, um I am clean keenly aware that there's a possibility that it's my own mind is creating the visual interprets something the way I can interpret. What is What is absolutely obvious though that you encounter this energy and there's an exchange. Right? So, the exchange is that I am aware that oh, there is a being here and we have an interaction. That is that is what that you know, Danny it saying, that's my brick, that's my anchor. That I know that this is happening, this is this this is unquestionable. The visual is questionable because who knows how that happens. But for me the appearance was like a tall creature. Uh you know, I know I hesitant saying the grayish skin because it's, you know, we have an idea of ETs how they look like. Like the typical gray alien you see in the movies. it was kind of like that but but but tall. Mhm. Very tall and a a longer sort of head like a an Uh this this was a long kind of head in in the With a robe. The shape was with some kind of robe. Kind of yeah, that's I mean like so so that's I mean like I accept that there's a possibility that that's my mind's, you know, um translation of of of the energy or whatever this being is like the representation. But I saw it as that. And the question was Okay, so what do you want to know? Why are you here? What do you want to know? And in my mind I played out the game immediately. Then it was it was really quick that I played out like, well, I can ask all these questions and the answer actually doesn't matter. That was the strangest thing that I came to a conclusion like ask what? And what what difference it makes if I know or I don't know, doesn't matter, right? And so so I kind of like processed this super quick. And I didn't have a question. I was like, I don't have a question. I was like, I I'm just passing through. Mhm. Right? But when I said passing through it wasn't like an un- unconscious uh response. Like I know that I processed this that I knew that I lightning fast went through the possibilities what it is I want to know and I just came to this conclusion like, well, it doesn't really matter. Things are just are and it is what it is and and I was like, I I'm just passing through. I don't really have a question. And this thing got annoyed with me to the point like boom, I was out. I just that the experience stopped completely. The vision stops. I was out. I was sitting in my little meditation chair that I sit. And after that for months I could not get back in at all. No matter what I would do. So I was just kicked out. And then later on, 4 months ish period, I I went in with this, you know, I it went through my meditation cycle and and in that cycle I was literally focusing like I need to get back. I need to find out why is it am I banned permanently? Like I had all these questions, right? So now I had questions out of the sudden. And I wanted to solve this. Like how do I get back in? Right? So I was super focused on on that that task of getting back in and find out if I can and how. And somehow that unlocked something because of my intention. Like there was a very sharp intent that I I went in with. And the there's again the communication comes like, "Okay, you you can't come here anymore without a purpose. You can't, you know, as a tourist. You can't just pass through. I don't And it's interesting that that's was the answer because this creature got annoyed with me because I didn't have a purpose. I was kind of like, "Well, I'm just passing through. I don't have a question." And that was immediately I was out. So that was the reason. And so the answer was it wasn't coming from the same being. Like you get in and there are this nonverbal this voice, but again it's nonverbal. It's just annoying. Like, "Oh, I got it." And that was basically the idea of or the the message that you cannot come in here anymore as a tourist. You've been here hundreds of hundreds of times. This is you know, if you come, it has to have a purpose. There has to be a function. You can't just come. I wonder why did it stand out to you, that particular instance, the being locked out. I don't know. I just think it's interesting because it's similar to, you know, well well it's interesting that you say a lot of people experience the same thing. Mhm. Because it's because it is that this has a feature that we can verify in our agreed upon reality. You can verify it because if you line up a few people who had this experience right now right here without any substance. And they're going to say the same thing to you. Like, "Hey, this happened to me." Or something similar happened to me. And so, again, this space where we are talking right now is our agreed upon reality with its rules and its rigidity. Right? Yeah. all verify. This table is here, the microphone is here. We're doing a podcast right now. You can't walk through the wall. I mean, Danny definitely can't walk through the wall. He claimed it many times. So, you know, so so that's our agreed upon reality. And within this agreed upon reality, you can have people who will verify something that happened to them. And this this event will be very very similar. Mhm. Right? So, that's something you can latch onto. Like, "Okay, this is tangible." Because it's happened to many people. And they all talk about it. And it's the experience is very similar. Yes. Yeah. And whatever happens within the space, we can't verify it because you would have to be there. It's kind of like if you dreamt something. I can't verify what, you know, what you dreamt. And is there a possibility that we both go dreaming and we're going to share some kind of a dream. There are some legends about the Aborigines Aborigines in Australia that do this supposedly. That they go to sleep together and they interact with each other in their dreams. Yeah. Could be a legend. Could be, who knows? But there is something like that. And um you could you verify that? There's also near-death experiences where people like there's been a studies where people have been in car accidents together and like ex- saw each other in their near-death experience. Right. Yeah, so There you go. Now, if somebody says this, you're going to say, "Well, you hit your head." 100 people says this, then you go, "Okay, I need to look at this." So So, th- this this is something that you're touching on I think is very important. John Chavez from DMT Quest, who uh got involved with the film and uh not like he he invested in it, but also he asked us if we we would be okay with in venturing into some territories like near-death experiences or things like this potentially if we can be presented with a certain amount of data. So, what John is really good at is very aware of all the different kinds of research that exists out there. Mhm. And he made me aware of this. I didn't know this that apparently what you would call these fringe investigative uh you know, sections of science, near-death experience, uh some people manifesting objects, like things that you would think like, "Oh, this is some, you know, like Twilight Zone crazy shit." Apparently, there's like real data about these things. Yeah. And it for the most part is kind of being ignored. I have a friend who that I know really well, and he had a open-heart surgery, and he was very well, kind of like us, like he's very open-minded, straightforward, not uh you know, like necessarily married to believe anything in particular, but pretty um I would say secular in this predisposition. He came back completely changed. And he said, "Danny, I was above my body. The whole shebang. I went to visit my mother in Ireland. I saw her. I know it wasn't a vision. I know I saw her like in real time. Mhm. He's like, "I will never be the same." It's like because there's a there's a level of realness to it, I guess. I've never had that. I've never had an out-of-body experience, but I understand that sentiment. Of like the the realness of it that is so salient to the person. I saw video on YouTube a couple months ago where this guy was explaining how when he was young, he had a near death experience. Like he he was in a car accident, right? And he said he saw some sort of entity or he communicated with some sort of I I'm I'm a little bit vague on on what exactly he said he saw the first time when he was young. But then later he said he went to a mountain with one of his buddies and they did mushrooms. And he said he saw the same entity. And and he said maybe he said maybe it was DMT it was either DMT or mushrooms. And he said that the entity said, "What the [ __ ] are you doing here? Get out and don't ever come back." Mhm. I think I've heard this it was the same thing. Mhm. This guy? Interesting. Yes. Yeah, this is the guy. It's a 12-minute video. We're not going to watch the whole thing, but But it's it's you know, that's that's it cuz and cuz the reason I bring that up is because I had this guy on here who did this he basically won this uh it was a part of the grant that this dude John Bigelow. Um Related to Ben Ben Bigelow from WWE? while a friend observed. Uh okay, so it was DMT while a friend observed along a lake. I went from total fear um out my head blast off to total calm and empty quiet space. Same entity. Okay, so Did you have that Did you have the the NDE? Did you have NDE Never had NDE, but I definitely met the same beings. So I had this guy in here who So there's this guy named John Bigelow who's been like a part of the whole he's an aerospace billionaire. Yes. Yeah, and he's he's really into this stuff. Robert Robert Bigelow. What did I What did I call him? You said John. John Bigelow. Robert Robert. He's he's building the space he started the space hotel. I remember this back in the you know, X Prize times like he was building this space hotel. He was Yeah. He's very into the whole alien disclosure movement and all this stuff and he's got a lot of money and he basically he's um he put up basically a bounty like a bunch of money for people who could um come up with a theory on near-death experiences and and what they were whatever and this guy won the prize for it um because he was what was the gentleman's name who he had in here again? Uh Jeffrey Mishlove. No no no not Jeffrey Mishlove it was the guy before that. The guy who was talking about the the near-death experiences of people together. was a uh Jeff Jeffrey Long? Uh yeah Jeffrey Long yeah yeah. So he won a bunch of money for his study on these near-death experiences and he put like I think he's had thousands of people together and and he's been studying this for his whole life and I asked him about this guy who had the DMT experience and told him don't come back and he thinks there's absolutely zero connection. Between? Between both spaces. Right. Oh a spiritual and DMT space? But between the near-death experience Mhm. realm and the DMT realm. I'm open to it. I'm I'm on record saying this this is a conversation me and Zoltan had back in the I had both of those. You had you had right. actual NDE when I hit the truck right which I never saw my body I did never looked at myself but I could move in space behind the house and the you know like I was not bound by you know I wanted to look behind a bush and I just did and that was not possible like bush was far away or behind the house so it was it was I never looked at my body because I was a kid I didn't know what what the hell was going on but on a MEO5 you can have like people call it ego death and I sort of have a theory what actually happens there is that um and it's it's it's funny that it's comes from the frog and I'm going to say like if you have a reptilian mind right that I just call the reptilian mind that the basic function your DOS you know, operating system. How many times you blink and all that stuff, right? And the feedback system from your body, right? So, there's your mind that is is not the brain, the mind that is not material, right? So, your your your thoughts and all those processes. And there's a connection between that because those processes tell you like, "Whoa, I got to run." But how do you know? Like, well, your your subconscious or call it reptilian mind or call it the the basic operation system told you that you're in danger, so you got to run, right? So, this two works together. And and my theory is is that the emu 5 is basically the the the frog venom severs this connection. So, your mind gets zero feedback from it the body of any kind, zero. There's no feedback from the body, and so it will perceive as you died. Because all the sensory data that would otherwise coming in just simply not there. And so that's why possibly you experience this state of like, "Oh, I just died." Like, I had that experience. Like, I went through that like, "Holy [ __ ] it just died." Where you're not connected to anything back up. Well, you you're conscious? Yeah. Right? But but I had this absolute certainty that I just died. Like, it's an absolute certainty like, and that's the recall I same thing. If you research it, people talk about the ego death or people try to figure out what happens. Some people have it on NDE and some people have it on emu 5. 5 emu um and that the experience that they talk about is that. Like, they trying to like, I died. And they have this absolute certainty that they did. And I had the absolute certainty like, holy cow, it just game over. This just ended today, you know? Well, so you're a perfect person to ask. I do want to ask you about this difference that the guy was describing because my impression also that the DMT NN at least feels very different than what I'm experiencing when I'm deep states of meditation. I've never had near death but from the descriptions and again, this is why you're a perfect person to ask. You don't feel that there's a difference in the essence of it like a the digital nature of like how the DMT space feels, doesn't it feel different to you than the what you experienced when you were 12 years old when you hit the truck? Uh Maybe not. I'm asking you. NN DMT to me that there's there's a in that space there's a very conscious process that I can direct. Mhm. Like I'm going in and I know that I'm going here, I'm going there. Um like there's a complex process is going on. Like we kind of you know, we kind of always talk about like look, any psychedelics uh that that exist is you observing something in the theater. Right? And you just take a different seat. It's a different angle. So every single opiates to THC to everything that has somehow alters your perception, altered your perception, but you looking at the same theater act. Mhm. What is whatever is going on, you just look at it from a different point with different focus. What's important to you now changed so you see something else. It's It's what what what it means is what we talk about like you have this filter system. Yeah. Right? So every single one of those substances change the filters. What is important, what isn't important. So you look at it a different way. Uh DMT is the backstage pass. Like It's such a good What's going on? What's going on in the theater now no longer matters. Now you see how these things are moved and oh yeah, this guy flying there's a there's a rope that he was you know, so you see how the thing works. Right? And then 5-MEO is you're not in the theater. You look at the whole thing, the whole existence, the whole thing from the outside like like if was the backstage pass and see how things move and they're very mechanical in some way, digitally you could even say that things are built and there are different level of managements. There is a tour manager, there is a you know what I mean? Like everybody has a function. There are various entities with different functions and levels of consciousness and power. And then all of a sudden 510 is the elevator to the boss. Like we're going to the boss. We're going all the way. This is the guy. This is the one consciousness. Upper management. The the no this is the boss this is the ownership right here. This is the boss. I love how you said it might be the satellite you're looking at everything with from a satellite. Right. And so you you go to the boss. That's it's everything that is there is is here. Right? So that's kind of how I would differentiate this. Right? And so on Ennan Yeah. Right? The experience is very conscious and I'm I'm I'm I know that I have complex processes and I think about things and and move things and I purposely in you know induce certain things and I have you know and I have encounters with creatures. Now everybody's experience is different. I There was a time when I asked for help. And I got help. Mhm. From creatures. These were also grayish creatures really tall. This was the only time I can Wait, that's the thing with your chest? Yeah. Oh, that's a wild one. I can walk around on DMT. Like it's you know I could operate you know vehicles I shouldn't operate you know what I mean? But so you know it's completely conscious. This was the only Yeah no no no just don't but you know but you know it takes experience and hundreds of hundreds of times to being there but this was the only time when I was pushed back. Like a lot of people, you know, smoked DMT and they laid back and experienced it that way. I sit in a meditation position. This is the only time I got pushed back. Like I forcefully, like I felt like just, you know, flat night. I but I went into that space for a reason. Like I had this anger and I couldn't explain. And then, you know, I'm meditating since I was a little kid. Right? So, it's not normal. My general, you know, being is not things just are whatever, right? And it's so it's really an alien experience to me that I had this pertaining just this this anger. Like I would wake up almost every day like I was just there was this anger and and and it was weird because I had a an outside perspective of it. Like I realized like, you know, okay, engine light is on. Why is it on? Yeah. Like I was angry and but but it was sort of an external experience. Bring in steel. Like there was an anxiety. Like I would I would just do this all day. Like it's just ah. So, I knew that, okay, engine light is on. There's something's wrong. I'm angry and anxious. And I am perceiving that and in a weird way I compartmentalize it. It doesn't affect what I'm doing, but it's just there. That's what I mean like engine light is on. So, I I'm aware that something and it was not going away. It just kept happening day after day after day for like three, four, five weeks. And so, you know, and I meditate, I do my things and and you know, I'm like, let's clear it and I would clear as much as possible, but it just creeps back. Like what the hell? And so, I had this wild idea like, you know what? Let's go into the space and let's find out. Let's go meet the mechanic. Let's let's see the doctors, right? And I went into this with with and, you know, this was after I got back. This was after I kicked that. So, this is to me, this is again a reason that I'm coming in the space with consciousness, with with purpose. I came into this with a purpose. And this was the again, this is where I lay my brick when I say this happened. Right? And I'm going to anchor that that this happened. There's I was sitting there and I felt like a forcefully I was pushed back, which is not normal to me. Like I I fell back. And there were these giant tall creatures around me. I looked up and they were if I would gauge 20-ft plus, just huge creatures, right? Kind of hovering over, they had these long hands. And I literally saw that they grabbed something. There was a uh to a lack of it's a it's a ugly potato. Was right here with a long stinger. Like it's almost like a a mosquito's head. It was like it's a weird thing. Then I saw it. And then they grabbed this thing and they start pulling it and I could see this stinger coming out of my chest. It was going through my body and they were pulling this out. Right? And then they just carried it away. And where is verifiable to me that I felt it, I felt how I kind of relaxed and I'm like, "Wow." And the anxiety leaving me. So So and I can cut ahead of the story that after this this whole anxiety and anger just went away. So and verifiably this happened because also the agreed upon reality thing that was happening to me stopped. Mhm. So I know that there is a physical proof that no longer does anxiety, anger was no longer there. Wow. And so they grabbed this thing, they took it away and then and this is the difference between 5-MeO-DMT that here This was This was 5-MeO-DMT. This is DMT. Oh, this is DMT. Because I can have a completely conscious, logical conversation. Why you don't really have that on 555 is you going to the bus and language and all that stuff stops. And and here I got the packets of data like, okay. This is a thing that you guys, meaning humans, you call these demons. But it's not a a a thing with a bad intention. It's not a demon. Let's just call it a demon. And so what this is is like, you know, when sharks are swimming, they have a little fish goes around them and then they grab whatever that Yeah. And so that's what it is. You you have a certain frequency, you put out a certain energy. And and there are entities that will be attracted to that. So technically it's a parasite. Right? So parasite that something pissed you off, let's say, and then you are on that frequency. You're angry and on your not frequency. And they're going to be parasites or creatures that are attracted to that. You're leaking that now. And then they will be around and they feed on that as long as you're angry. Once your anger is gone, they have no more food. They will be gone. But if you're angry today and tomorrow and after tomorrow and it keeps happening, something bothers you and you keep yourself in this state, these entities, these parasites start to become familiar with you. And they don't have much This was all told me told to me. They don't have much a lot of complex processes. But enough for them to know that okay, this is my food source now and I'm here for a while and I'm start to be familiar with this creature that giving me this food. And so all we have to do is getting him in a position where he's pissed. And then he will leak this food. And so bad stuff starts happening to you because they don't they're not complex creatures, but they can to some degree affect what happens in reality. Wow. Right? So because they can affect your mental processes, because they know your little demons are attached to you, right? And you live your life and your your mental process is not completely unaffected. So, that's basically what they said. These creatures are affecting your mental processes enough to steer you just a little bit into the direction that you will be angry or dissatisfied. So, there you therefore you will generate that frequency, that energy that they are feeding So, these creatures were basically telling me like, "Okay, we removed this thing, but be careful. Do not, you know, chill. Don't don't get back to this particular frequency. Be very conscious of it because they will be back." Wow. So, that was a, you know, and they removed this thing and then after that like it was just gone. Like a a month worth of anger and and and unaccounted anger. I don't know what I was angry about. All this anxiety that I don't know I I'm like, "I have no problems. I don't I don't know where this is coming from." So, that's why this was strange. And so, I used N, N, DMT this process and this is what happened and you know, and I don't care. 8 billion people can, you know, argue about this. I don't give a crap. This happened. I experienced this. I I don't care what you got to say about this. This happened to me. Right? And it's verifiable and I can verify it in the agreed upon reality, right here. I'm not anxious, not angry and I was for about a month, unexplainably. Right? So, so those are those experiences when we got to drop the anchor like, "Hey, it happened. Nobody can take this away from me. This this happened." Right? And so, um in a So, like this was just an example of entities and how, you know, that process works in N, N, DMT for me it's rare that I come across entities. To me it's a more of a It's a very cerebral. And there and there are places I go to. Like there is this place I would go to where I call it the ecstasy of existence. Like it's almost like a a a a giant structure and I I'm aware that there are a lot of beings are in there. Mhm. Non-formal. Like these these are not like the entity that kicked me out I had a full vision of like a figure. Right? These are almost like non-figurative or non like What would be the word for it? have a form. They don't have formless. Just I just I just feel the energy. And there are thousands of them in there just a whirling and they're like in this state of ecstasy of almost like they realize that we exist and how amazing that is. And so generally that's my process. I go to the N, N space with a intention. First I body check. The first hit is always am I clear to go? Meaning you know, it's like Houston all systems are good? Are we angry? Are we distracted? Are we cool? Am I sharp? Am I focused? This has to be the first. So I'm not distracted. If I'm distracted with something then I stay in this space. I will not take a second hit. Okay. I will stay there. And then and then I simply can find this place and I go there and I just I just exist and there is ecstasy sort of feeling. So I would and I know this place. I go if I'm if my system check is not coming back clear, there's an engine light on, washer liquid missing, whatever the freak it is, right? Then I'm staying here and I'm going to go to this place and I just have this renewed happy sort of face and I just stay there. If everything is cool then we go further. And then those processes are very cerebral. It's rare for me that I see entities and encounters all these this mental obstruct processes. Now, 5-MeO, tastes none of this happen. This is elevator straight up. There is nothing in between. It just goes to dissolution and and and entering this space where everything is just this one thing. Yeah. Dude, I mean, it's it's really cool to listen to you describe this stuff. Like, it seems like you're using it as a tool to enhance Yes. every part of your life. Yes, absolutely. Yeah. And I mean, you're a great example of that just by the fact that all the things that you do and and the success that you've had. It's just it's so interesting to me. Like, and you said I think you said earlier that there's the I I've described this to you, too. Like, there's this lingering effect afterwards after you do it maybe a few times and and like when you get back into the real world where maybe you're a little bit more tapped into something else and maybe your antenna is a little stronger each time you do it that kind of helps you with solving problems. Do you experience that? Yes. The form of that is So, so once you this is a very similar space to where meditation takes you. I just feel like this is a fast tracking those things, right? But, it's very similar. And you realize that what all this is about um reinforcing and optimizing your being, not just your physical being, but your your mental process and the witness. The witness is that thing I told you about where I can especially 5-MeO actually. That's that's That's a That's one space when it's very obvious. Like you have your body, your mind, which is all the lexical data that you collected, what you were taught, all those things, all your experiences on this planet, how to operate, everything that you know about things is your mind. But there's another layer, the witness, that sort of drives it all. So, I would, you know, people can can call it a soul, the spirit, or whatever you want to call it, but there's this other thing that is just there. Right? And And then you can be very um aware these differentiation. Like my very first 5-MeO years and years ago was I definitely had had this experience of like, okay, my body and then my mind was freaking out. Freaking out. Like, oh, we're not going there. Like it they knew that that road is ending for them. Like the body, like I'm dying. The mind is like, what am I dissolving? What's going to happen here? Like what happens to me? That was that, you know, freak out. And then but then I noticed but I am also witnessing all this. And the witness was felt indestructible. And later in for, you know, many many other 5-MeO experiences I got to get a hold of that. Like, okay, I got it. I can't really die. That this this the witness is is is permanent. Right? And so so that that witness, that spirit, whatever you call it, that attention, that that is inherently you, you know, it's just no matter what happens, this exist. And then the more you go there is and the more obvious that this exist. So, what you're going to get out of it? One is that you stop being afraid of dying. Because it's not just you think, I don't have to believe that I can't die. I know I can't. Cuz I was there. Well, the body can, but you Yes, but you know, but that that thing can't, right? And so you and That soul, you think that soul just gets put into another container? Yes, and then you just you know. And then you when you experience it, it's obvious. Like it's you kind of laugh about or chuckle about, which I had. Like, "Huh, that's funny." Like I'm just laughing at life while while I'm in the space. Because it's funny. Like how we didn't know that or how to you know. So there's that that you you reinforce that understanding. And when when you stop being afraid of things, that's obviously helping. So that's five. Anyway. Um And on and then you have these these these processes, right? And in these processes, you can optimize yourself. Like there is it's a very obvious like, "Oh, how everything happens." Like even human emotions and how they're structured, right? Like you have these moment of realizing that I exist, that flash of like I am. I'm here. The very next feeling will be fear of losing that awareness of being. And then you understand that every single thing that exists in human emotion is rooted in one of these. Existence and the fear of not existing. And so negative from jealousy to fear, everything that's negative in this yin yang is connected to the fear of losing something, but ultimately your existence. Ultimately your your consciousness. And everything that's positive is I exist and need to enjoy that. Or love, care, all those belong to that. And then the whole play is the interaction between between these two. If I can tell you that existence, the one that the fear shadows, cannot be taken away from you, then now you can start knocking at these negatives. Because if I don't have to be afraid of dying or non-existing, then all these negatives that are rooted in the shadow of existence can be start, you know, just throw them out. Not unnecessary, right? And then beyond that, also there are processes that how I mean, repeatable miracles. Right? That's what I meant by it doesn't matter if I have a wanted to be a snowboard champion or a guitar player, that the principles are the same. Right? And so you start to see the patterns of like, ah, that's how this works. So, yeah, there is a definitely a weaponization for all You know what I mean? All this Oh, okay, right? I can I can do this and and I can, you know, perform, you know, miracles, so to speak. And then in that agreed upon reality space, you have to keep track of the miracles. Because keep track of the miracles means something that you wanted happens. Somebody you thought of show up. Something, you know, it happens to everyone. Synchronicity cities and weird stuff, right? And what happens, because we don't have a physical explanation, we don't have a rule set how that happen or we just simply don't understand they happen. What happens, anything, you know, your mind can't hold two ideas that contradict each other. It's not possible for you to believe and not believe in the same time. This is why also I don't know if I would agree with that. You because what here's here's what I'm going to say. If you're on a fence, you don't believe. That's why. So my my philosophical answer to that is that either you are in if you have doubt, you're not in. So either, you know what I mean? It's actually a Buddhist monk told me this. He walked up to me on the street. This This freaking happened. A Buddhist monk walks up to me on the street. This is I just got initiated by these these monks a month before and it was a weird time in my life. Monks in New York City I lived in New York City at the time. You know, the yellow robe traditional just walk up to me like, "Oh, hey, you look good." Like they just knew. This was the strangest thing. Anyway, so my monk walks up to me and he goes, "Do you believe?" I'm like, "Well, I knew what he was asking." I'm like, "Yeah, you know, sometimes yes, sometimes no." And he was like, "Well, you know, it's it's a yes and everything else around that is a no. Mhm. Sitting on a fence is a no." Right. It's either yes and everything else you absolute or everything else is a, you know. So, anyway, so that's my opinion on it. So, yeah. Yeah, sure, sure. In an instance it might be right. Yeah, I just I just feel like you can, you know, you can you can move between pretty rapidly. That That can definitely That's yes, but but yeah, because new information will change what you, you know. So, yes, I 100% agree with new information changes what you think instantly if you not a rigid, you know, petrified person that is holding on to dogmatic crap, right? But, you know, but beyond that what I meant by holding on to your miracles is that when that happens, like like I had a I had a close encounter, right? Which if I told you everybody would think this guy is crazy, right? But it happened with witnesses. So, it's crazy. Um your mind will try to find an explanation and if it can't, it will try to erase this because it's contradict your agreed upon reality, right? So, what happens to all your miracles when you start thinking about them like 5 years from now, something crazy happened to you, you start to question yourself, "Did I Did that really happen? Did I make it up? Did it Did I over Did I color this story? Maybe I embellished it a little bit, right? You start questioning your miracles. And I think it's important that that you write them down and hold on to them. All the synchronicities, all the weird stuff. And man, you know? Because what that teaches you what more and more happens you more and more open to accept them. And more and more open to accept them more and more happens. Mhm. Right? Because you are open to that possibility. You're noticing that that channel, basically. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. So So what I get out of I mean I started with psychedelics in the mid-90s, right? So obviously went down to the psilocybin and and LSD and and all that experimenting. And you know, I never touched anything until I had a friend who was a professor and I highly respected him and he started to talk to me about it and I'm like, "Hm. If this person that I highly respected a massive intellectual giant is talking about this, I need to understand what's happening here." That's kind of what what happened with psychedelics. And then so from the get-go I never went into that space with like, "Hey, let's just get [ __ ] up." And you know, that was never That I don't do that. It was always intentional and it always was a I always took it I'm an explorer. Mhm. And I'm going to sail best and let's see if we find a continent. You know what I mean? Like that was always my my thing. So that was always my relation with this. And because of that I came into this with a scientific mind. And the the explorer's mind. And so that means you observe, you stay pragmatic, take notes. Find patterns. Mhm. That's how I approach it. And so that's what I've been doing for decades after decades. And so my relation is that to the space. And so because my relationship was that instead of like, "Woohoo! Party." Um eventually I could create these structures like, "Okay, I see processes. Okay, this works. Mhm. Oh, I can use this." And you know I mean and and what what that happens what what it does it's it's modifies 100% modified who I am. In fact, I don't think I'm the same person. I you know, like you I I would go as far like if if you can modify yourself genetically, turn on certain genes and turn off certain genes, I'm pretty sure that I have. Right. Right? And you know, and then I of course and I went down to the transcendental meditation and all that stuff as well. Mhm. Parallel to this stuff, you know, like you go into that space and with a flashlight, let's let's see who I am. Everything, all the corners, flips. Yeah. Leave nothing unturned. Because I have to look at everything that ever happened to me, everything that ever taught to me and told me was embedded when I was a kid. Mhm. Is that data real? Did I understand it correctly first and foremost? And was that real? Is that real? Is it verifiable? You were taught like don't cross your eyes because it stays that way. Is that true? Right. So I mean that the dumbest little things, everything that was taught to me had to go through that process and discover that is it real or should I discard? That's the point of that. So I transcend into a different person. Everything that, you know, and there's a little bit of a in between transcendental meditation and and the recapitulation of all the Carlos Castaneda sort of the the the man of knowledge of the Mesoamerican tribes, how they were handling that. There is a process like how to clean house. So this is the the big cleaning house. And so I went through that. And so the combination of exploring new territories through psychedelics psychedelics and going through traditional well, traditional in quote, actually, processes of of of meditation and and the cleaning house, a recapitulation process of of let's change who I am. Let's optimize. Let's build, you know, Warhammer 40K, right? Like let's rebuild. Let's build a machine. Let's build a war machine that is conscious and can do these things and how I can make I can give you examples like how um just one of them, right? So, how crazy this this process is. Since I was a kid, um once I start playing guitar, every time I tune my guitar, my I kind of lean away from the guitar. I had this fear of the guitar strings break and hit me in the face. I had this fear and so I I always like, you know, stayed away from it. I did that my whole life. Until I find why I'm doing it. So, when I was a kid, somewhere around 6-7 years old, we used to have a commercial on TV when a little girl was playing a violin, right? And then playing something and out of sudden like you can the the string breaks, right? And then the violin goes you know, just because she broke a string. And it was a life insurance commercial. Right? The metaphor was that anything can happen in life and we have this in my language it makes all the sense that the string of life can break and you know, you need life insurance. A 6-year-old not going to understand this Right. concept. Right. All I saw string breaks and the little the little girl that playing the violin now need life insurance. What happened to her? So, ever since I'm tuning my guitar leaning away from the guitar because that thing was in there. I was not aware of this until I'm doing my recapitulations, my transcendental meditation and as I said, it's a big flashlight. You're finding all the dumb [ __ ] that you ever thought of or did or been taught of. And so I found this. Like, oh, that's why you're doing that. You don't have to do that. That was a metaphor. Throw it out. Yes. Yes. So that's that's that's an actual example of what kind of stuff you find. That is the craziest stuff is in there. Like imagine you and your personality was formed in the first 6 7 years of your life. By who? People who are saying they didn't want to tell you the truth because you were a kid. Right. So parents were teachers were all lying to you about stuff cuz they didn't want to tell you the truth. You know, like babies come with a bird dropped in the chimney whatever the hell they were telling you, right? Wait, what are you trying to say? Yeah, right. You have a You have a bird on the way? So you know what I mean? So So there's there's dumb stuff that was taught to you and there are irrational fears that were you know, so all that stuff you you become a person and the personality of yours was was constructed in a time when you were not really conscious of that, right? So it's kind of unknown to you who you are. Yeah. And that's the point. Let's go back. Yeah. And I feel like psychedelics are supercharging that. Like I can really look at things like what's going on here? Who am I? How do I modify this person into the most optimal form? The reason that what you're saying right now stands out to me as super important is because this is actually something that people can verify for themselves easily. Even in the in the crazier ways, not in the like the cuz what you everything you just said can still be folded into kind of like the psychoanalytical frame. Right. But even in the crazier things like people don't necessarily have to go into psychedelics because to be fair, there are worse things than than not existing like suffering forever. So you know, that there are worse things, right? Okay. Um but but no, but in a in a deal of fear but but everything that Zoltan did in his life revolved around a simple attitude, which is I'm going to find out for myself. And I think that is such an important thing to emphasize. Uh recently I told this to Zoltan yesterday. Uh this was told to me by a friend of mine and you read it somewhere, so I'm definitely cutting somebody out from the chain of command that actually uttered the idea. But it's a cool experiment. A friend Nico like told me about it. Basically, you you sit down in the house before you do some mundane task, bank, store, whatever it is you're about to do. Sit down, close your eyes for a second. Envision yourself with everything you're wearing as accurately as possible where you're going to be. If it's at the bank, in front of the teller, doing whatever you're doing. Okay? If it's at the store, maybe the cashier, doing the checkout. Whatever it is that you're going to be doing. Envision yourself there and then say, "Please deliver me there safely." Simple. Then when you at that spot, st- standing in front of the teller in the bank, you don't have to close your eyes, obviously. You'll look retired, but uh to envision yourself on that couch 10 minutes earlier sitting there. Talk to yourself in the past. Say, "Thank you for delivering me here safely." So, what's interesting is that you basically create a portal. You communicate to existence, "I understand how this works." I know at the moment, from my limited perspective, I think of it as like, "Oh, what do you mean? I just got up and I went to the bank." No, it's an occurrence that happened because you had an aim, you had a vision, you stayed with it. It's a simple one that you do all the time and you can accomplish easily, but you're signifying that you understand how it actually works. Which is you have an intention, you have an energy putting into the intention, and you're staying on it for a particular amount of time until it occurs exactly how you wanted it to happen. You you don't necessarily know how you're moving your hand or moving your body or you just kind of accept it to be true. But what actually happened when you wanted to go to the bank is that you had all these ideas about going there. And then you had an impulse and you stay with that impulse. The point is that when you start communicating to yourself across time this way, quote unquote, you're starting showing weight. Can I do this with a thing that I don't necessarily expect to happen. This is where you start playing with it. This is what I mean by anybody can anybody can verify this. The practice is that you're supposed to be expending the amount of miracles or uh synchronicities that can happen to you. And you can test this. So then you go, "Okay, next time I'm going to the bank, I'm going to imagine I'm going to do the same. Deliver me there safely, but I'm also going to envision something that might not happen. Like uh I'm going to see somebody with a pink hat or something." If you show up to the bank and somebody has even close something pink distinctively pink on their head, go, "Oh, interesting. Thank you for delivering me here safely, also. Yes, interesting." And then you start playing with it. Okay, what how far can I take this? Mhm. I'm going to the bank. I'm going to meet somebody on the way and I'm going to have some kind of a big life change. And I And you start believing in it because you're like, "Yeah, well, dude, that's that was crazy. Like, why would they have a pink thing on their head?" And now you start playing with it. Try this. Yeah. Try this. Anybody can try this. Testing the matrix. I had this dude on here Eric Wargo who wrote a book called Time Loops. Have you ever heard of it? No. Fascinating uh book he wrote about basically the idea of how time is like a loop. And he what what he started doing was he started recording his dreams down. And then [ __ ] that it was happening in his dreams was happening in his future. Right? So, like and then he also points out all these times in history where people had dreams that actually happened. Like where people like that were like jotting down their dreams had things happen. For example, and even around big events, the Titanic, there was multiple people who had dreams about the Titanic sinking. Even somebody who wrote a book about it right before it happened. There was during right before Yeah. a thing? Pull it up, Steve. Steve's got it. That's crazy. Um also, before 9/11, there was hundreds and hundreds of people who woke up and talked about having dreams about towers being taken down by airplanes. Right. Before 9/11 happened. And um like the idea is that the idea is the future predicts the past. As well as the other way. As well as the other way around. It's one system that communicates through itself across all the Yes. time back and forth and just one block Yeah. Right. Or there is no time. Or there is no time and there's just one block universe. So, like if you if you know or or if your future self is projecting is is is somehow communicating with your past self saying like, oh, I'm successful. I've done all these things. I've achieved all these amazing things. You somehow have this intuition that like I need to to become this. This is what I like this intuitive thing you can't really describe that you know is your path and your journey. Right? But what it really is is your future self communicating with you. And he has this whole I'm I'm [ __ ] this up a little bit. No, no. I I I'm in full agreement with that. And I think it's just that the more you have these check marks of like, yeah, that worked. Again, in Zoltan's example, it's very pronounced because he knew he's going to be a rock star when he was like 14, right? So, but he knew. It's not like he just postulated. He communicated that across time to say, I know that and well enough to know that just to step into that frame. Yeah. Is there a world line for a version of Zoltan that didn't get there? Yes. It's the one that didn't postulate it strongly enough. Right. So, now that sounds like one of these, oh, a parallel universe. Like Right. test it. multiverse Try it. Yeah. It costs you nothing to try this, right? And I promise you there's going to be something there that's going to occur. And again, don't fall into any like silly trap of like, well, you know, I wanted to see some silly hat, but somebody then I went outside and on the way back home I saw a pink bubblegum. That doesn't count. Like, be fair with the, you know, with your assessments. But the more you're fair with your assessments and like you're better manifest. Yeah. It's just that you're better in envisioning things and connecting to them in a way that will actually make it happen. you pay more attention to them they have more. And I gave the Just Google the book, Steve. Google the Titanic book that came out before the Titanic song. Oh, yeah. Sorry. You want a water or something? Mhm. Steve, you got my liquid death? Liquid death. You can have Um, before so I was explaining this this thing that happened to me recently where I uh Oh, we'll get you the water. Right. I um There's this dude who um is friends We got any left? Yeah. Yes. Nice. Thanks, Steve. Thank you. Awesome. There there's this guy who's my my dad um worked at the post office with forever and I see the guy, you know, sometimes when I go to my parents' house he's there. I see him maybe like three times a year, something like that. Right? He's just like this funny New Yorker guy. I never think about him. I I mean, that's mean to say, but I don't really like he's he's like he's on the very he's on the very far periphery of like people in my life, right? Not somebody I think about every day. I happen to be driving home one day and I random thought popped into my head about him. Like his voice popped into my head saying I was imagining how he would react to something I knew it was going to happen in the future. Like I I knew I knew I was going to see him in the near future and I was just thinking about like what our interaction would be. So random it popped into my head. No reasonable explanation to why that thought popped into my head. 10 seconds later he calls me. Right. The dude's called me five times in the last 15 years. Those are the miracles I'm saying that you have to keep track of. So, your mind does not delete them as as unexplainable phenomena because your your mind is not comfortable. That's why I kind of said that uh you know, it doesn't like conflicting information. And you know, our everyday reality we're not talking about miracles. We're not talking about these things. It's not a a thing that everybody just agrees. So, it kind of goes against the grain of of general agreed reality. But it they happen. And so, the more you keep track of them, the more you solidify them. No, no, no, that happened. That happened. Do not erase this data. This Do not bleach bit or whatever that this keep this data, all right? The more you have the more um the more accustomed you are to the miracles. And so, the more you can perform. And once you accomplish a bunch of impossible things, in turn, you any task is in front of you, you're no longer thinking about which is the enemy. You no longer have doubts. Oh, I'm going to do that. I have no doubts. That's what Danny was referring to. We had this conversation that when did you know? And I'm like, I was a kid. I knew exactly what I was going to do. There was no never a moment in my life when I thought it might not happen. Never. Not for a second. And I would say that is the weaponization of your intent. So, intent is a really interesting thing because let's say to give you a pragmatic example. You get up in the morning and say, I'm going to go get some bread. That's my intent. I'm going to go and get bread. You get in your car. You get a phone call from your friend. He gets a flat tire. Well, I'm going to go help him. Then some time passed and are you hungry? Yeah, sure. Let's go eat. Like you go to eat. So, the as you see, the path is nice really convoluted. You're all over the city. As As as you didn't forget for a second that you left your house for bread. Right? You're good. Because the the the the path to success is not a straight line. The path to achieving the things you want is not a straight line. Life will knock you around, but the important part is that vision. The intent has to stay there. Unfazed. That light is there forever until you achieve that. And then once you achieve that, check mark. I got it. You fulfill that cycle. And then you probably have more goals, more things that you want to do. And every single time you fulfill one, you check mark those. And keep track of them. That I did that. I did that. That was impossible, yet we're here. All those miracles. And then what happens, that's just a record keeping for for your own mind, so you not habitually delete these things. And you believe in your own miracles. But in turn, what happens to you is that whatever vision I have, whatever I want to do, I don't have the automatic question of yeah, but that's not possible. That's maybe too difficult. Oh, it's going to cost a lot of money. Oh, I don't know the right people. I don't have those thoughts. Zero. Silence. I have a goal. I focus on it, and I'm going to go and get it. Right. I don't have the doubt process. And the reason I don't have the doubt process because since I was a kid, I'm practicing this keep track of the miracles. And there's a state of mind that state of mind that and being that amplifies these things. So, definitely with DMT and with certain meditative states. I don't know if you know this, but all the participants in the DMTX study in Imperial College I hope I'm not confabulating this, but I'm pretty sure that Alexander Bader in his book The The Bigger Picture is describing he was one of the test subjects. And he is talking about I think he said all of them experienced an incredible uptake in these synchronicities even before they started the the actual tests. So, like I think it was like a month before that they all started experiencing crazy the crazy synchronicities during and a few months after it like tapered off. And when you are in certain like I guess calm states or like after deep meditative states, all of a sudden all of these things are much more pronounced. You can see them, but at the same time you see that you just flow through them. You're not even trying to grab them or anything like that. There's thing that people call Burning Man magic. It's a real thing. It's like when people go to Burning Man, there's this insane uptick in synchronicities that happen there that way outside of the realm of just chance. And I think it's because that everybody kind of in a particular state that it just kind of makes these things happen. But again, this is anybody can test this. You know, Ricky Gervais famously said, "I don't know why." Cuz he started kind of late in his life. And he said, "I don't know why, but I always I just knew it's all going to be all right." Like I never even when we had no money and like I was just like Isn't it weird? It's like something when you when you have this knowledge, like you this this this deep knowing of what's going to happen, right? How it's going to end up. It like it dictates your actions to get there, right? Like dictates every move you make in your life. Like I I have a similar feeling when I was young, which is what I think is the reason that in my life when I have big goals that I wanted to to do or to achieve, I I the analogy I use is I always dove into the swimming pool before it was full of water. And I would just [ __ ] like I would have to make sure or somehow believe that that water would fill up before I got in the pool. Where I like I make the big leap, right? Knowing that it's possible, it's that I could land and lose I could miss my mark and lose everything, but I'm like [ __ ] hoping to God that I'm going to land on solid ground. You know, and I always find a way to land on solid ground and I don't like like I always take the risk. You burn the boats. Yeah, you burn the boats. Right, right, yes, yeah, burn the boats. But there are the patterns again. Look at the patterns. Yeah. All the pattern is like we let's say we talk about creative visualization is a thing. People talk about it. Books were written about it. The principles of the same. Right? Um the universe yield to willpower. Mhm. Right? Countless books about that, countless thoughts about that. If you look at the underlying patterns again, you you're going to find oh there is something here. Right? And um and so again to weaponize it and and and make it in a pragmatic practical Mhm. practice. There is something about falling one side of this fence. Either you are happening to this world or this world is happening to you. Mhm. And it's a mind state and you have to make a choice. And if typically when people, you know, if I come from a pragmatic perspective which that's the side I live on and that's the choice I made. I was born into this world. Allegedly it was here before I came. Right. We don't know. Actually, but allegedly there's a history Allegedly is not a software that was downloaded into me like it's not like I just started to play Call of Duty and all the buildings were there for whatever reason because a programmer put it there. Right? So you could argue well like was it really here? But but let's say, you know, I was born into this world, the world was already here. That means I am impacting this world. Whatever I'm going to say, do whatever activities I'm going to have in this world, I am changing now it's course because I'm here. Right? So I'm an impactor. Right? And if I take that side and I accept that like okay, that means I it also comes with responsibility. Whatever I'm going to do will affect permanently this physical reality and it will have long-lasting impact, right? So I'm responsible for the things I will say and do in this world. That's one side. Or well, you know, the the the the the victim mentality of like I'm here and why did this happen to me? Why me? Why me? That is there in if you look at people, they fall on one side of the story. The victim mentality is I'm here, all these things are happening to me and you know, I see why it's easy to take that side because data is flying at you 24/7. So you you because you're the perceiver, it's easy to to to take that stance like I'm here and I'm perceiving all these things and all these things are happening and all these things happen to me and stubbed my toe and it was it's your fault. I'm not the captain. Right? But all and the people do this to me and that and and then you pick that side and so you are now you're a traveler, you're a you're a not a traveler, a passenger. You're a passenger in this. And generally those people don't really go far in life. You're a passenger, you're a victim. Or you say I'm No, no, no, I'm here. You guys have to live with me now. Yeah. I'm here. I arrived. And you know, it sounds like well, that's an egoistic point of view. Yeah. Yeah. I am here. It's for the ego. I am. I'm here and I am going to impact this world and I'm going to live by my rules as much as possible. I'm going to do the things I want to do. Right? And if you are solid in that side, you will succeed. You have to because you also take responsibility like anything that happened to me, right? Is my fault. Or my achievement. If I was in the wrong place in the wrong time, even that. I some sign I missed, something I didn't read, some some I was there. I got myself there. I didn't accidentally appear somewhere out of nowhere without my will being involved. So, I take full responsibility for everything there is in my life, right? That mentality, that sort of that path will that will make you successful. There's no other way. And now couple that with this idea of unbending intent. Whatever I focus on, I'm not going to take my eyes off of it. Even though I'm understanding that I will have to do a million other things, but not for a second I forget I'm I'm I'm going for the bread that I can eat in the morning. You still got your soul left the house to go get that bread. And all these things you can find it through again, meditation or these spiritual processes, right? Or you can shortcut it because you can find it in those spiritual realms through psychedelics as well. And and and the two together actually pretty powerful because one enforces the other. One verifies the other. And then you always have this world, this agreed upon reality when when I can check it. Did this work? Right? It wasn't like, well, let me read your palm and you know. And then this is no, this is verifiably I wanted to do that happen. I wanted to experience that experience that. And then the more and more you have, the more and more will happen. You just open the door for that. That's an actual mechanical process. Well, guys, we just did a 4-hour podcast. No way. Really? Oh my god. I think I think it's a perfect spot to end this. Yeah, yeah. I didn't realize this. A mind melt of a conversation, man. I appreciate you guys both for coming and doing this. Thank you, brother. Thank you for having us. Sultan, it was a [ __ ] awesome meeting you, brother. Same here. Um Thank you, brother. Thank you, for having us. Yeah. Yes, of course. Tell people where they can find out the next thing you're doing with the DMTX experiment and or not the DMTX experiment, the the laser the laser code of reality experiment. So, they can always go to the website codeofreality.com. We have a We have a new website coming up right now. And Dango Thoughts on YouTube, d a n g o thoughts. And Code of Reality Inc. is basically going to be now an official thing and we're going to be working to actually, you know, bringing the right kind of minds together. We have incredible minds coming into the space from literally Well, I don't know how many of them I can talk about yet, but from scientists to people who are like, you know, like just higher-level thinkers and software engineers. And like, we really have incredible people that are coming online. And we're very excited about bringing everybody together and encouraging more entities around us to also do more of the same, more of like investigative processes that are more open-minded and more also, I guess, open-hearted. So, not so much rigid with what they believe is true, including more things. And Zoltan, I mean, Zoltan, I mean, I guess you're a famous person. Zoltan, where where can people find your your We need to get your your band some more views. Where can we uh It is a very family-friendly name of Five Fingered Death Punch. Actually, it came from a kung fu movie, but you know, it's it's a manifestation of all these things. Well, I Yes and no. I mean, it's uh there was an old kung fu movie, Five Fingers of Death. Oh, [ __ ] And then and then remember the the five What was it? The five-point exploding heart technique in Kill Bill, Right? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay, I was literally watching that movie and I'm like, man, that sounds so ridiculous it should be a band name. So, here we are, right? So, so you look at it and a dot com wasn't taken because it was so crazy, right? So, it's both the best and the worst band name on the planet. You know, because when you see Well, you know, when some old lady sitting next to me Right, some old lady sitting next to me in the airport and and ask me like, "Oh, you look like a musician." I'm like, "Oh, here we go. We have to I'm going to have to tell her, you know." So, I'm going to preface it like, "So, do you know what kung fu is?" Cuz otherwise you get the face. This is what Look, yes, that's that's the manifestation of of all that what we we are talking about. So, that's that's a vehicle for me, but what Danny was saying I I would add to that like that's exactly what has to happen. I think we need to achieve a critical mass. That means high tech you know, high achievers and and and and high-level thinkers, you know, the intellectual giants need to come together and and explore this. There are a lot of the lot of people involved. There are a lot of them are already there. And most of them will not yet speak out. Like I was silent about it for over two decades because it just wasn't the time. There was not a you know, right now we can talk about you know, uh encounters with you know, with with extraterrestrials and people no longer think that you're crazy. 20 years ago it definitely was I had experiences that had witnesses and people like, "Holy cow, this is actually happening." Right? That 20 years ago I couldn't even open my mouth about. And then so this psychedelic space was kind of similar. So, as I said we reaching that space where end of childhood and and then we need to pull together the the people so we can create achieve the critical mass and we start to define the agreed upon rules or reality of that space. The same way we define what this is, right? There are rules there. There are happenings that and and and visions and and things that we see and experience that are verifiable by massive amount of people. So, that means there is a rule set. There's This is real. There is something here that that is important. And what's more important than than try to find these answers. Why are we here? What is happening? What is perception? What what is going on? Really. That is the underlying question when everything else everything that exists around us from science to everything is basically the a form of discovery of that very basic original question. What is going on? What is this? Why? What are we? What why? What's our purpose? That. I don't think there is a more important question than that. I agree. I think what you guys are doing is really pushing the conversation forward in a big big big way. So, we should definitely do this again down the road, man. We'll see what happens. Hopefully we have fun things to update on. Yeah, man. All right, guys. Thank you, Danny. Good night, everybody.