It's always the obvious questions that are  so vigorously discouraged. And one of the questions that's been the most discouraged  over the past 30 years are what are those lines in the sky that you see trailing jets?  What is that? Some people call them chemtrails. Claim that somehow the US government  is spraying poison on the population. Those people are clearly crazy. Wikipedia calls  them crazy. Every news outlet calls them crazy. But the trails are still there and it's clearly  not water vapor because that doesn't make sense at all. So what are they? We spent the last 6  months trying to find someone credible who could explain that to us. A serious sane person with an  engineering background who could tell us what are we looking at cuz we're looking at something and  I don't care what names you call me. I still want to know what it is. And we think we have found  that person. Dne Wigington of Northern California has been on this subject for almost 30 years  and has compiled what we believe after looking at it pretty carefully is the most comprehensive  account of what we're seeing. And it's very bad. [Music] [Applause] [Music] [Applause] [Music] Dane, thanks a lot for joining us. Um, I  never knew what to think of this topic, chemtrails or contrails or the the the stripes  in the sky that linger after airplanes pass. I don't remember those them as a child. They're  very common now. I've heard people say there's something up, something nefarious going on.  So, I go to Wikipedia to see what they say, and I want to read you the Wikipedia entry,  the first part of it on this question. Okay, you may have seen this, and I'm quoting from  Wikipedia as of this morning. The chemtrail conspiracy theory is the erroneous belief that  long-lasting condens condensation trails left in the sky by high-flying aircraft are actually quote  chemtrails consisting of chemical or biological agents sprayed for nefarious purposes undisclosed  to the general public. Period. Believers in this conspiracy theory say that while normal contrails  dissipate relatively quickly, contrails that linger must contain additional substances. Those  who subscribe to the theory speculate that the purpose of the chemical release may be solar  radiation management, weather modification, psychological manipulation, human population  control, biological or chemical warfare, or testing of a biological or chemical agent on  the population. and that the trails are causing respiratory illnesses and other health problems.  So I read that and the purpose of course of that paragraph is not to illuminate what this might be,  but to attack anyone who speculates about what it might be. It's a form itself of psychological  warfare of propaganda. And when I read that, I said to myself, there's clearly something going  on because the people who control Wikipedia, which would be the intel agencies as we know, um  don't want anyone to talk about this. So with that lengthy preface explaining why this conversation  is taking place, I will turn it over to you to explain what are these lines in the sky that  we have all seen. There's sprayed particulate dispersion. There is no theory in this equation.  Bottom line is when we have up close film footage of these aircraft at altitude KCT10s, KC135s,  C17 Globe Masters with nozzles visible turning dispersions on and off. This is not quote  condensation. Geogwatch.org is the only only entity that has taken a Noah flying lab, National  Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration flying lab, top scientists in it to sample what these  heavy aircraft are emitting at altitude. That sample was processed at rinser polytenic in  New York, one of the world's most renowned testing institutions. We found exactly what we knew we  would find. Starting with aluminum nano particles, bioavailable free form aluminum is toxic to  all life. Period. That element is named in numerous climate engineering patents as part of  a geoengineering dispersion element. So again, there's no theory involved in any of this. And  what's so incredibly profound in this equation, Tucker, you have the entire global climate science  community, governments all over the world saying we need to put aircraft in the air immediately to  disperse light scattering particles. And we use the science terms at geomagingwatch.org Because  the chemtrails term is the instant marginalization term by design. You bring that term up, any  elected official won't talk to you anymore. Media will immediately marginalize you. Solar radiation  management, stratospheric aerosol injection, cloud albido enhancement, climate engineering. If we  stick to the science terms, they can't marginalize us. So again, this elephant in the sky that we  are told is a conspiracy theory is exactly what the entire global climate science community says  we need to deploy immediately to slow down the warming of the planet. Stated purpose to deflect  some of the sun's incoming thermal energy. We know these programs, not surprisingly, are making  a bad situation worse, not better. And Tucker, they're being used as a form of warfare.  And we know that we have countries like Iran constantly demonized. Of course, as you well  know, immediately after 9/11, we have the list of countries to be targeted, given to General Wesley  Clark, a list that clearly existed before 9/11 even occurred. Subsequently, every one of those  countries, every one of them was endured a once in 1,000-year drought. Statistically, mathematically,  that's impossible without climate intervention operations. And we have the leader of Iran on the  floor of the UN in on film on the record stating NATO was cutting off their precipitation. We  have Iranian top scientists recently stating NATO's been doing this for 40 years. Destabilize  the food supply by destabilizing the rain and you destabilize the population. So it's you just  said a bunch of amazing things. All of which I just want to say sound plausible to me. Um but  let's just back up a little bit. So you're calling this geoengineering. The term the term chemtrails  you say is a propaganda term designed to discredit people who ask sincere questions about what the  hell am I looking at? So Google that term they'll get what you got and that's what we try to avoid.  If anybody is unfamiliar with the issue and they Google that term that's the end of their search  most likely. So we try to point semantics matter in this in this case. Okay. So the the first line  of the Wikipedia entry points out something true, which is that when you look at these lines  in the sky and you're told, "Well, it's just condensation. It's water vapor." You know that  maybe that's not the right explanation because water vapor dissipates and doesn't remain in the  sky for like 20 minutes after the plane leaves. that suggests bigger particles in in the mist,  the particulate matter in the mist. Is is that correct? Exactly correct. If you see, for example,  breath condensing, if you see some researchers in the Arctic and their breath is condensing because  it's very cold, do they get a cloud starting to form over their head? If you have a vehicle that's  exhaust condensing in the morning, do you have a freeway with giant clouds hanging over it from  the condensation from the vehicles in some cold region? No, that's not how condensation behaves.  And again, my journey into this whole battle of now 27 years. But when I built my off-grid home  in Northern California, middle of the wilderness, it was the cover of the world's largest  renewable energy magazine. I have solar, wind, and hydro. And I was losing on some days from what  these aircraft were emitting, 50, 60, even 70% of my solar uptake from what these aircraft were  emitting. I knew that could not be condensation. When I began to research, I was very surprised  at the mountain of information on geoengineering, solar radiation management, and I'd look  for primary elements. I begin to test my precipitation. I hoped I would not find these  elements in my rain because I knew if I did, it would change the entire course of my life. I  cannot look the other way. I came up with seven parts per billion in my first rain test over  the next 18 months because I took that long researching before I was willing to speak out  on this issue. At the end of 18 months, I had single rain events with 3,450 parts per billion  of aluminum in my rain. This is bioavailable free form aluminum, which is toxic to all life  forms. Period. Primary element named in climate engineering patents. And we have the world's most  recognized geoengineers specifically stating on film on the record their goal of using aluminum  in these programs because of its high reflectivity with no consideration of the consequences. That's  how I got into this battle. So, if I understand what you're saying, this what we're watching is an  attempt, I assume, by governments, and we'll get into who's doing this, to mitigate the effects of  climate change, to reflect back rays from the sun so that the earth doesn't warm at a at a pace that  is dangerous to whatever they think it's dangerous to. Um, but this is a this is a global warming  mitigation effort. Is that correct? That is the stated purpose. We know this is that is the stated  purpose. So I think that's plausible because there is so much energy um commitment sincere commitment  in some cases obviously uh fake commitment in others but there and so much money behind this  effort to mitigate global warming that that makes absolute sense. It is a religion. Um, and  you're saying that you were not originally aware of this or interested in it, but because you live  off-rid and you derive a lot of your electricity from solar and you clearly have an engineer brain,  you were wondering like, why the hell is my solar not working correctly? And that got you into this  process of learning about it. Correct. And I have friends in the solar industry and who off the  record inform me that some of the commercial solar plants are producing half their design  output and they won't talk about why because they don't want to lose subsidies. So again this this  is a very known element in many fields. In fact, with the nation's weathermen, National Weather  Service and Noah, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, there is an illegal federal gag  order on all agency operations with those two entities. Why would our government feel the need  to gag the weathermen? I had no scientist state to my face, quote, "We all know this is going on. We  have no first amendment protection. We don't know what to do." So the bottom line is let's all just  pretend this isn't going on while it's virtually dismantling the planet's primary life support  systems and ubiquitously contaminating everything everywhere. Not just talking about aluminum. We  have in lab tests and again we've done hundreds of lab tests. We did 500 working with the  University of Minnesota an internationally recognized agricultural institution. We have  aluminum, berium, strontium, maganesees, surfactants, polymer fibers, graphine. All of this  coming down in our breathable air column. Tucker, that's horrifying. People worry about the safety  of their home now more than ever. Simply Safe is an amazing solution. And with the early access  Black Friday sale upon us, there's never been a better time to protect your house, your family  this way. So, typical security systems react after someone's already broken into your house.  It seems a little late, really. Simply Safe takes the opposite approach to stop bad things,  home invasions for example, before they happen. How active guard outdoor protection cameras detect  threats outside your house. Alert real security agents who take action while the intruder is still  outside, not in your bedroom. Why doesn't everyone do this? We don't know. But this is a great idea.  And Simply Safe works whether you're home or not. You could be around the world. It's got 247  coverage no matter where you are. There are no long-term contracts, no hidden fees. You can  cancel at anytime you want. It's been repeatedly named best home security system for a good reason.  Plus, there's a 60-day money back guarantee, so you're not risking anything. Don't miss out on  Simply Sales's biggest sale of the year. 60% off right now. Listeners, get 60% off a Simplysafe  home security system at simplysafe.com/tucker. Simplysafe simlisafe.com/tucker. [Music] That's  the kind of safety you want. So, who's doing this specifically? Ultimately, all roads lead to  those who print the money. But we know as far as the coordinating entities, certainly DoD, DARPA,  and we have documents to prove the existence of these programs going back decades, documents  hundreds of pages long. We have an 800page US Senate document from 1978 outlining the scope  and scale of these programs then specifically calling for intergovernmental cooperation even  between quote otherwise adversarial nations because of the crossber ramifications of these  programs. You can't just geoengineer over your own country. Who's the biggest player? Obviously the  United States of America because the size of our military we have the US military has three times  more aerial tankers which are the primary aircraft used in these operations. Three times more than  all other militaries in the world combined. And if I could back up to the whole condensation  trail narrative again, which is perhaps one of the greatest lies ever perpetrated on populations  all over the world. All military tankers and all commercial aircraft are equipped with what's known  as a high bypass turboan jet engine. That's a jet powered fan. 90% of the air that moves through  that engine is not combusted. So by design, that engine is nearly incapable of producing  any condensation material except under rare and extreme circumstances which are diminishing by  the day because of the warming that's occurring in the troposphere. So much warming. We've had  two former military pilots that fly py aircraft, private aircraft. Important people have  contacted us at gogwatch.org. In both cases, they were off the coast of the Pacific Northwest,  and their aircraft were forced into emergency auto descents because the air outside that aircraft  was 45 to 50° above what it should have been. The air was not dense enough to carry those  aircraft. These people are very, very alarmed, but very afraid to speak out. Well, that's an  amazing that's an amazing fact and it and it points up something that I think is indisputably  true, which is the climate is changing. Um why it's changing is a is a whole separate set of  debates. Of course it's always changed. Um climate injuring alone though if I could elaborate I mean  climate injuring alone if and I'm I'm not negating the other sources of damage of the planet. We've  been very poor stewards but our point at geo engineering watch.org is how could anybody from  any perspective and and the environmental left is the most reluctant to face this issue and we know  why Tucker because they don't want to lose their 501c3 nonprofits. Our attorneys at gwatch.org  spoke to attorneys from every major environmental group. Greenpeace, Sierra Club, WWF, all of them,  they will not address this issue because they don't want to lose their nonprofit status. Is that  not criminal hypocrisy? So, we're stating in in the case of trapping more heat than it deflects,  causing far more harm than any perceived good. They're simply using it as a weapon under the  guise of trying to mitigate the climate. So, again, these operations are taking us from the  frying pan into the fire, so to speak. So again, the the greatest most damaging form of human  activity on the planet at this moment in time must be considered these operations, climate  engineering. Well, sure. I mean, geoengineering by its very nature is just like textbook hubris  where you think you're God and you're in charge of the weather and the planet. No, you're just  some lumpy furry schmuck living out an incredibly short lifespan with no ability to make anything  better because you're not God. Like just the whole mindset is the mindset that gets us to nuclear  war. So I'm opposed to it on those grounds. But before we ascend too much higher, let's just come  back down a little bit and to the specifics. So where these aircraft seem to be everywhere  in the United States, where are they taking off from? Where do these chemicals come from? the  aluminum particulate, the the rest that you did, the magnesium, all the rest you described, like  what's what's kind of the chain that gets us to the stripes in the sky that we see? Aircraft  are taking off from countless locations. We we're aware of a number of military bases where  we know they're they're deploying from. We also have commercial aircraft with commercial markings  that we know are being used in these operations. We know that because we have film footage of  these aircraft. Retrofit nozzles mounted on the wing pylons. We have uplose photographs aimed into  the exhaust jetream to make this look like quote condensation. We are not implicating commercial  pilots or personnel, but we are communicating with them. Some commercial pilots that distribute our  printed materials in pilot lunchrooms for example covertly because they know their aircraft are  being used. These are automated systems. They carry a small payload. You might remember about in  the year 2000 the weight of the aircraft became a very big deal. How much luggage you carried on,  how much weight you carried on. That appears to be when this was implemented. And we also know  that the DoD has leased a significant number of commercial aircraft with commercial markings.  Why would the DoD need or want that? And again for the base material because we're talking about  an extraordinary amount of material here based on our testing with University of Minnesota again  about 500 lab tests there and extrapolating how much material was in the precipitation projecting  that globally it appears something in the range of 40 to 60 million tons of nanop particles are  being dispersed annually in skies all over the globe. And the smaller the particle, the more  toxic it is, the more harmful it is, the more bioavailable it is. And and all the official  air quality testing by design doesn't even look for these elements, let alone disclose them. So  official air quality testing is PM10, 10 microns, occasionally PM2.5. Those are boulders compared  to a nano particle. You can fit up to a 100,000 nanop particles across the width of a single human  hair. It's in they're inconceivably small. And the reason they use such small particles is because  they stay aloft longer and that's the goal. Keep the particles suspended in the atmosphere and  there's more volutric forcing. There's more surface area the smaller the particle for a given  amount of material. So it appears and we have a published study on this. There is a peer-reviewed  published study that implicates coal fly ash as a base material for these operations because  it contains many of the elements the climate engineers feel they need to disperse in our skies  and it provides plausible deniability and it gets rid of the waste product that they're always  trying to get rid of. There's other elements added. American Elements Corporation appears to be  one of the primary suppliers for these operations. But again, the fact that this can go on in our  skies and the mountain of data that exists on this and the continued pretending by the so-called  climate science community that this isn't ongoing is mind-numbing and they won't be able to hide  this for much longer. Tucker, I want to I want to stress that these programs will be forced  to light. And if I could end with this, when those pretend again like the Wikipedia definition  you read that this is some sort of an outlandish conspiracy, let's go all the way back to 1962. 63  years ago, President Lyndon Johnson on film on the record ranting like a lunatic. It's the first 30  seconds of the weekly commercial free nonpolitical geoengineering watch national broadcast we put  on radios out of our pock stations on out of our pocket across the country. But the first 30  seconds is this film footage of Johnson stating we had the power to control the world's cloud  layer then and quote he who controls the weather controls the world. How far have they come since?  A new study, one of the saddest ever released showed that one year after having an abortion,  women were 50% more likely to need psychiatric treatment and 87% more likely to experience  personality disorders or behavioral disorders. So abortion is not healthc care, it's trauma. It's  awful. It's the saddest thing. And some people get railroaded right into it. They think they  have no choice. But they do. And our friends at Preborn want to remind everyone that they do. They  have a choice. At Preborn, women find real care, not lectures about how they should have their  abortions and then brag about them and how they're going to feel great after it and whole and free.  It's all such a lie. You must know people who have had abortions. Everyone does. They're not freed  by it. They're enslaved by it. It's the saddest thing. And pre-born is pro-life in the truest  sense. They want women to have an actual option. Pre-born's network clinics welcome expecting  mothers with open arms. There's no shame, no guilt. There is compassion and support. They're  introduced to their babies through ultrasounds. And for the first time, they understand this  is alive. This is life. This is a miracle. When a mother chooses life, Pre-born walks with her  for up to 2 years, providing maternity clothes, diapers, counseling, and anything she needs.  With Christmas right around the corner, we hope you will support Pre-born. Pre-born is a fivestar  rated charity, meaning that when you send money to them, they actually use it for what they say  they're going to use it for. It's not for private planes for their staff, hardly. Dial pound 250  and say the keyword baby. That's pound250 baby. Or visit pre-born.com/tucker. pre-born.com/tucker.  stand with life, true life, with the miracle and the joy of life with pre-born. Well, it's that  kind of lunatic hubris that, you know, destroys the world. Um, and Johnson was a, of course,  whether he knew it or not, committed to helping destroy the world. Um, so an evil man by I think  by any metric. Um, so I'm not I'm not necessarily surprised. What I am surprised by, however, is the  fact that this program, the one you're describing, could have continued for over 60 years at this  scale, you know, continental scale, global scale, and no one knows about it or talks about it. I  mean, you know, we have a huge government, lots of elected officials. Like, what do they say when  you ask them? This this is a bit like the safe and effective narrative, isn't it? Let's all have the  entire medical community pretending that injecting toxic heavy metals is safe and effective. And  they still pretend to this day that that is the case when it doesn't take a large intellect or an  educated individual to understand that's going to do harm. And yet that narrative still continues to  this day. So again, this mass psychosis of denial is mind-numbing. But you can't hide this for  much longer. And we do have the climate science community now starting to speak out, starting to  state how incredibly catastrophic these programs would be if they were imple implemented. They're  not outright admitting it yet, but they're getting closer. And if you look at historical precedent,  when did the US military start its modification in hurricanes? And and there's some interesting  things going on on the hurricane front this year as in none of them. They're being deflected. And  people that pretend that you can't manipulate a weather system of that size. That's absolute  nonsense. The science completely disputes that US military commenced its hurricane modification  operations in 1947 with project Cirrus and even the results of that initial smallcale testing  appeared to have so much of effect on a cyclonic rotation that there were lawsuits pending from  that at which time they begin to be more covert about their operations. And you said you'll notice  that there aren't hurricanes in Florida. So, the last few years, uh, Florida, the West Coast  of Florida in particular, just been hammered, absolutely destroyed. You know, billions, tens of  billions of dollars of damage done by hurricanes, no hurricanes this year. And you're saying that  that's not an accident. Is that what you're saying? I'm saying that we know the technology  exists to steer storms of that size. And let me make a comparison. You could have a a 10-year-old  child divert the course of a 100,000 ton freight train by pulling a lever literally and changing  the tracks. That's correct. And that's the kind of small input, massive output that you can have  with these cyclonic rotations when they have the ability to manipulate atmospheric pressure  zones. This is undisputed patented science. So why would we think they're not using these type of  operations? We have historical precedent. Project Papey in Vietnam was so successful at controlling  precipitation. This is a historical record that in by 1976 they passed the INMOD treaties forbidding  weather manipulation for wartime purposes but not over a country's own population. So if we look  at the Can can I ask you to stop? I'm I'm sorry you're throwing I'm so ignorant on this topic  but I'm suddenly very interested that I just want to make sure we don't miss anything. Operation  Popeye. Is that what you called it in Vietnam? Correct. What? I've never even heard of that. I'm  embarrassed to say. What is it? What was it? Very easily researched historical record. US military  was so successful at controlling precipitation over Vietnam that the international community was  very concerned about this at least on the surface. And they passed environmental modification  treaties in 1976, international treaties forbidding weather manipulation in wartime. So  again when when people claim this is conspiracy, we don't have this kind of power and control and  they they try to muddy the climate engineering issue as being the localized publicized cloud  seating operations. Those are two completely different animals and we see even some state  legislators doing the same. They're and we're trying to correct that at geo engineering.org  because we're working with numerous state legislators now and have been. There's legislation  pending in 36 states to ban geoengineering over their skies. Tennessee and Florida have already  done so, but we're we're correcting them and giving them a an accurate compass heading that  the localized publicized cloud seating operations, the kind which they tried to implicate in  the Texas floods that killed so many young Americans as being connected to a localized cloud  seating operation, which is virtually meaningless in comparison to climate engineering. It's an  ant compared to an elephant. So intentionally those that control media and are trying to  control the narrative are trying to confuse these two issues. They are completely different.  They're trying to mask or hide the elephant in the sky which is climate engineering operations. So  again these programs are historical record. The Chinese government so successful at for example  engineering snowstorms. Tucker do you remember the blizzard in New Orleans this January? You remember  that? No, I don't. There was a blizzard in New Orleans. First time in recorded history. There  was a blizzard in Florida. Blizzards on the Gulf Coast. That was January 21st, by the way. That's  an interesting date to have that happen. These are demonstrations of what climate engineering can do.  And the Chinese government has long since openly stated they were engineering snowstorms with  endothermic reacting elements. These are patented elements that can literally transition what should  be a liquid precipitation event, a rain event into snow. And these elements, if people understand  they have a first aid kit that sits on their shelf at room temperature for 20 years, you mix the cold  pack together, you have ice instantly. That's an endothermic reacting element. Yes, that's being  into cloud moisture. And they were so successful in China, they caused billions of dollars of  damage to Beijing, at which time they began to be less open about this. Everybody covered it.  CNN, Popular Science, The Guardian, everyone. But if you bring that up here, suddenly you're a tin  foil hatw wearing nutcase on that same day while it was while it was blizzarding in New Orleans.  In the polar regions, Alaska, Greenland, Iceland, Siberia, it was above freezing and raining. Do  you remember the deep freeze in Texas, Tucker, a few years ago? Five years ago, something like  that. Yes. Very, very well. Yeah. It shut down a lot of their grid. Correct. So when it was below  zero in Dallas, it was 33° warmer at the North Pole. Think about that. And that's what we're  not told. So when you have let's look at the COP climate conferences. Do you know what those are?  The international climate conferences that we have periodically. Those conferences are not to change  business as usual. They are to force countries to actively or passively participate in climate  engineering. So at some of those conferences, the Cancun conference, the Copenhagen conference,  we had record low temperatures at the time of the conference in spite of above normal temperatures  in all surrounding areas. That's a demonstration of what climate insurance can do. So back to the  hurricanes, the deflection of hurricanes so far this year, is that a demonstration to other  countries as well as to the power that the US military has to manipulate atmospheric pressure  zones? And again, these are patented processes. For listeners that have heard of HARP in Alaska,  I'm not sure if you ever heard of that, Tucker. HARP. No. Okay. That's images of that exist.  There's no dispute as to its function or what the patents outline that it can do. Even Discovery  Channel did a long episode, which they've seem to be taken off the air now, called controlling the  weather. But that's a weapon of mass destruction. They play it off as a benign research facility.  That's an ionosphere heater. It transmits 3.6 million watts of power to the electrically charged  ionosphere causing an electrical chain reaction. They're literally using the atmosphere  as a physics lab, which we know they do, right Tucker? You know of Project Starfish Prime  and Project Fishbowl, if you've heard of those, those are the the US military's experiments with  detonating hydrogen bombs in the magnetosphere, which they thought could collapse the  whole atmosphere. Did that stop them? No, it didn't. So installations like HARP are used  to control atmospheric pressure zones. Back to the hurricanes, if you can manipulate atmospheric  pressure zones with these directional ionosphere heaters, you can literally manipulate their path.  And and is that what we see going on? Is that a demonstration to others right now? Does the  administration want to not have a big hurricane cataclysm since they've gutted all the emergency  protection, everything? Do they not want to fight that battle too right now? We don't know. We can  speculate on those things, but the fact that there is nothing that we can call natural at this point  is indisputable. That's amazing. When you drink a cup of coffee from your typical douchy woke coffee  company, you're supporting an entire agenda you may not be aware of. It's not just about coffee.  It's about Antifa, BLM, transindoation, the notion that masculinity is somehow toxic, and other  programs specifically designed to destroy the West from within. and they've been pretty effective.  You shouldn't have to support any of that just cuz you want to drink great coffee. You can do both.  You can have an excellent cup of coffee and you can defend what matters in your nation. Black  Rifle Coffee is a really good way to do that. Veteran founded, missiondriven, Black Rifle Coffee  donates to groups that you would be proud of, not ones that hate you. Their money goes to the right  places and they're going allin this Veterans Week. From November 7th until the 11th, Black Rifle is  raising money to eliminate up to $25 million in veteran medical debt. That is a lifechanging  difference. Visit blackriflec.com/tucker. Use this code Tucker. Pretty simple. For 30% off  your first order, black rifle coffee. It is purely American. A couple different threads. One,  the US military in this country, our military runs propaganda operations against our population  and they do it on social media and of course they do it through the conventional media as well and  they have for a long time but it's it's certainly gotten more aggressive. So um that's illegal, it's  immoral, anyone who participates in that should be in prison. Um but it happens and unfortunately  we haven't been able to stop it. So, we know that they lie to our population about a whole bunch  of things, including what they're doing. Two, we know that in the past 15 years, you see these  kind of fat affeminite generals all of a sudden talking about how climate change is like one of  the main national security threats and like the purpose of the US military is to fight climate  change. There's been a lot of that and it's very confusing to people like me who think of the  purpose of the US military is like shooting people trying to invade our country. like what does  climate change have to do with national security? But they've been saying that a lot and your  description suddenly makes it all make sense. Like a lot of what they do is trying to mitigate or  saying they're trying to mitigate the effects of climate change. I mean, I guess this is more out  in the open than I realized until right now. I I would call it masking the effects because they're  certainly not mitigating it. Everything they do, every short-term toxic surface cool down comes  at the cost of a worsened overall warming and damage to the planet. And you're completely  correct, Tucker, completely correct in the US military's top brass statements on the record  that they consider the collapsing climate system the greatest national security threat of all. So  when we have so many military bases at sea level, some of which are already being inundated,  that's a part of the problem. But you have other elements. For example, and this is from a  perspective of the existence of the human race and how much longer we're going to be here. The  ozone layer is near functional collapse right now. It's not the hairspray cans. Single greatest  damaging factor is climate engineering. Period. Not just the oxidizing particles that are being  dispersed in our atmosphere, but the manipulation of those particles with extremely powerful  frequency transmissions. So we know that of all the towers being put up everywhere for quote  communications, fake trees and you know all the different forms they come in. We know that many  of those installations are being supplied with 10 times more power than they need. That's part  of my background in the electrical field. I know people that work on these towers. 10 times more  power than they need for communications. Why do they need that much more power? Thousand% more  power. And we know these facilities are being used to manipulate the electrically conductive  atmospheric particulates. There's a repelling effect caused from these transmissions because we  can see the effect on water vapor loops. So, if we look at the flash flooding in Texas as an example  that killed so many young Americans, we captured in real time and I'm I'm still surprised we have  access to these data loops because we have access to the transmissions from the NEXRAD network that  are used to manipulate weather systems. And what happened in that case was because of the repelling  effect of those transmissions and picture picture this scenario when there was that convective cell  over that location and transmitters energized all around that cell and we recorded that it's  posted online that in effect held that cell in one place. It precipitated out in one location.  We can speculate about agendas and objectives. We can't know that. But the fact that that storm  was manipulated is beyond dispute. Same with Hurricane Helen. We recorded that in real time.  The frequency transmissions manipulating that storm and steering into place. It's indisputable.  These are patented technologies. Hurricane Harvey, we recorded that. How did meteorologists know 7  days in advance that Hurricane Harvey was going to go where it went and sit there for 3 days?  How could they possibly know that? Frequency transmissions held it there. We recorded that in  real time. And again, these people are reading scripts, Tucker. They're literally reading scripts  passed down to them by Rathon, private defense contractors, Rathon and Loheed Martin that are  neck deep in climate engineering, everything, patents, operations, everything. And they  literally supply and provide the quote forecast, which is the scheduled weather, to the National  Weather Service in Noah, our nation's weatherman. that passes all the way down. And local  meteorologists simply, they know how long their leash is. They're protecting their paychecks  and pensions. They tow the line as well. Just like the safe and effective in the medical community,  everybody just toes the line because they don't want to disrupt their personal paradigm. These  storms are being steered and manipulated, period. That's beyond dispute. I I'm glad you keep  bringing up the COVID vax because it would be hard for my middle-aged brain to accept a lie at this  scale. like how could you do that? How could you hide something this big, this profound from an  entire population? Um except I just saw it 5 years ago with the CO facts which was like a total  lie and now there's no dispute about the fact that they lied about it but no one was ever punished  and most people believed it. So I know for a fact what you're describing is possible. Can you um  Well, actually before I forget, let me ask what So you who pays you to do this? like this sounds  this is quite an operation that you're running. You're clearly I guess not in it for the money.  Like this is a bigger movement than I was aware until right now. So you're running lab tests on  rainwater. You're researching this actively. Like is this a volunteer effort? How and why are you  doing this? Cuz I can find no greater point for existing. How can I possibly look the other way?  I was restoring habitat in Northern California, the east side of Lake Shasta. Habitat that was  decimated by irresponsible logging practices. I wanted to do that the rest of my life. I wanted  to plant trees and watch them grow the rest of my life. Ah, good for God bless you. I I I mean  there's no greater solitude than what I was doing. But how was I to continue doing that knowing what  I knew when the solar output reduction happened that I mentioned earlier? And I began to test rain  knowing the implications of toxic rain. Rain that contained aluminum. By the way, aluminum in regard  to not just killing soil microbiome, but tree root systems. This is peer-reviewed study. Sense that  bioavailable aluminum, they shut down nutrient uptake. So the trees die a slow protracted death  and all official agencies blame beetles. The trees are dying because of the beetles. That's all we  hear. And the bottom line is beetles are a symptom of a sick dead dying tree. My father was an  arborist. I know trees. I love trees. When I was in kindergarten they had to come out after recess  and drag me out of the tree because I didn't want to come down. Yeah. I feel the same way. I I I  mean with no trees, no people. That's simple, right? That's right. So how is I to continue doing  that? I can't I can't look myself in the mirror. I can't look my children in the eyes. How could I  not do this? And if we carry this further, Tucker, you you know the bees are collapsing, right?  Oh, of course I know very well. So, we know this year we were told 70% collapse this year. That's  staggering. That's incredibly alarming. But what's the real figure? The real figure is that's a 70%  collapse of the 20% that was remaining. We're down to singledigit percentages of pollinators  left right now. We know insect populations have declined, this is terrestrial and aquatic insect,  80 to 90% globally. It's very noticeable. And if you don't believe it, remember the windshield  on your parents station wagon as a child in the summertime was covered in bugs. And that is not I  I drive in a rural area every night and no bugs. That's real. No bugs. No bugs. No people. Also, we  publicized this in 2012 with my work with former government scientists that could speak out because  they're retired and the science community tried to marginalize us and now they've had to admit to  it. If your listeners search insect apocalypse, they'll find the alarms going off all over the  globe because this translates to plankton as well. No plankton, no people. We have peer-reviewed  science study now for the Atlantic. Plankton population is down 90%. 90. Other oceans not  far behind. That's the greatest oxygen producer on the planet. That is the base of life on Earth.  Plankton. We are on on a the human race right now, Tucker. I've used this example before, but it it  sends a message that's very accurate. It's like occupants of a car parked on the railroad track.  The train is seconds from impact, lights flashing, horn blaring, and and they're trying to decide  what station to put the radio on. I I mean no matter what other issue we're facing and I would  argue power structure maneuvering right now from conflict zones to carnage zones many other  factors are directly related to the unfolding and accelerating biosphere collapse which climate  engineering is fueling not mitigating it's fueling it and they will not let go of this covert  weapon of control. It is the crown jewel weapon with which they can have been and are bringing  populations to their knees including our own. without those populations ever even knowing  they're under assault. They're not going to let go of this weapon. In regard to our military brothers  and sisters that are participating in this, because many ask that question, why would they?  But the bottom line is, and I've heard you say, I just heard you cite this, and I thank you for  doing so, that our military brothers and sisters took an oath to protect their populations.  I heard this on a former presentation you just made, to protect their populations from all  threats, foreign and domestic. So, they're being compartmentalized. They're being told that these  programs are some benevolent necessary operation. Just like the pilots in Vietnam, I'm sure, were  told when they were spraying Agent Orange on everybody. They're not told this is going to  kill your comrade on the ground. Of course, they're not told that. So, here we are. And  I think in a lot of cases, people don't know. They don't they don't think it through. I mean,  again, they're so high on this false feeling of omnipotence, like we're in charge. We have the  technology. we can make things better. I mean, people delude themselves. I think good people I  know good people delude themselves into committing evil because, you know, they think they have this  power that they actually don't don't have. So, okay, the bees start disappearing. The bats,  as you know, of course, insects, plankton, these are all phenomena that most people  are not going to notice because they live in cities. They're not in touch with bees, okay,  or insects. But the trees dying is very obvious. I mean, these are, you know, plants that live for  100 years and all of a sudden they're dying. The fur trees are dying. Give us a sense of American  forestry right now. Like, how are the trees in this country? I think this the more important  statistic might be globally at this point because we have that statistic. Tree cover is has declined  since pre-ivilization baselines. 66% 66% gone. The remaining 1/3 is dead and dying. Trees. We've  changed atmospheric chemistry so much. Forests do not smell like forests anymore. Anybody who knows  trees and knows what forest once smelled like, yes, knows that that scent is gone. Why is it  gone? Because of the now intense UV radiation that's bombarding the planet. And we're getting,  by the way, UVC in the surface. I mentioned the ozone layer collapse. Climate engineering  single greatest factor. And the climate science community acknowledges this. By the way,  Tucker, they acknowledge openly if we geoengineer, as if we haven't been for 80 years already.  By the way, these programs are immediately deployed after World War II. That's how long  they've been ongoing. But the science community openly admits that if we were to geoengineer, it  would destroy the ozone layer. We have a we had a former NASA contract engineer working directly  for geoatch.org with state-of-the-art metering equipment into five figures. we supplied and and  again we do this out of pocket. This is we don't monetize anything. Our our film, The Dimming,  the groundbreaking documentary, The Dimming, which is the standard on this issue, 26 million  views, non-monetized, posted for free the day it was done. I'm in this for the cause. If we don't  win this battle, nothing else matters. And back to the trees that don't the forest that doesn't smell  like forest anymore because the trees are shutting their stomata. That's a respiratory port on the  trees allowing them to breathe, to feed on carbon, to release oxygen. They are not respirating.  They're dying a slow, protracted death. That's the second greatest oxygen producer on the  planet. Again, from every conceivable direction, climate engineering is pounding the nails into  our collective coffins. But they will not let go of this covert weapon of control. And for those  that say they wouldn't do this as themselves, again, they already have. We detonated 2400  nuclear bombs on the planet. How many people know that the Nevada detonations, which they  did in total secrecy, right? We know now from peer-reviewed study. The downwind fallout from  the Nevada nuclear bomb detonations killed no less than 700,000 Americans. That's peer-reviewed  study. How many people know that? So again, they don't care about the consequences of what  they do. We know as far as biological testing, according to the Washington Post, as of 1977,  US military had conducted no less than 239 openair biological tests on innocent, unknowing  civilians. Oh, come on now. Biological warfare tests on Americans. I know you know. You must  know that. Look it up. I mean, this is historical record again covered by matrix mainstream  media. We had a revolution over a tea tax, dude. I I I feel like this you can't put up with  this. I don't I don't I encourage I encourage all of your listeners to look up every single thing  I state that is very easy to find that statistic. Washington Post first published that in 1977. I  I hope it's clear from the statistics I'm citing. I'm not shooting from the hip. So again, this is  this is business as usual and why people can't face that I is is perplexing. And and let's look  at Ziggnu Brazinski. I know you know who he is. former US presidential adviser going all the way  back to Johnson. What did he state in the record? Your listeners can look this up very easily  as well. He stated with today's technology, it's far easier to kill a million people than to  control them. You think these people are here to help? Really? So again, I I I want to stress that  the amount of layers with this issue and there's many legitimate causes or concerns at this point  in time. If we don't deal with what's happening in our skies, we're not going to be here long.  And let's look at if if we could look at CO for a moment. We know that for one the world's second  most recognized climate engineer Dr. Ken Caldera former DoD scientist. We own an audio of him at  gingwatch.org in his words stating what he did for the DoD was to design methods of spraying  pathogens into clouds to infect the populations below. We know in the outbreak of CV19 at one  point 85 countries were infected in 3 days. That's indicative of an airborne dispersion. We know  from Italian researchers they found CV19 attached to airborne particullet. Do not all these dots  connect? They certainly would appear so. We know from our precipitation testing we have polymer  fibers and graphine in our rain. Graphine is like a vascular machete. I mean that's it's listed in  geoengineering patents for certain purposes. Again they don't care about the consequences. But those  two elements also, Tucker, are used militarily as biological carrier platforms to carry a pathogen  from the clouds to the ground to infect the population below. Why is that in our reign right  now? Could they at any point of their choosing put something much more lethal into the precipitation  and level the playing field? Certainly they could. This is also shocking. Have you spoken to  elected officials about this? Members of Congress? many and I continue to and many know I've had  private private meetings with Gavin Newsome at this California state capital his top aid and not  that that individual would ever do anything for the common good. He wouldn't. He's there to serve  those who have him on the end of their strings. No response there. I have on my desk I'm sorry  to interrupt. So you actually said this or a version of this to Gavin Newsome, the governor of  California. Yes. And in fact, and what I conveyed to Newsome also, if these programs were allowed  to continue, because I was focused more on the state of California and the impact here, that  the drought catastrophes in California would be catastrophic. I supplied data, which he didn't  try to dispute because I I've had meetings with California Energy Commission scientists  as well, air quality scientists. You know, California's been concerned about, of course, the  lack of precipitation, which affects our hydro power production, also affects Hoover Dam, Canyon  Dam. But if your listeners looked at presentations I gave well over a decade ago, engineered drought  catastrophe target California. Everything I said in those precipitation or those presentations back  then is more relevant now than ever. Presented that data to Newsome and these the drought has  continued, which they're not even disclosing now. Even in Northern California right now, they show  zero drought. That's a blatant glaring statistical falsification. It has never been drier here in  regard to soil moisture and fire fuel moisture. They're lying about everything. They're lying  about the UV readings on the surface. Blatant glaring lies. They meter. We know about every  single aspect of this equation. They're disposing and metering only down to 300 nanometers in  regard to the UV spectrum. That's half of the UVB spectrum. No UVC is even metered for, let alone  disclosed. Same as the air quality particulates. PM10 is looked for. Nothing below that. I've had  California state air quality officials in a closed door meeting, five of them, tell me to my face,  the system is rigged. We're testing for combustion particulates only. The rest goes out the window.  Whole system by design to not show the immensity of damage being done. So, back to Newsome and and  those officials. No, no, no response. Yes, they know the Palisades fire. I'm sure that's fresh  in your mind, right? You very The ability for the climate engineers to shut off precipitation is  far greater even than their ability to augment it. They can shut down rain as long as they want as we  know from the Middle Eastern countries as I just stated on Iran. So, in the case of the Palisades,  no rain for 8 months. It's not an accident. These particullet are incendiaries. Aluminum  nanop particles are such an effective incendiary. They're used in military demolitions. Thermite  that incendiary dust coats the forest floor, coats foliage, and when that builds up over time,  that makes everything more volatile as well. I spoke about atmospheric pressure zones, which  they can and are manipulating. And in doing so, they can manipulate surface wind flows creating  extreme zonal wind flow patterns. the same as they did in Lahina. Same thing, extremely  anomalous low pressure zones. One to the north, which was an engineer high pressure zone to  the south, hurricane Dora. Between those two, you create a bellow's effect, a blowtorrch effect,  whatever the source of ignition. And many online speculate about that and and very fringe um  ideas of what might cause the ignition. Again, that's irrelevant. What's setting the template for  these fires to burn with such ferocity? And that is definitely climate engineering. And I'll leave  it with this. We found a 140 page US military document which we posted titled wildfires  as a military weapon. Within that document, 17 sites were named in the US as study zones  LA was one and that described exactly the type of pre-preparation that we see happening in all  these locations. behind it was declared a flash drought zone a week prior to that incineration.  So we can speculate on the agendas and objectives being carried out. The fact that climate  engineering is inseparable from these equations is absolutely indisputable. That document by the  way also posted at geo engineeringwatch.org with the important sections highlighted. Shocking  data. Has there been any attempt to push back legislatively? Like has the Congress ever taken  this up? Yes. Uh again, we have 36 states with legislation in some process. Two states have  already passed it. I'm communicating with an aid to Dantis. I've had an hour conference call  with Latapo there on the issue. We have some some very rational people involved. He is he very  much is. His whole team was was on the call. We've had Marjorie Taylor Green just address  this. That was publicized. Well, we tried to reach Mrs. Green before this to try to give some  compass heading because if if you fly into this uh blind, it's you can do more harm than good.  And one thing we encourage, unfortunately, Marjorie didn't get this message. We hope she  does at some point, don't open the entire climate scenario and mix it with this issue. And that's  that's what she did. We want to keep the focus on climate engineering. And when there's a denial  of the other sources of damage to the planet, that tends to immediately alienate half the people  we need in this battle. So what we would try to encourage and encourage other legislators to do  is if the subject of the climate comes up that how can we have any legitimate discussion of climate  anything from any perspective without first and foremost addressing this elephant in the equation.  And that that narrative is much more productive at building bridges instead of burning it. running.  So, I mean, I knew the climate was changing, of course, because I pay attention to nature. Um,  but you've just single-handedly convinced me that a lot of this is driven by human activity, just  not your suburban and your hairspray. It's driven by the US military. It's both. I want to stress  again, we are not denying it.org that again aren't statistically we are putting about 100 million  tons of carbon into the air a day. 26 million tons of coal, 100 million barrels of hydrocarbon. We're  cutting down the forest. We're paving the planet. We're poisoning the oceans. All of these things  happen effect. We're acknowledging that. But we're saying when we have intentional intervention  which has prevented the planet from responding to the damage done. If it w if it weren't for toxic  rain Tucker the forest may have tried to uptake more of that carbon and to keep things more in  balance but they can't. The trees can't. Their root systems are being poisoned soil microbiome  being poisoned. Ozone layer being destroyed. These programs are literally disabling the planet's  counterbalancing life support systems. So, we will never know now how much better a position we would  have been in had climate engineering, aka weather warfare, let's call it what it is. It's weather  warfare. Had these programs never been deployed, we will now never know how much better a position  we might have been in. But those in power, again, do not care about the consequences of their  actions, even to themselves. And we know that from psychoanalysis. looked at this from a  psychoanalysis standpoint and it specifically cites the kind of personality disorders that  exist with those in power have a common thread and that common thread is this a near total lack  of comprehension as to the consequences of their actions even to themselves that's a power addict  and I I know you correct more than anybody in the world does an addict care we're dealing with a  headless heartless soulless cancer at this point and does an addic care the next fix may kill  They don't care. And and and at this point, it's a runaway train. So for many people that  walk away saying they would never do this to themselves, we are they already have. We know  this from the nuclear scenario I outlined. And if if I could tie one more dot together, forgive me,  but this is important because it's an existential threat. I outlined that climate engineering  is decimating the planet's primary protective life support system. Starting with the ozone  layer. Now we're much more susceptible to a CME, a coronal mass ejection solar flare. If we have an  event like the Carrington event in the 1800s, that would shut down grid power around the world. Now  we have nuclear plants that can't cool themselves. Now we have Fukushima times 100 or 200. Game over.  Again, directly connected to climate engineering. What is the effect on animal populations? I you  mentioned bees, plankton, and other insects, but what about mammals? Do you notice any effect?  Yes. Yes. We have peer-reviewed study of whales that have extraordinary amounts of aluminum in  their tissue. Where's that coming from? This is bioavailable aluminum. And you might hear  the attempt to debunk this is to say, well, aluminum's a very common element, which it is.  It's the third most abundant in the earth strata, but it does not exist in free form naturally.  Period. Yes, that's correct. Always bonded to other elements. So that's the part that they  leave out. So when we have even whales absorbing this same material having an obvious effect in  regard to overall global animal populations, wildlife populations down conservatively about  75% in the last four years alone. That's 75% of an already depleted population. The giant herds  of caribou, you've seen films of that, right, Tucker? A million strong. Some of those herds  were were a million. They're down to 5,000 or less from a million. Virtual crash. And we have  some extraordinary images from what chemical ice nucleation can do. It it is profound.  The when you have an endothermic reaction, we know what an exothermic reaction is. You have  this massive energy release. The splitting of an atom being the epitome of that. But an endothermic  reaction is profound in in many ways as well. So we have images of for example hundreds of water  foul frozen solid to the surface of a lake. How does that happen? We stuck you've seen the  massive baseball and softball size hail falling everywhere. Right. Yes. So much so that insurance  companies are cancelling any hail coverage now because it's it's increased. so profoundly.  That's chemical ice nucleation. The extreme form, if your listeners searched Lake Michigan ice  balls, they can see the shores of Lake Michigan coated with 75 lb perfectly spherical ice balls.  They don't fall that big from the sky. They form that way in the ocean because they're chemically  nucleating over the Great Lakes constantly. That's how they pile up these massive amounts of snow in  Eerie and Buffalo and they make sensationalized headlines. You can literally throw a rock to no  snow, but they only show the 4T or 5 ft of snow in Erie and and Buffalo and sensationalize look  how much snow snow there is while we're 80° at the top of the Sierras in the middle of winter  in California. They don't publicize that. Do you remember Tucker when um Boston had the record lows  2014 I think Boston had record lows in the really sensational snow? What didn't they tell us? Middle  of winter while Boston was buried in snow. It was literally no snow 14,000 ft up in the Sierras.  They never told us about that, did they? So again, it's there's a perception aspect in this too.  Keeping business as usual until the last possible moment, until the moment of impact, being able to  retain their power in this way while using weather as a weapon. But the crops are shutting down as  well globally. We have crop collapse happening everywhere. Same scenario. They're shutting  their stomata. They're not feeding. They're not absorbing carbon. They're not releasing oxygen.  So again, this is a ubiquitous contamination. I I think the first step is to let people know  the facts that you just laid out and to have, you know, a public debate about it. It always  begins with words. Anything uh good? So could you just end by telling us for people who have made  it to this portion of the interview and want to know more, can you speak slowly and direct them  to where they can get more information on this? geoengineeringwatch.org strives to be a  data repository on this issue. And yes, the only way we can move this fight forward is  to share credible data from a credible source. And we strive to be that source. I have one  goal, one mission. I live for the day when what's happening in our skies is fully exposed  and halted, which Tucker I would argue we can only do from the inside out. The legislation is  good because it puts it on the radar, but it's symbolic. They're not going to stop DoD operations  from that. Only by pushing this issue to the full light of day can we cause a shock wave around the  world so that populations and countries all over the world understand what their governments have  either actively or passively done to them without their knowledge or consent. And in doing so, our  military brothers and sisters would hopefully awaken to what they're doing to their countrymen  and one would hope would stand down. I know we have the Mgrim experiments as an example of most  human beings if they're being told by someone they perceive in authority will carry out almost any  form of atrocity and we need to get past that. But if we can fully expose this, the fur will fly.  I would argue we would alter the equation and drag many other issues with it. Issues like 9/11  or the safe and effective because you can't hide what's happening in our sky. There's many issues  that people can and try to put in the rearview mirror. You can't do that with this. It's getting  worse by the day. The damage done is getting worse by the day. But if we share credible data from  a credible source, that's much more effective at waking people up than running out in the street  pointing at the sky and ranting. If they can look at satellite images, which we capture the  moment we see them on the NASA satellite feed, we capture them because they try to scrub them  off. We have satellite images that are beyond shocking that you don't even need to know anything  about meteorology to know something very radical and very wrong is going on. And we put that on  our printed materials which we distribute to all legislators and we we supply them for activists  and populations. There's about a half million of our 20page booklets in circulation right now.  We're trying desperately to give visuals which are a much better key to the door. We're trying  desperately again with legislators to not open up the whole climate condition front or climate  change front. Stick to this issue. Stick to this. And we can't have a discussion about climate  unless or until we deal with this first. We take this out of the equation. Then we can assess where  we're at. So again, by knowing how to play chess, by knowing the chess board, we need to  play effectively and efficiently. I mean, if we can do that and start spot fires  of awareness, ask others to do the same, we will put enough holes in the dam that those in  power can't plug the leaks and we will push this issue to the full light of day. And if we can  do that, we will alter the equation. And again, time is not on our side. We can avoid a toxic  medical concoction, injection, we can avoid a lot of things. We have to breathe. Every breath we  take is filled with these nano particles. In fact, we have peer-reviewed studies to prove that as  well. And we have in the case of the nanoplastics, the climate science community is now starting to  admit to that they're showing up in human brains, lungs, cinch, everything, every human organ.  And again, we know that these particles are not just a result of plastic decomposition in  the environment because our testing with RPI in New York conclusively prove that the particles  we found were manufactured. That means and they can tell with their u spec spectoy spectroscopy,  excuse me, watching too much porky pig. Um they know that. So bottom line is um we're dealing  with a ubiquitous contamination of the planet and if we can't breathe without inhaling that uh the  ramifications are beyond grave. That's a fight for life right here, right now. Yeah. Are you spraying  chemicals into the air without telling me using my tax dollars? Simple question uh that I plan to  start asking people uh in leadership positions. So, I don't know how I made it this long without  knowing all of this, but I'm grateful uh for this conversation and I and I hope it sparks a a  national conversation and some outrage. Dane, thank you very much. Thank you, Tucker. Thank you  so much for your voice. Thank you to your team. The importance of you and your team at this  critical moment in human history cannot be overstated. And we at Geoengineering  Watch and our platforms which are much smaller than yours. We quarter million  followers is all nothing compared to yours, but everybody in our ranks is 1,000% behind  you, brother. Well, that's so nice. Thank you. We want to be helpful. I appreciate  it. Thank you, Tucker. [Applause] [Music] Since we launched ALP, we've had four flavors,  but we are proud to announce ALP has a brand new flavor, one of several we'll be rolling out  over the next year or so, and it is sweet nectar. Now, I have personally tested this product two  at a time, and it's excellent. Sweet nectar, the new flavor out from Al. Really, really good.  And you can order it in bulk, by the pallet if you want. I have strongly recommended sweet  nectar and stay tuned for more information.