Go to the show, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night! All day! Comedy, crime, fighter. You don't hear it? Yeah. There we go, you go to the damn. Yeah, we're in it. We even have a cross button. Damn. It's like a real radio show. Damn, professional Joe. You have to blow your nose or anything. First I've read button. Not anymore, Doc. What's happening? I don't do any of that stuff. Oh, that stuff. How long has it been since you did that stuff? I'd a year and eight months almost. Oh, so you go back? You go forward? No, no, no, dude. I'm clean as a whistle, dude. Done. Nothing. How many times did you quit in the past? Well, I went five years with sober. And then I went 10 years just running and gunning. And now I'm back to a year and eight months, man. 10 years of running and gunning. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. It's quite not cleaning it, dude. White nut clicking it. Literally. Surviving advance. That's why it's doing. Yeah. Thanks for having me, bro. I love you. I love you too. Yeah, man. Good to be here. What the fuck's going on? Just saw, you know, are we ready to go over to China? Man, I'm a China. Yeah. Yeah. I'd be World War three day, everybody. Nancy Pelosi's in China. They're rolling tanks around. Yeah. Yeah. They're not a direct threat, but they said if anything happens with those jets, you might fire back, keep the jets out of our area. They said something like that. That it will our jets? Yeah, there was some. I'll look it up to put like that. But then they were saying this is not a direct threat. We're not taking this as a direct threat. This is not a threat. I was like, I don't have threats being said a lot. I heard those eight year old sloppy tits are hers. I guess in trouble. Like I'm actually there. I don't. Well, there's a whole bunch to that. Like has to do something with some processing chips that she has some like illegal like insider trading on or something like that. Look at this. In a ban tweet, a top state media commentator reportedly said that China could forcibly dispel Pelosi's plane and shoot it down if it flies to Taiwan. Could you fucking imagine if they blow her out of the sky? It'd be crazy, dude. And you see everybody on Twitter just telling China, you know, hey, if it happens, we understand. Imagine if they fucking execute her. Yeah, it's crazy, right? Because like I guess Russia is not happening. So they're like, who else can we go? Russia is happening, though. But I mean like in terms of like, I don't know, man, just seems like the Ukraine is like just a complete failed state. Well, Russia is ramping up. And the real fear is that what's going on right now is all happening while the roads are moist. That you can only travel on the road. You can't drive on the ground in Ukraine. So like they're very limited. So their tactics are very limited because when they move the tanks in, the Ukrainians are shooting at them from the side of the road. But once the winter comes, you could drive anywhere. Oh man. Yeah. So winter is coming. Literally. Yeah. Literally winter's coming. So we're headed towards September, right? We're in August now. Next month is September. And then once it gets cold, and Ukraine, I don't know when it gets cold in Ukraine, exactly. But once it gets cold, that ground gets hard. Once that ground gets hard, they can roll tanks anywhere. They can't go off the side of the road. It's like a bog down now. You think World War III's coming? I'm very scared. I am too. I don't trust that anyone has got a really good plan to prevent it. It just doesn't seem like anybody expected Russia to do what they did in Ukraine. And then once it happens, it's still happening. So it's like, how do we get out of that? How does Ukraine survive it? How does the rest of the world handle it? What happens if Russia takes over Ukraine and wants to push further? Scary shit dude. It is scary shit. Because it's like a hot war in, I mean, it's not technically Europe. It's technically Asia, right? But we think of Russia. But how is Russia is like partially Europe and partially Asia is that how it is? Ukraine is definitely in Europe. And Russia. Like some parts of Russia are considered to be. Yeah, like Eastern Europe. Yeah. So Europe and part of Russia is in Asia. Why am I a mean- Transcontinental country? Armenia is a part of Asia. But I have Eastern European Armenian in me, right? So it's kind of, so it's like that weird kind of gray space in there. Yeah. Park dude. What a wild world we live in. And Ukraine reminds me a lot of Afghanistan. And what we did there, which was like supplying weapons and funding, doing like extremists there. And then drawing Russia into a prolonged war to try to weaken them. And then eventually, the people we gave the weapons to and the money to, we make them the bad guys now. And we're like, we got to go solve that problem too, with like, al-Qaeda and stuff that was in the Taliban and all that stuff. And it seems like the exact same playbook that they run over and over and over and over again. The difference is they're making the Ukrainians look like the greatest people ever. You know, that, you know what I'm saying? Like Zelensky and his wife from the cover of Vogue. I'm so glad that. Yeah. It's a very strange to do that in the middle of a war, to have like a photo shoot. Like a glamorous photo shoot. Why you're like bombing POW, like camps and stuff like that. Killing off your own. It's like what do you mean bombing POW? Didn't they just bomb like a giant, didn't you cringes just bomb like a giant POW camp? I was reading and that killed a bunch of people. A bunch of Ukrainians? Yeah. They're acting people. I don't know if it was done by accident. And you see that lot. So basically they blacked out to Ukraine. It was very hard to get anything out of the Ukraine. Explosion kills Ukrainian POWs held by Russian back forces. Moscow and Kiev accuse each other of targeting Ukrainian prisoners held in Russian controlled territory. So it's not clear who did it. Yeah. Which side you imagine being a fucking prisoner in Russia like this Brittany Griner situation. Imagine being a fucking prisoner in Russia. And you're like, you are basically caught in a war. Like you are upon in the war. You're upon. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. I feel for any of those people. I feel really bad for her. I feel really bad for Julian Assange. I feel really bad for anybody in America that's in a prison for drugs in particular. Marijuana. Yeah. No, it's ridiculous. And how about Edward Snowden? Like he's still stuck in Russia. And now Russia is like technically our enemy. You know, he goes over to Russia to escape the grips of the United States criminal justice system because he reveals that the NSA has been spying on every fucking American. Yeah. Shh. Yeah. There's no good guys. Yeah. Who are the good guys? And like most of us don't even want to fight with the everybody just wants to raise their family. You know, laugh at a good fart joke, drink a little beer, have a fun, get laid once in a while. And it's like these power leads to all get us all to fight with each other. No, it's crazy. It is crazy. It's crazy. And like 99 like the spectrum of life, 5% 5% on each end are the crazy people. Everybody in the middle just wants to be like I used to do, I used to do, I used to go entertain the troops and we went to Afghanistan and you met the locals. They were the nicest people. You know, I would do tours in China. I would do stand up in China. Nice as people. Like everybody is so more alike than we are different. But we highlight these little things that gets everybody to fight with each other. Well, it's other people that, you know, they orchestrate it. It's not the people that are just regular folks living their life. It's the elites. It's the people that are in charge of government, the people that in charge of military, the people that in charge of massive corporations that seek to consolidate power and control resources and, you know, regular people, most people just want to live their life and, you know, raise their family and have fun with their friends and do their job. Get laid once in a while. Such a small percentage of people that are cons to start wars and cause trouble and with such a small percentage of people. And the thing they're most terrified of is everyone being united. If there was like a way where everyone can communicate very easily with everyone else, you know, there's language barriers and cultural barriers. But if those dissolve because of the internet and because of software that lets people translate languages quickly, that's going to help. And it's just people are going to realize after a while that we have way more in common than we do apart. That's easy to hide when there's language barriers and cultural barriers and distance barriers. But kind of control of information, like if you're getting pumped certain things and that's all you're hearing all the time. That's all you're going to believe. But thanks to the internet now, we realize that there's like a whole other side of the story that we were never told. And if you take a look at religions, man, you look at like Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Judaism, they're all almost saying this exact same thing. It's like almost where they power-rig Jesus, right? It's like where, where, what the fights over, right? Is he the top guy? Is he like rank fifth? Where is he? Where is he? Just regular dude. Yeah, right. Mystic, man, wizard, dude. Who knows? He's a son of God. Or was he the son of God? And what do you think? Do you think there was really a Jesus? Listen, man, it's very weird to be a guy who used to like do blow and raw dog strippers and be like, I love Jesus. But you know, I'm really cool with the guy. I'm really, it's a really weird thing to say that you like, you sometimes like, you pump the brakes a little bit. But man, a big journey for me has been this spiritual thing that I've been on. Like, I think Jesus was just like a star seed. And I don't know like, like, okay, man, I think that like, should I smoke weed before you talk? Go for it, dude. Please light it up, bro. I feel like we're going to get deeper to the conspiracy hole. I was talking to young Jamie about that. He's very much into it. But the young Jamie is a connoisseur of the conspiracy. He gets it, dude, gets it. He gets it. I think that the universe sends people down to help send humanity and to help direct people in humanity in certain way, in directions. And I think that's what he was. And whether he was born at this time or born way back, you know, when they had that one movie that was like, the story of Jesus is told 28 different times and a 20 different. Yeah, that's called the God who wasn't there. That's the documentary. For me, that doesn't mean that someone might, someone existed and they're just telling the same story in their own language, in their own way. But it's all the same story. And whoever that was, whenever he was here was very special and organized religion, which I have no problems with. But I think there's, you know, especially like the Vatican and Rome, hardened religion, taking out all the kind of mysticism of it and made us take it literal. And that's not what I'm into. I'm into a spiritual thing and the universe and energy. I'm trying to become a wizard and trying to become a wizard. Dude, I'm trying to manipulate energy. That's the whole thing right now. How are you doing this? There is no reality. There's only perception. That's what I'm all about. So I'm, for my, I really have worked on changing the way I look at the world. There's no reality. There's only perception. Yeah, that's my belief. How's that? How you perceive things has become your reality. But what about things that are tangible, like games, like, like the game of battle? Basketball. If you throw ball and it does not go into the hoop, then it does not go into the that's not a little thing. Those are little things. Overall, overall was, you could be like, okay, is that, is that good shot or was that a garbage shot? Well, I tried to take my shot and that could be a good part of that. The understanding, the interpretation of the energy, that's what I'm all about. The interpretation of the energy. So my whole thing is when we take a look at all everything going on in the world, which is like, are, is there a small group of people that are running everything? Right. It seems like there is. Right. And what is that world economic forum? What is Davos? Right. He ever gotten into that? Do you see that post? There was a post that, fuck, who made it? Here, I'll send it to you, Jamie. But I, I pulled it aside just because I'm like, wait a minute. Did you really fucking say this? It was a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, I then contributed to Klaus Schwab saying that we need to get rid of private vehicle. Oh yeah. Is that real? Did you really say that? Oh, I mean, they put out that video says that you know in to 2030 you all nothing had love it. So you're going to tune in, yeah, I did something, I didn't say that. You guys from guess central casting just smiling you'll feel nothing and you will be happy. That's it. That's it. You'll own nothing and you'll be happy. Yeah. Well, then someone's kind of own it because they're renting it to me. No, so you're fucking nothing. Well, not you, you know what I'm gonna lie. Me, I won't own nothing, but they'll own everything. World Economic Forum urges public to eliminate ownership of private vehicles. Zuzu Zuzu Zinkz, he is rising Zeboss. How about his dad bro? How about his dad bro? Said someone from someone, Gateway pundit. World Economic Forum urges public to eliminate ownership of private vehicles. Did he really say that? That seems like a crazy thing to say. Well, you know, it's a super interesting man who they are and what they represent. Paper they put it on July 18th, which three circular economy approaches to reduce demand for critical metals. Oh, wow. And this is who put this out? This is on the world economic forum. Yeah. Shifting from fossil fuels to renewables requires huge amounts of critical metals, which is true. Recycling alone won't be enough to sustain them. Oh, I get it. They fucking played the old switcher rule on us. You got to get an electric car. So up actually now that we've got you off the fossil fuels, that's not enough. Not even know. You don't need to. Recycling is not going to be enough to sustain the amount of materials needed. So we need to increase sharing reuse and a preference for longevity to reduce demand. What does that even mean? It's going to open the movers. In terms of interpret that, please. We need to increase sharing reuse and a preference for longevity to reduce demand. What does that mean? Why is that so ambiguous? I get reduced in sharing. I get reusing. But a preference for longevity to reduce demand, reduced demand. What does that mean? Do you know what that means? Don't buy new cars a lot. But it might off the. Preference for longevity. So preferring older cars? Is that what it's like? I prefer to own it longer. Like Cuba? Like communist Cuba? You can't earn anything. That's basically what they're saying. They have cars. They have cars in Cuba. They have dope old cars. Which I love old cars. Oh my god. Have you ever seen those photographs? Because what they've done is they've maintained them and taken care of them and refixed them and refinished them. They're fucking amazing. They have like 1950s dope ass cars. So you can find, I know there's articles that have been written on the cars of Cuba. Poverty makes you find ways to thrive. You have to figure out a way to play the game and win the game with limited resources. And that would be taking a no car and learning how to make it look amazing. That is kind of the game, right? Yeah, for sure. That's always been like a prideful thing for people. If you can afford a car and you fix it up, like look at that cars in Cuba photo gallery with the green cars in the center. The top top top. Yeah, right there. One more over. No, you missed it. It's gorgeous. Right there. Look at those cars, man. That's incredible. So they do have a few modern cars. You can see that cars pretty modern. But I think part of the issue is we could find this out. I think part of the issue is that it's hard to get cars over there. Why is Cuba filled with classic cars? Let's see what it does. The story of classic cars in Cuba is full of political and historical significance. Cuba has never had a car manufacturing industry so they relied solely on automotive imports to populate the island's road. Roads. During the Cuban Spanish-American war, the first car ever imported to Cuba was, how do you say that? La Pari scene. I'm a little known French manufacturer in 1898. However, the turn of the century, Cuba's primary source of cars and parts was the United States. So that's what it is. Okay, 20 centuries, so shall I? So by 1956, we're more than 140,000 cars in Cuba. Okay, and then the Cuban revolution and the embargo is 59. And it says the saw it change in the island's automotive industry as old friends became foes, Fidel Castro placed an embargo on the US and foreign imports. Oh, you couldn't get cars in there. Any cars, which meant no American cars were exported to the island. The embargo even extended to include car parts, which had serious implications for Cuban car owners with no new cars coming into the country and no parts available to make repairs. Car owners had, oh, had the make a choice, I guess the typo, had to make a choice. Either let their cars rust in the garage or use what parts they had available and make repairs themselves. Wow, so they just started figuring out how to make parts of their own parts. Yeah. They need to became a mechanic and created innovative ways to keep their cars running. Unfortunately, as the ban on American cars include American car parts, Cuban locals were forced to make repairs and restorations using parts glean from Russian and Chinese vehicles. Primary of the plethora of, oh, that's right. I'd heard a lot of these cars have different engines in them. Like they don't have the original engine in them. Ah, but aren't there places in like China that make old car parts? Like it lets say you own like a fancy old car and you need a new part. They don't make them in the regular car manufacturers. So there's places in China that make old car parts. That's, I'm sure they probably do. I mean, they definitely do it in America. There's a company called Year One. It's a really dope company. And Year One makes classic car parts. Yeah. Like say if you have a 1969 Camaro, you can get a 1969 Camaro fender, a full-on replica fender. Make sure that's true. I know, because I know they have a lot of sounds true. The year one, it's like year one auto stuff. But basically, because so many people in America love classic cars, they've developed this industry where they can give you replaceable parts. And then there's companies that like make you a brand new classic car. So this is, yeah. So it's all stuff that they'll make. Like A body, 1962, 1976 Dodge Duster. Let's go to that, because that's a pretty obscure. Well, actually go to the Barracuda. Go to the Barracuda. OK, so 1974, E body Barracuda. What do they sell? I don't have a lot of stuff in stock right now. New or selling items, does it say anything? Is that, is it of anything? That would come up. OK, but now that's up down there. All that stuff down there. What is all that stuff? Oh, I see. So those are, oh, I'll see, step one section. This is a website. Right. It's a little clunky, right? The website's a little clunky. So go to engine. Yeah, let's see. Let's go to engine. So click on that. Oh, yeah. There we go. She's just clocked. She's just trying. It's like you, how dare you question me. Oh my god, they have so much for sale. They have everything. Look at all this shit. A lot. Yeah, alternators and 500 wedge crate engine. Oh, go back, please. A 500 wedge crate engine, 505 horsepower. They have, oh, look at all these different engine mounts. Oh, they have all kinds of shit. They have different blocks. Yeah. Yeah. This is like your own, like classic new car base. Basically a classic new car. And then there's other companies that will do it for you from scratch. There's this company called Revology. And he only, I think he only does Mustangs, but dude, these cars are insane. He makes a Mustang. He takes like, I don't know what of the old car you even have to have because it's not the old car. It's a fucking kolai, brand new Mustang. I want one of those. But it's a night, like that's a 67. That's a 67 GT, that's a GT350, I think. That is a wicked car man. And this guy will make you like a new one of them. Like look at the inside of it. Since that cost, a shitload of money. I don't know, but it's worth it. If you have it, it's a shitload of money. But see the difference is, if you have no, it's no worth it, you're right. Nothing's worth that amount of money. Go back up to that first image, the blue one, yeah right there. Nothing's worth the amount of money. Like you're talking like hundreds of thousands of dollars for a car. But that thing is a fucking rolling work of art. And it might be one of the only reasons why you would want to have that kind of money. Yeah, exactly. And look at that thing, man. If you're going to afford it, I mean, bro, look at that. That's art right there. That is art. And maybe some people don't get it. I get it. Some people think, I have classic cars. Some people think they look stupid. I was like, I get it. I get it. I get it. They're loud and they're fucking noisy and they're bumpy and they don't handle as good. But there's a difference in what's going on. You're looking at it like a you go. You're looking at it like a thing that gets you from point A to point B. You're looking at it like a Prius. Yeah, that is not a Prius. No, no, no, no, no, that is American ingenuity and it's a powerhouse. American art. How can you look at that? It's a fucking stupid. Bro, that thing is so sick. That's a 1968. That's the same car from Steve McQueen and Bullet. 100% make that a little smaller. Like that looks stupid. A Prius looks stupid. To get rid of that thing is sexy. That is gorgeous. Sexy, that car is. They just knew how to make cars back in a man. They just, it's the weirdest thing that a country and all you like like an industry can figure out like this insanely compelling shape and then lose it. Like it was like, it just vanished. Like what they had versus what it became. Yeah. Those things became gross. Yeah. You're looking at Mustangs for like the 80s? Yeah, dude. Like, yeah. I used to drive one of those. I was in a high speed car chase with a tow truck driver and a police helicopter driving one of those, like the 80s, 90s Mustang. That problem for Francisco gave me in a car game that he won and read a Piazza. It's like, I just need to pay this car. And I needed a car and she gave it to me. That's amazing. And like I was at a Laker game. And me and my buddy Scott Ross, who has a who owns, you know, 10th planet in Ventura. We were going to a Laker game. We got done. I might have been partying that night a little bit, but I go and I go to the 7-Eleven. I buy some stuff. I get back in my car and I back up and I don't see this tow truck driver had parked illegally and I hit his car. And I was like, what should I do? And the voice side of my head is like, go and I'm like, smell, I just go, right? So we're just driving. And I'm just trying something I hear. I look back at this tow truck driver's chasing me. And we're just, and then all of a sudden we get into like this Robert De Niro runin' like car chase scene through West Hollywood, all through West Hollywood. And we get on Santa Monica. And this car was like a beat-up car. It was like a junk. So this guy's so crazy, this car tow truck driver. He drives up on the sidewalk and blocks all of the traffic from going and I know where to go. So I was like, fuck it bro, I back it up and I shoot the intersection. I jump the intersection, boom. And I take off and the way I got away was I valet parked my car at the standard hotel and let him take me and my jibani took me and we went down and did our weekend at La Jolla. And that's a true story, dude. I just valet parked your car. Like, not mine, yeah, yeah, take it dude. And I got out of there, dude. What year was this? This had to be early 2000s. And I didn't have a car and he gave me a car. Could you imagine what it was like if you got arrested in the 60s and there was no computers? Like how did they know? You could get away with a lot more shit back then. I could imagine if you're like, you're a bank robber and you're fleeing the state. Yeah, for sure. How the fuck would they know? If you got like two or three states away, how the fuck would they know was you? I think you just got get on one off ramp and you are gone. I mean, did they have significantly less crime? Like, well, I mean, there were less laws, right? So they were probably less criminals. I mean, every day they're sitting in the law. You're like, I'm going to jail for a while now. Right. Yeah. Well, if they start making laws about this stuff, like what you can and can't own, that's when people are gonna wake up. Yeah, have you ever looked into cloud swabs like dad? No. Have you ever heard a new swab in land? You never heard a new swab in land? No. Have you ever heard a operation high jump? I knew I was going to love this podcast. No, dude, it's operating high jump. What does that mean? Okay. So at one point, some people are like, what's going on with Antarctica? Have you heard this where they sent Admiral Bird up? What's going on in our North? Yeah. So the US government's like, some's going on with Antarctica. There's some activity up there. We want to find out what's going on. So they send this cat name. Admiral Bird up to investigate with a giant fleet, like a fleet to go to go bang, bro. When was this? I think this was in the, when was Eisenhower in? Was it the fiddies? Yeah, it was like right around like, it just either around World War II or right after it. And so they sent Admiral Bird up to go find out and according to his journal that they found much later, he basically met with UFOs, Nazi UFOs. What? Yes. Nazi UFOs. The Nazis had a flying saucer. Had made a deal basically working with Antarctica. You've never heard this. No. It's the greatest story, Admiral. It's the greatest story. So the Nazis made a deal with the aliens? Yes. Holy shit. For technology and the deal was, they were going to work together, okay? I know this sounds crazy. So basically the aliens go down and and cloud Schwab's dad go down and meet with Eisenhower's going to be like, we get, we get either do it one way or the other way. We can do it nicer. We can do it the wrong way. And that's where they say Eisenhower made a deal with these aliens that they could kidnap people and do experiments, but they couldn't just do it anywhere. They had the, they had specific places, which were our national forest. What? And yeah, dude, you've never heard of this. Yeah. You're making this sound as if this is like a story that is commonplace. Well, for my people, it is. Jamie, it helped me out here. If you heard the story. I'm not saying brand new. You never heard of this. Oh, yeah. You never heard of Operation Hyjopro. I feel like I've heard of that, but I haven't not in this content. This sounds amazing. Please keep going. And this is where the missing four one one come from. The missing information. What missing information? No, the missing four one one. What do you mean by that? Which is all these people have mysteriously disappeared in force. And they don't know why. And they don't know why. And they don't know why. No, no, no, no. So missing four one one is the number of people that have been abducted. Yeah. And it's all really weird because they all have like, a lot of similar characteristics. German born like German backgrounds. Excuse me. Highly intelligent. And like, I don't know how weird you want to get broke. I want to get weird. Okay, bro. They think like this might be some time traveling. Nazi ship, bro. I know you're going to think I'm crazy, but it's true dude. That's what they believe. And they made it these day. These day folk. Who when you say they believe who these day? The conspiracy people. Are they united on that? No, there's a whole different. There's a lot of war and clans. Dude, but that was the people you want to go. What is interesting is how advanced the engineering of the Germans was. In. There's a lot of Warren clients dude, but that was the view on go. What is interesting is how advanced the engineering of the Germans was You know, it's really interesting when you think about car manufacturers like Audi and Volkswagen Mercedes. It's all out of BMW BMW didn't BMW make engines for Nazi fighter pilots. I I think that's what they first started off did but I think that's what BMW did right yeah 100% and then we were out he made Hitler a car. Yeah Hitler had a race car That was never part of their marketing plan though. Yeah, that would have been a crazy campaign. What does it say there? 1939 BMW 801 D piston radial aircraft engine and national origin is Germany so In two planes in that year. They made World War II planes. They made engines for World War II planes. That's this why? Oh man I mean IBM was making stuff to for these camps too dude. It's crazy. Yeah, like they had computers talked about that before Yeah, right. What was that? There's a book I What did they do they were make it was the precursor to actual computers. It was like a Filing system to get track of stuff. Yeah, of who was wearing what into these camps right? I'm remembering this and And then oh yeah, man, it's gets super weird that but the place called IBM right was it called something else? I think it was IBM. Yeah, the book is called IBM in a Holocaust a strategic Alliance between Nazi Germany. I mean you ain't fucking around that title huh If you Fuck do we do that did we really do this this strategic alliance between Nazi Germany and America's most popular powerful corporation expanded Interesting so that area and of Antarctica they went to was new new Schwab in land new Schwab in land do you think that's why addresses with the space 100% Yeah, and so they're all in contact with the aliens. I think well dude I mean it gets into a lot of people think this about power and money What it's about it's spiritual war did this is these people got all the money and all the power they got it More than they could ever want. I think they want complete control But that gets in the spirituality not just complete control, but lowering your vibration and I'm jacking your loose Spirit energy think they're doing that Consciously or do you think they're doing it like they're chasing the economics and along the way It actually becomes a spiritual battle because everything is a spiritual battle. I think it's done purposely I think they're evil. I think I think they're there at low There's low frequencies stuff going on and they've made deals with people and things and That's why things going on That was very ambiguous, but I understand where you're going with it. Okay, I mean if you want me I just don't want it too weird too fast, bro, but I asked I'm like we just opened up with good I I want 100% believe this spiritual war and that these people are working with dark entities and that's what this is all about Let's imagine this if there was like an alien race that came here from another planet and gave just a random group of people uh Technology yeah gave them an understanding of things and how to do things how much of a record Do you think they would keep it that? Wouldn't that be something that people would want to talk about? Yeah, but that but that's the beauty of the internet that we're now able to do that We could never do that before so you think that's what the story is about The story is about they went there and they met with aliens and the aliens gave them information I mean, Hitler was really into the occult. Yeah, I mean, you would send people all over the place It's a lot of bad ideas. Yeah, a lot of bad ideas But see the occult has a negative connotation to it not everything Involved with the occult is negative and what the occult really means is secret So there's not as much of a word means. Yeah, it's basically mean it means like it's hidden I always associate it with people that Believe in silly shit And so inside talking about the occult I'm always like hmm How do you feel about ghosts? You know how do you feel like when people start talking about like dark magic? Real you sure I believe in that there's an energy manipulation, but I don't disbelieve. Yeah, I don't disbelieve Listen I like I don't know what's going on I just kind of read stuff and I'm like how does this fit into the puzzle right? How does this fit into the jigsaw of life? and you start looking around and you just start going okay, man This is interesting that is interesting This starts the make sense because if you look at from a power and money point of view It doesn't make any sense Why would you want everybody to lose their jobs? Why would you want everybody to be staying at home? If if you could nobody's making any money, then you don't make any money I don't think that's true. I think you just got to keep people at like a constant level of consumerism and a constant level of work and you'll always make money But you control the money this way the way to control people is to control their access to food and goods and Control their access to travel so if you can limit their travel If you can tell them the traveling's bad If you can tell them that if they have to travel they have to travel with other people And then if you could change their food and tell them they have to eat bugs You have to eat bugs. We're gonna have to they're trying they're literally pushing that you're eating bugs Right they're pushing you got to stop eating meat like you stop being all are you sure you sure that regenerative farming Isn't real because the people that run it are saying that they can literally get to like a zero carbon state Where they're not emitting any extra carbon? They can do that with regenerative farming. I just don't think they can do it for millions of people Yeah, where are you that is the problem? Like regenerative farming to me it's like the reason why they do factory farming it's fucking gross and terrific It is So many people are eating meat. How are you gonna feed that many people? I think that synthetic meat has a real shot the You know it's not really synthetic. I don't think that's the right word for it What what is the word for the meat that they're making whether they're basically like Reproducing steak cells like they're making a lab-grown steak But it's actual meat This is interesting to me because I'm like if they're doing like If they can figure out what the building blocks for an actual cell are and recreate it perfectly And if they could do that in some sort of a form that that makes it a stake That would that would mean they could probably do that if someone gets their arm blowing off I would mean they could probably do you know for sure that'd be great like that might happen 50 years from now With the same kind of technology they might create meat I think now they're just making it. It's like mush and they put it together With like fat and they just they're just not very presentable at this point. What does it look like cultured meat? That's what they're calling. Oh, that's I love the names. They come up with stuff. It's such a great cell cultured meat spin around the world Culture it's from France It's a meat produced By in vitro cell cultures of animal cells the form of cellular agriculture Which such agricultural methods being explored in the context of increased consumer demand for protein? So was it look like let's see what a lab-grown steak looks like I think it looks delicious. Probably looks like a lab-grown vagina. Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah That's lab-grown Whoa, oh, you know what that is. That's tiger steak. That's what that is is lamb lab-grown tiger steak So they've reproduced other animals tissue That looks like a fucking real steak man. That's lab-grown steak Is that really lab-grown? Do you think there's not enough food though Joe? Is that do you think that's an issue right now that there's not enough? I have not done any accounting on how much food there is Have you well, you know we hear a lot of stories about you know We subsidize farmers not to grow and it's just like if if if you know why to do that though Why they started doing that because in world war? I think it was World War II and The reason why they started doing it because they wanted to make sure they were never caught without grain and caught without food because there was One of the scariest things about war Particularly in those days was famine Like if you were cut off to supply of food and food couldn't come in I mean obviously there's everything about wars horrible everything about it But famine is kind of crazy and I think they were trying to avoid that By supplying you know making sure there was like a surplus And so they made some deals with farmers make sure this is a inaccurate Interpretation I'm pretty sure that's exactly how it was though So that's why they started subsidizing the same soil Well because they were we're a war And then they just kept doing it Now I don't know how much has changed. I really don't know much about Subsidies and how they work But I do know that you know we make a Load a corn that most of it is used for animal food The US government created farm subsidies during the Great Depression to offset the surplus of crops And low prices of both crops and livestock Okay, though the Great Depression ended nearly a century ago Subsidized farming persist today Farmers make up less than 1% of the US population Hmm, so what was the food subsidies that took place during world war two? Was that World War I? Yeah, that's so that was that one the Great Depression was in between them Okay, so maybe that's what I'm fucking that's what I fucked up the year of it So it's essentially They had to do it because we needed food We needed to make sure you can fucking starve and people back then people had to like get together and work to help Like they would they would make things for the war effort Like you're supposed to donate tires and people would like donate like Pots and pans and metals and shit and they would melt them down and make bullets out of them Like it was A crazy united time in a way that I don't think we really understand today It was a crazy time everybody came together and I just wonder if we could ever do that now today I feel like people are starting to wake up Maybe and coming together a little bit more But the point is that's the subsidy of that's where it started it started for a good reason It started because they were really trying to feed people and they were in the middle of a war Right, but but for me And it's also that they they said that it was also about controlling the price of Product right so that's for sure definitely to to keep because if you keep the market right It's just everyone's buying it for pennies on the dollar if they can get it everywhere Which is fine. I'm totally great But I'm very nervous about what's happening with these farmers right now. Yeah, it is strange right I mean strange what they're doing in Is it the Netherlands? Netherlands Canada the board and the Netherlands where they're having these They're blocking streets and lighting things on fire because they're proposing these New things to farmers. It's basically going to put farmers out of business in terms of like how much methane They can do right which is how many cows they can own. Yeah, basically. Yeah I think there is Some feed that you can use that reduces the amount of methane a cow produces But I mean how are they doing that? And do we really think it's cows farting that's the problem right? It is a problem Really is a problem But is it anything like what's going on in these giant cities that we live in? Well, you would think it wouldn't be until you realize how big some of these farms are And how many cows they have and that's how they feed millions and millions of millions of people Most people are removed from the fucking horrific reality of meat farming And dairy farming but that the reality is like those there's a lot of those fucking animals There's a lot of them and they're all farting and it's really burping burping through real problem Really? Yeah. Yeah burping is the big problem more than farting You know, but the people that are The fans of regenerative agriculture I'd love for them to sit down with someone who is like an economic realist who could tell us like can you do this Everywhere can you have animals just run free and shit and then you have the chickens around and then you have the pigs run And they do everything they want to do and the whole soil stays healthy from the manure and the way they eat it and everything The way they eat the the the greens Or you bullshitting me like is the only way to make McDonald's burgers for a billion people The only way to stuff these animals into these fucking cages and do that horrific shit that we see in those videos Yes, that's the question is it is a hard question too because there are so many people So this is where I get excited about lab grown meat I think thinking the best possible solution is Those two things regenerative agriculture Where the but the only could produce a certain amount Because realistically it seems like you would not be able to produce as much you wouldn't have as much land I mean it's if you're just gonna have cows everywhere It's like Traffic you imagine if like that we realize like we have two choices Factory farming or cows just roaming goes the only way we can keep up with all the steak houses and all the five guys burgers Fucking cows everywhere can't touch him on the street. That's gonna feed a family. Let him enjoy his life Dude that that might be the solution That's broken. So it's one of those two things. It's either factory grown meat lab grown meat cultured meat Or a regenerative agriculture. What is the new one that they're putting out near meat or almost meat or something meat? They didn't have like it's just bailed on their beyond burger. Yeah, that's it beyond meat right and then it had like insane amount of uh seed oils not yeah, like It's not good for you. Yeah, not good for you. You want to eat vegetarian. There's plenty of really healthy things you can eat If you want to eat vegetarian should eat real vegetarian food not some fake fucking meat thing If you want to be a vegetarian to eat Indian foods delicious There was a place I mean there's a lot of delicious vegetarian food There's a place near my house in back in LA and it was this a total Indian joint like everybody spoke Hindi Is that is yeah, I'm cool. That I said they spoke in their native language and everything was in you know their native language and It was all vegetarian. It was this crazy Authentic place. I love that restaurants do that too like you go into a certain Yeah, you want to see those people working there. Yeah, if it's a bunch of hipsters you're like oh, this is a suck right But you go in there and it's authentic bro. You're good to go It was literally like you were transported to a small You know small shop in India. That's what it's like and the foods legit So that's my point. It's like eat real food. Don't be eating that nonsense. Well, you know I mean like I don't give a fuck yeah, man I mean like I've lost some weight and I go lie. I'm happy fat But I'm also happy in shape too. So it's like how'd you lose weight? I did an intermediate fasting intermediate or whatever 12 It's like all intermittent. Yeah, that too. Yeah. Yeah. I've done that. Yeah. I did that 48. I'm good for 48 72 I'm ready to go on a killing spree. You do 48 hour fast. Yeah. Oh, wow. That's a long time. Yeah I was doing 22s mostly, but then I got it to 48 and I liked it man. I was losing weight, but man. I was getting like I think we eat entirely too much food. I mean it's pretty evident when you look at the population and when I say we I definitely include me. I eat too much food. I like it. I'm a glutton But if you look at the rest of the population like most people don't eat like us Well, they stretch us really thin. We're working more and we ever have so sometimes you gotta stop and The only thing open is that green yellow arch and you're like oh man I have an eight that in a month and then you eat it your bicep go fuckers You know where your boss ate a preservative bomb. Oh, you know, it's the most amazing thing when they take those burgers And they put them on a shelf and they never rot And we see right you're like this is not good for anybody Maybe let's find out how much of that's true. I know there's photographs of like big max that are on shelves They're just sitting there forever. Oh, you're looking like some you're drinking you're like good for like 15 years you like this ain't healthy not healthy not healthy at all like I Tried eat good man, but I also like to eat like shit. I like to have a case course right everybody does Oh, man, I go there's like a extra thing to eating like shit because you know you're giving your body a little treat I go to I go to McDonald's get that vinyl ice cream and every time I show up There's like a race ride about the breakout right there. It's like some giant black trans about the fight cholos on the other side of the fuck I'm gonna go with one you go on Santa it's on La Brea near Santa Monica so look at this Grow back up sorry the thing is had found McDonald's cheeseburger looks exactly the same after five years I wonder if it's edible do you imagine if someone just fucking ate that thing? Five years He had to eat it he had to try it look at this she vowed to a Megan boundary Concrete has vowed to ditch fast food altogether after she found the burger still exactly the same The day she bought it back in 2017 Making from Washington DC decided to conduct the experiment after noticing a forgotten burger in the back of her car had not started to rot after five days She said I would it was untouched until around three weeks ago I was in the closet sorting out my Christmas stuff and I knocked the bag and the burger rolled out I'd forgotten about it. It was rock hard as hard as a hockey puck I could probably smash a window with it Well, she sounds really dry and it and it could start to crumble She sounds like an alcoholic that hides bottles all over the place Hiding fast food so no one knows she's eating it Yeah, that's great. I mean dude, you know, it's not healthy when it's turning burn that quickly But sometimes you just gotta you know people are spread thin dude Yeah, they gotta eat dude, and it's like oh dude. I get it. I know I'm I I'm not an anti-fast food person Don't I mean I'm a person that says like just don't eat all the time don't don't make that your whole diet anything too much right Anything but that kind of stuff and specific It's like when you get in a habit of having like chocolate shakes and burgers and fries and you know those fucking Buns and all the sauces and everything you get in a habit of that and then You're just giving your body too much to get rid of you're you know, if that's not nutrients Yeah, you're giving your body like this just rush of sugar and there's a lot of protein and fats in there too So like by itself like what I like to do is go to in and out and get those how do they do it? What is it called flying Dutchman? I don't know Do the shit But the flying Dutchman is like they take a cheeseburger Patty and they put a piece of cheese on it and that's it No animal is that animal style? No animal styles when they pile a bunch of crazy That's a flying Dutchman with onions. So no lettuce no nothing just to meet in the cheese So that's like the least guilt-free shit for me Because I'm just getting ground beef nothing cheese. No, it's pretty fucking good That's why the line is around the block every time exactly look at that. It's a flying Dutchman on french fries animals Look at these fucking yeah, I mean It didn't hard dude Carl junior one time was just whatever they could shove on a burger was their new burger It was like lettuce tomato bike An elephant it just was like it was just so ridiculous And it's like it's that's the most unhealthy shit. I've ever seen in my life But it looked good and tastes good. I'm sure the in and out thing is like what they've done is said look It's gonna take longer because we're gonna cook it right now But it's gonna be better so you have to wait and everybody's like let's do it Yeah, whereas everywhere else like you want it right now Which is so crazy that they already have a cheese burger ready for you before you even done ordering it they're handing you your order Takes time to make a fucking cheeseburger the fact you can get it so fast and I like did I have the metabolism of a dead person? I Game way I once gained weight driving. I felt my pants getting tired So I have to take off my spell as I was driving to a gig and you were eating in the car Yeah, I could just feel like I had undo my pants Yeah, so I've really Bad My metabolism super slow so I can gain weight doing nothing his the intermittent fasting helped that yeah for sure Yeah, so I had a show called Wild World of Spike on Spike TV and I remember that I was doing like stunts I didn't even know I didn't even know what the show was about when I got it because I just wanted to be on TV Who was on that with me and Jason Ellis and Kit Kope? Oh, that's right. That's right Ellis is doing stand up right now He's so funny dude because he's lived such a crazy life He's it's like fun watching someone starting to learn stand up And you kind of like give him a couple tips here and there to lead him in their way But so we were doing a show and like I discovered what a hematoma was I didn't know what that was before and then I would get these stunts with these giant hematomas on my leg And I just gained this Layer permafat that I never lost like I probably started to show around 175 and I ballooned up to like almost 200 maybe and I kept it forever and then doing this this fasting Like helped me finally shed a lot of that that fat that I have forever I could never get rid of you must feel much better too I love it dude, but sobriety and like eating better. It's just it's it's 180 dude Nice it's I wake up every morning. I'm like oh man I feel so much you have any vices now I have all the vices bro But I mean like in terms of like cigarettes Oh alcohol no alcohol already well called no drugs no marijuana no marijuana Um You know I always questioned like at some point will I ever be able to do shrooms again cuz shrooms kind of changed my life Um, what do you think? Maybe I mean I'm just being honest with you, but right now I just enjoy being sober But you know the whole story about Bill W at that one point or like you had done acid and yeah What did everybody yeah like to do the 12 steps and then trip balls And that was gonna be the experience and the spiritual experience and then he almost got ran out So they're like okay, no But I'm interesting because boy what a much better organization it would have been it would be interesting Be my lifestyle if you if you could do that if you could do like the whole spiritual journey and then like work Yourself into a place where you're capable of doing the psychedelic experience. Yeah I just don't know some people can do that the problem is it's whenever you got something like that Here's problem it gets culty What if you're giving people psychedelics? Yeah, you know It's already culty if you're giving them a guideline to live their life Because each and it's very hard for a person to tell you how to live your life because it's very hard for a person to live their life It's very hard for people to get it together So if you're given advice like how good do you have it together? Right, so if you're telling me that I have to believe in a higher power And I have to do this and I have to do that and this is the way Like are you sure or is is that the way for you? You know like maybe it is the way But it could get culty and I'm not saying alcohol is anonymous as culty I'm saying any kind of organization that starts to tell you What you're supposed to be doing and how to do it it could get culty I think anything could get culty right? I mean like then you add psychedelics. Yeah, then you get where then you then you could really if you had movie trivia night And you had psychedelics it could get culty right? I think most of those early cultures that got together like these fucking circles of wisdom and shit These motherfuckers have been into dude. If you ever there's a guy Brian Murrow rescue He was on my podcast and he's got an amazing book and it's uh it's all about how the ancient Greeks And the ancient Romans were tripping It's called the immortality key It's an amazing book and it's actually opened up a field of study at Harvard now They're studying this this part of the history of the ancient Greeks Because they found these wine vessels and when they do a sample test on the wine vessels They found ergot and ergot is a type of psychedelic. It's like a it's it's in mimics like LSD It's got LSD like properties It's something like lysergic acid or it's related to lysergic acid So they definitely had at least that in their stuff and they found some other stuff too I think they might have found cilasibin too But that was what their wine was their wine wasn't just wine. It was just this is one of the things that he When it's a depth about like when we think of wine But wine that we have today like you get a nice Cabernet. Oh delicious. Oh like it with a steak Their wine had shit in it They were pouring like fucking They were pouring in each other To the psychedelic mushrooms and shit and fucking ergot You know they think that ergot was responsible for the Salem rich truck the witch trials Oh, there's a whole bunch of into that like skits of frontie. Oh, what is that and Like people hear invoices like I mean you read all these holy texts everybody heard voices back in the day And like how we treat those people it might not be the proper way not saying You know, they're there there any kind of like shaman or anything But there might be some stuff to that. You know, I hear I've heard voices like when I did True voices at that good advice. Yeah, but when you do that. Yes, that's different. Yeah, that's different Like when you do shrooms, it's like you're taking on an entity You know, that's interesting man I think so when you get into like what is alcohol spirits, right? It's like there's something to that the thing I was telling you though about the Salem witch trials We could look this up make sure it's true, but I'm pretty sure it is What they did was they did a core sample You know what they dig into the earth and they find and through the core sample I don't know how they make the calculation exactly But they know where the years were as they go down and when they get to the years of the Salem witch trial It turns out there's a late frost and when late frost happens sometimes plants die and sometimes they get fungus And fungus grows on them that fungus is called ergot and so they found evidence of this stuff 1976 Linda corporal offered the first evidence at Salem witch trials filed an outbreak of rye ergot Ergot is a fungus blight that forms hallucinogenic drugs in bread Its victims can appear bewitched when they're actually stoned ergot thieves Oh thrives excuse me ergot thrives in a cold winter followed by a wet spring So they found evidence of that so if they had evidence of that at least accidentally they were tripping balls Because they were eating the bread was like so important to them like you know That was a big part of how they stayed alive They're probably all tripping their fucking balls. Oh, yeah 100% what about the guy whose job it was to go around To determine whether somebody is a witch or not look at this according to this theory The abrupt end of the witch trials in May 1693 happened quite simply because Salem ran out of ergo contaminated grain Wow So the witch is over no more witches because we're not tripping balls anymore Oh my god, I never knew that Isn't that nuts? That is crazy everybody's on trims are like which? Yeah, the you imagine you really would think you would be witch like why am I thinking like this? I never knew that. Isn't that nuts? That is crazy. Everybody's on trumes are like, which? Yeah, the you imagine you really would think you would be wished like why am I thinking like this? Why don't I feel this way? Oh my god, I'm under a spell. And if you believed in spells and fucking the 1600s, they believed in spells. 100% 100%. You know, that's crazy. Oh nuts. I did trumes at the K-Rock who's the Christmas about like basically the same thing. Yeah. And I heard a voice and it's the last time I ever worried about my life. Really? It would say that you're exactly where you need to be. I heard it loud. Wow. And I never worried. And then I just went and watched profits of rage just annihilate, bro annihilate. And it was like, and my life has always been kind of on this nice, nice path since then. But yeah, shrooms were a big part of my, my recovery and just like all the stuff having the kids. And then there's this COVID thing for me to like reevaluate and I'm on kind of the spiritual path right now, which is like, I really love it. I really it's a much better way of looking at the world. So you've made, it's not like you made like big leaps, like big changes in the way you think about things. Yeah, man. Yeah. There's this video going around about me and our Shafir yelling at each other on my past punch drunk videos, you know of us doing it. And I watch it and it's super cringy, right? I watch I go, but now I understand the last stuff. How my energy was back in the day and how people received it. And I get it. I get it. Was this the run in the gun days? This was this was running in the gun in one. Gunning too. This was the earlier days when it was just like blow and stuff like that. And you, let me take one thing about you. You always, even if you're on coke, you're always a cool guy to hang out with. Thank you, Joe. It means a lot to me. You always were. But you're not one of those guys who does coke and then becomes unmanageable. Well, you know it's interesting, Joe. So I saw you recently at Christina's party, right? Yeah. And the truth of the matter is is that I was talking about this on my broken simulation podcast. I was, I drove around that place like 30 times because I have like really bad social anxiety. And I was just like, I was like, gotta go in, gotta go in. And then I was like, defensive farting the whole time. Right. I just just, just very hard farting. Right. Just blowing up my car. Just nerve fart. He had nerve parts really bad. And then I finally went in and I was like, okay, I'm okay, but I have like really bad. So like that's a big part of like why I have student drugs too. Like to be able to like be calm into my, the being to my like scan and being able to talk to people. And like, I wasn't a good drinker. I never really liked drinking, but Coke was just like every time I did blow, I fell. I like, I was like, Motley crew and the girls, girls, girls. But you know, I could just walk it through point in the chicks and wear, do it like fucking you felt like the man. Yeah, I felt like the man. And then it just, it worked till it didn't work anymore. And then, you know, just I had a couple of things happen and I fell back and and then just like, you know, I had two girls and I said, I had to change myself. I'm somebody's dad, which is like the weirdest thing ever for me. Like I'll be with them at the park and I'll look at them. I go, I'm this person's dad, dude. Like, like it's like I am there more, I'm going to teach them their moral compass and all that stuff. And like, yeah, it's just a weird feeling and it's the best feeling I've ever had in my life. But it's I sometimes have this out of body experience that I'm this person's dad. It's so weird to me. And but I love it. And it just I wanted to be I didn't want to embarrass them. So I decided I'm going to clean up my act and go on the spiritual journey and it's been it's been a really great time. It's like life is so much easier now. So then it was before and it's just you feel like this less resistance the way you live your life now, right? Yeah. Pete, that's one of the problems with people to get like stuck in patterns, you know, you've always behaved a certain way. I thought a certain way. So you're stuck in that pattern, you know, you live your life doing blow and getting crazy, you get stuck. And so then to create a new pattern, it requires a lot of effort. You know, it's a big, big switch. I always wanted to I always said I always wanted to set a high score in a game that nobody else was playing. I just wanted to have these rock and roll stories. I thought we're so important. And then I look back like nobody cares. It's almost the point of embarrassment. Like all this stuff I used to do, all this chaos I used to get involved in. And at the time I thought it was what it was super important. And then I realized it wasn't. And I was just like, that's beautiful man. That's beautiful for you that you figured that out that you made that adjustment. The store and all the stuff like like I. So I really enjoy the store. It's one of my favorite places to go. I miss when all you I miss the time when you were all there, you know, it's like, I'm the last of the one of the Mohicans, you know, in terms of the old desk, quiet crew and all that. I miss that. But I also used to love the dead period too when we would all go there and there would be like 30 people in the crowd and you could go up there and bomb and dignity and just work on your shit dude. It's changed. It has changed. It changed. You know, it changed when we came back in 2014. It stopped being it would it had changed while I was gone too because when I came back, they had already started doing bros battle. And I remember watching bros battle thinking like, wow, like this is so creative and it's so important because it was such a joke writing show like you had a right jokes to fuck with each other. And in the way Moses does it because he's such a nice guy. He makes them all hug. It makes everybody hug at the end. It's nice. Like you're insulting each other and he's a great host too. That's me and Brian Kalins show. Brian Kalin and mine show is uh, we just load lay into each other and then at the end we hugged before we go. But when I came back and I saw that that was happening at the store, I was like, oh, that's this is very interesting. This is very interesting. I'm like, this is a whole different thing and kill Tony too. They were doing kill Tony and like they were doing in the belly room and I remember going in there going, man, this is really interesting. Like this is a crazy show. You're giving these people one minute. They do stand up and then you got Hinchcliffe who's like the best roaster ever. Yeah, fucking was super fast. He's the fastest dude. He's the best host of one of those shows I've ever seen. I took him on his first uh, road gig. Did you really? Did you? Yeah, it's the funniest story ever, dude. So I'm like, hey man, you want to do a gig with me? I forget where it was. It was like, um, it was like, uh, Fresno or something like that. So you know, it's starting off that and it was for a seven 11 Christmas party, right? So I bring him up and I would do this thing called pre show post show. Like how do you think you could do and then a reaction to how you actually go? Right. And it was his first time ever. And it was so fun to watch him like try to figure it out in front of this all seven 11 Indian crowd. It was so funny. And yeah, it was his first road gig. And from there, he just kind of went boom. And he's been crushing it ever since. He's killing it. We just did a gig in Dallas. How was it? It was awesome. Dallas is a great town. It's a great town. I love Dallas. I love town. I love Dallas. I love Houston. They got futuristic black chicks. That I love. There's something about these big Texas cities. It's just extra fun. And you remember back in the day when you would do stand up, you go to like some of the bluer states. And you know, it was very interesting. Like, you know, the crowds in LA now are super tricky. I would say they're tricky. You got to kind of like learn how to like present to them. So I just did a Jimmy Dorshale. Like he asked me to stand up in this tiny theater. He does in the valley. And they're the best crowds. You can just tee off, right? And then I'm like, OK, God, go do a Hollywood and stand up in Hollywood. And now I'm going to have to figure out what this crowd can handle and what they can't handle. Right. It was never like that before. Right. Back in the old days, like you would just sling dick in comedy, dick in LA. And then you'd have to go on the road and kind of like dumb it down a little bit. It's kind of flip now. And it's like in LA, you got to like, can't say this, can't say that, can't say that, because they're going to shut down right on you. On the road, you can just tee off. Like, red states like used to be super conservative, right? They were like, when do you think that shift happened at the store? How long ago you've been feeling this way? Since everybody started coming back from COVID, I don't think it's here. It's like, it's not the store. The store is great. It's crowds in LA, whether you're at the improper wherever. It's like they're everywhere. Everywhere. They're way more sensitive. Like sarcasm is violent. You know, they're not like that here at all. I know. That's why I like to do the road. Like, but the thing, this is not a red city. This is a blue city. This, the whole thing is not like a red blue thing. It's like people lost their fucking marbles versus people kind of went back to living their life and trying to just deal with the fact that it's a disease. And hopefully you don't get it. And if you get it, get treatment and, you know, it became a cult. It's not about science. Now that's, you know, when the conspiracy theorists have been saying the same thing now that they said at the beginning, it's not about science. And like, masks, they tried to bring that back. So like, we might bring it back in a long beach, Beverly Hills and who else was in a Pasadena where like, no, we're not taking it. We're not doing masks. And they're like, yeah, you know what? The numbers are high enough. We're not going to, we're not going to bring back the masks. Like, no, dude, everybody says the emperor's got no clothes on. That's what happened. We're getting Biden survived it. Can we end this? I mean, Jesus Christ. I got a crazy story for you. But more crazier than the Nazis meeting with the aliens? No, it's right there though. Okay. You sure? Okay. So I do have this podcast called Broken Simulation. And I was interviewing a friend of mine named Jeff Hilliard and Jeff, it's, it's going to drop this week. And he used to be a sober companion. What's up, weird? Okay. That means like when people are newly sober, either like someone who loves them will send you into like, knock the pipe out of your hand or like just to make sure you don't use an abuse or do anything like that. Someone who goes with you so you don't fuck up. Or if you're newly sober and you just want somebody there in case you start getting like a little froggy, you know, they stop you from doing stuff. So he, he, he was a sober companion. He used to go to all these hotels and he wanted his clients at the time was a high in escort. And this was like during the election. And he was having a conversation with her. And she was like, one of my, one of my people I party with is Hunter Biden. Right. And he told her before the election, this is what Jeff says on my show that they're going to get his dad in by the slimmons of margins. And then they're going to figure out a reason to get him out and they're going to put in camel toe hairs. And that's who they're going to fuck in. They're not going to do that. Did you see that video the other day where she announced her pronouns and so she's wearing a blue suit? Yeah. They're not going to have her to be the president. Well, I think she's so bad. They've got to be put that seems to be maybe they thought, maybe they thought that way back in the weekend. But I think now after they've seen how she gets reviewed by the public, she would be like the most unpopular president by far. She'd be more unpopular than Dan Quail, more unpopular than any, any of the presidents that we make fun of, advice, presidents rather. But she is, she's don't you think? Yeah. I can't imagine that they would do that. Can you imagine they would do that? Well, I mean, I'm surprised by it. I mean, I can't really get surprised by anything they do, right? At this point, I think they would try to put somebody else in to replace them. They'd probably, I mean, if he makes it to the four year mark, do you think he's going to make it to the four year mark? Not according to this hooker. Well, here's the thing about hookers. They're always right. And they make good choices. They make good life choices. So they're definitely not mentally ill. It does definitely not on drugs. And definitely don't lie. So I don't want to tell you. She I think they would, you already see the rumblings that nobody wants them to run again. So I think it's going to be super injury. But who else could they run? I mean, are they going to run Gavin Newsome? Do you think they're going to keep Colin Harris? Do they have two totally new people? Because if he doesn't run, if he's gone, does she autumn, she doesn't like become device president, right? Or she hasn't become the president? No, I mean, if he steps down, yeah, she like right before, if he steps down right before then she might be the place for a day. Couple of days. Well, if she's in there three days, she just starts passing off. She just starts launching out. Yeah, man. So she becomes a candidate again. It's not like they would definitely run her. If he stepped down in 2024 and they have a real, obviously it's going to be another election, somebody has to run with her. I mean, if he can't do it, she steps in, right? Or maybe she gets a lucrative offer to do something else. Promonly fans or something? No, from fucking from Klaus Schwab, once you to work at the World Economic Forum. Oh, yeah. The country has to go through the touch of transportation. Who knows, man? Who knows what all these pieces that are getting moved around are for, but you know, it's interesting to see them try to figure out who's going to run. And then seeing that Trump is probably going to run. I'm going to try to put Trump in jail to try to figure out what shit they can arrest him for and died and then died him on. My name, Hillary Clinton who just can't read a room is like, I think I might run again. That's hilarious. Right? She just, I mean, she obviously doesn't read any of her social media or anything like that. Well, she can't. Yeah. I mean, that would be devastating. I was talking to young Jamie about that. What do you think about the Clinton body count? Oh, dude, it's real, bro. Do you think about that most recent guy? Oh, I mean, like this one's a wild one, folks. If you don't know, this is a guy who let Epstein into the White House seven times. They found him hanging from a tree 30 miles from his house from an extension cord with a shotgun wound to the chest and they're calling that a suicide. Are you sure? Yeah, dude. Like wait a minute, wait a minute. Let this guy do for a living. Yeah, hold on a second. Who do you know? Is it letting where? What happened? Is it the most dangerous job in the world is a like a Clinton bodyguard or Clinton business? So yeah, right? It's like it's like a 9% clipping or something like that. But listen, we don't know whether or not the Clinton's kill people, but we do know for sure that people have assassinated their rivals. That's been a thing throughout history. Well her dad like didn't he? Her dad at one point was in charge of like the Chicago mob. What? Yeah, were you in that? Yeah. Like when they took out El Capone, he stepped in. Well, that would make sense. Right? And then you look at like you want some real theater, dude. Is that real though? Let's find that if that's real before we go any further because that sounds so bananas. Like she's either way. She's extremely fortunate that her rivals and people who know things about her. Yeah, people who know something themselves. It's like what the fuck, man. One of the craziest ones I ever read about was a guy who shot himself at the head twice. He's like an Enron whistle blower and he pulled over to the side of the road and he shot himself in the head twice. Well, is that Gary Webb too? Who came out about the whole crack epidemic? Did he shoot himself in the twice too? I found an article that says this, but it says according to someone, and I don't know who this is. Sam, terribly. Solid. Solid. Solid. It's not an Olere Nicholas. It says Larry Nichols was a former trusted advisor to Bill and Hillary, but I don't know. It's an article in the web. Okay, so it's just an article on a website. Yeah, it's a blog. Right. I don't know what it is, but I look at it from my previous. It's pretty presentable. It's very presentable. Seems to prefer I might have made this stuff. So it might not be true. So it's said what it says, Hugh Rodman is Hillary Clinton's father. He's pictured above daughter. Hillary is sitting holding the doll. What does that mean? Nickel. Okay. When I was in the town of Al Capone, Hugh Rodman and Dan Rosten, Kowski, took over and ran the Chicago mob, according to Larry Nichols. Well, who's this Larry Nichols fellow? I said it's a question. Nichols is a former trusted advisor to Bill and Hillary Clinton. Nichols helped run Bill's political campaigns while Bill was president and governor of Arkansas. Nichols called Matt Judge to break the story of President Clinton and Monica Lewinsky. Whenever I hear Judge, I hear like, I think, Judge report. And I think, yeah, that's true. Is it, but yeah, no, for sure. I know, but whatever I hear, Judge report, I'm like, okay, is that slanted? Uh, like, Judge, judge report is like a heavily right leaning website, right? Isn't it? Uh, it's, it's still I thought it's like one of those things where my gone the other way. Why do I left? Yeah. No, but I could have sworn like they were very, yeah. They go, they went like anti-Trump. Are you sure? Roger, Port. Oh, okay. So this is whether or not it's legit. No, it's the bias. Media bias checks. So it says mixed could be a little bit of both. But this is also back in the 90s. I don't know if it's changed. Oh, but look how it says this. So it's right of center. It's not extreme right, right of center. And in terms of the factual reporting, it's mixed. It's like in between mostly factual and low. So there might be a little. Because these media sources are slightly moderate conservative and bias. They often publish factual information that utilizes loaded words. Okay. So that's why. But you know, it's an interesting thing like you're always your program to like when you see some things on one network. Yeah. Oh, what is this bullshit? To this mission. Yeah. I see a Vox article. Yeah, this land. You know, it's like it's, it's a natural inclination that people have to like resist people they think might be ideologically driven or that all. And that just means the information isn't real. Right. Or it might be bias or it might be funky. It's hard. You know, like, you know, I know you're into the UFO thing. And the UFO thing is one of the ones, I got Jeremy Corbel coming on to and one of the it's UFO things, one of the ones that I keep going back and forth on. Sometimes I think we are being visited by other other galaxies or other creatures from some other world and other times I'm going, why would they tell us? Why would, why would the Pentagon be telling us that these are crafts not made from this world? Why would they tell us? They wouldn't tell us. I don't think they would tell us Jack shit. So if they are telling us, I think it's a smoke screen. I think at any time you see like a saucer or anything, I think that's man made. Do you think they're from China or Russia or the United States? All of them. All of them. Yeah. There are entities that are interdimensional and that they don't come here in a, don't think they come here in a metal craft. No, I think they walked through some portals or something. And they're in your mind. I think that's what's happening when you're eating mushrooms. Yeah. I mean, you're contacting other things. Like the thing, the feeling that you have when you're in a high dose of a psychedelic, like a DMT type trip, the feeling that you have of going to another place is like unmistakable. Right? It feels like you're in another place. That might be like a place that's a real place, but you can only access it chemically. Like our idea that you have to access things physically for it to be real. You know, like you have to open up a door to get in the room. That's true. But why do we think that way? We only think that way because that's how we move around the earth. But if you think about it, just experience itself, the kind of experience that you get on a high dose psychedelic, whatever the fuck that is, whatever is happening, it's an hallucination. Okay. Whatever it is, it's real. I agree. While it's happening, that is real as fuck. There's nothing more real. It's not like you can end it anytime you wait. Can't just stop it. You got to hop off the ride. No, whatever the fuck that is is as real as anything you ever encounter in life. Maybe you real are because you have no control. You have zero control. And it's one of the most terrifying things about it is people are scared. You're giving your consciousness up to the psychedelic. I feel like you're in another place when you're doing that, man. And if that is another place that can only be accessed chemically, maybe we should think about it that way. Don't think about it like it's not really there because I'm still here. Yeah, but that's just like tissue and bone. And what about your mind? What about whatever the fuck it is that is you inside your head, your thoughts. They're not there. They're going to this fucking other dimension and they're seeing pharaohs floating in gold cherry 100 per second. Buddhas and aliens and jokers and they're seeing all kinds of wild shit. Ten elves and shit. And everything is changing constantly around you and moving and if you play music it dances to the music. That's a wildest thing about some psychedelics, like particularly DMT. If you play those South American ekeros, those songs that they play when they do the ayahuasca ceremonies, when you do that the fucking the psychedelic imagery dances to the music. Like it changes to and syncs up with the music. Have you done ayahuasca? No, haven't done ayahuasca. We've only done DMT with those ekeros. I would love to do ayahuasca. I would do it down the line standpoint. I just got to make sure I do it with legit people. Yeah. It's like one of those things, man. It should be fucking legal. If it was legal then you'd know who was legit and where to go and what's good. Otherwise you're not. I think that's why they don't want you to do it. And it is weird. They know. I don't think they know. I don't think any of those people have experienced it. If they did they wouldn't make it illegal. They would immediately want to change their tune. Because if you did DMT and then you didn't think that that was the most profound thing that's ever happened to you in your life other than like the birth of your children. You didn't do enough. They still think they make me so good. If we just like every politician once they win an election they have to have do shroom day or do a psychedelic day where they just have to hit it hard heroic doses and then go into office. They should have a series of ceremonies. They should probably have a series of them. They should probably do some some peyote. They should probably do some mushrooms. They should probably do some DMT. They should probably do a series of things. But the problem is there's not enough people that are doing that. There's not enough people that are looking at their life and saying I want to have like a spiritual journey where I can sort of correct my path and make sure that I'm doing the right thing and I'm true to myself and I'm on like a soulful pathway. Because that's not encouraged in our culture that's all it is. And some people seek it out and those people become you know they become different people when they've had those journeys. And I don't think it's for everybody. I used to think it's for everybody but I don't think it's for everybody. I realized that when I thought it was for everybody I was being foolish. Some people are having a hard time with regular reality. And that shit's maybe not good for them. I would say probably not good for them but I'm not a doctor. Well you know for me man it's just like I think people there's so much information out there that can help people change their life 180 degrees and they just they don't know how to find it and no one's pointed it out to them. Yeah. And it's also they don't know whether it's legit. They don't know who's who's running it. Why is it? Am I going to go to jail? You know there's like weird shit. That is a weird thing right whether legal versus illegal. Like if something's legal they're like oh I can do it. And if it's illegal like oh I would never. Well that's what's really weird about these ketamine centers. You know they're doing IV ketamine therapy. I've never done ketamine but the friends that I have that have done it like Neil Brennan says he was tripping his fucking balls on earth. He grabbed me at the comedy stores telling me about it and I was like what is it like? He's like dude I'm tripping. I mean I'm fucking tripping. Oh he's still tripping. No no no no no. He's saying like when he did it. Like when he's he's like thought okay I'm going to do this in a clinical setting. Probably like pretty mild it's like no he's I was fucking tripping balls. And those are legal. So you can go and get like if you're depressed. If you've got anxiety there's a bunch of different reasons why they do it and they give people ketamine therapy. I don't know what the what are the what's the basic like what's the requirements to get ketamine therapy. What do you have to have wrong with you? It's got to be like an off label thing. It's not like the fucking your insurance is paying for that. I like anything that helps you explore what you're feeling instead of numbing yourself out to it. And I think that's a that's a big part of like I think what's wrong with a lot of our culture is like instead of trying to understand what you're feeling and why you're feeling it. I think some people want to numb themselves out so they can continue down this path. And I think we're all here on a path. We're all here to learn something. And sometimes the universe likes to tell us hey this isn't what you're path on and makes you super uncomfortable and some people are depressed. I think like things like depression, anger, sadness is the universe talking to you about you need to change some stuff up. You're not on the path you want to go. Patients with depression, anxiety, PTSD, end of life distress, chronic pain, drug and alcohol problems and other conditions may be eligible for psychedelic assisted therapy with ketamine. You're in bro. That's why I'm telling you man enhance enhance. Like don't run from it. You know I'm in a place right now where I think things happen for me not to me. I used to be like really think everything was happening to me. This is instead of like okay what's the universe trying to tell me what am I learning from this was my role in where I am right now. And that's like that's a big power shift in how I see everything. And I think we live in a society that runs away from that stuff. I'm sad. I'm depressed. I'm all that okay why why are you? Why are you going to take these medication? Now I'm not saying all medication bad people got to do what they think is best for them and there's a lot of great positivity and all that stuff. But a lot of people don't want to ask themselves why do they feel this way and why they go down that line and why they want to do maybe they maybe they're meant to do something else and they just got to get the you know the ability to make changes in their life. You got to make change to get change. That was my biggest problem. I want to change by what was in doing anything to get those changes. Right. I think so many people just get stuck, you know, living their life a certain way. You know, thinking about things a certain way. And what you're saying, having the philosophy that things happen for you and live your life like things happen for you. Like you're going to make better choices. Yeah. Whether or not you really truly believe that everything is happening for a reason. If you think that way, you're going to make better choices. You're going to feel better about it. You know, like to think there's a lot of anxiety that gets alleviated in certain people when they put their trust in God or they put their trust that God has a master plan for it all. It's all out of my hands. I'm just going to trust God. And that in people say, well, that's a foolish notion. You don't have to think that way. But the people that some of my friends at are atheists or some of the most anxiety-ridden miserable. Well, they're just so freaked out. And then some of them become spiritual, air-quotes, spiritual. You know? And I think that, I don't think it's necessary for people to believe in anything. But I do think that people have structures that have been long established because they help people get through just the fucking existential angst of being a person. And a good strategy for that is thinking that there's a great deity that's watching over everything and thinking that you have a very special role in life that this great deity wants you to fulfill. And so everything is happening for you. You know, it's all God's plan. And if you think like that, it can be very self-serving in a good way. It can help you like with... You know, it's all God's plan and if you think like that it can be very self-serving in a good way Make it help you like the with These are like one of one things a lot of people are burdened with is negative thoughts Yes, people are burdened with negative thoughts and anxiety Negative thoughts are them motherfucker of motherfuckers because you can't really just turn them off Like if someone goes a little sick positive like well fuck you Yeah, like when you have negative thoughts. It's hard to get away from those bitches Yeah, but if you really Program your mind to think that there is a god that's watching over you and everything's gonna be fine and everything is God's will and God has a master plan for you and just keep showing up a church and keep praying and you're gonna be good If you just that'll alleviate Enough anxiety for you to get a lot more shit done I 100% believe in everything you're talking about how many friends do we have that are atheists that are just Riddle to the anxiety just riddled just angst well They believe in like they believe they don't believe in a god or anything like that But they have a they have a faith and that faith is in science right? They they read stuff and they read an article and they believe they automatically have faith in what that article is telling them is real And like I have zero problems with science, but like I said, I question everything It's free might as well do it right and ask questions as long as you're willing to do the research on whatever it is You're questioning I agree because there's some shit out there that's stupid to question and then there's some shit There you go. Hey, how come no one's questioned in this? You know, there's there's plenty of weirdness in the world where anybody who doesn't think that some conspiracy are legitimate is naive You're a fool because people have openly conspired people have gone to jail for inspiring Right, right, right. It is a natural inclination of human beings It's not like that doesn't even make sense to me a conspiracy They make money and they gain power what you expect me to believe that it's such a dumb attitude that people have and the problem is That phrase conspiracy theorist is such a negative if that gets slapped on you Immediately people like oh you're a conspiracy theorist. Yeah, just a couple like enron or like an operation north woods or I ran contra yeah golf a Tonkin instant the goddess into Vietnam You know Kennedy's assassination You know just a few just a few bay of pigs just a few just a few Fuck you man Fuck you you don't think and you don't think some conspiracies are real Well, then they're gonna run another one on you all the time because you don't believe in them because you're scared to say You've been tricked into not questioning the most questionable Exist People the reason why we go to war it's those cuts. Yeah, and they use the same playbook over and over and over and over and over again This is a new playbook though. They're turning us against each other for you know being non binary and for Say in spaz you see they went after Beyonce Beable people so they're so Fuckin crazy with what they get outraged about spaz is an ableist term She can't say spaz but it's also like what is the media choose to highlight right? It's like there's a million people out there saying a million thing What do you highlight when you highlight it it becomes like there's a trend when it's really just one crazy person? That's just going hey man spaz's I don't even know that existed right? I never thought that were was a bad word I thought that was someone like knocks over cans and spills. That's me. I'm spastic. Yeah, I fucking knock things over But there's an actual physical problem being spastic like it's an actual thing That's the problem. That's a condition. I guess so like let's find out what it means But when we were when we grew up I didn't know anybody that had that condition But I certainly knew that phrase right it was always for a guy back in like a spaz Yeah, or stop knocking shit over and being a fucking spaz like sit down Like you know, you're knocking shit over I didn't know that was like this kind of thing that makes that is worth like Protecting their feelings on let's find out. Okay. Like send addiction. All right, Penn. So you get here But yeah, okay spaz third person spaz's past tense spaz past participle spaz To lose physical or emotional control He offered a postgame assessment. I spazed out real bad, but still there's nothing But I enough no disrespect to anybody, but I don't understand the connection between that and Okay, so here it is spastic often offensive a person with cerebral palsy See this is why okay, so relating to or denoting a form of muscular weakness Spastic paralysis typical of cerebral palsy caused by damage to the brain or spinal cord involving reflex resistance to passive movement of the limbs and difficulty in initiating and controlling muscular movement That's also just definitely finding what a spasm is. So right. It's Right it is a bit of a stretch because it says relating to or affected by muscle spasm But they use that term sometimes for people with cerebral palsy Is terrible Was that mean here's the lyrics from health it was used right down here. I haven't even heard the song It says spazing on that ass spaz on that ass Fan me quick girl. I need my glass Bro, we need to start writing wraps. What are we doing? You know how many hours in that you ever read children's books? No, that's like people couldn't make it as rappers So they write kids books The gruffalow It's crazy. I can't leave all those lyrics because this On top of that on top of the yeah, yeah tip tip tip tip on hardwood floors 10 10 10 across the board. Is this a good song? I haven't heard it song even though like the Read you can read your You're an asshole if you read lyrics. I mean, she has a beautiful voice But also like delivery right play it. Let's hear it Songs called heated and did they beat the spaz part out spaz on that so I heard shit They're gonna go back and correct it. Oh, it's kind of like let's get retarded in here. They did let's get it started in here Archie backers rolling over Just give us any time Yeah, I'm here. That's not bad. That's a catchy song Spaz it on that ass Have you thought that would be an issue Imagine you go back and listen to some old nwa kids and get back to me Imagine thinking that that's a problem. It's unspassing on that ass spaz on that ass And there's like a social book going on Just people are just looking for things you could blame about no matter what it is I remember when I was younger still old but younger and I didn't know what a hollow-back girl Matt and I went to this chick I was telling down my what you're not you're not a hollow-back girl. She's like fuck you you fucking asshole All you got and that's something I think it's about like a girl that hooks up with people. Oh Okay, you're hauling her she hauling I know hallebeth girl You know what I'm saying right you hallered her she's right. Yeah, right Something like that. Okay. It makes sense So it's like I don't even know what's offensive anymore. I've tapped out all that problem is everybody's got a fucking opinion And there's always gonna be someone out there that finds something you say offensive because if you're talking shit like we do Being offensive is part of the thing. Yeah, it's not the whole thing, but occasionally it is Occasionally you're saying things because they are offensive because it's funny to say something offensive sometimes Yeah, and people can get offended. I that's fine I don't know when being offended became a felony right But when it gets down to spazzing on that ass and then you're like I am not having this conversation This bullshit, this needs to stop it spazzing on that ass. Bazz on that ass That's That's the end of society Pretty catchy sweet it's I mean it's catchy, but it's like who is actually upset so a while ago like about five years ago I'm an LA clipper fan I love the basketball team and the clippers were I think it Memphis and they were playing the Memphis Grizzlies and this Iranian Center checked in and the the announcers One of the announcers who had been the announcer there for like 30 or 40 years I think made a joke that that the center could have auditioned for Borat right one guy Set in an email and this guy who had been the the the announcer for 30 or 40 years got suspended for two games One guy sent an email but did the guy look like Borat? Yeah, so what's wrong with being looking like Borat? He's a fucking beloved character. I don't even know but one guy got upset by it in email The the stage the television station and they suspended this guy for two see when they say cancel cultures and real This is somewhat what they're talking about Because what it is is its corporations that act quickly that make it seem like there's consequences Panicking they panic, you know, but they don't all panic some of them stand their ground and a lot of these companies are saying get out here This is nonsense leave us alone. It is nonsense It is nonsense and especially nonsense in that context because that was clearly humor The guy was cracking a joke. He got looks like Borat Borat's funny. That's funny if he looks like Borat. You'll be BAAAH! Bro, I was there and I thought it was like I does. Why is that bad? Is this not negative towards Borat? It's not negative towards him. The fuck is wrong with people One but the point was is that one person can play Borat is the shit. Yeah, it's a great movie It's the shit. Well, he's a great character. Fucking Sasha Bond cone is the shit One guy. I was a negative. I don't imagine you can't even say that So silly, but why would a corporation shut down for one dude, which is going to be to this? Like no, it doesn't it doesn't have to make sense. They're just panicking. They're just scared They're scared of a boycott. They're scared of their name getting out there They're scared of it being like they're the person who didn't respond and then a campaign of people come after them You know, I get it. I get it if I was a Corporation and things are shifting this quickly. I'm like whoa whoa whoa whoa whoa people are so sensitive now It's and then COVID was just gasoline gasoline on the fire Yeah, and now monkey box on Did you know that 98% of the people who get monkey box get it from unprotected gay sex and the other two percent are liars That's just a joke kids. I'm neither a statistician or but I do think that that's most of it I really do jokes aside. I think What is it? Most what is it? Poppers and ass juice is that what the back of the text? It's like a thing that it's a single stop But why can't I know um bisexual men give it to women seems like they could right? 528 infections diagnosed between April 27th and June 24th 2022 at 43 sites in 16 countries overall 98% of the persons with infection were gay or bisexual men 75% were white and 41% had a immuno deficiency virus infection the HIV infection the median age was third 38 years old transmission was suspected to have occurred through sexual activity in 95% of the persons with the infection then again is five percent or liars This is case series No, no how bad is it like when you get it see what it says common? systemic features preceding the rash included fever lethargy my algae a headache lymphadano did not lymphadonopathy. I guess that's like swollen lymph nodes that is all Commitments actually deserve it so okay rash lesions mucosal lesions Hmm genital Oh Yes Man you get polka dots on your toes. Um what do they do to cure it? What do they do to cure that thing? People calling out for the vaccine to try to get a vaccine for it Yeah, they're waiting in line for it. So they already have a vaccine for it. Well, there's lines in New York See it that you see pretty much monkey box been around for it. I even know I didn't even know there was monkey box It's a problem. It is it's a problem L.A. is declaring a state of California Gavin News. I think they did stay of emergency. I get to keep my emergency power cases of monkey Pocks are there That's in five hundred and fifteen seventy one in a state with what how many millions forty hundred fifty eight hundred people in California alone or the nationwide map. It started the US map fifty eight hundred people have it in the United States One Florida cases listed here, but included in the UK since the he was tested in the UK So this is current August 1st right? 5,811 cases Wow my Montana I only have zero cases There's the fucking manliest people alive They're the manliest ones as Yellowstone, right? That's fucking Kevin Costner, right? What am I getting? Zirrine about to get fucking monkey box calm or nobody's talking Yeah, he's not getting my couple states were just one case Which then how did they get it? You know if a cowboy can't just has one cowboy shows up on a ranch from Nebraska Yeah, all of a sudden you see a blue spot After watching slowly turns blue you know they have this one badass gay cowboy fucks everybody He just shows up at these ranch is slinging dick and riding ponies. Who I need one case who do who gave it to him? They give it to himself. Yeah, right who is case zero. Yeah, where did monkey Pocks originate from? 23,600 worldwide according to Monday's numbers That's a really really good Snoop Dogg concert Had Snoop Dogg out in arena 23,600 worldwide according to Monday numbers from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention The outbreak first bought it in Europe in late April has reached 80 countries the vast majority in nations that hadn't been previous oh hadn't previously had significant caseloads of the rare viral infection so there's a rare viral infection and Monkey Pocks originated Where did originate from? Well like the original is this like an old disease? Yeah, is it so it's it's a zoonotic disease isn't it a zoonotic? Yeah, does he's it came from animals? I Think it I think it is I think most of the diseases that we have like the avian flu and this is another problem with factory farming They that's one of the things that happens like they jump like pigs will get a disease and swine flu will jump and Sorry affecting people. Oh my god. Yeah, when I was at the Center for Disease Control with Duncan We filmed an episode of Joe Rogan questions everything there. They scared the fucking shit out of me Yeah, cuz this is a story. That's what every zombie movie starts by the way in Duncan eight edibles And we went to the airport and we got so high we missed our flight and not by a little it had taken off like a half an hour ago So we were stuck in this fucking airport. I mean Inter-dimensionally traveling like so high and then we got a flight out in the morning so we basically stayed up all night like six in the morning flew into wherever is I guess it's Houston what's outside of Galveston? Anyway, then got a rental car and then drove there so we were giddy we were silly We hadn't slept and then we were talking this guy in this fucking laboratory where the walls are as thick as this building a recalising glass and inside these people with spacesuits and they're manipulating these fucking viruses They have these these big like vacuum ducks and the ceiling that suck any air any possible particle of a Escape virus out of them. It is wild to see So this guy is showing me and he's like inside we we have in this facility Multiple diseases that could just wipe people out and there and so they're just trying to figure out how to you know How what what makes these viruses function that which gets really? controversial right and they're also trying to figure out how to develop Vaccines for them and medications like how do you you know? How do you kill it in vitro in a cell culture? There's they're doing all kinds of tests on them But this scary stuff is when they try to make them better Right that's getting a function research. That's why you'll shit and that's the shit that the Obama Administration shut down. Yeah, I believe it was 2014. They shut it down did they supposedly but then you know the trumpet misteration came along and according to Josh Rogan Josh Rogan is a journalist. I think he's for the Washington Post, right? He was on the podcast explaining it that they restarted gain a function research It's exactly what he wasn't doing that. I felt Obama was part of that and he was like visiting there The those I think when he visited he was like what the fuck are we doing? Really? I think he put the gabash on it. What's what's good with that? I'm pretty sure the Obama administration put the gabash on gain a function research and then it became a question of what exactly is gain a function research? Right and that was those arguments that Rand Paul had without you when they were arguing you do not without do respect you do not know what you are talking about Wow, and he they were going back and forth in this very fascinating way because the problem is the term I almost wish they had abandoned the term that Rand Paul said, okay, did you or did you not take Viruses and make it so they were more That was the more effective in infecting human beings and did you or did you not develop them on human lung cultures? Did you or did you not do that did you or do you did you not alter? Viruses to make them more infectious capable of infecting human beings Did you do that? Did you what kind of stuff did you do to viruses? Tell switch dead? You know, like don't call it gain a function research. Let's call it abracadabra what abracadabra? Did you do to the virus perfect term? Did someone do abracadabra? Did you give someone money to do abracadabra forget about you? Get a function. Let's just say this thing where you're manipulating viruses. Let's just call it abracadabra Did you did we do that did we spend money did we spend taxpayers money? Okay, 2017 a December 19 2017 the US National Institutes of Health announced that they would resume funding gain a function Experience right so this is during the Trump administration So the more torin had been in place in s October 2014 right so that's it so during the Obama administration in October of 2014 went let's stop doing this at the time the NIH has stated that the more torin In quotes will be effective until a robust and broad deliberate deliberative Process is completed that results in the adoption of a new US government gain of function research policy what? That seems like read that statement again will be effective until a robust and broad deliberative process is completed that results in the adoption of A new US government game of function research policy so that means they were planning on restarting it no matter what? That's the DNA H stated so they were like Into we meet again. It's basically what they said just hold on. We'll get the funding We're gonna make it up the crazy thing is like now that they've done this and now that this This virus has come you know out and infected the world They're still the question of where it came from and there's still people saying it came from the wet market Like they're just running article recently and I was like, okay, who believes this and who thinks this is horseshit? Have you ever heard of the sparse? Pandemic simulation No, it's kind of like event 201 have you heard of 201? No, holy you've never heard of that to a one that have anything to do New Jersey and no Well, I don't know where is a John Hopkins located So this is a very interesting one. This is why this pandemic scenario. What is this? Center for health security dot org. This is a legitimate website Yes, okay, and this is a training exercise based on a fictional scenario. Here's the problem It basically tells you the game plan that went down and Before we get into this one we look up event, but no, no, no, no, we were here. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. I just want to set Let's not jump we were here. Okay. Hold on Hold on, but just let me just Establish this the centers sparse pandemic exercise narrative compromises comprises rather a futuristic scenario that illustrates Communication dilemmas concerning medical countermeasures that could plausibly emerge in the not so distant future It's purpose is to prompt users both individually and in discussion with others to imagine the dynamic and oftentimes conflicted circumstances in which communication around emergency MCM development distribution and uptake takes place. Well, that just makes sense because in chaos and any kind of an emergency It's very difficult to get information now, but okay, but all that's logical while engaged with a rigorous simulated health emergency scenario readers have the opportunity to mentally rehearse responses while also weighing the implications of their actions at the same time Readers have a chance to consider what potential measures implemented in today's environment might avert comparable communication dilemmas or Classes of dilemmas in the future. That makes sense that you would want to have something like that in place So where is it bad? So what what basically gets in is it's a It's if you follow it step by step exactly what happened. Let's see what the steps are You have to go through it now a real quick. I know you don't want to jump But if you get into this thing, no, we're not jumping. Well, we'll go to that. Okay, but for this So if they outlined it step by step Yeah, that if this is the plan they had in case of pandemic broken Well, of course they outlined it but there's also a notion that this is the game plan that they created to follow Okay, there's that there is that our dad the problem with that is it implies a grand conspiracy to release a virus into the world Right, I think much more likely the virus accidentally got into the world and then what they had to do was figure out a way to manage people Okay, and they did it by the same ways that they had devised to handle a pandemic if one was to break out I think it's way more likely that someone did some sloppy shit Especially when you find out that the laboratory where they think it might have emerged from yeah had safety violations in 2018 like they were it these people are not happy doing what they're doing like I'm sure they're getting forced into working with fucking viruses and there's probably some fucking You know, I mean you see the way they treat the Foxconn employees How are they treating the employees at the virus place are they tip top Magu? Is it like Galveston whether they're on the spaceships, right? They have like a 95 massive hand- And then there's a bunch of people that do not under any circumstance want to tie it to US funded research And when you read stories about oh definitely came from the wet market they don't have an animal host They don't they don't yeah, so if they don't patient, yeah, right? They don't have that so if they don't have that like they don't really know There's a lot of guessing and there are legitimate scientists to think it may have come from a wet market That's legitimate. What are by just don't know if they're correct? I think there's a lot of people that don't think so There's a lot of people that have examined the virus and think that it's been manipulated The problem is I'm too dumb to know. Yeah, I mean if you're too dumb. What does that make me Jesus Christ? But my whole thing is it here's my whole thing with everything it's your whole thing with everything I'm sure please yeah, tell your book that will be my next special It always just seems like this If it's just some random event that got our hand how come it always seems to fall the same way where the same people get The money and same and get all the power all the time because they're the people that already have the money and the power and they keep keep Expanding it. It's a natural human instinct. It's a natural human instinct when you're governing people to try to have as much control over them As possible because you can get shit done like that's why people are so angry at Trudeau With that truck a rile rally because it's a natural human instinct to try to demean those people and Did say that many of them are racist and massages? It was a crude way he did it like it was a really good. It was very clunky like if you're a leader You're a leader and this is the way you treat people with no evidence Right because you didn't have evidence that they were racist and massages and if how many of them there's hundreds of them That's why we're getting plays you do that right right right right but with no evidence You're not supposed to do that if you're a person that people were supposed to look to as leader You should be offering evidence why this group is problematic and Evidence with like real research and you know it for a fact and you can prove it in court if you want to say that You want to say hey Maybe you didn't know but there's a bunch of Nazi truckers head in our way and they really are Nazis We should know that too, right? But you we're never gonna believe you now So when when you say that these people are terrible people just because they're protesting against mandates It means you don't like protests. That's what means you don't want protests. You don't like pushing power That's a natural human instinct to try to stop Stop the people that are the dissenters. Stop the people that are questioning Stop the people that are opposing you stop them in their tracks by whatever means we can investigate them find out what they're doing Cut them off in the past You know you you have to have an ability to talk about stuff that you don't like and protests are a part of that We just have a different set of rules down here man We have the first amendment It's a totally different thing You know we have this ability to express ourselves. That's pretty rare in terms of like it really is Yeah, I mean other countries are pretty free but this place is really fucking free in terms of the most of the world and anyone who denies that look I'm not a fan of drone strikes and unnecessary wars and capitalist agendas that ruin environments I'm not a fan of any things. Let's just be real clear But when you look at it, you gotta look at the big picture. This is like the first time Over the last like couple of hundred years of people just generally got along Or when a boat shows up at your shore most of the time you don't think they're trying to kill you right It's only been a few hundred years or 400 years You know, I mean We all fucking Columbus read about what Columbus did read about what those people did. It's horrific They were monsters. They were barbarians. They killed babies. They cut people's arms off because they didn't bring back enough gold There's a there was a priest that traveled with them and wrote a He wrote like a journal and they got a hold of this journal. They're reading about this guy talking about what the Columbus's men did Unbelievable. It's scary There were like Sanction monsters You know, and that was most people back then man Most most those fucking marauders and explorers. They did horrible shit man Horrible shit You know, you read the Empire of summer moon and find out what the Comanches did to other Indians. Yeah. Oh my god horrible shit Man, they would capture people cut their arms and legs off and then while they were alive throw them on the fire Oh, it was and they would laugh and laugh and they would always fight to the death native American Their arms and legs off and then while they were alive throw them on the fire. Oh! And they would laugh and laugh and they would always fight to the death. Native Americans would fight to death because they didn't believe in captives. Like if you got captured, you're getting tortured and killed. Like you might as well fight now. They're not going to like put you in a prison, take care of you and try to fucking prisoner war and give you back when the war is over. Now you're getting murdered. Yeah. Slowly and agonizingly. When they did the women was off, they cut their noses off. Oh! One of the girls was in Empire the summer moon, she was kidnapped. And then when they returned, they returned to without her nose. And they freaked out, went back and killed a bunch of people and it's, they brought people to trial. It was terrifying times, man. Where just the ruthlessness of human nature was so awful. And obviously the things that the Europeans did to the Native Americans was awful too. But the most awful thing they did was give them smallpox, give them diseases. Yeah. That's what he kills. It wasn't even blankets, man. That's, that's apparently a myth too. They didn't really understand virology back then like that. They just gave it to them. They just gave it to them by being around them. That's what killed everybody in North America. Killed like 90% of the Native Americans. Like when we talk about like the genocide of North America and Indians, it's real, 100%. But it's also disease did it too. Disease killed most of them. That's probably why the fucking my impairments were left there. That's probably why when you go through the Amazon, when they do that lidar scan of the Amazon, they find these ancient pathways and structures that indicated grids were cities were, they probably all died off from fucking smallpox. It's wild shit. It is, man. And like the history of man is like who knows what the real timeline is. I think the timeline goes way back. I think it goes back tens of thousands of years before the younger dryest impact. That's what I think. 100%. I think it only makes sense when you see shit like the pyramids and you see some of the really ancient structures like go back like tepy. Like what 12,000 years ago they did this? Like who did this? And where these pyramids are located, lay lines, all that stuff. Just the amazing way they have it do North, South, East and West. It comes to this perfect peak. Like you can't make any fuckups when you're building a pyramid. And they have some that are fucked up. Some that are like kind of bent, jacked. But what Graham Hancock thinks is those are the ones where people were trying to imitate the older structures. Just everybody died off. They lost everybody. Like they got to a very high level of sophistication and then everybody died. It's almost like grizzly bears who move in the houses and miss you. Get into like this is my cave dog. Exactly. Dude, it's exactly like that. It's exactly like that. Yeah, I messed up a bit about it that we were the children of the idiots, don't work as a vegib. And everybody else died. I was, my joke was that the dumb people out fucked the smart people. But I think what it really probably was was some sort of cataclysmic event. I think it happened all over the world. And I only think this because of talking to Randall Carlson and all the physical evidence that he provides when they do the core samples and they find all that iridium at like 12,000 years ago. And there's another moment to it. I think like 10,000 years ago. I think we got fucking blasted with space rocks. I think it killed those people and then people had a rebuild. That's what I've ever heard the Brock saga. You were going to tell me about the 201 thing though. Okay. I mean, but it's into that what I was telling you before. That's okay. I just felt like we had to like if you want to get into the 201 and we can get into that. It was basically was 201. Basically to one is a lot like what the thing I was telling you where these people got together and they just basically role played out what happened if a giant pandemic came out and scenarios and it just totally matched up to what happened. Now the only thing tiny pushback I put is that you see like laws being passed for COVID before the pandemic actually happens within me. Like certain laws pass to give the government certain powers. And then literally talking about this. This pause is right here because I got a piece so bad. Yeah, let's play because I drank two giant liquid IVs after getting out of the song. All right, we'll be right back. You see that in LA, man. This is a drought though in Texas. This is unusual for Texas. Really? A lot here which is one of the things that I love. Fire is dying down. Okay. It says star flight has been contacted according to Austin Fire Department which says the fire is dying down. No evacuations have happened yet. Hold on, go back to that. It says low fuels, mulch and bushes fire dying down. Okay, fire is dying down. Dude, the craziest thing I do joke about but the craziest thing is that when in California the fires where like people like live stream driving through the murder fires. I know. And you're like, what are you doing? It's all for clicks and views. I know. It's like you're going to die stupid. And people do die like that. They died in not doing live streaming but died in their cars trapped in fires in Northern California. Oh, one big giant fire. A lot of people died from fires. I think there was a very high number of people that got stuck on this one road. Imagine, yeah, you're stuck in traffic and you watch the fire just evaporating the cars in front of you and you know, you can't go backwards and you can't go forwards and you're stuck with your family. That's one of the reasons why I had my land crews are made. If you got to get out. Yeah. I wanted to get in a apocalypse vehicle. Yeah, I'll respect that giant gas tank, giant gas tank that can drive over anything of car can drive over other than like one of them crazy jeeps that can back that can articulate. I'm a list you're going, bro. Just a just a whole group of people crossbows guns. I just think you should have something that can drive on a place where there's no road. Yeah, it's a good thing to have. I think that's huge. Yeah, because that when when shit went down out here, I have a 1995 land cruiser. And I don't know if you know about those, but the land cruisers are like some of the most dependable off road vehicles that have ever been made. And the 95s were the one of the last models, the 80 series. I have the FZJ 80. The oil is the price. It's dope. Icon built it for me. It's silver. It's sweet. It's beautiful. It's dope as fuck. Is this some Batman shit? It looks like a 1995 land cruiser. It's just got cool tires on it and great lights. But it's got flood lights so I could see all kinds of shit with it. But most importantly, these cars have solid axles front and rear. It's a real off road vehicle. So even though like most people that bought them used them for like mall crawling, like they were used in Afghanistan, they were used in a lot of like overseas military applications. They're fucking durable as shit. So a lot of those guys who came over like a jack car, they got who wrote the terminal list. The reason why if you watch that television show Chris Pratt's driving a land cruiser, he's driving a 60 series, 62 series, which is a dope model here. And he's got this like souped up one by the same company. It's icon one. But he'd something to get out. I think about that in LA all the time, dude. When shit's the fan everyone's trying to get out. Yeah. If you got a Corvette, you're not going over here. Yeah. Yeah. You got to have something to get out of here. I know it's your bike or something. Most of the time you're not going to need it. I know. I know. Most of the time, but so slowly to prepare like the things like that. But if you do, if you needed to drive over the ground, most people can't do it. But there's no, your car can't do it. And my car can only go some places. You can't go straight up a mountain. You can't go, there's, where there's no road. You're not going to go. But the difference between being able to, like when the snow hit out here, I was having a great fucking day. I was having that. I was having that layer. It was fucking, man. The thing just drives like so smooth over snow. It was like, oh, it's like my truck was like, we got this, dude. We got this. I think about like if shit's a fan in LA, how am I going to get my kids out? It's too big. There's too many people. I want to live right on the edge of LA. Yeah. That's when they're flood right to you then. Leave it to LA. I think we're going to go right to you. We got to be the mile, bro. And they got to leave, you got to live a couple miles outside of a place like, I mean, a couple of hours outside of a place like LA to be able to like have enough time to evacuate when the zombie apocalypse. Do you think about that with like Austin where you're going to go if you have to? I didn't think about that until COVID. I mean, I did think about that, but not really think about that until COVID. When COVID happened, I was like, what if this was way worse and what if the power grid went down and what if there was a solar flail that blacked out all communications and you know, what if there's an asteroid impact that takes out Chicago and blows our grid to pieces and there's a nuclear winter because of the fucking. I think about that all the time. That can happen, man. Yellowstone can blow. You know, there's a lot of things that could go wrong is the lab. The asteroid impact one is one of the most likely. It's happened before, man. It happens all the time. We are getting at least little tiny ones that are flying through atmosphere all the time. I think there's like an alarming number that enter into our atmosphere every day, but they're usually small. Like what is the number of meteorites that enter into our atmosphere? Let's just guess. I'm gonna say. I think it's like a hundred. Really? Yeah. What do you think? A thousand every day. Every day. Oh, every day. Every day. I mean, yeah, I'm 100. I'm low ball. I'm low ball and say in a hundred, but I think it's probably get thousands over like a year. I think maybe let's let's find out and the answer is more than a hundred. I think I'm super low ball. How many meteorites enter into our atmosphere? I've had it added together a bunch. So it added together meteoroids, micro meteoroids and other space debris. That's made 25 million enter every day. 25 million every day. Whoa. That's it. It's just a space. Book hockey. That's what that is. Oh, this is space 17. That should be the name of your next special space. Book hockey. You should do a bit on this and you should literally name it space. Oh, my God. Look at that one. estimated that probably 500 meteorites reached the surface of the earth each year. OK, but less than 10 are recovered. That's interesting. That is because most fall into the ocean, land and in remote areas of earth, land in places that are not easily accessible or just not seen to fall, they fall during the day. Interesting. Do you know that they find a lot of chunks from the moon meteorites that are apparently they know they're from the moon, they find them in Antarctica. The moon is really interesting. Really interesting because like it doesn't make sense. A lot of it. People think like the most. Why there how it works, what it represents. There are cultures that remember when the moon wasn't there. They're probably not right. OK, they think they're ancient, bro. Yeah, they're not right. They know how old the moon is. They know how old the moon is. That's one of them theories. It's silly to go that far to think there's cultures that knew when there was no moon. No, they don't. They did. Do you know what the moon? They did. It stabilizes a lot of things about the moon is what is it? One quarter-sized the earth, isn't it? It's an energy cloud, I think. It's one sixth earth gravity. What is it? One quarter-sized earth? How big is the moon? I think it's less than that. I think the moon's interesting, bro. It's less than a quarter-sized. I think it's an energy collector. And Pac-Man is about the moon. Less than a third, the width of earth. Oh, that's a lot bigger than I thought. That's a third. I'm... I... A third, the width of earth, really? It gives back a lot of different answers for the way that you say how big is the moon? So the prevailing theory, I believe, is that the moon was formed when earth was hit by another planet. A radius of 1,080 miles, the moon is less than a third of the width of earth. If earth is the size of a nickel, the moon would be about as big as a coffee bean. The moon is an average of 238,855 miles away. Earth is four times bigger than the moon. Moon is more than one quarter, 27% the size of the earth. Wow, so it's more than 25%. A much larger ratio than any other planets and their moons. So what they think is that earth... They have, I think the theory is earth one and earth two. And that earth one was the original earth and this was like the early formation of earth. And then earth was hit by another planet. Because back then shit was wild. Yeah, it was wild out there. By the way, that's not that long ago. Earth is only like four point something billion years old, right? And the universe is like 10 billion, almost 10 billion more than that for what we know. So it's crazy. The universe is around for 10 billion. And can't even think about it in years. But what was that what happened the moment before the universe showed up? What was there? Right, what was there? Dude, these meat suits can't calculate that shit. Well, that in the idea of infinity is too much. Yeah, we can't. We can pretend that we can understand it, but it's not really. I think these are sumo meat suits, right? Kind of like when you go to a party and you're like doing those... When they're meant to limit our ability to understand certain thoughts for re... Are we on purpose? Yeah. Because we're here for karma. Well, isn't it... Oh, what? Yeah, dude. I believe we're here. This is a realm of karma and we're here to figure something out. Really? Yes, that's my honest belief. And these meat suits are purposely made to limit our capacity to figure stuff out so we don't just Superman this shit or the boys it. So we have to go through and we have to learn this thing. I think we live multiple lives. It gets into this thing about abundance versus scarcity. And I think we live multiple lives until we get it right. And I've heard that. That thought is an old thought of a lot of people believe that, including Alio Gracie. I think the grandfather of the Gracie clan. I do believe that. I believe that. You believe you live your life over and over again until you get it right. I think we're taught scarcity as children that there's only limited this and limited that and it puts fear into us. Instead of that, there's enough for everybody and the more you give away, the more it comes back to you. And like, we only live once, blah, blah, blah, that's pounded into us. So I think that we have multiple lives. That's interesting. You're like kind of almost like back engineering it. I try to look at it from like ancient times to today. What we know about ancient times versus today, like what is going on. And I think people had, I think if you look at the impact theory and the concept is that people were super advanced, they built all these giant structures and then something happened and they had a rebuild. It almost kind of makes sense because you have people that are super intelligent, but they're acting like fucking total cycles. Like people would if it was like a Mad Max scenario and then eventually evolved be less of a Mad Max scenario. And then it became just kings and monarchs and ruling over people and famine and disease and occasionally witches. But the reason why people are so fucking smart and why none of it makes sense is because we did have a certain level of sophistication at one point in time. We don't have anymore. And I think history is a giant lie. I think we're told a lot of history that we know isn't exactly what went down. I think there's a whole bunch of stuff when pieces start coming together. You're like, whoa. How do these conversations go with talent when you guys do? Oh, it's the best bro. It's conspiracy theory. It doesn't. It doesn't believe it or not. But you know, he's a great guy. I love the best. And I love him. The piece is and it's a fun show. I think he believed in anything. It would just be another conspiracy show. But the fact that I always used to love the old debate show William F. Buckley, where they show up in suits and verbally and not finding each other. And I always wanted to do that. And so when you know, Kalins, like let's do a show, I'm like, okay, let's do it. And that's the number one debate show between binary men. Okay. We just kind of go at each other. And it works. And I just enjoy it. He doesn't want, he believes in some stuff he doesn't want. But that's why the show's great. And I enjoy it. I love hidden history. I kind of started getting into it when this author Matt Lacroix came on my podcast. He told me about all the pyramids and how like all the pyramids around the world have such similar architecture and design and how they're on all these lay lines. Then I had this woman who kind of helped change my life. Her name's Vangal. She's a Buddhist author. She was saying the same thing, but in a spiritual way. And I go, wow, the man, we got science over here saying this and then spirituality saying this. Maybe there's something to it. And it's just about all kind of like the Anunnaki and stuff like that. Whether you want to get into that. But I believe we have a long, long history of that we've been lied to about how really special we are. But would have been, have we been lied to or are we all trying to figure it all out? This is the problem that I have with a lot of conspiracy theorists is that they want to think that someone in every, every facet of life, someone has it completely under control and knows exactly what it is and why we're here. What's wrong with that is that everybody started off as a baby. Everybody that's alive today started off as a baby. And they started off as a baby fairly recently. Yeah. So I don't think they know. I don't think it's possible. I think you'd have to be alive back then to really know what the fuck is up. And even if you believe, even if you 100% believe you don't know for sure, even if you believe in some wacky skull and cross bones, fucking scroll that they pull out where they tell you how the earth was formed. Yeah. At the Anunnaki coming you got to be prepared. You got to suck a dick with a Polaroid because we have to have evidence on you. What do you mean it's not working? Yeah. I think we can do this as you got to suck a dick on. You know, it's like, even if you believe all that, I think you don't know. And I think that's the reality of being a person. I don't think there's any all knowing all wise person that's evenly running the world through strings like like a puppeteer. I think it's more likely a bunch of people that have a masked, mass well and power and they're trying to maintain that in any way shape possible. And that doesn't leave a lot of time for exploring the origins of mankind and then conspiring to keep it from the plebs. I agree with a lot of that. Okay. The only pushback I have is when we take a look at like, let's say how Canada treated the indigenous people, right? So they went in there and they kind of made these deals with people. And then what they did is they shipped their children off to schools away from the adults and the elders and that made a disconnect. Well, they did that here too. Yeah. And it makes a disconnect from your heritage. Yes. And I think that's a big, big issue with the black community that was done to them. They never really were told how powerful they truly are. And like, we mistake this thing, culture for heritage and heritage isn't, your culture is not heritage. Your heritage is much different. And your heritage is your lineage through you, your people, through time. And that allows you to get a running start in life. Right. And they raised their heritage. Yeah. So that's what they did into the Native Americans too. And they made black community as well. That is a common theme in cultures when they take over another culture, right? They make them assimilate to their laws and their gods and their way of living. Yeah. The Native Americans, one of the things is most demoralizing for the men was they cut all their hair off. You know, they would shave their heads. They're giving buzz cuts. And I was reading this book. One of, I think it's black elk speaks. I think it's that one about this guy going through that whole system and being alive during the time when the Native Americans rum the planes. And being right there when they all got taken down destroyed and being alive when like sitting bull, like that whole little big horn thing went down. They killed custard and all those Americans fucked up. And they came in, there was a giant super camp of Native Americans that have come together and union like for the first time ever and they slaughtered them. This guy was alive when all that happened. And then went on to be captured by the system and have to live on a reservation and the whole deal. And these people that tell these stories about those times, it's, I mean, it's no wonder why so many Native Americans are alcoholics and stuck on these reservations. These in horrible poverty. Like the whole thing was atrocious. It's like, it's a terrible moment in history when you, you think that that is how history was done over and over and over again. This is like what we're dealing with with today with everybody being woke and super sensitive and over crazy is still way better to live in, you know, as a plane's Indian in the 1800s and having all this shit happen to you. Like all the things that are happening in society, even if they're questionable and even if they're problematic, at least for most people are moving in a better direction. Most people, I mean, even people that want to be woke, why do they want to be woke? What does that mean? Well, they want to be the most sensitive, the most inclusive, the most kind. So like their intentions are probably good. And then they get crazy with it. And then some people are like hyper aggressive with it. Like, you know, the few percentage on each side, whether it's the right-wing people that want to take down the capital or the left-wing people that want to like the capital building on fire because, you know, you're not supporting trans women's rights to babies, bathroom and Kmart, like, you know, whatever the heck, Dan saying for gay Ukrainians get pregnant. Yeah. You craning men. That's a portion. Yeah. It's like we're moving in a good direction. It's I don't really believe that there's a mastermind behind it all. I think there's people that capitalize on weakness and vulnerability. And during COVID, obviously we were very vulnerable and the economy became very weak. And those are very dangerous scenarios for people that are used to capitalizing on moments when society is weak and divided in moments of economic strife, moments when they can control markets and control industries and figure out how to profit the most and how to eliminate certain competitors. You know, it's all scary shit, man, because economics does play a factor in how they make decisions that can affect the vast majority of us and the people that are profiting off of these decisions. It's a freaking relatively small amount of people. Small group of people, man. Like here's a question. Who owns the fucking oil in the ocean? And why do you get it? Who gets it? Who gets the pump? Isn't that the world stuff? Yeah. Like how do you own that? You don't own that part of land. Like you can't own the ocean, right? The ocean is international waters, right? I get, how many yards from the shore are they allowed to pump and say like, this is California's oil. Like, like it would point out to the side. No, it's not. At the same time, I mean, I'm sure there's probably a law, but at what point in time they decide that's someone can own that. Because if you're going to sell oil that you got out of the ocean, like first of all, you should give us a piece because sometimes you guys fuck up and it ruins the beach. Why don't even know why when they fuck up, we got paid for it. It's like going to a restaurant and they're like, hey, the cook fucked up your chicken. It's going to be another five bucks. You're like, what? Oil companies post record earnings, a sky high bracket. Yeah, they're posting record earnings while the fucking get, that's weird that they would charge a lot for gas and make a lot of money. Yeah, it's crazy. Wow. What business models that? The best one. $1,000 profit for BP as prices soared during the rush you can create war. Wow. The world's ablaze and the oil industry just posted record profits. Is it us or them? I was like, hey, is that a dick in my ass or a finger? I just want to know what is happening. It's not. Have you started the fucking thing? I also don't think there's a limited supply of oil. I think it replenishes itself and you make it a set. You make it seem like, oh, dude, we might run out. We might run out. We got to jack it up a little bit. How long? It doesn't take a long fucking time to replenish. I mean, it might. Yeah. I think the idea is that it replenishes itself. But the idea is that the supply might outstrip the demand. I don't think anybody's questioning whether or not the world will make more oil. I think the question is how much does it make? How long does it take to make enough that we need to drive fucking one of them badass Mustangs? Yeah. Well, it is not why they called it fossil fuel forever because it was like the notion that it was from dead dinosaurs, which was hilarious. I think it was, I think that's a misnomer. I think they think it's more dead plant material. I think it's decaying plant material. If I remember correctly, see if that's the case. I don't think there's enough dinosaurs. I think that was just like a silly way of thinking about it. I don't think they think. I think it's a bunch of bile or organic matter. A natural fuel such as coal or gas formed in geological past from the rem remains of living organisms. But what kind of organisms is it mostly? Fossil fuel, just Google fossil fuel is mostly plants. Plants and animals. And animals. Dead plants and animals that is extracted in bird. Dead dinosaurs. I would imagine there's way more animals than plants. Yeah. What is the process? I don't remember where I read that. But you remember it was like, peak oil is going to come. We're all in trouble. You're like, but that's why. You're losing. Hmm. Fuck, I was going to tell you something. I forgot it. I can put some decomposing plants and animals. God damn it. What was I going to tell you? Fuck. I had it was a good one too. I'll probably remember it in a moment. I think it's interesting, dude. I think I don't know if it's one. I think there's a lot of group of people. But I think there is a push to not allow us to know how special we are. And that really is a big part of what's everything going on. And I think they really are doing that on purpose. Or do you think they're not thinking about that? I think they're just thinking about trying to make a lot of money. Again, I think it's a spiritual war. And it's being done purposefully. I could be wrong. I've been wrong about the first 48 years of my life. So I can. It's an interesting theory. We should explore it. You don't have to have anything. I mean, I get it. You could be wrong. Would you have to find a way you could use to it after a while? I just, like when you study, like there's this book called Murder by Injection. And it was talking about how the Rockefellers and what they did to them, the healthcare industry and what the Rockefellers did. Yeah. Well, they basically pumped all this money into the American Medical Association, which basically became this kind of like, became the standard for the government's policies on health. But in reality, it was more like just an organized crime family. What? Dude, study this stuff. Like, dude, the weirdest thing is, is they wage war on the chiropractic community. Oh, but that's probably a good thing. Let's, let's go to this first murder by injection, the story of a medical, the medical conspiracy against America, paperback, well, 391 ratings and five stars. The present work, result of some 40 years of investigative research is a logical progression from my previous books, the expose of international control of monetary issues and banking practices in the United States, a later work revealing that the secret network of organizations through which these alien forces wield political power. The secret committees, foundations and political parties through which their hidden plans are implemented. And now the most vital issue of all, the manner in which these depredations affect the and political parties through which their hidden plans are implemented. And now the most vital issue of all, the manner in which these depredations affect the daily lives and health of American citizens, despite the great power of the hidden rulers. I've felt oh boy, this guy. This is a run on sentence from a guy with an Adderall son. This guy's on the good shit. He's on that. I need to write a book right now. This is crazy. This is great. You get into that. And then the other book is I'm sure you know about tragedy and hope. But let's explore this. So what do you think happened with the medical community? Who basically the Rockefellers created the basically funded the AMA to basically almost make it so it was impossible unless you played ball with them to get anything and get any funding going to be seen as legitimate and they controlled it through that. And they ran out any holistic medicine or anything like that. That wasn't involving a pill without pharmaceutical companies or anything like that. Now I'm going to be honest with you. I'm not I'm not explaining it as well as it should be. But that's a good thing. I don't be hard on yourself. I'm doing an amazing job as you be in front of Yale right now. The only way I'm going to be a Yale is if I'm a custodian. So I mean, but basically, but they basically took over everything to find. Have with us a very what is that Jamie? You got something? That guy could be a Yale. He's not a super important. He's been very important. But okay. He basically, basically, I have no way would wait up knowing it. They basically took over and became the governing body of how the healthcare and medical communities operated. But doesn't somebody have to be the governing body? Don't they have to make sure that people don't get sold snake oil and fake medicine, which is really great. I've done that throughout history, right? 100%, but then that could easily be manipulate to go the other way so that you are buying snake oil. When you are buying these things that maybe aren't the most healthiest for you. When there's healthy, healthy options out there that maybe someone can't make as much money off of. There's certainly always here. Okay, go ahead. Please. This is the author of the book. I believe in this book. I believe in this book. Oh, here we go with the anti seven. I'm just saying this this is what the Wikipedia says he is. He's an American white supremacist, anti-Semitic conspiracy theorist, propagandist Holocaust Oh, God. Holocaust is our writer. This is a disciple of the poet Ezra Pound. I don't know who that is. But hold on, in which he alleges that several high profile bankers had conspired to write the federal reserve act for their own nefarious purposes and then included Congress to and then what? No, not an act enacted into law. The Southern Poverty Law Center subscribed them as a one man organization of hate. The problem is the Southern Poverty Law Center didn't they have a similar designation for Sam Harris? Like it wasn't there like an issue where they called him an anti. They called them something. Something I don't want to put words in. Well, you know, there's like a real issue with like multiple people being accused of horrific offenses by them that they've been sued. They sued people or people sued them rather. Well, if you look at ESG, right, which is environmental social governance, that is basically a new branding of what they call cultural Marxism. And if you look up culture and Marxism, it would say it's anti-Semitic. So here, hold on a second. This guy wrote that he espoused anti-Semitic views and expressed the belief that America owed a debt to Hitler. Jesus. Yeah, you might want to look at these guys. That doesn't change. Sam, it does change. It changes a lot. It changes the only source that you have for this wacky fucking theory. I mean, there's other books. I just haven't read them. Why is it so exciting for you to think that's true? That that that that that's the case. Instead of that people are messy and that the American Medical Association was trying to figure out a way to govern and figure out what's what's real what's not real and have high standards in terms of what medications accept and what physicians accept. And then along the way, money compromises that. Right. And then people start denying the use of certain medications because they're not profitable and pushing and propagandizing towards other medications. Right. And maybe not even also being deceptive and inaccurate about test results because they want to achieve a desired result that will be more profitable. Now that's been proven to be true. Right. That's been proven to be true with via. By who like the CDC, right? And I mean, this is like a court w w h o. And all that that's simply the same thing I'm saying is just a modern day version of it whether it's not CDC or the AMA sword of. But what I'm saying is that the roots of it were not this nefarious plot to imprison Americans. The roots of it were most likely that they were trying to figure out what is legitimate medicine and what is not legitimate medicine and that along the way, then nefarious people can compromise the system that's already in place for profit if they have got you some sort of a power system that allows them to dictate who gets funded and who doesn't. That is provable. Okay. That's real stuff. I totally agree with that. But I think that could be a plot. Well, broken clock could be right twice. I mean, like somebody could say some stupid shit or it might be he's out of his fucking mind. It can be. But I think there's a history that he just helps her. And I could be wrong. And I'll take an L on that. Why do you believe that there's a history of them manipulating stuff? And because why do I believe that? Because you could do research into it and see what they're doing. I mean, if we just take a look at what's going on right now, right now, I think goes back to what we were talking about before that certain people do get compromised by thoughts of profit. And whether it's people that are the head of pharmaceutical companies that are pushing some new medication that's going to be very, very profitable or, you know, whether it's the people that decide to fund certain research and not fund other research or rig studies or also like throw out bad studies. The things that's not transparent, you know, if they do like 10 studies and they can do 10 and throw out eight and find two of them that show a good result. And they could say we got a good result. And the way they can describe these results is like really sneaky. And this is what they get busted for. And this is why we found out that they lied about opiates being addictive when they were pushing Oxycontin and Oxycodone and all that shit. I mean, there's like, there's a direct paper trail and shows they were deceptive, you know, and this is what they've done. Like big corporations have done this forever. Have you seen what is it called? Dope? Is that what? Dope sick. Dope sick. You haven't seen it. You haven't seen it. I haven't even seen it sick. I have to watch it. It is the exact playbook that they ran. Well, that's about the opiates. Right. But yeah, that's real. But so that's my whole opinion. Like maybe that guy's an idiot and I hate anybody who is like, this group is that doing this. I don't think it's like a born in group or anything like that. But I do believe people can aspire. I think they do too. This is where you and I share. But I'm trying to look at it like objectively. Right. And the problem with conspiracies and conspiracy theories is their fucking fun. Yeah, I love them. Yeah. I love Bigfoot and UFOs and ghosts and Hitler. I love here and all this crazy shit. Like Hitler was conspiring with demons and what called magic bro. I mean, also like that maybe Hitler lived and moved to Argentina. How about that? You don't play that one? Oh, I don't know. Tim Kennedy was the one who filled being on that. And everybody goes, that's crazy. Do you folks know that there is a giant thriving German community in Argentina? And some of them have fucking like this is grandpappy. Like it's an SS soldier wearing his fucking uniform wall of their house like Tim Kennedy described going to these places and seeing these people. They have October fest down there. Have you ever seen that? Yeah. Bro, this is a fact. Okay. I got a bunch of watches escape Nazi Germany and went to South America. Right? I mean, I think that's he's lost the war. I think Germany lost the war. This is October fest in Argentina. How nuts is that? That is nuts. There's that many Germans down there. Look at these people. They got the leader hos and they got the old school dress and the bagpipes and shit. That's wild. That is secret German village in the middle of Argentina. Like bro. Now, now Google this did Nazis escape Germany and move to Argentina. That whole, you know, you got to remember also 1947, the way you get information is books and newspapers. That's it, you know, in Argentina, in Argentina, haven for future the fugitive Nazis. In Argentine haven for fugitive Nazis, April means chocolate eggs and Hitler parties. 20 years after the capture of Eric, how do you say his name? Prebeque in some bar. Bar de losche are trying to come to terms with the city's legacy of silence. How do you you say that word? Bar de losche. Some in Bar de losche. So most likely that's what that is. Do you think that's crazy? Have you ever seen? Go back up to the top. Well, no, no, scroll to the first paragraph. What is this thing here? A little boy, Hans Schulz, the blue-eyed son of a Hitler youth member would walk uphill half a block each afternoon from the German school to his white stucco house in the Argentine ski resort of Bar de losche steps from an icy lake tug by Andean peaks. Inside he'd often find his dad, the president of the town's German Argentine and culture association sitting with his vice president and close friend and our store well respected delicatess and owner name, Eric Prebeque. This is wild shit man. Yeah, scroll down a little further. Does it say anything else is notable? Yeah, it's very not very old on second. Here we go. Last October, Prebeque died in Rome where he spent his final years under house arrest serving a life sentence for his role in carrying out the massacre of 335 civilians at the R.D.A.T. in caves in 1944 when he was a captain in the Nazi SS. But from 1946 when he was smuggled to Argentina until 1994 when the TV journalist Sam Donaldson confronted him on a barre loge. I hope I'm not fucking up that word. Barre loce street Prebeque lived a comfortable if fabricated life in this Bavarian-style city at the bottom of the world. Holy shit dude. When I looked into the operation paper clip, they just there was a, they didn't all come to America. Someone to Russia, someone else, they went elsewhere. Have you ever looked in a Huntsville Alabama? That's wild though. That's wild. No, I haven't looked in Huntsville. What's Huntsville? Alabama. What? Dude, they have. I know. I know. I know where you're going with that. Yeah. Tell me. Dude, they have an arena named after a Nazi. Vombron. Like, and then in a hot. Oh, you mean, Vernevombron? Yeah. That's an interesting one, right? That's a really interesting one. Wherever on bronze who was the, um, can I do Joe for you real quick? Yeah. Okay. Please. A Nazi, a Scientologist. No, a Nazi, a Nazi, a Scientologist, a pedophile and a, um, I'm not, you must say, I'm a Satanist. I'm trying to get okay. Take a, a Nazi, a Satanist, a pedophile and a Scientologist walk into a bar. What do they do? What do they do? Invent NASA. The horrible story of NASA is that NASA was, uh, constructed with people from operation paper clip, which was Nazi scientists, like not just people that were working under Nazi Germany, but people actively practiced as Nazis. The Simon Wiesenthal Center, Google this, make sure it's true because I keep saying it at one point in time. The Simon Wiesenthal Center, I believe, said that if Warner Vombron was alive today, they would prosecute him for crimes against humanity because people claimed that he'd hung the five slowest Jews in front of his rocket factory in Berlin. That's, they would encourage people to work faster. Oh my God. Now that part, I don't know if it's true. So we should probably find that out or edit it out. But I've said it so many times. I know I read it. I know I read it. And I know why, well, you're not pushing books by anti smack. So you look good on this. I know I watched a documentary where a guy who is a, um, a concentration camp survivor remembered seeing Warner Vombron at the, uh, at the camps or at the, um, at the rocket factory. But that's a, that's a fact that they use Jews as slave labor. It's a fact. Right. Yeah. It's tragic. And it's, it's scary shit that they brought those people over and they knew there were Nazis. And they also had those, um, dueling scars in their face. This is the Wiesenthal Center's, what does it say article about the US and Nazis? Right. So this was interesting. United States record on this issue can basically be divided into four periods during the first which lasted from the end of the war in 1945 until approximately 1948, the US government played a major role in the prosecution of senior Nazi officials at the Nuremberg trials and of other criminals in additional proceedings. Some of which were held in former concentration camps during the second period from 1948 until approximately 1953, the exact opposite happened with the Cold War already underway. The US lost interest in actively pursuing Nazi war criminals preferring to build up West Germany as a bullwark against communism and therefore adopting a far more lenient attitude towards former Nazis, some of whom were enlisted as intelligence sources or rocket scientists. Their criminal Nazi past ignored. Equally appalling was the fact that during these years US immigration authorities allowed entry into the United States as refuge to thousands of the worst of Hitler's, East European henchmen. That's true. That's scary shit, dude. The narrow scroll scroll scroll up. Look at this. Holocaust crimes however cannot be prosecuted in the United States as they had not been committed as they had been committed overseas and their victims were not Americans at the time of the crimes are committed. So instead Nazi criminals were prosecuted for immigration and naturalization violations. That is for concealing their wartime past. Although it's appeared to be a cop out of sorts when announced the decision yielded relatively successful results, the good news was that it was relatively easy to win such cases compared to war crimes prosecutions. The downside was that the punishments, denaturalization and deportation were often grotesquely in commensurate with the crimes. And what is the same thing about Werner von Braun? I didn't think it was specifically about him. But but school to Werner von Braun was a Nazi. Let's see that. Well, I mean, they would talk about for like the longest time up until almost the 80s or early 90s like in Huntsville, you weren't allowed to talk about how it was a Nazi. You'd have to be because everyone was like convincing themselves like he didn't want to do it and stuff like that. Think about those times man. Think about 47 where, you know, when they were doing all this or 48 when they're bringing all these guys over here, how would anybody find out? How would anybody find out that the head of NASA was a fucking Nazi? His Nazi record was not widely known until after his death. Right. Yeah. Right. Oh, we did not know what he did. We had no idea. Yeah. Huntsville, Alabama, Werner von Braun received an unpleasant surprise, a West German court asked him to testify in the trial of three former SS men from the Mitt Deltball Dora concentration camp, which had supplied slave labor for the production of the V2 ballistic missile. von Braun had been the technical director of that project and visited the associated Mittel work factory a dozen times. Now the head of the center that managed the gigantic Saturn five moon rocket. He was afraid the attendant publicity would damage his reputation and that of NASA. I tried to beg off, but at the end spoke to the judge and the court at the West German consulate in New Orleans on February 7th, 1969. He denied any personal responsibility and put as much distance as he could between his say that word, pien, muy n' raucet development center and the middle work complex. Yeah, man. It's crazy. That's wild shit. Crazy. The military did the same with von Braun's SS officer rank and Nazi records of more than a hundred associates who had come to the US with him. Wow, Jesus Christ. But the, I guess they felt like we were in the cold war with Russia and we have two choices either lose the war because the Russians get the Nazis or we get the Nazis. Like that's the shit that you have to do. And it sounds horrible. It is horrible, but so is war and so is losing a nuclear war to the Russians. Right? And if these motherfuckers are making weapons and fucking superior jet engines and all kinds of crazy shit that Germans were doing and making rockets, they were very advanced with rocketry. Those crazy motherfuckers, they had a grab them. That's what sick with sick is it was probably the thing to do because if the Russians got all of them, you imagine if the Russians got all the Nazis. Come on over here, we got you. We got you, bro. What do you want to want to pass? Yeah, you got a problem. Set them up. You want some hot Russian ladies? Keep company with you while you're designing the next fucking apocalypse weapon. It's going to destroy everything. Let's get all the greatest fucking scientists that you got. Have you ever heard of Tataria? Tataria. You've never heard of Tataria? I just like my life. Sam is always, he's always, I don't like it too weird. I guess we already did, but to talk to a person. There's this belief that there's been a hidden empire wiped from our history books and it's Tataria. When was it around? It was a shipping empire that was around up until maybe the 1800s. What? Yeah. And that where was this wiped out of history books? And I love the I love that sounds exciting. Where did they wipe it out of? Where was it supposedly? How did Russia? It was Russia. Yeah. It was how to Russia and it was like very advanced. And have you looked into this? Yeah, of course. As much as you looked into that guy being a Nazi? Well, I didn't look at it. I read his book. I did. Okay. Here it is. Tataria. Tataria. Look up to Tataria. Tataria. Tataria. Well, before we get into that, have you ever looked into like, wait a minute, they seem to say it's real. No, it was a real place. Sam. Yeah. Someone said like a UFC fighter said he was from Tataria. Maybe it was hard fucking people in that part of it. Let's see what it says. What is Tataria about? Is there an article that doesn't look like the problems with the PDFs? My eyes suck. I can't read it. I can't read it. I can't go with the conspiracy theory. Sure. Okay. That's the grand to talk about. Us land or civilization originated in Russia with aspects first appearing in Anatoly, for Minko's new chronology and then popularized in the racial history of Nikolai, La Vashov, Russian pseudoscience known for its nationalism. Tataria presented as the real name for Russia, which was maliciously ignored in the West, but it also says it's a deep notion. But it's basically that there is a shipping empire that went all over the world. Imagine if you're on the beach and the Maldives, you see some hardass looking Russian ganks to what Tataria tattooed on his back. Yeah. Oh, I got to get out of here. But they're also known to be giant, Stute. This is the great pyramid in the White House. The remnants of Tataria and buildings. Dude, that's the crazy thing in the White House. Well, as long as it's the White House, too. Now I believe. What's up, Penn Station? What the fucking time? The original Penn Station in New York. Have you ever led into the conspiracies involving the world fair of the like to Chicago World Fair? And how like so they basically said they built this world fair in like two years. And if you ask actual architects, they would go just the design would take 15 years and the build it would take forever. And they said that they built in two years and then knocked it all down. Bay gone. What would it look like? It's like the conspiracies of the world fair. It looks like the Vatican. So this is what they built and then they knocked it all down. They said they built all this in two years. Whoa, they built that in two years? That's what they said. And then they knocked it all down. What? Okay, we're gonna have to dive into this one. Because did they really knock it all down? Yeah. Why would they do that? This is in Chicago? Yeah. So they built all this and then they demolished it. Yeah. What remains of the 1893 Chicago World Fair today? So why did they do that? Are you asking me? Yeah. Because they're racing history. Why would they want to raise something they built? That's the whole different thing. I feel like I'm providing a much needed service with your thought process and these things. Thank you. I think someone needs to go wait. Hold on. Yeah. The interesting thing about this World Fair, I think this was the Tesla Edison one where they were about to like AC DC power was a really big thing. Right. Look at that. They said they built that in two years. All the structures, the sculptures and everything. How many people? Did they build all those buildings? That's what they're saying. So why did, why would they knock those down? They knock those down? Are those like sets like when you go to like Universal Studios and there's no building behind it? Not that I know of, man. Oh my god. Why don't you Google why they demolished? I was hoping it would be in this thing. Let's just just googled that. Let's Google just if you could indulge me, please Google why did they demolish the Chicago World Fair? What do you think? What do you think it's going to say? I tell you some propaganda by them, right? It's the it's the it will raise history, bro. But why would they want to find something that we know about? But if we know that they did that, why would you? Because the tatarians had very advanced technology like giant organs that could heal you through sound. Have you ever heard of that organs like musical organs like or like Phantom the opera? It's really you through sound through sound. Free energy. That's a big part of it. Free energy. Yeah. What do you mean by free energy? That they could harness energy. Oh like Tesla type. Yeah. Harness electricity through the air. Yep. Yep. You know, they said that if he had done that, if Tesla had done that, it probably would have fucked the whole computer revolution for a good or bad. For bad. It wouldn't have worked. All the electricity in the air be frying all devices. But then I would think I wouldn't be able to make. Also, there was a fire. Giant fire. Yeah. Oh, yeah, convenient. Fire lift up a large part of the rent. Well, let's say they're experimenting with electricity for the first time and it causes a massive fire. What a shocker. Yeah. Well, don't you think maybe they didn't know what the fuck they were doing, Sam? For the for three hours, the flames raged along the past end of the court of honor until nothing was left, but Charles charred timbers and black and plaster. A shower of sparks fell upon the ice in the lagoon until it looked like a sea of fire. They fell upon the adjacent buildings threatening them with destruction. It was a magnificent spectacle that drew ceaseless, examined exclamations of wonder and awe from the spectators that crowded the grounds and the vicinity of the fire. It was the greatest pyrotechnic display of the fair. Intrifying fire. But over on Sam, but it's him a caught fall. But the destruction did not end with the burning of these buildings. Fire brands were carried to the roof of the manufacturers building and the promenade around the the crown of that enormous structure was soon on fire. The wind was strong and the flame soon reached the immense wooden ventilators under the eaves. They were soon burning fiercely. The story under the roof was in a blaze. It sounded like a horrible fire, Sam. Yeah. But why would you you think someone would start this on purpose to destroy it? But would you think that it would be possible that the winds were really strong and an actual accidental fire that happens all the time broke out and it destroyed those buildings? Because they were experimenting with electricity for like what caused the fires? Do they know what caused the fires? Did they have like arson inspectors back then? It's very interesting, too, because you know, you go through a lot of these big cities and you kind of see this weird kind of ancient architecture. And then it's surrounded by modern architecture. And it just the two don't match at all. One is like very advanced. Like stuff we don't see anymore. And now this new stuff and it's just like it's really mind-blowing. And you see a lot of this stuff, especially when you go to the smaller cities. Like they went around and got rid of a lot of this stuff in the bigger cities. And they didn't bother to deal with the smaller cities. Listen, it's the Panama Pacific International Exposition proved so popular and profitable that long before its closing proposals were made to save, oh, long before its closing proposals were being made to save all or part of it. Architect Willis Polk in particular lobbied heavily for the preservation of the Palace of Fine Arts, the Palace of Horticulture, North and South and North Gardens and the Avenue of Palms. Lewis Christian, Moll Gart told the Commonwealth Club that when the Exposition buildings are torn down, then we'll be have destroyed one of the greatest architectural units, which has ever been created in the history of the world. The influential club like many others passed a resolution pleading for the preservation of as much of the fair as possible. Speckative forces proved far stronger than the dream, however, and the arches and towers were brought down in clouds of colored plaster, revealing their fall, the underlying, lathe framework, the South gardens were scrapped clean of paintings, fountains and sculpture, and small buildings removed to the waterfront and barged throughout the Bay Area. The North Gardens, Marina Gray, Marina Green rather, and Yacht Harbor remained a gift of the Exposition along with the column of progress with its adventurous bowmen at the end of South Street until the 1920s. It succumbed to automotive collisions and was pulled down. Huh, this was the 1915 World Fair in San Francisco, a similar thing happened. Would you do me a favor and hold on, go back to that and Google the adventurous bowmen at the end of South Street? What is that? So that was the last thing that remained? What did that look like? See if you like images. So there it is. That's you. So is the statue. And so too many people hit the guy with the bow and arrow, and that was the last thing remaining. Now, it sounds fucked that they would tear that stuff down, but you know, I'm open to the idea that some idiot owned the land or someone wanted to do something else with it, and they decided to destroy it and build new shit there. You don't think so? Like after a fire, you think that they would have decided to preserve it. Would it preserving it would cost a shitload of money for two separate events? Two separate events. The fires were in Chicago at this pre-19th of order. What is that? This is 20 years later in the San Francisco World Fair. That was what you were showing me right there. Oh, I thought. Defense to separate about the fires were in Chicago at that this pre-19 Oh, what is that? This is 20 years later in the San Francisco World Fair that was what you were showing me right there Oh, I thought it was the same world fair. So there's two world fairs that caught fire. No, no one of them They just destroyed this one. Yeah, this one says they destroyed it for no reason. I don't that's where I don't we didn't get there Yeah, so you think they did it because they want to hide history. Yeah, you don't even hide Is it possible? Tell me what you think of that? Which one is this? That's the one that's got caffeine That's the ignite. Yeah, dude. That's 150 milligrams of clean caffeine Spicy pineapple. It's good. That's my shit son. I and I helped design that one. Yeah, I idea Okay, so this remains that's pretty dope See here's a dome building like you don't see anymore. It's like this weird architecture That's true. Isn't surrounded by anything around it and it's and it's like so every what he means So this gets in it this gets into something you talk about like mud floods too Like yeah, but this stuff is like happened during modern history like they know about this like they know who built it Pretty amazing That's insane nine go from okay, it's still there. So look at that scroll back down there says nine amazing examples of World world's fair architecture still stand today and look how dope that looks go back that picture again But they knocked down a lot. I'm sure they did, but that's because people are assholes Yeah, I don't think there's a grand conspiracy to knock. I mean I could be wrong But I'm looking at it. I'll take as a win take it as well Take that W saying the world is very interesting brother and Why would they try to hide their their ability to create awesome structures? Because I if you're asking me Joe everything is about Try not to let us know how special we really are keep going back to that But even I don't know what you know that we are powerful beings and the way they do that is by knocking down that by by not letting us know our history by by rewriting history by by What who would do that low frequency shit? Well, I think we flood ourselves with low frequency Right, I think that's a problem that we gravitate towards no low frequency shit and low frequency shit becomes profitable Right It was just becomes like before the internet like we only had a few kinds of Few different kind of ways to get stuff right and And the and these people controlled all that whether it was like just think about all the stuff that people were able to get away with before the internet Was here and we could like people do their own research and stuff like that and the control picture like if you eat up Dude, that's a baby you look at that you look at the Vatican that I don't know. It's like what is that? I want to do that again on an edible Oh my god, oh my god the stuff you must have seen in felt and Yeah, because the edible is a good thing to do because it lasts a long time You know, that's a good you just want to be joint you're gonna be normal in 20 minutes Yeah, I want that you want to be you want to be riding that cannabis wave for a while and soaking in the history of that place And what did you think while you were there? It's wild. It's so much art. It's fucking insane Do you want to go where did you get all this? How is this all yours? Don't you like in that library just like let me see what's in there dude. What do they have? What is in there? Did you ever read the sacred mushroom in the cross? No, I have you need to read that I will It's a great book about this guy John Marco Allegro who decipher the Dead Sea Scrolls He was on the on the committee like for 14 years worth of Dead Sea Scrolls and his conclusion was the entire Bible was all misunderstanding it was really about psychedelic mushrooms and fertility cults It's a wild book Supposedly the Catholic church bought it up, but it's it's in print again now. Oh Really? Yeah, I love that dangerous books. I got old copies of it. I got copies used copies of it from when it was first released I have two copies of it. Okay, fascinating book because if the guy was right Great way that the thing about it is that there's for sure in a lot of ancient Religious artwork. There's depictions of mushrooms For sure. Yeah, and for sure they thought that if they ate a mushroom in trip balls They probably thought they'd stumbled upon some gift from God some magic something something that Reaffirmed all of their beliefs in the world just like you know the people that thought rich which is were real They did the LSD bread and they fucking trip balls Those people probably when they were consuming mushrooms They probably thought that God had given them this fucking amazing gift to communicate with him And they had to hide that information in any way shape or form and so they didn't stories and they hid they hid the meanings in Allegories and in all these Difference this was John Marco Legro's belief and that he broke down the word Christ He traced it back to an ancient Sumerian word that meant a mushroom covered in God's semen Really and what they believed is that when it ranked you got to remember Infant mortality back then is very high are we talking spacial cocky right? Oh, yeah, it's basically cocky exactly But God's face we cocky but infant mortality back then was really high right so they and they wanted to make as many people as possible Otherwise I wouldn't be meaning people like these people were actively Practicing fertility rituals and they were trying to get pregnant and it was like a really important thing So they had rituals they would do to try to get pregnant and they also had this ancient use of psychedelic mushrooms So when it rained all of a sudden these mushrooms would appear like you know It's like when you go out your yard and it was raining and then you'll see mushrooms like they weren't there yesterday Well, they would go out and see these things and they would eat them and they would trip their fucking balls Yeah, and it made sense that they thought that God had given this like that God came upon the earth and that this mushroom That from would get allow you to talk to God and they would try to hide this shit from conquering armies So they hit it in stories. I believe all that and I also think that you know the Vatican has a real interesting role in like The interpretation of the Bible and what the Bible represents and how they try to make it like literal instead of like a spiritual thing and You know, I mean if you kind of take a look at like Saint Patty's Day, right? You ever studied st. Saint Patty's Day and what it really is it's like so it's like you know Saint Patty's Day is basically Saint Who was it a Patrick is sent into Ireland to Read the snakes that is it right? But the truth is like I don't think there's snakes in Ireland and that what they're actually talking about are pagans and It's actually his story of genocide dog. Really? Yeah, that's what Saint Patty's Day is all about No, yeah, I don't I think I don't think they used to be snakes I think Just got them all along. Yeah, you just go around killing like our nurse snakes. Thanks man Yeah, I think I had to do a pagans and pagan so then you get into something called eagle versus serpent Have you ever heard of that story that that? No, but let's let's start with Saint Patrick's Day I'll work our way to eagle versus serpent. That's a light. That's interesting James like what about he can't Can't follow this chaos. No, I am. I like what what okay? Saint Patrick's Day was really about pagans what he said that part was is not that'd be hard to find out but there were not snakes there Okay, it says did Saint Patrick really drive snakes out of Ireland the stuff of legend the reptiles never existed on the emerald aisle Saint Patrick's Day, oh you saw the bitch Enter your email to continue reading you saw a bit. Yeah, what are you doing trying to get us? Fucking mailing to cold It's too cold for snakes right right so Maybe it was just like a way they had to explain why there's no snakes there Which gets into this thing called eagle versus serpent and that did we'll get into but those are symbolism Right the eagle represents authority and power. Oh, that's why you see it on all these flags The eagle represents the serpent represents knowledge Hmm knowledge is power and so and Ancient knowledge so like when they talk about serpents, they're talking about pagans and And we have a negative connotation what pagan is in this country because we assume it's like which is and stuff like that But we assume it's kids with asshole step-dads Right goth kids The really in the anime right right right smoke and cigarettes in high school yelling at the bottom That's what they think it's not man. It's it's about basically a cult Well paganism was the existing religion that Christian and he kind of incorporated right didn't they incorporate a lot of their Holidays coincided with pagan rituals. Yes, like Jesus's birthday and all that's bring people in some modern pagans refuse to observe a day Which honors the elimination of an old religion of favor of a new one and? Where a snake symbol on same Patrick's day? The idea that same Patrick physically drove the pagans from Ireland is inaccurate What he did do was facilitate the spread of Christianity? That sounds like a very useful Muslim a very cleaned up version of it. That sounds like somebody's PR person came in Well, I'll read this off. That's not quite what we did I mean people have a distorted version of history We were trying to spread Christianity, which is of course the real true word of God right and then Patrick the patron saint of iron was born in Britain Not Ireland near the end of the 4th century at age 16. He was kidnapped by Irish raiders It's sold as a slave to a Celtic priest in Northern Ireland. Whoa After toiling for six years as a shepherd he escaped back to Britain Yeah, so it's a real person in the 4th century Is that a real? Yeah Which now explains why I want to go back and walk back right? What? There were no snakes. Okay, we get that so snake was okay Leprechons are likely based on Celtic figures Leprechons are based on mushrooms and you can eat leprechaun Eat mushrooms rather and meet leprechaun. Yeah for sure. That's what the elves are I mean everybody has their own version of it, but there's like little things that you meet when you do mushrooms No, they must have had mushrooms. They had cattle. They always had moisture right? They had a lot of moisture So like I know Europe had mushrooms a lot of uh Mexico's a lot of mushrooms. That's where Gordon Wasen I think his name was who first started writing about psychedelic mushrooms I think it was in life magazine Gordon Wasen Google that and He was a guy that like sort of first started describing psychedelic mushroom effects In like modern publications. This is back before it was illegal Mushrooms weren't even made illegal in America until 19th century. It was cocaine was for the longest time Seeking the magic mushroom is a 1957 photo essay by amateur mycologist Robert Gordon Wasen describing his experiences taking still alive in mushrooms in 1955 during a Mazak tech Mazatak mazatak ritual and how do you say that? Waja Mexico Beautiful name. Yeah, that is a great name. You you want to get weird in haka So did he didn't he wrote it in the book, but didn't he do something in life magazine? There was something that was in like a mainstream publication there at life. That's it life series of great adventures by our Gordon Wasen Yeah, there it is. Okay. Interesting Mushrooms of life changers man, and I think that human beings have been eating them forever And I think based on briomer or rescues work with that book the immortality key, which I can't recommend enough It's a wild immortality key. Yeah, you would love it. It's wild. I got 1000 books to read. I have it also It's also based on very hard evidence like they have the vessels that these people drank wine out of and they found ergod in these vessels The Liberty cap and the fly are all agaric, which is um fly. Our garric is uh, I think it's a type of M I needed my scary a mushroom Grow in Ireland and are both believed to produce visions of fairies and leprechauns ding ding ding We have a winner along with a variety of other world creatures associated with Ireland fairies and mushrooms have always been a big part of Irish culture And a deeply intertwined in culture in fact the Gaelic slang for fairies and mushrooms is the same word I'll say that again Gaelic slang for fairies and mushrooms is the same word the word is pukis pukis in our that's a wish that wish that do pukis Now what they call it Cracked pipes are pukis do that. Yeah, I think Before we do that before we do that we'll go to that I promise in Ireland the trip goes The trip one goes from magic mushrooms described as going away with the fairies Being off with the pixies in pagan times inba for for Roast nine in ambos for oast nine. We're psychedelic poets The poets spoke of eating the red flesh of a pig dog or cat Which is believed to be in reference to the fly agaric because that mushroom is read with white It looks like Santa Claus, which is another fucking conspiracy. Oh, yeah for sure poets chewed on this red flesh of a pig before lying in a dark room To seek out inspiration. Yeah, bingo. Yeah Do you ever went or they were tripper? Yeah, you're mushrooms going over. Yeah, just as some cave and just Yeah, everybody tripped. I think that was a giant part of most cultures until the power culture is eradicated And that's the story of the immortality king Must be Southern California thing, but pukis means a tweak pipe. Oh wow crap. They're also called crack pipes Wow Pookie Wow, that's crazy damn dude. That's crazy. It went from being Something that allows you to connect with leprechauns to a crack pipe. That's what they always do. They take it and they they invert it dude All the time Wow, that's crazy It is crazy dude, or there was like a dude named pookie who was just got weird He was such a crackhead. They named the pipe after legendary crackhead was the best crackhead ever He was the chief in chong of crackheads. I don't know in Austin if like Man, I'm this how I know I'm old like I didn't do my drugs out in the public now I mean dude you drive around people smoking math. I was walking I like so I like to walk around Hollywood and just look for danger right like it. Oh, yeah I just just so I could talk about That's why you're crying by there. Yeah, I'm my podcast So I could just talk about what I really so you go to bad places just to walk around Yeah, I'll walk around it just to see why I could find you're a fucking investigative journalist. I am. I'm a dick joke comic investigator And dude I was on Hollywood Boulevard one day and like Hollywood Boulevard now is like straight out taxi driver Dude, it's the same kind of it's really like gritty. Yeah, gritty dark energy and you just walk around Still tourists and they're still to So this is the one of the streets So the the tourist Company that's in charge of the Hollywood Taurus board was bragging that Hollywood Boulevard was voted top 100 Taurus spots to go to but what they never told you it was number 100. I'm at 100 What was number 99? I have no clue, but it was voted number over here's house Like that some reason dude. You ever hear about what Ben Franklin was okay. That's a different story But what do you do? You never heard that like what he was found in it. They found in his house No like tons of bodies, bro What Ben Franklin they found tons of bodies in his and Franklin was a serial killer. No, he was like doing some weird shit dude Body experiment Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Is this real? Yeah, everything I say Was Ben Franklin's basement filled with skeletons? Repairs on Franklin's old London house turned up 1,200 pieces of bone from at least 15 people Holy shit For nearly two decades by the way, this is from the Smithsonian This is not some wacky conspiracy thought It's the same terribly back. Yeah We're nearly two decades leading up to the signing of the Declaration of Independence Benjamin Franklin Franklin lived in London in a house on 36 Craven Street in 1776 Franklin left his English home to come back to America more than 200 years later 15 bodies were found in the basement buried in a secret windowless room beneath the garden in 1998 conservationists were doing repairs on 36 Craven looking to turn Franklin's old haunt into a museum From a one meter wide one meter deep pit over 1200 pieces of bone were retrieved Remnants of more than a dozen bodies said Benjamin Franklin's house six were children Forensic investigation showed that the bones dated to Franklin's day Holy shit The most plausible explanation is not mass murder but an anatomy school run by Benjamin's young friend and protege William Houston. Oh Just an anatomy school. Yeah, we're just gonna bury them downstairs Okay anatomy was still in its infancy But the days social and ethical more is frowned upon it a steady supply of human bodies was hard to come by legally So Houston Hunter and Fields other pioneers had to turn to grave robbing Either paying professional resurrection men to procure credit cadavers or digging them up the most selves to get their hands on specimens Researchers think 36 Craven was an irresistible spot for Houston to establish his own anatomy lab The tenant was a trusted friend and the land lady was his mother-in-law and he was flanked by Convenient sources for corpses Bodies could be smuggled from graveyards and delivered to the warf at one end of the street or snatched from the gallows at the other end When he was done with them Houston simply buried whatever was left of the bodies in the basement Rather than sneak them out for disposal elsewhere and risk getting caught and prosecuted for a dissection and grave robbing Franklin was probably aware of the illegal studies going on in his building says the Benjamin Franklin house But it's doubtful that he was involved himself Still, we can't imagine that curious man that he was he didn't sneak down and check out the proceedings at least once or twice Of course he did You imagine if you're my friend and we live together and I say Sam, what are you up to you like bro? We got to find out how people work and there's only one way to do it. We got to look at bodies. Whoa I do that We got to find a place where we can fucking legally or secretly look at bodies while I'm gonna basement Okay, so what do we do with the bodies? Burium bro But back then when they were studying medicine isn't that what they did Like all those people that like studied anatomy back then how did they if it was illegal? To study anatomy if it was illegal to study bodies. How else would they find out? How anatomy work that seems weird, but who knows they had weird laws back then but it does seem weird But it makes sense right because if they had never studied anatomy before and then all of a sudden it came along I'm like we've got to fuck up your grandpa. You got a carve grandpa like a turkey to find out what makes people tick You know, so weird note to add in another article about this. Oh boy It's just the franklin's history is a mason was one of the historian's initial points of inquiry Those shrouded in secrecy masonic rituals have dark known undercurrents Which have at times gone horribly wrong for example in a 2004 initiation ceremony a new member was accidentally shot by a member Who meant to fire an empty gun but instead fired a loaded one yeah, they fake shot at each other. Yeah But when the story didn't historians dug deeper into what was going on the Franklin home during the years The bones dated back to they discovered the real culprit behind the bones is one of willing who's in the other Basically same thing Crazy right yeah, I think they all were a part of like secret groups back then right so you ever heard of The special deal that Ben Franklin supposedly was a part of and I I love to hear if you could debunk this because I love it now a special deal special deal with the basically The royal family of England that they would get a percentage of taxes of all taxes So Benjamin Franklin made a deal that some of the taxes from the United States would go back to England still to this day I don't want to just bunk debunk that but I do I was what they just put out a special like a Who's that Ken Burns? Yeah, he made it been Franklin special like maybe three three four episodes There was a time period. He was going back and forth Which is what this other article is saying where he lived there And it was whether it was in Germany or England. I don't know not I don't remember specifically he lived there for a long time like his wife he abandoned his wife like 25 30 years He had a kid band and never came back Franklin did yeah, he was like the American representative living in England. This is like you know like right after the Revolutionary war Text there's a lot of stuff about taxation representation is still going on after the fact So there might be some thing to that I'm trying to remember all the stuff about that documentary adjust. Yeah that like maybe the like Benjamin Get 80 people buried in your fucking house Do this fucking deal Well, in this kid all will blame you and then they they're supposed to be that the Queen of England or the The royal family gets a percentage of our taxes. What what do you think is going on now that one day? Some assholes like you and I would be sitting doing a podcast talking about What the government is doing today? About may it imagine imagine imagine yeah 30 years from now. Yeah They're talking about how Nancy Pelosi went to Taiwan and started war with China that that we underestimated China's response and That was the initial start of World War three imagine if that's what it is if this is our Gulf of Tonkin or whatever This is our deed not D-Day. This is our what's D-Day? The world Harbor, Pearl Harbor. Yeah, this is the day the day that will live in infamy This is our day Imagine imagine imagine imagine if that's because history is gonna play out right? We we are not there yet whatever whatever's gonna happen hasn't happened. Yeah, that's a possibility. It is that's what's crazy Is that the Chinese government is saying that did you know that Chris Williamson said that yesterday that they had posted on their social media account prepare for war Yeah, that's what we're using now social media. It's the clear war of Trump to death. Yeah, yeah, remember Well Kim Jong-un little rock man It is like our rockets are bigger and better. I promise you We have the best rockets. I'm the best of rockets. No one loves rockets more than me Yeah, dude. I mean she went over there and Is she there now? Yeah, she landed she landed what do you think that's all about is that a dickwave in contest? Well, that's also like did Imagine if that's how they're trying to get rid of Nancy Pelosi. Oh, this lady's making too much fucking money She's fucking up our whole scam. Yeah, right? But Nancy, you know time one would love for you to visit Hey, we love time You maybe make a deal over there find out about some chips, you know bring the husband. He's really good with numbers And you won't have to drive there. He drink all he wants bro. They made more money in the stock market They're better at the stock market than George Soros and Warren Buffett It's unbelievable guys that that's all they do. That's their thing Warren Buffett. That's his fucking thing. I Hit what she's like in a 80% As a genius he's amazing Just a wine drunk with Brother shiny to ask her whether she gave it for me. She certainly not and she pushes the microphone. Okay. Thank you Dude how long has she been there forever? There's a picture of her yes, which can it get at his inauguration. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's insane to be there It's amazing. It's amazing It's amazing and it's just like how how do we not have term limits like that is too long To be there keeps getting voted in what's amazing is one of my favorite images of her mock-clapping Trump. Oh, yeah You don't like this Doing here. Oh my god Kyle Dunnegan shit with the funniest dude the craziest shit of all time It's so funny so Gifted so good that that is so good That fucking that thing that they do. Oh my god that that web series that they do It's aiming. I think Kurt Matt's current is the fucking man. He is so funny. Yeah, I knew he's a great writer He's so good. He's so funny the two of them together The fucking sketches that they put together are so funny. They're so ruthless and it's just weird that like we need like Those guys to do it on YouTube and we're not seeing like Saturday night live do it and all these others because that's what should be done I know no one can go that hard and let's run the internet Right, it's kind of crazy, but even just a little bit It just seemed like when ever and this is my kind of problem with comedy right now And I love all comics, but there's a lot of comics who are like my generation Who felt like the censorship from the religious right that still can't Just don't understand that that censorship. Yeah, there are crazy religious right people out there But the censorship is now from the left A lot of censorship from the left, but if the left lets up the right will pick it up Well, you already see it you remember when the with the rovers wait You got the crazy people on this is the end of hookup culture. You like stop it Please now the guys who are like hating against gays why they're sucking truck or dick on the weekends Now the real conspiracy theorists will say that this rovers is way thing is to distract us from all the other stuff going on the world So that we'll fight over that because it's such a hot button topic for America. Yeah, people are so divided on abortion rights and so it's so important and such a line of the sand for a lot of people especially women You know that this a woman's right to choose is such a line of sand that when they take that away then People are gonna be fighting so hard for that that they're gonna ignore all the other shenanigans that are going on Well, I think that I think the biggest problem that the right to choose people messed up on is that so many of them Were anti right to choose when they came to get in the vaccine and you see it happen All the time choice. Yeah, and then they they it's different They think it's different because it involves other people like the being having a pregnancy and me as a woman Having autonomy over your body is is your choice and a man telling you what you can and can't do which is often the case is What's so infuriating the difference is they thought the vaccine was gonna stop the spread of the virus and stop the virus in its tracks So I was a world horse a public Problem when it really wasn't if you take a look at like the actual numbers of people who could who passed away from it It was like a 99% survival rate. Yeah, but it stills a public problem if you have a hundred friends And one of them die is fucking thing and especially people that are vulnerable people with autoimmune diseases older people overweight people Right I get their perspective and I get if if it really did stop the spread of the virus that it would it totally make sense The problem is once it was recognized that it didn't they stuck with the same game plan Instead of saying hey, what are the other options? What are the other things to do it and how many people exactly are experiencing adverse symptoms and effects from this? How many people are hospitalized because of it? What what's happening like really happening? Let's say instead of pretending that it's all good Let's look at all of the good it does and then also what's the bad it does and let people make informed choices That's always been the case with medicine especially when you're talking about something that may or may not Help you because it may or may not stop the spread it may help you if you if you encounter the virus within a certain period of time But then you know a lot of places they're saying if you were vaccinated and boosted a year ago It doesn't count anymore. It's crazy like they're making you get boosters and more boosters and even while the effects of the Boosted a year ago. It doesn't count anymore. It's crazy. Like they're making you get boosters and more boosters and even while The effects of the virus have diminished greatly, right? It's still dangerous to a lot of people no doubt about it But at what percentage now and what are the numbers and can we be accurate about that so we can make an informed decision? That's why people get upset because they don't feel like they're able to make their own decisions about these You thought and but do you believe there was a manipulation of the numbers? I do make it presented as something so it all came with videos of Chinese people fall backwards, right? Oh my god this thing's going on in China and it's presented on the news as this crazy thing going on and even though We never saw until when Vaccines and you see all these kind of you see the comedian What's her face in in oh? Yeah? Falls right back. Yeah, there's there's certain people that and Dr. Drew's talked about this from the booster do have and maybe even from the Second shot do have an adverse event. I know people that have had it the question is how many the question is also when your mass Vaccinating right when you're giving a medication to 300 million people just in this country alone, right or whatever it is 260 million people you're going to absolutely have some adverse effects the question is is it worth it to? To like risk that because the benefit is overall good That's where people should be making like logical Debates and logical conversations about it The problem is people get scared and when people get scared and they think that some people aren't doing the right thing when they did the right Thing, then they get angry and emotional and then they start believing things that turn out to not necessarily be true because some of these people that are put out these You know results and studies they they have skewed the data and this has been proven Right, so it's like this is just humans This is humans and and just because it lines up with this what they thought the pandemic was gonna be this because that's that was their game plan To what to do if something that went went down doesn't mean they planned it. I don't think they would I mean so many fucking powerful important people died man a lot of fucking people that were like You would think like they were at the top of the food chain in terms of Resources and knowledge and influence a lot of those fucking people died from Covid I got covid covid is fucked. Yeah, I got real. It's fucking real But it's just it's not good. That's I'm not trying to diminish covid, but it's not the same for everybody That's a fact and and taking into account different people particularly children's immune systems and their responses to it I think you know We we as a as a society always when something goes down and it's scary We we have like sides that we pick and we have positions that we take and we stand by them and we defend them Even when more data keeps coming out that shows you that it it wasn't exactly accurate So I always think dude. This is my opinion that you know you'll have the trust authority side And then you have the conspiracy side and never is it one completely way or the other right? But for me, I think it tends to more lean towards the conspiracy side more often than not now not saying that's completely But it towards leans towards the conspiracy side more times than not because to be honest with you Joe I've been saying the same thing today that I'm saying when this whole thing came out So that's the only reason I go there's nothing that's happened to me that has changed the way I look at this thing It just it just always is the same people they get the more the money more the power the more and then you discuss like is this a move to get us into? some kind of like Thing on our phone where we have to have a vaccine pass on our phone and all that stuff and you can't go certain place unless you got this vaccine Pass and what that represents Let's get and contact tracing and all that stuff that We start seeing that's happening in China now. I don't know everything that's truthful that comes out of China because there's a military Industrial company like that. They definitely have that they definitely have a social credits gives the system and you know That's been documented. It's also been documented the people that didn't have enough points or did the wrong thing or said the wrong thing or whatever They weren't allowed to travel where you weren't allowed to purchase certain things this parts of the world right now where you have to show Your ID in order to get gas like you have to show off. Yeah, you have to scan your your number Right, I see if you're allowed to get gas I mean what happened in Canada with the truckers where they shut down people's bank accounts Yes, they were so shame scary shit been some people have been talking about for a very that that is the scary part of moving to Crypto, right? Did they give them their money back did they give the the truckers in Canada their bank accounts back Whatever happened with that That's an interesting question right it's scary when they took away their access to their funds to try to encourage them to quit or somebody Just I want woman just sent like a hundred bucks to it and the government shut down her bank account didn't allow her to Get into a bank to that to me super scared Canada unlocks vast majority of bank accounts frozen over support for trucker convoy So they they unlock the vast majority, but they kept some lockdown Do you think through those Castro's kid boy he looks like it doesn't it's okay? I think that's the wildest conspiracy ever you you see that you see that How is that is that there's really a timeline where that actually makes sense where it is mom You get that? I have a oven episode. I did called Cucka Palooza, right? basically all of these offerings that don't look like their fathers But they look like friends of the family and I have this whole theory that they all just like everybody hooks up and it's not Potato Oh yeah with Frank Sinatra looks exactly like him here Trudeau was born a little more than nine months after the marriage of his parents and More than four years before Margaret made a much publicized trip to Cuba, so that doesn't make sense Margaret was 22 when she married the 51 year old prime minister was a subject of intense media scrutiny I like that. Yeah good for him good for him. You go sort of like okay Subject of intense media scrutiny or ex back then that was normal though, right? Experts say it would have been impossible for an earlier visit to Cuba to go unnoticed experts say as long as they say Cuban media have been unusually open about the death of Castro's oldest son Fida Lito describing it as a suicide after a long depression neither state media nor independent reporters covering the death Have reported the existence of a suicide note. Okay, but that's just we're going into a weird area here But do you know just for fun z's? No, but the supposedly Faces dude, but let's yeah, that's what I wanted to do. Okay February one suicide of Castro's oldest son Fida Lito spurred the most recent reports on several sites claiming that Fida Lito left a suicide note referring to Justin Trudeau as his half-brother The theory was that Castro was Trudeau's father Was also shared wildly on social media. Okay Just for fun z's and this is just fun z's Let's go let's Google look at the two of them together. No, there's some that I like there's some there's like Right down there see that six pictures right there there it is. Yeah, that's it That's wild That is fucking wild when you look at those. So look at all of them the top. Oh my god Look at the top one bro. That is Why but then you compare him to who they say is his father? And he doesn't look anything like that. That is wild Hey, bro, you need a 23 in me Right away sir. We need a you know, it's wild how close he looks if it's not his dad Boy if I was the father I'd be fucking suspicious shit. Well, you ever heard his real dad. I think that's what this is. Oh Okay, well, let me say hold on Okay, but it's real daddy looks like his real dad, too Yeah, he looks a lot like his real dad dude a lot Okay, I give up. It's just coincidence It looks a lot like his real dad. Do you ever like hold on go back to that go back to that Don't don't take that away go to the top the top one that looks a lot like a man He looks a lot like a lot a lot a long They're both a man. No. No. No. No. Look at the nose This shape that's not ridiculous at all. He looks a lot like a man a lot It's just it's just fun. It's fun. Hey man. We just have fun because looking at it right there. He looks a lot like his dad Have you ever seen like a prince? Obviously we had the fengst match around but who's bread in the news? That's the best one. Yeah. How about the? That's Woody Allen's kid fuck you no not even close you not even close fuck you Have you ever looked in the Woody Allen case dude. It's super. Let's end this. Okay How long are we going for hours? Then click in close 3.5 don't go too deep Thanks no two or once We got a show in two hours. I got a new short dude. I love you buddy. Love you, too. All the words in two weird It was awesome. We got to do this more often anytime anytime. I love you very much. I mean it's so cool Thank you for everything you're the fucking man. I appreciate you very much. You're a fun dude. Thank you, too And we've had fun gigging in the past and we're gonna do it tonight. I'm so excited I'm so excited boys brow. We haven't done a show together in fucking a few years years. Yes, my friend Love you, bud. Love you, too. Social media tell everybody all your podcasts. I have seven, but really seven podcast seven podcasts Oh my god. Yeah, I've I what listen it's either I could talk to myself or just throw a camera and a microphone in front of me Tim fall hat broken sim is my grand theft auto one where I go around and I just look for I just look for danger and tell you what I see My spiritual podcast is called zero. I got a show week My good friend Brian Kalan called conspiracy social club cash daddy's is my financial one and Punch strong sports just go to a fat dragon pro on Twitter or Sam triply everywhere else go to sam triply.com for all my dates. I'm in San Francisco this weekend And he's hilarious comic, too very funny dude. I love you, buddy. So much good night everywhere. I love you, Chuck