The Joe Rogan experience Oh, I am good good to have you man You were just telling me before we went on air the numbers of The social dilemma and their bonkers so what to say that yeah The social dilemma was seen by a 38 million households in the first 28 days on Netflix, which I think is broken records and if you assume you know a lot of people are seeing it With their family because parents seeing it with their kids the issues that are on teen mental health So if you assume one out of ten families saw it with a few family members were in the 40 to 50 million people range Which is just broken records? I think for Netflix I think it was the second most popular documentary throughout the month of September I think or film throughout the month of September is really well done documentary But I think it's one of those documentaries that affirmed a lot of people's worst suspicions about the dangers of social media and Then on top of that it's sort of alerted them to what they were already Experiencing in their own personal life and like highlighted it yeah, I think that's right. I mean most people were Aware I think it's I think everyone's been feeling that the feeling you have when you use social media Isn't that this thing is just a tool or it's on my side? It is an environment based on manipulation as we say in the film and that's really what's changed that you know I remember you know I was been working on these issues for something like eight or eight years or something now You please tell people who didn't see the documentary what your background is and what you how you got into it. Yes, so I The you know the the film goes back as a set of technology insiders might my background was as a design ethicistic Google So I first had a startup company that we sold to Google. I landed there through a talent acquisition and then started Work about a year into being at Google made a presentation that was about how Essentially technology was holding the human collective psyche in its hands that we were really controlling the world's psychology Because every single time people look at their phone They are basically experiencing thoughts and scrolling through fees and bleeding things about the world This has become the primary meaning-making machine for the world and that we as Google had a moral responsibility to You know hold the collective psyche in a thoughtful ethical way and not create this sort of race to the bottom of the brain stem attention economy that we now have So my background was as a as a kid I was a magician. We can get into that. I Studyed a lab at Stanford called or studied in a class called the Stanford persuasive technology class that taught a lot of the engineers at And Silicon Valley kind of how the mind works and the co-founders of Instagram were there and Then later studied behavioral economics and how the mind is sort of influenced I went into cults and started studying how cults work and then Rived at Google through this lens of you know technology isn't really just this thing that's in our hands It's more like this manipulative environment that is tapping into our weaknesses Everything from the slot machine rewards to you know the way you get tagged in a photo and it sort of manipulates your social validation and approval these kinds of things When you are at Google did they still have the don't be able sign up? I Don't know there's actually a physical sign was there was never a physical sign? I thought there was something that they actually had I think it was there is this guy. It was at Paul Not Paul. It was his last name. He was then better one the eventers of Gmail And they had a meeting and they came up with this mantra because they realized the power that they had and they realized that there was gonna be a conflict of interest between advertising on the search results and Regular search results and so we know that they know that they could have used that power and they came up with this Montrei I think in that meeting in the early days to don't be don't be evil There was a time where they took that mantra down and I remember reading about it online and and they took it off their page I think that's what it was yeah and When I read that I was like that should be big news Like there's no reason to take that down. Why would you take that down? Yeah, why would you why would you say well, let me give you a little evil. I get crazy It's a good question I mean, I wonder what logic would have you remove a statement like that that seems like a standard state like it's a great statement Okay here it is Google removes don't be evil clause from its code of conduct in 2018. Yeah. Yeah I wonder why did they have an explanation did it say anything? Anything Don't be evil has been a part of the company's corporate code of conduct since 2000 with Google was reorganized under a new patent Parent company alphabet in 2015 alphabet assumed a slightly adjusted version of the mon thing. Yeah, do the right thing. Oh, that's a spikely movie bitch However, look retain its original. Don't be evil language until the past several weeks The the phrase has been deeply incorporated into Google's company culture so much so that a version of the phrase has served as the Wi-Fi password on the shuttles that Google uses to ferry It's employees to its mountain view headquarters. I think I remember that. Yeah, wow on the bus and you type in don't be evil I wonder why they decided Well, I mean they they did change it to do the right thing. I mean we always used to say that Just a friend's not within Google, but just you know instead of saying don't be able to say let's let's do some good here, right? That's nice. Let's do some good. Here's yeah Think positive think doing good instead of don't do bad Yeah, but the problem is when you say do good the question is who's good because you live in a morally plural society And there's this question of who are you to say what's good for people and it's much easier to say Let's reduce harms than it is to say. Let's actually do good like this It says the updated version of Google's code of conduct still retains one reference to the company's unofficial model The final line of the document is still and remember dot dot dot don't be evil and if you see something that you think isn't right speak up Hmm, okay. Well, they still don't be evil. So maybe it's much ado about nothing but Having that kind of pat we were just before the podcast. We're watching Jack Dorsey speak to members of the Senate In regards to Twitter censoring the Hunter Biden story and censorship of conservatives But allowing dictators to spread pop again that dictators from other countries and why and what with us all about one of the things that Jack Dorsey has been pretty adamant about is that they really never saw this coming when they started Twitter Yeah, and they didn't think that they were ever going to be in this position where they were gonna be Really the arbiters of free speech for the world right which is Essentially in some ways what they are. I think it's important to roll back the clock for people because it's easy to think You know that we just sort of landed here and that they would know that they're gonna be influencing the global psychology But I think we should really reverse engineer for the audience How did these products work the way that they did? So like let's go back to the beginning to the Twitter I think his first tweet was something like checking out the buffalows in Golden Gate Park in San Francisco You know Jack was fascinated by the taxi cab dispatch system that you could send a message and then all the taxis get it and the ideas could we create a dispatch system so that I post a tweet and then suddenly all these other people can see it and The the real genius of these things was that they weren't just Offering this thing you could do they found ways of keeping people engaged I think this is important for people to get that they're not competing for your data or for You know money they're competing to keep people using the product and so when Twitter for example invented This persuasive feature of the number of followers that you have remember like that was a new thing at the time Right you log in and you see your profile Here's the people who you can follow and then here's the number of followers you have that created a reason for you to come back Every day to see how many followers do I have so that was part of this race to keep people engaged as we talk about in the film Like these things are competing for your attention that if you're not paying for the product You are the product But the thing that is the product is your predictable behavior? you're using the product in predictable ways and I remember a conversation I had with someone at Facebook who's a friend of mine who said in a coffee shop one day People think that we Facebook are competing with something like Twitter that one social network is competing with another Social network, but really he said our biggest competitor is YouTube because they're not competing for social networks They're competing for attention and YouTube is the biggest competitor in the digital space for attention Hmm and that was a real light bulb moment for me because you you realize that as they're designing these products They're finding new clever ways to get your attention That's the the real thing that things different in the film the social dilemma rather than talking about You know censorship and data and privacy in these themes It's really what is the core influence or impact that the shape of these products have on how we're making meaning of the world when they're Just hearing our psychology Do you think that it was inevitable that someone manipulates the way people use these things to gather more attention and do you think that any of this could have been avoided if There was laws against that if instead of having these algorithms that specifically target things that you're interested in or things that you click on or things That are going to make you engage more if they just allow these things to If someone said listen you can have these things you can allow people to communicate with each other but you can't manipulate Their attention span Yeah, I mean I think the so we've always had an attention economy right and you're for right now And politicians compete for it. Can you vote for someone you've never paid attention to who never heard about never heard them say something? You know outrageous no So there's always been an attention economy and so it's hard to say we should regulate who gets attention or how it's Organic in some ways right like this podcast is an organic I mean if we're in competition It's organic I just put it out there and if you watch it you don't or you don't I don't you know I don't have any say over it and I'm not manipulating it in any way Sort of so I mean let's imagine that the podcast apps were different and they actually While you're watching they had like the hearts and the stars and the kind of voting up in numbers and you could like send messages back and forth and Apple podcasts worked in a way that didn't just reward You know the things that you clicked follow on it actually sort of promoted the stuff that that someone said the most outrageous thing Then you as a podcast creator have an incentive to say the most outrageous thing and then you arrive at the top of the Apple Podcast or spot or Spotify and And that's the thing is that we actually are competing for attention It felt like it was neutral and it was relatively neutral and to progress that story back in time with You know Twitter competing for attention. Let's look at some other things that they did So they also added this retweet this instant resharing feature right and that made it more addictive because suddenly we're all playing the fame lottery Right like I could retweet your stuff and then you get a bunch of hits and then you could go viral and you could get a lot of attention So then instead of the companies competing for attention now each of us suddenly win the fame lottery over and over and over again And we're we're getting attention and then oh, I have another example is gonna think about I forgot it. What was it? You jump in if you want Apple has an interesting way of handling sort of The way they have their algorithm for their podcast app is It's secret. It's kind of it's weird Mm-hmm, but one of the things that it favors is it favors new shows and it favors Engagement and new subscribers so comments Engagement and new shows. There you go like that's the same as competing for attention because engagement must mean people like it And that's yeah, there's gonna be a fallacy as we go down that road But go on what's interesting because you could say if you have a podcast and your podcast gets like it's a hundred thousand downloads a new podcast Can come along and it can get 10,000 downloads and it'll be ahead of you in the rankings and So you could be number three and it could be number two and you're like well How was that number two and it's got ten times less? But they don't do it that way and their logic is they don't want the podcast world to be dominated by you know New York Times and the big ones. Yeah, and whatever whatever's number one and number two number three forever We actually just experienced this We have a podcast called your undivided attention and since the film came out in that first month We went from being you know in the lower 100 or something like that to we shot to the top five I think we're the number one tech podcast for a while and so we just experienced this through the fact not that we had the most listeners But because the trend was so rapid that we sort of jumped to the top I think it's wise that they do that because eventually it it evens out over time You know you see some people rocket to top like oh my god We're number three and you're like hang on there fella just give it a couple of weeks and then three weeks later four weeks later Now they're number 48 right they get depressed right though That was really where you should have been but the thing that Apple does that I really like in that is it gives an Opportunity for these new shows to be seen And what they were they might have gotten just stuck because these these rankings and the ratings for a lot of these shows These shows are so consistent and they have such a following already. Yeah, it's very difficult for these new shows to gather attention right and The problem was that there were some people that game the system and There was companies that could literally move like Earl Skakele remember Earl became the number one podcast and like no one was listening to it Earl has money and he He hired some people to game the system and he was kind of like open about it and And laughing about now is any banned from iTunes now or something? I think he got banned because of that because it was so obvious he gained the system You know like a thousand downloads and he was number one. I mean the thing is that we're Apple podcasts you can think of as like the federal reserve or the government of the attention economy because they're setting the rules by which you win Right they could have set the rules as you said to be You know who has the most listeners and then you just keep rewarding the king that already exist versus who is the most trending? There's actually a story friend of mine told me I don't know if it's true although it was a fairly credible source who said he was a meeting with Steve Jobs when they were making the first podcast app and that they had Made a demo of something where you could see all the things your friends were listening to so just like making a newsfeed like we do with Facebook and Twitter Right and then he said was well why would we do that if something is important enough your friend will actually just send you a link and say you should Listen to this like why would we automatically just promote random things that your friends are listening to and Again, this is kind of how you get back to social media how is social media so successful because it's so it's much more addictive To see what your friends are doing in a feed, but it doesn't reward what's true or what's meaningful and this This is the thing that people need to get about social media is it's it's really just rewarding the things that tend to keep people back Adictively the business model is addiction in this race to the bottom of the brain stem for attention What seems like if we in hindsight if hindsight is 2020 what what should have been done or what could have been done? Had we known where this would Pile out is that they could have said you can't do that you can't manipulate These algorithms to make sure that people pay more attention and Manipulate them to ensure that people become deeply addicted to these platforms What you can do is just let them openly communicate right, but it has to be organic and then the problem is so if you this is the thing I was gonna say about Twitter is when one company does the Call it the engagement feed meaning showing you the things that the most people are clicking on and Retweeting trending things like that Let's imagine there's two feet. So there's the feed that's called the reverse chronological feed meaning showing in order in time You know Joe Rogan posted this two hours ago But that's you know after that you have the thing that people posted an hour and a half ago all the way up to ten seconds ago That's the reverse chronological They have a mode like that and Twitter if you click the sparkle icon I don't know if you know this it'll show you just in time. Here's what people said you know sorted by recency But then they have this other feed called what people click on retweet It's better than most people you follow and it sorts it by what it thinks you'll click on and want the most Which one of those is more successful at getting your attention the sort of Recency what they posted recently versus what they know people are clicking on retreating on the most Certainly what they know people are clicking on a retweeting the most correct and so once Twitter does that Let's say Facebook was sitting there with the recency feed like just showing you here's the people who posted in this time Order sequence. They have to also switch to who is like the most relevant stuff Right the most clicked retweeted the most so this is part of this race for attention that once one actor does something like that and they Algorithmically you know figure out what people what's most popular the other companies have to follow because otherwise They won't get the attention so it's the same thing if you know Netflix adds the autoplay 5 4 3 2 1 countdown to get people to watch the next episode that if that works at say increasing Netflix's watch time by 5% YouTube sits there says we just shrunk how much time people are watching YouTube because now they're watching more Netflix So we're gonna add 5 4 3 2 1 autoplay countdown and it becomes again this game theoretic race of who's gonna do more now You feel open up TikTok TikTok doesn't even wait if you know or your kids use TikTok, but when you open up the app It doesn't even wait for you to click on something It just actually plays the first video the second you open it which none of the other apps do right and The point of that is that causes you to enter into this engagement stream even faster So this is this again this race for attention produces things that are not good for society and even if you took the whack emol stick Or you took the anti-trust case and you whack Facebook and you got rid of Facebook or you whack Google or you whack YouTube You're just gonna have more actors flooding in doing the same thing and one other example of this is The time it takes to reach let's say 10 million followers So if you remember back in the ash was an Ashton Kutcher who raised for the first million followers race was CNN right? So now if you think of it the companies are competing for our attention if they find out that Each of us becoming a celebrity and having a million people we get to reach if that's the currency of the thing that gets us to come back to get more attention Then they're competing it who can give us that bigger fame lottery hit faster So let's say 2009 or 2010 when Ashton Kutcher did that it took him I don't know how long it took months to frame to get And it was a little bit though, right? And then TikTok comes along and says hey we want to give kids the ability to hit the fame lottery and make it big hit the jackpot Even faster we want you to be able to go from zero to a million followers in 10 days right and so they're competing to make that shorter and shorter and shorter and I know about this because you know speaking from a Silicon Valley perspective Venture capitalists fund these new social platforms based on how fast they can get to like a hundred million users There was this famous line that like I forgot what it was But I think Facebook took like ten years to get to a hundred million users Instagram took you know, I don't know four years three years or something like that TikTok can get there even faster and so it's shortening shortening shortening and that's what people are Are that's what we're competing for it's like who can win the fame lottery faster? But is a world where everyone broadcast a millions of people Without the responsibilities of publishers journalists, etc Does that produce an information environment? That's help that that's that's healthy and obviously the film the social dilemma is really about how it Makes the worst of us rise to the top right? So our hate our outrage our polarization What we disagree about black and white thinking more conspiracy oriented views of the world human on You know Facebook groups things like that and I think we can definitely go into it There's a lot of legitimate conspiracy theory so I want to make sure I'm not category orically dismissing stuff But that's really the point is that we have landed in a world where the things that we are paying attention to are Not necessarily the agenda of topics that we would say in a reflective world what we would say is the most most important So there's a lot of there's a lot of conversation about free will and about letting people choose whatever they Whatever they enjoy viewing and watching and paying attention to but when you're talking about these incredibly potent algorithms and the incredibly potent addictions that people The people developed these these things and we're pretending that people should have the ability to just ignore it and put it away Right and use your willpower. Yeah, that seems I have a kid's over I have a folder on my phone called addict and it's all all caps And it's at the end of my all you have to scroll through all my other apps to get to it and so if I want to get to Twitter or Instagram the problem is that the apps which are we'll put it in the most recent So once you switch apps and you have Twitter in a recent it'll be right there. So that's what I want to go if you left and yeah If I want to see that, you know, you can't do that yet some it's insanely addictive and If you can control yourself It's not that big a deal But how many people can control themselves? I think that the The thing we have to hone in on is the asymmetry of power You know, as I say in the film, it's like we're bringing this ancient brain hardware the prefrontal cortex, which is like what you use to do Gold directed action self-control will power holding back, you know marshmallow test don't do the get don't get the marshmallow now wait later for the two marshmallows later all of that is through our prefrontal cortex and When you're sitting there and you think okay, I'm gonna go watch I'm gonna look at this one thing on Facebook because my friend invited me to this event or it's this one post I have to look at and the next thing you know, you find yourself scrolling through the thing for like an hour Right, and you say man that was on me. I should have had more self-control but they're behind the screen behind that glass lab is like a supercomputer pointed at your brain That is predicting the perfect thing to show you next and you can feel it like it's This is really important so like if I'm Facebook and when you flick your finger you think When you're using Facebook, it's just gonna show me the next thing that my friend said, but it's not doing that When you flick your finger, it actually literally wakes up this sort of supercomputer avatar voodoo doll A version of Joe and the voodoo doll of Joe is You know the the more clicks you ever made on Facebook is like adding the little hair to the voodoo doll and the more Likes you've ever made adds little clothing to the voodoo doll and the more You know watch time on videos you've ever had adds little You know shoes to the voodoo doll so the voodoo doll is getting more and more accurate The more things you click on this is in the film the social dilemma like if you notice like the character You know as he's using this thing It builds a more and more accurate model But the ais the three ais behind the screen are kind of manipulating And the idea is it can actually predict and prick the voodoo doll with this video or that post from your friends Or this other thing and it'll figure out the right thing to show you that it knows will keep you there Because it's already seen how that same video or that same post has kept 200 million other voodoo dolls there Because you just look like another voodoo doll so here's an example And this works the same on all the platforms if you are where a teen girl and you open to dieting video on YouTube Um 70% of you to watch time comes from the recommendations on the right-hand side right so the things that are showing recommended videos next and It will show you it'll show what what did it show that the the girls who watched the teen dieting video It showed anorexia videos because those were better at keeping the teen girls attention Not because it said these are good for them. These are helpful for them It just says these tend to work at keeping their attention So again these tend to work if you are already watching diet videos Yeah, so if you're a 13 year old girl and you watch the diet video youtube wakes up its voodoo doll version of that girl And says hey, I've got like a hundred million other voodoo dolls of 13 year old girls Right and they all tend to watch these these other videos I don't know what I just know that they had this word thin-spo thin-spiration has been aimed for it To be inspired for anorexia. Yeah, it's a real thing YouTube addressed this problem a couple years ago, but when you let the machine run blind all it's doing is picking stuff That's engaging. Why did they choose to not let the machine run blind with one thing like anorexia? Well, so now we're getting into the Twitter censorship conversation on the moderation conversation So the real this is why I don't focus on censorship and moderation because the real issue is if you blur your eyes and zoom Way out and say how does the whole machine tend to operate like no matter what I start with what is it gonna recommend next? so You know if you started with You know a world war two video youtube would recommend a bunch of holocaust Nile videos right if you started Teen girls with a dieting video it would recommend these anorexia videos in Facebook's case if you joined There's so many different examples here because Facebook recommends groups to people based on what it thinks is most in case I'm engaging for you. So if you were a new mom. You had reneighed. I rest on my friends on this podcast We've done much a work together and she has this great example of as a new mom. She joined one Facebook group For mothers who do do it yourself baby food like organic baby food and then Facebook has this side bar It says here's some other groups you might recommend you might want to join and what do you think was the most engaging of those? Because Facebook again is picking on which group if I got you to join it would cause you to spend the most time here Right so force some do it yourself baby food groups which group do you think it's left it? Probably something about vaccines exactly so it really vaccines for moms. Yeah Okay, so then if you join that group now does the same run the process again So then so now look at Facebook says hey, I got these voodoo dolls I got like a hundred million voodoo dolls and they're all they just joined this anti vaccine mom's group And then what do they tend to engage with for very long time if I get them to join these other groups? Which of those other groups would show up? Chem trails Oh, it's a gate flat earth flat earth absolutely Yep, and YouTube recommended so I'm interchangeably going from YouTube to Facebook because it's the same dynamic They're competing for attention and YouTube recommended flat earth conspiracy theories hundreds of millions of times And so when you when you're a parent during COVID and you sit your kids in front of YouTube because you're like I'm I've got this is the digital passifier I got to let them do the thing I got to do work right and then you come back to the dinner table and your kid says you know the Holocaust didn't happen in the earth is flat and People are wondering why it's because of this and now to your point about this sort of moderation thing We can take the whack-a-mole stick after the public yells and Renee and I you know make a bunch of noise or something and the large community by the way If people making noise about this and they'll say okay shoot You're right flat earth. We got to deal with that and so they'll tweak the algorithm and then people make a much of noise about the inspiration videos for the anorexia for kids and they'll deal with that problem But then they start doing it based reactively But again if you zoom out it's just still recommending stuff that's kind of from the crazy town section of YouTube problem the recommendation I don't mind That people have ridiculous ideas about hollow earth because I think it's humorous But I'm also a 53 year old man, right? I'm not I'm not a 12 year old boy with a limited education That is like oh my god the government's lying to us. There's lizard people that live on the earth right But if that's the real argument about these conspiracy theories is that they can influence young people or the easily impressionable or People that maybe don't have a sophisticated sense of vetting out bullshit right well and the algorithms aren't making a distinction between who is just laughing at it And who's deeply vulnerable to it? Generally it's just it just says who's vulnerable to it because another example the way I think about this is if you're driving down the highway and And you know there's Facebook and Google trying to figure out like what should I give you based on what tends to keep your attention? If you look at a car crash and everybody driving the highway they look at the car crash according to Facebook and Google It's like the whole world wants car crashes We just just feed them car crashes after car crashes and your car crashes and what the algorithms do as Guillaume Chazz Lowe in the film says who's the YouTube whistleblower for the YouTube recommendation system Is they find the perfect little rabbit hole for you that it knows will keep you there for five hours and the conspiracy theory Like dark corners of YouTube Were the dark corners that tends to keep people there for five hours And so you have to realize that we're now something like 10 years in to this vast psychology experiment Where it's been you know in every language in hundreds of countries, right and ever in hundreds of languages It's been steering people towards the crazy town. I know when I say crazy town I think of you know imagine there's a spectrum on YouTube And there's on one side you have like the calm Walter Cronkite Carl Sagan, you know Slow you know kind of boring but like educational material or something and the other side of the spectrum you have You know the craziest stuff you can find Crazy town no matter where you start you could start in Walter Cronkite or you could start in crazy town But if I'm YouTube and I want you to watch more You can find. Um, crazy town. No matter where you start, you could start in Walter Cronkite or you could start in Crazy Town. But if I'm YouTube and I want you to watch more, am I going to steer you towards the calm stuff or am I going to steer you more towards crazy town? Crazy town. Always more towards crazy town. So then you imagine just tilting the floor of humanity just by like three degrees, right? And then you just step back and you let society run its course as Jared Lanier says in the film. So that's what everybody is talking about. And so if you look at the degree to which people are deep into rabbit hole conspiracy thinking right now. And again, I want to acknowledge Co-in-Cell Pro, Operation Mockingbird, there's a lot of real stuff, right? So I'm not categorically dismissing it, but we're asking what is the basis upon which we're believing the things we are about the world and increasingly that's based on technology. And we can get into what's going on in Portland. Well, the only way I know that is I'm looking at my social media feed and according to that, it looks like the entire city's on fire and it's a war zone. But if you, I called a friend there the other day and he said, that's a beautiful day. There's actually no violence anywhere near where I am. It's just like these two blocks or something like that. And this is the thing is warping our view of reality. And I think that's what really for me, the social dilemmas was really trying to accomplish as a film and the director of Jefoelowski was trying to accomplish is how did this society get go crazy everywhere all at once, seemingly? This didn't happen by accident, happened by design of this business model. When did the business model get implemented? Like when did they start using these algorithms to recommend things? Because initially YouTube was just a series of videos and it didn't have that recommended section. What was that? That's a good question. I mean, they originally YouTube was just post a video and you can get people to go to that URL and send it around. They needed to figure out once the competition for attention got more intense, they needed to figure out how am I going to keep you there? And so recommending those videos on the right-hand side, I think that was their pretty early, if I remember actually. Because that was some of the innovation is keeping people within this YouTube wormhole. And once people were in YouTube wormhole constantly seeing videos, that was what they could offer the promise to a new video uploader. Hey, if you post it here, you're going to get way more views than if you post it on Vimeo. Right. And that's the thing. I opened up TikTok right now on my phone. Do you have TikTok on your phone? Well, I'm not supposed to, obviously, but it's more for research purposes. Research. Do you know how to TikTok at all? No. My 12 year old is obsessed. Oh, really? Oh, yeah. If she's standing still for five minutes, she just starts like, she starts TikToking. And that's the thing. 2012. 2012. So the Mayans were right. Right. 2012, the platform announced an update to the discovery system designed to identify the videos people actually want to watch by prioritizing videos that hold attention throughout as well as increasing the amount of time a user spends on the platform overall. YouTube, YouTube could assure advertisers that it was providing a valuable high quality experience for people. So that's beginning of the end. Yeah. So 2012 on YouTube's timeline, I mean, you know, the Twitter and Facebook world, I think introduces the retweet and reshare buttons in the 2009 to 2010 kind of time period. So you end up with this world where the things that we're most paying attention to are based on algorithms choosing for us. And so sort of deeper argument that's in the film that I'm not sure everyone picks up on is. These technology systems have taken control of human choice. They take control of humanity because they're controlling the information that all of us are getting. Think about every election. Like, I think a Facebook is kind of a voting machine, but it's a sort of indirect voting machine because it controls the information for four years that your entire society is getting. And then everyone votes based on that information. Now you could say, well, hold on radio and television were there and were partisan before that. Actually, radio and TV are often getting their news stories from Twitter. And Twitter is recommending things based on these algorithms. So when you control the information that an entire population is getting, you're controlling their choices. I mean, literally in military theory, if I want to screw up your military, I want to control the information that it's getting. I want to confuse the enemy. And that information funnel is the very thing that's been corrupted. And it's like the Flint water supply for our minds. I was talking to a friend yesterday and she was saying that there were articles that she was laughing, that there's articles that are written about negative tweets that random people make about a celebrity doing this or that. And she was like, and she was quoting this article. She's like, look how crazy this is. This is a whole article that's written about someone who decided to say something negative about something, something some celebrity had done. And then it becomes this huge art and then the tweets are prominently featured. And then the response to those, I mean, like really arbitrary. Weird. Because it's a values blind system that just cares about what we'll get attention. Exactly. And that's what the article was. It's just an attention grab. It's interesting because Prince Harry and Meghan have become very interested in these issues and are actively working on these issues and getting to know them just a little bit. Are they really? Because it affects them personally? Well, it's actually interesting. I mean, I don't want to speak for them. But I think Meghan has been the target of the most vitriol hate-oriented stuff on the planet, right, from just the amount of sort of criticism that they get. Really? And scrutiny. Yeah. I mean, she's just like newsfeed's filled with hate about just what she looks like, what she says just constantly. Boy, I'm out of the loop. I've never seen anything. She's pretty. What do they think she looks like? Honestly, I don't follow it myself because I don't follow these attention traps. I try not to. But people, she just faces the worst picture. I mean, this is the thing with teen bullying, right? So I think they work on these issues because teenagers are now getting a microversion of this thing where each of us are scrutinized. And I think that's what's not. I mean, think about what celebrity status does and how it screws up humans in general, right? Like take an average celebrity. It warps your mind, it warps your psychology, and you get scrutiny, right? When you suddenly are followed, each person gets thousands or protect forward in the future a few years, each of us have tens of thousands, to hundreds of thousands of people that are following what we say. That's a lot of feedback. And you know, as Jonathan Heit says in the film, I know you've had him here. You know, it's made kids much more cautious and less risk-taking and more bullied overall. And there's just huge problems in mental health around this. Yeah, it's really bad for young girls, right? Especially people who have a real celebrity. Especially people who have a real celebrity. And I've had quite a few celebrities in here and we've discussed it. I just tell them that you can't read that stuff. Just don't read it. Yeah. Like there's no good in it. I had a friend. She did a show. She's a comedian. She did a show. She was talking about this one negative comment that was inaccurate. And I said she only did a half an hour in her show, so she's like, fuck her. And that's not like her. I go, why are you reading that? She's like, because it's mostly positive. I go, but how can we not talking about most of it then? Talking about this one person. Yeah. It's one negative person. We're both laughing about it. She's healthy. You know, she's not completely fucked up by it. But this one person got into her head. I'm like, I'm telling you. It's not the juice is not worth the squeeze. But don't read those things. But this is exactly right. And this is based on how our minds work. I mean, our minds literally have something called negativity bias. So if you have 100 comments and 99 are positive and one is negative, just where does the average humans mind go? Right. They go to the negative. And it also goes to the negative even when you shut down the screen, your mind is sitting there looping on that negative comment. And why? Because evolutionarily, it's really important that we look at social approval, negative social approval, because our reputation is at stake in the trial. So it matters. But it's never been easier now for not just that one comment to sort of gain more airtime. But then for that to build a hate mob and then to see the interconnected clicks. And I can go in and see 10 other people that responded to that better news. And so especially when you have teenagers that are exposed to this and you can keep going down the tree and see all of the hate fest on you. This is the psychological environment that is the default way that kids are growing up now. I actually face this recently with the film itself because actually the film has gotten just crazy positive acclaim for the most part. And there's just a few negative comments and for myself even, right? Like, I'm just a conjunction. But I was glued to a few negative comments. And then you could click and you would see other people that you know who positively like or responded to those comments. Like, why did that person would say that negative thing? I thought we were friends of that whole kind of psychology and we're all vulnerable to it. Unless you learn as you said to tell your celebrity friends, just don't pay attention. Even mild stuff. I see people fix it on. Even mild disagreement or mild criticism. People fix it on. And it's also a problem because you realize that someone's saying this and you're not there and you can't defend yourself. So you have this feeling of helplessness. Like, hey, that's not true. I didn't. And then you don't get it out of your system. You never get to express it. And people can share that false negative stuff. I mean, not all negative stuff is false, but you can assert things and build on the hate fest, right? And start going crazy and saying this person's a white supremacist or this person's even worse. And that'll spread to thousands and thousands of people. And next thing you know, you check into your feed again at 8 p.m. that night and your whole reputation has been destroyed. And you didn't even know what happened to you. Well, and it's happened to teenagers too. I mean, they're anxious like I'll post, you know, teenager will post a photo. Or high school, they make a dumb comment without thinking about it. And then next thing they know, you know, at the end of the day, the parents are all calling because like 300 parents saw it and are calling up the parent of that kid. And it's, you know, we talk to teachers a lot in our work at the Center for Humane Technology and they will say that on Monday morning, this is before COVID, but on Monday morning, they spend the first like hour of class having to clear all the drama that happened on social media from the weekend for the kids. And again, like this and these kids are in what age group? This is like eighth, ninth, ninth, tenth grade, that kind of thing. And the other problem with these kids is there's not like a long history of people growing up through this kind of influence and successfully navigating it. These are the pioneers. Yeah. And they won't know anything different, which is why, you know, we talk about in the film, like this, they're growing up in this environment. You know, one of the simplest principles of ethics is the ethics of symmetry, doing on to others as you would do to yourself. And as we say at the end of the film, like one of the easiest ways you know that there's a problem here is that many of the executives at the social media tech companies don't let their own kids use social media. Right. They literally say the end of the film, like it's a, we have a rule about it or religious about it. We don't do it. The CEO of Lunchables Foods didn't let his own kids eat Lunchables. That's when you know if you talk to a doctor or a lawyer, a doctor and you say, you know, would you get this surgery for your own kid? I say, oh, no, I would never do that. Like would you trust that doctor? Right. And it's the same for a lawyer. So this is the relationship where we have a relationship of asymmetry and technology is influencing all of us. And we need a system by which, you know, when I was growing up, you know, I grew up on the Macintosh and technology and I was creatively doing programming projects and whatever else, the people who built the technology I was using would have their own kids use the things that I was using because they were creative and they were about tools and empowerment. And that's what's changed. We don't have that anymore because the business model took over. And so instead of having just tools sitting there like hammers waiting to be used to build, you know, creative projects or programming to invent things or paintbrushes or whatever, we now have a manipulation based technology environment where everything you use has this incentive to not only addict you, but to have you play the fame lottery, get social feedback because those are all the things that keep people's attention. Isn't this also a problem with these information technologies being attached to corporations that have this philosophy of unlimited growth? Yes. So there are no matter how much they make, I have plot Apple because I think they're the only company that takes steps to protect privacy, to block advertisements, to make sure or that at least like when you use their maps application, they're not saving your data and sending it to everybody. And it's one of the reasons why Apple Maps is really not as good as Google Maps. But I use it and that's one of the reasons why I use it. And when Apple came out recently and there was, they were doing something to block your information being sent to other places. And they forget what was the exact thing that was in the new iOS, they released a thing that blocks the tracking identifiers. That's right. It's not actually out yet. It's going to be out in January or February. I think someone told me. And what that's do, that's a good example of they're putting attacks on the advertising industry because just by saying you can't track people individually, that takes down the value of an advertisement by like 30% or something. And you I do so far, I get this whole privacy report thing. Right. It says it's like in the last seven days, it's prevented 125 trackers from profiling me. Yeah. And you can opt out of that if you'd like. If you like, no fuck that track me. Yeah. You can let them send your data. But that seems to me a much more ethical approach to be able to decide whether or not these companies get your information. I mean, those things are great. The challenges, imagine you get the privacy equation perfectly right. Look at this. Apple working on its own search engine as Google ties could be cut soon. I started using duck duck go. Yep. For that very reason, just because they don't do anything with it. They give you the information, but they don't take your data and do anything with it. The challenge is let's say we get all the privacy stuff perfectly, perfectly right and data production and data controls and all that stuff in a system that's still based on attention and grabbing attention and harvesting and strip mining our brains. You still get maximum polarization, addiction, mental health problems, isolation, teen depression and suicide, polarization, breakdown of truth. So that's we really focus in our work on those topics because that's the direct influence of the business model on warping society. Like we need to name this mind warp. We think of it like the climate change of culture that you know, they seem like they seem like different disconnected topics, much like with climate change. You'd say like, okay, we've got species loss in the Amazon. We've got we're losing insects. We've got melting glaciers. We've got ocean acidification. We've got the coral reefs, you know, getting dying. These can feel like disconnected things until you have a unified model of how emissions change all those different phenomena. Right. In the social fabric, we have shortening of attention spans. We have more outrage driven news media. We have more polarization. We have more breakdown of truth. We have more conspiracy minded thinking. These seem like separate events and separate phenomena, but they're actually all part of this attention extraction paradigm that the company's growth, as you said, depends on extracting more of our attention, which means more polarization, more extreme material, more conspiracy thinking and shortening attention spans. Because we also say like, you know, if we want to double the size of the attention economy, I want your attention go to be split into two separate streams. I want you watching the TV, the tablet, and the phone at the same time. Because now I've tripled the size of the amount of extractable attention that I can get for advertisers, which means that by fracking for attention and splitting you into more junk, you know, attention that's like thinner, we can sell that as if it's real. It's like the financial crisis where you're selling thinner and thinner financial assets as if it's real, but it's really just a junk asset. Oh, wow. That's kind of where we are now where it's sort of the junk attention economy. Because we're, we can shorten attention spans and we're debasing the substrate of that makes up our society because everything in a democracy depends on individual sense making and meaningful choice, meaningful free will meaningful independent views. But if that's all basically sold to the highest bidder that debased is the soil from which independent views grow, because all of us are jacked into this sort of matrix of social media manipulation, that's ruining and degrading our democracy. And that's really, there's many other things that are ruining and degrading our democracy, but that's that's this sort of invisible force that's upstream that affects every other thing downstream. Because if we can't agree on what's true, for example, you can't solve any problem. I think that's what you talked about in your 10 minute thing on the social bull and my thing I saw on YouTube. Yeah. Your organization highlights all these issues in, you know, in an amazing way. And it's very important. But do you have any solutions? It's hard, right? So I just want to say that this is a complex problem as climate change in the sense that you need to change the business model. I think of it like we're on the fossil fuel economy and we have to switch to some kind of beyond that thing, right? Because so long as the business models of these companies depend on extracting attention, can you expect them to do something different? You can't. But how could you, I mean, there's so much money involved. Now, they've accumulated so much wealth that they have an amazing amount of influence. And the asymmetric influence can buy lobbyists, can they convince Congress and prevent things from happening. So this is why it's kind of the last one. That's right. But I think we're seeing signs of real change. We have the antitrust case that was just filed against Google in Congress. We're seeing more hearings. What was the basis of that case? To be honest, I was actually in the middle of the social dilemma launch when I think that happened in our, our, my home burned down in the recent fires in Santa Rosa. So I actually missed that happening. Sorry to hear that. Yes, I was a big thing to drop. But yeah, I know it's awful. There's so much that's been happening in the last six weeks. I've been, uh, I was evacuated three times where I lived in California. Oh, really? Yeah. So we got real close to our house. Justice Department's who's monopolist, Google for violating antitrust laws, department files, complaining against Google to restore competition in search and search advertising markets. Okay. So it's all about search. Right. This is, right. This was a case that's about Google using its dominant position to privilege its own search engine in its own products and beyond, which is similar to sort of Microsoft bundling in the internet explorer browser. But, you know, this is all good progress, but really it misses the kind of fundamental harm of like these things are warping our society. They're warping how our minds are working. And there's no, you know, congressional action against that because it's a really hard problem to solve. I think that the reason the film for me is so important is that if I look at the growth rate of how fast Facebook has been recommending people into conspiracy groups and kind of polarizing us into separate echo chambers, which we should really break down, I think, as well for people like exactly the mechanics of how that happens. But if you look at the growth rate of all those harms compared to, you know, how fast has Congress passed anything to deal with it, like basically not at all. They seem a little bit unsophisticated in that regard. Like they think. I understand. Yeah. They try to be charitable. I want to be charitable too. And I want to make sure I call out and there's Senator Mark Warner, Blumenthal, several other senators. We've talked to have been really on top of these issues and led, I think Senator Warner's white paper on how to regulate the tech platforms is one of the best. It's from two years ago in 2018. And Rafi Martinez, his staffers, amazing human beings works very hard on these issues. So there are some good folks, but when you look at the broad, like the hearing yesterday, it's mostly grandstanding to politicize the issue, right? Because you turn it into on the right, hey, you're censoring conservatives and on the left, it's, hey, you're not taking down enough misinformation and dealing with the hate speech and all these kinds of things. And they're not actually dealing with how would we solve this problem? They're just trying to make a political point to win over their base. Now Facebook recently banned the QAnon pages, which I thought was kind of fascinating, because I'm like, well, this is a weird sort of slippery slope, isn't it? If you decide that, it almost seemed to me like, well, we'll throw them a bone. We'll get rid of QAnon, because it's so preposterous. Let's just get rid of that. But what else, like if you keep going down that rabbit hole, where do you draw the line? Like where are you allowed to have JFK conspiracy theories? Are you allowed to have flatter or are you allowed? I mean, I guess flatter is not dangerous. Is that where they make the distinction? Yeah. So I think their policy is evolving in the direction of when things are causing offline harm. When online content is known to proceed offline harm, that's when the platform, that's the standard of which platforms are acting. What offline harm has been crossed by the QAnon stuff, do you know? There's several incidents. We interviewed a guy on our podcast about it. Armed gunpoint type thing, I can't remember. And there's things that are priming people to be violent. You know, these are, I just want to say, these are really tricky topics. I think what I want to make sure we get to though is that there are many people manipulating the group thing that can happen in these echo chambers. Because once you're in one of these things, like I studied in culture earlier in my career, and the power of cults is like they're a vertically integrated persuasion stack because they control your social relationships, they control who you're hearing from and who you're not hearing from. They give you meaning purpose and belonging. They have a custom language, they have an internal way of referring to things. And social media allows you to create this sort of decentralized cult factory where it's easier to grab people into a echo chamber where they only hear from other people's views. And Facebook, you can give in just recently, announce that they're going to be promoting more of the Facebook group content into feeds, which means that they're actually going to make it easier for that kind of manipulation to happen. But do they make the distinction between group content and conspiracy groups? Like how do you, when does group content, when does it cross a line? I don't know. I mean, the policy teams that work on this are coming up with their own standards, so I'm not familiar with it. If you think about, you know, they've got how hard it is to come up with a law at the federal level that all states will agree to, then you imagine Facebook trying to come up with a policy that will be universal to all the countries that are running Facebook, right? Well, then you imagine how you take a company that never thought they were going to be in the position to do that. Correct. And then within a decade, they become the most prominent source of news and information on the planet Earth. Correct. And now they have to regulate it. And you know, I actually believe Zuckerberg, when he says, I don't want to make these decisions. I shouldn't be in this role where my beliefs decide the whole world's views. Right. He genuinely believes that. And to be sure, but the problem is he created a situation where he is now in that position. I mean, he got there very quickly and they did it aggressively when they went into countries like Myanmar or Ethiopia, all throughout the African continent where they gave, do you know about free basics? No. So this is the program that I think has gotten something like 700 million accounts on on Facebook where they do a deal with like a telecommunications provider, like their version of AT&T in Myanmar or something. So when you get your smartphone, it comes from Facebook's built in. Facebook's built in. And there's a symmetry of access where it's free to access Facebook, but it costs money to do the other things for the data plan. So you get a free Facebook account. Facebook is the internet basically because it's the free thing you can do when you're found. And then there's, we know that there's fake information that's being spread there. The data doesn't apply to Facebook use. Yeah, I think like the cost, you know, we pay for data here. Like that, yeah, I think you don't pay for Facebook, but you do pay for all the other things, which creates an asymmetry where you're, of course, you're going to use Facebook for most things. Right. See Facebook messenger. Yeah. Video calls. Yeah. I don't know exactly with video because different. Facebook has video calls as well. In general, they do. I just don't know how that works in the developing world, but there's a joke within Facebook. I mean, this is caused genocides, right? So in Myanmar, which is in the film, the Rohingya Muslim minority group, many Rohingya were persecuted and murdered because of fake information spread by the government on Facebook using their asymmetric knowledge with fake accounts. I mean, even just a couple weeks ago, Facebook took down a network of, I think, several hundred thousand fake accounts in Myanmar. And they didn't even have at the time more than something like four or five people in their extended Facebook network who even spoke the language of that. Country. Oh, God. So when you realize that this is like the, I think of like the Iraq war, Colin Powell pottery barn rule, where like, you know, if you go in and you break it, then you are responsible for fixing it. This is Facebook actively doing deals to go into Ethiopia, to go into Myanmar, to go into the Philippines or whatever and providing these solutions. And then it breaks the society. And they're now in a position where they have to fix it. There's actually a joke within Facebook that if you want to know which countries will be quote unquote at risk in two years from now, look at which ones have Facebook free basics. Jesus. And that's terrifying that they do that and they don't have very many people that even speak the language. So there's no way they're going to be able to filter it. That's right. And so now if you take it back, I know we were talking outside about the congressional hearing in Jack Dorsey and the questions from the senator about are you taking down the content from the Ayatollahs or from the Chinese Xinjiang province about the Uighurs, you know when there's sort of speech that leads to offline violence in these other countries? The issue is that these platforms are managing the information commons for countries they don't even speak the language of. And if you think that conspiracy theory sort of dark corners crazy town of the English internet are bad and we've already taken out like hundreds of whack-a-moles sticks and they've hired hundreds of policy people and hundreds of engineers to deal with that problem, you go to a country like Ethiopia where there's something like 90 major, there's 90 something dialects I think in the country and six major languages where one of them is the dominant Facebook sort of language and then the others get persecuted because they actually don't have, they don't have a voice on the platform. This is really important that the people in Myanmar who got persecuted and murdered didn't have to be on Facebook for the fake information spread about them to impact them, for people to go after them. So this is the whole I can assert something about this minority group, that minority group isn't on Facebook but if it manipulates the dominant culture to go we have to go kill them then they can go do it and the same thing has happened in India where there's videos uploaded about hey those Muslims I think they're called flesh killings where they'll say that these Muslims kill this cow and the cows are sacred. Do you believe you? They will post those that go viral on WhatsApp and say we have to go lynch those Muslims because they killed our sacred cows and they went from something like five of those prepping per year to now hundreds of those happening per year because of fake news being spread again on Facebook about them on WhatsApp about them and again they don't have to be on the platform for this to happen to them. So this is critical but imagine you and I are all, let's imagine all of your listeners you know I don't even know how many you have like tens of millions and we all listen to this conversation we say we don't want to even use Facebook and Twitter or YouTube. We all still if you live in the US still live in a country that everyone else will vote based on everything that they're seeing on these platforms. If you zoom out to the global context all of us don't use Facebook in Brazil but if Brazil which was heavily glass election was skewed by Facebook and WhatsApp where something like 87% of people saw at least one of the major fake news stories about Bolsonaro and he got elected and you have people in Brazil chanting Facebook, Facebook, when he wins he wins and then he sets a new policy to wipe out the Amazon. All of us don't have to be on Facebook to be affected by a leader that wipes out the Amazon and accelerates climate change timelines because of those interconnected effects. So we at the Center for Immunology are looking at this from a global perspective where it's not just the US election Facebook manages something like 80 elections per year and if you think that they're doing all the monitoring that they are for English speaking, American election, most privileged society now look at the hundreds of other countries that they're operating in. Do you think that they're devoting the same resources to the other countries? This is so crazy. Is that you Jamie? Is that weird noise? You're like a squeaky? Yeah, maybe it's me. I don't think it is. Just my feedback. There it is. You might be me. Is that breathing? I don't know. You have asthma? I think I had an allergy come back. Oh, I was like, thank you so much. What's terrifying is that we're talking about from 2012 to 2020, YouTube implementing this program and then what is even the birth of Facebook? What is I like 2002 or 2004? 2004. This is such a short time. program and then what is even the birth of Facebook? What is I like 2002 or three or 24? 2004. This is such a short timeline and having these massive worldwide implications from the use of these things. When you look at the future, do you look at this like a runaway train that's headed towards a cliff? Yeah, I mean I think right now this thing is a Frankenstein that it's not like even if Facebook is aware of all these problems, they don't have the staff unless they hired like hundreds of thousands of people definitely minimum to try to address all these problems. But the paradox we're in is that the very premise of these services is to rely on automation. It used to be we had editors and journalists or at least editors or people edited even what went on television saying what is credible, what is true? You sat here with Alex Jones even yesterday and you're trying to check him on everything he's saying. You're researching and trying to look that stuff up, you're trying to be doing some more responsible communication. The premise of these systems is that you don't do that. The reason venture capitalists find social media so profitable and such a good investment is because we generate the content for free. We are the useful idiots. Instead of paying a journalist $70,000 a year to write something credible, we can each be convinced to share our political views and we'll do it knowingly for free. Actually we don't really know the word the useful idiots. That's the kind of the point. And then instead of paying an editor $100,000 a year to figure out which of those things is true that we want to promote and give exponential reach to, you have an algorithm says hey what do people click on the most? What do people like the most? And then you realize the quality of the signals that are going into the information environment that we're all sharing is a totally different process. We went from a high quality gated process that cost a lot of money to this really crappy process that costs no money which makes the company so profitable. And then we fight back for territory for values. When we raise our hands and say hey there's a thin inspiration video problem for teenagers in Norexia. Hey there's a mass conspiracy sort of echo chamber problem over here. Hey there's you know flat earth sort of issues. And again these get into tricky topics because we want to you know I know we both believe in free speech and we have this feeling that the solution to bad speech is better you know more speech that counters the things that are said. But in a finite attention economy we don't have the capacity for everyone who gets bad speech to just have a counter response. In fact what happens right now is that that bad speech rabbit holes into not only call worse in worse speech but more extreme versions of that view that confirms it. Because one's Facebook knows that that flat earth rabbit hole is good for you at getting your attention back. It wants to give you just more and more of that. It doesn't want to say here's 20 people who disagree with that thing. Right. Right. So I think if you were to imagine a different system we would ask who are the thinkers that are most open-minded and synthesis oriented where they can actually steal man the other side. Actually they can do you know for this speech here is the opposite counter argument. They can show that they understand that. And imagine those people get lifted up. But notice that none of those people that you and I know I mean we're both friends with Eric Weinstein. And you know I think he's one of these guys who's really good at sort of offering the steal manning here's the other side of this here's the other side of that. But the people who generally do that aren't the ones who get the tens of millions of followers on these surfaces. It's the black and white extreme outrage oriented thinkers and speakers that get rewarded in these attention economy. And so if you look at how if I zoom way out and say how is the entire system behaving just like if I zoom out and say climate you know the climate system like how is the entire overall system behaving. It's not producing the kind of information environment on which democracy can survive. Jesus. The thing that troubles me the most that I clearly see you're thinking and I agree with you. Like I don't see any holes in what you're saying. Like I don't know how this plays out but it doesn't look good. And I don't see a solution. It's like if there are a thousand bison running full steam towards a cliff and they don't realize the cliff is there. I don't see how you pull them back. So I think of it like we're trapped in a body and that's eating itself. So like it's kind of a cannibalism economy because our economic growth right now with these tech companies is based on eating our own organs. So we're eating our own mental health organs. We're eating the health of our children. We're eating the sorry for being so gnarly about it. But it's it's a cannibalistic system in a system that's hurting itself or eating itself or punching itself. If one of the neurons wakes up in the body, it's not enough to change that. It's going to keep punching itself. But if enough of the neurons wake up and say, this is stupid. Why would we build our system this way? And the reason I'm so excited about the film is that if you have 40 to 50 million people who now recognize that we're living in this sort of cannibalist system in which the economic incentive is to debase the life support systems of your democracy, we can all wake up and say, that's stupid. Let's do something differently. Let's actually change the system. Let's use different platforms. Let's fund different platforms. Let's regulate and tame the existing Frankenstein's and I don't mean regulating speech. I mean really thoughtfully, how do we change the incentives? So it doesn't go to the same race to the bottom. And we have to all recognize that we're now 10 years into this hypnosis experiment of warping of the mind. And like, you know, friends with some hypnotists is like, how do we snap our fingers and get people to say that that artificial there's an inflated level of polarization and hatred right now that especially going into this election. I think we only be much more cautious about what's running in our brains right now. Yeah, I don't think most people are generally aware of what's causing this polarization. I think they think it's the climate of society because the president and because of Black Lives Matter and the George Floyd protests and all this jazz. But I don't think they understand that that's exacerbated in a fantastic way by social media and the last 10 years of our addictions to social media and these echo chambers that we all exist in. Yes, so I want to make sure that we're both clear and I know you agree with this that these things were already in society to some degree. Right. So we want to make sure we're not saying social media is blamed for all of it. Absolutely not. No. No. In fact, gasoline is gasoline. Right. Exactly. It's lighter fluid for sparks and polarization. Yeah. It's lighter fluid for sparks of, you know, paranoid, which is ironically what everybody was the opposite of everybody, but everybody hoped the internet was going big. Right. Everybody hoped the internet was going to be this bottomless resource of information where everyone was going to be educated in a way they had never experienced before in the history of the human race where you'd have access to all the answers to all your questions. You know, Eric Weinstein describes as the library of Alexandria in your pocket. Yeah. But no. Well, and I want to be clear so that I'm not against technology or giving people access. In fact, I think a world where everyone had a smartphone and a Google search box in Wikipedia and like a search oriented of YouTube so you can look up health issues and how to do it yourself, fix anything. Sure. It would be awesome. That would be great. I would love that. Just want to be really clear because this is not an anti-technology compensation. It's about again this business model that depends on recommending stuff to people, which just to be clear on the polarization front. It's social media is more profitable when it gives you your own Truman show that affirms your view of reality every time you flick your finger. Right. Like that's going to be more profitable than every time you flick your finger. I actually show you here's a more complex nuance picture that disagrees with that. Here's a different way to see it. That won't be nearly as successful and the best way for people to test this. We actually recommend even after seeing the film to do this is open up Facebook on two phones, especially like two partners or people who have the same friends. So you have the same friends on Facebook. You would think if you scroll your feeds, you'd see the same thing. You're the same people you're following. So why wouldn't you see the same thing? But if you swap phones and you actually scroll through their feed for 10 minutes and you scroll through mine for 10 minutes, you'll find that you'll see completely different information. And it won't. You'll also notice that it won't feel very compelling. Like if you asked yourself, my friend Emily just did this with with her husband after seeing the film. And she literally has the same friends as her husband. And she's scroll through the feed. She's like, this is an interesting. I wouldn't come back to this. Right. And so we have to again realize how subtle and and and yeah, just how subtle this has been. I wonder what would happen if I scroll through my feed because I literally don't use Facebook. What do you use? I only use Instagram. I stopped using Twitter because it's like a bunch of mental patients throwing shit at each other. And I very rarely use what I should say. Occasionally I'll check some things to see like what the climate is. But of the cultural climate. But I use Instagram and I Facebook. I used to use Instagram to post the Facebook. But I kind of stopped even doing that because it just it just seems gross. Yeah. It's just and it's these people in these verbose arguments about politics and the economy and world events and just we have to ask ourselves is that medium constructive to solving these problems? No. Just not at all. And it's an attention casino. Right. The house always wins. And we're you know, Eric, you might might see Eric Wednesday in a thread, you know, battling an outer sort of duking it out with someone and maybe even reaching some convergence on something. But it just wizzes by your feed and then it's gone. Yeah. And all the effort that we're putting in to make these systems work. But then it's just all gone. What do you do? I mean, I try to very minimally use social media overall. Luckily, the work is so busy that that's easier. I want to say first that, you know, on the addiction in front of these things, I, you know, myself am very sensitive in it, you know, easily addicted by these things myself. And that's why I think I noticed if you were saying social dilemma, it's email for you. Huh? Yeah. Well, I, you know, for me, I if I refresh my email and pull to refresh like a slot machine, sometimes I'll get invited to meet the president of such and such to advise on regulation. And sometimes I get a stupid newsletter from a politician. I don't care about it or something. Right? So I email is very addictive. Swatting I talked to Daniel Kahneman who wrote the, he's like the founder of behavioral economics. He wrote the book Thinking Fast and Slow, if you know that one. And he said as well that email was the most addictive for him. And he, you know, the one thing you'll find is the people who know most about these sort of persuasive manipulative tricks, they'll say we're not immune to them just because we know about them. The Dan Arele is another famous persuasion behavioral economics guy talks about flattery and how flattery still feels good. Even if I tell you, I don't mean it. Like I love that that's sweatshirt. That's an awesome sweatshirt. Where'd you get it? You're just gonna pull shit with me. But that's, that's the, um, it feels good to get flattery even if you know that it's not real. Right. And the point being that like, can we have so much evolutionary wiring to care about what other people think of us that just because you know that they're manipulating you in the likes or whatever, it still feels good to get those hundred extra likes on that thing that you posted. Yeah, when does the likes come about? Um, well, let's see. Well, actually, you know, in the film, you know, Justin Rosenstein, who's the inventor of the like button, talks about I think the first version was something called beacon and it arrived in 2006, I think. But then the simple like one click like button was like a a little bit later, like 2008, 2009. Are you worried that it's going to be more and more invasive? I mean, you think about the problems we're dealing with now with Facebook and Twitter and Instagram, all these within the last decade or so. What, what do we have to look forward to? I mean, is there something on the horizon that's going to be even more invasive? Well, we have to change the system because as you said, technology is only going to get more immersed into our lives and infusing to our lives, not less. It's technology and to get more persuasive or less persuasive. More for sure is AI going to get better at predicting our next move or less good at predicting our next move. It's almost like we have to eliminate that. And I mean, it would be really hard to tell them you can't use algorithms anymore that depend on people's attention spans. Right. It would be really hard, but it seems like the only way for the internet to be pure. Correct. I think I think of this like the environmental movement. I mean, some people have compared the film, the social dilemma to Rachel Carson's silent spring. Right. Where that was the birth, that was the book that birthed the environmental movement. And that was in a Republican administration, the Nixon administration. We actually passed, we created the EPA, the environmental protection agency. We went from a world where we said the environment, something we don't pay attention to to we passed a month. I forgot the laws we passed between 1963 and 1972 over a decade. We started caring about the environment. We created things that protected the national parks. We, and I think that's kind of what's going on here that, you know, imagine for example, it is illegal to show advertising on youth oriented social media apps between 12 a.m. and 6 a.m. because you're basically monetizing loneliness and lack of sleep. Right. Like imagine that you cannot advertise during those hours because we say that like a national park, our children's attention between, this is a very minimal example. It's to be like, you know, taking the most obvious piece of low-hanging fruit and land and say, let's quarantine this off and say this is sacred. But isn't the problem like the environmental protection agency resonates with most people, the idea, oh, let's protect the world for our children. Right. There's not a lot of people profiting off of polluting the rivers. Right. But when you lose this, I mean, over over hunting, you know, certain lands or over fishing certain fisheries and collapsing them. I mean, there are, if you have big enough corporations that are based on an infinite growth profit model, you know, operating with less and less resources to get, this is a problem we face before. For sure. But it's not the same sort of scale as 300 and X amount of millions of people and a vast majority of them are using some form of social media. And also this is not something that really resonates in a very clear like one plus one equals two way. Like the environmental protection agency makes sense. Like if you ask people, right, should you be able to throw garbage into the ocean? Everyone's going to say, no, that's terrible idea. Right. Should you be able to make an algorithm that shows people what they're interested in on YouTube? Like, yeah, what's wrong with that? Well, it's more like sugar, right? Because sugar is always going to taste way better than something else because our evolutionary heritage says like that's rare. And so we should pay more attention to it. This is like sugar for the fame lottery or attention for social approval. And so it's always going to feel good. And we need to have consciousness about it. And we haven't banned sugar, but we have created a new conversation about what healthy, you know, eating is, right? I mean, there's a whole new fitness movement and sort of yoga and all these other things that people care more about their bodies and health than they probably ever have. I think many of us wouldn't have thought we'd ever reach it through, you know, get through the period of soda being at this sort of pinnacle popularity that is. I think in 2013 or 14 was the year that water crossed over as being more of a successful drinking product than soda, I think. I think that's true. You might want to look that up. But so I think we could have something like that here where we have to, I think of it this way, if you want to even get kind of weirdly, I don't know, spiritual or something about it, which is we're the only species that could even know that we were doing this to ourselves. Right. Like we're the only species with a capacity for self awareness to know that we have actually like roped ourselves into this matrix of like literally the matrix of sort of undermining our own psychological weaknesses. Like a lion that somehow manipulated its environment so that there's gazelles everywhere and is like overeating on gazelles doesn't have the self awareness to know wait a second. If we keep doing this, this is going to cause all these other problems, it can't do that because its brain doesn't have that capacity. Our brain, we do have the capacity for self awareness. We can name negativity bias, which is that 500 comments and 99 are positive. My brain goes to the negative. We can name that and once we're aware of it, we get some agency back. We can name that we have a draw towards social approval. So when I see I've been tagged in a photo, I know that they're just manipulating my social approval. We can name social reciprocity, which is when I get all those text messages and I feel, oh, I have to get back to all these people. Well, that's just an inbuilt bias that we have to get back reciprocity. We have to get back to people who do give it gift stuff to us. The more we name our own biases, like confirmation bias, we can name that my brain is more likely to feel good getting information that I already agree with than information that disagrees with me. Once I know that about myself, I can get more agency back and we're the only like species that we know of that has the capacity to realize that we're in a self-terminating sort of system and we have to change that by understanding our own weaknesses and that we've created the system that is undermining ourselves. And I think the film is doing that for a lot of people. It certainly is, but I think it needs more, it's like inspiration. It needs a refresher on a regular basis. Right. Do you feel this massive obligation to be that guy that is out there sort of as the Paul Revere of the technology influence invasion? I just see these problems and I wanted them to co-away. I didn't desire and wake up to run a social movement, but honestly right now that's what we're trying to do with the Center for Humane Technologies. We realized that before the success of the film, we were actually more focused on working with technologists inside the industry, you know, I come from Silicon Valley, many of my friends are executives at the companies and we have these inside relationships. So we focused at that level. We also worked with policy makers and we were trying to speak to policy makers. We weren't trying to mobilize the whole world against this problem. But with the film, suddenly we as an organization have had to do that. And frankly, I wish we had, I'm just digging really honestly, we really wish we had those funnels so that people who saw the film could have landed into a carefully designed funnel where we we actually started mobilizing people to deal with this issue. Because there are ways we can do it. We can pass certain laws. We have to have a new cultural sort of set of norms about how do we want to show up and use the system. You know, families and schools can have whole new protocols of how do we want to do group migrations? Because one of the problems is that if a teenager says by themselves, whoa, I saw the film, I'm going to delete my Instagram account by myself or TikTok account by myself. That's not enough because all their friends are still using Instagram and TikTok and they're still going to talk about who's dating who or gossip about this or homework or whatever on those services. And so the services Instagram and TikTok prey on social exclusion that you will feel excluded if you don't participate. And the way to solve that is to get whole schools or families together, like different parent groups, whatever together, and do a group migration from Instagram to signal or iMessage or some kind of group thread that way. Because notice that when you, as you said, apples are pretty good actor in this space, if I make a FaceTime call to you, FaceTime isn't trying to monetize my attention. It's just sitting there being like, yeah, how can I help you have a good face? It's close to face-to-face conversation these possible. Jamie pulled up an article earlier that was saying that Apple was creating its own search engine. Yeah. I hope that is the case. And I hope that if it is the case, they apply the same sort of ethics that they have towards sharing your information that they do with other things to their search engine. But I wonder if there would be some sort of value in them creating a social media platform that doesn't rely on that sort of algorithm. Yeah. Well, I think in general, one of the exciting trends that has happened since the film is there's actually many more people trying to build alternatives social media products that are not based on these business models. Yeah. I could name a few, but I don't want to be endorsing and I mean, there's people building Marco Polo, Clubhouse, Wikipedia is trying to build a sort of for a nonprofit version. I always forget the names of these things. But the interesting thing is that for the first time, people are trying to build something else because now there's enough people who are feel disgusted by the present state of affairs. And that wouldn't be possible unless we created kind of a cultural movement based on something like the film that reaches a lot of people. It's interesting that you made this comparison to the environmental protection agency because there's kind of a parallel in the way other countries handled the environment versus the way we do and how it makes them competitive. I mean, that's always been the Republican argument for not getting rid of certain fossil fuels and coal and all sorts of things that have a negative consequence that we need to be competitive with China. We need to be competitive with these other countries that don't have these regulations in effect. The concern would be well, first of all, the problem is these companies are global, right? Like Facebook is global. If they put these regulations on America, but didn't put these regulations worldwide, then wouldn't they use the income and the algorithm in other countries unchecked and have this which is why this negative consequence and gather up all this money, which is why it's just like sugar, it's like everyone around the world has to understand and be more antagonistic. Yeah. And not like sugar is evil, but just you have to have a common awareness about the problem. But how could you educate people that like if you're talking about some country, Mike Myanmar or these other countries that have had these like serious consequences because of Facebook, how could you possibly get our ideas across to them if we don't even know their language? And it's this system that's already set up in this very advantageous way for them where Facebook comes on their phone. Like how could you hit the brakes on that? Well, I mean, first, I just want to say this is an incredibly hard, and depressing problem with like just the scale of it, right? Right. You need something like a global, I mean, language independent, global self awareness about this problem. Now, again, I don't want to be tuning the horn about the film, but the thing I'm excited about is it launched on Netflix in 190 countries and in 30 languages. So we just used to have to horn. But yeah, yeah, I mean, to it. Well, I think, you know, the film was seen in 30 languages. So you know, the cool thing is I wish I could show the world my inbox. I think people see the film and they feel like, oh my God, this is huge. And I'm a huge problem. And I'm all alone. How are we ever going to fix this? But I get emails every day from Indonesia, Chile, Argentina, Brazil, people saying, oh my God, this is exactly what's going on in my country. I mean, I've never felt more optimistic. And I've felt really pessimistic for the last eight years working on this because there really hasn't been enough movement. But I think for the first time, there's a global awareness now that we could then start to mobilize. I know the EU's mobilizing Canada's mobilizing Australia's mobilizing California state is mobilizing with Prop 24. There's a whole bunch of movement now in the space. And they have a new rhetorical arsenal of why we have to make this bigger transition. Now, you know, are we going to get all the countries that, you know, where there's the six different major dialects in Ethiopia where they're going to know about this. I don't think the film was translated into all those dialects. I think we need to do more. It's a really, really hard messy problem. But on the topic of if we don't do it, someone else will, you know, one interesting thing in the environmental movement was there's a great WNYC radio piece about the history of lead. And when we regulated lead, I don't know, do you know anything about this? Yeah, I do. Yeah. Yeah. The experience this matches up with your experience. My understanding is that obviously lead was this sort of miracle thing we put it in pain, we put it in gas. It was like great. And then the way we figured out that we should regulate lead out of our sort of infused product supply is by proving there is this guy who proved that it dropped kids IQ by four points for every, I think, microgram per deciliter, I think. So in for the amount of, if you had a microgram of lead per deciliter of either, I'm guessing air, it would drop like the IQ of kids by four points. And they measured this by actually doing a sample on their teeth or something because lead shows up in your bones, I think. And they proved that if the IQ points dropped by four points, it would lower future age learning, age earning, excuse me, wage earning potential of those kids, which would then lower the GDP of the country because it would be shifting the IQ of the entire country down by four points. If not more, based on how much lead is in the environment, if you zoom out and say, is social media now, let's replace the word IQ, which is also a rot term because there's like a whole bunch of views about how that's designed in certain ways and not others and measuring intelligence. Let's replace IQ with problem solving capacity. What is your problem solving capacity? Which is actually how they talk about it in this radio episode. And imagine that we have a societal IQ or a societal problem solving capacity. The US has a societal IQ. Russia has a societal IQ. Germany has a societal IQ. How good is a country at solving its problems? Now imagine that what is social media do to our societal IQ? What distorts our ideas gives us a bunch of false narratives that fills us with misinformation. It makes it impossible to agree with each other. And even in democracy, if you don't agree with each other and you can't even do compromise, people recognize that politics is invented to avoid warfare. So we have compromise and understanding so that we don't physically or violently each other. We have compromise and conversation. If social media makes compromise, conversation, and under shared understanding and shared truth, impossible, it doesn't drop our societal IQ by four points. It drops it to zero. Because you can't solve any problem, whether it's human trafficking or poverty or climate issues or racial injustice, whatever it is that you care about, it depends on us having some shared view about what we agree on. And by the way, and on the optimistic side, there are countries like Taiwan that have actually built a digital democratic sort of social media type thing. Audrey Tang, you should have Audrey Tang on your show. She's amazing. She's the digital minister of Taiwan. And they've actually built a system that rewards unlikely consensus. So when two people who would traditionally disagree post something online, and when they actually, when two people would traditionally disagree actually agree on something, that's what gets boosted to the top of the way that we look at our information feeds. Yeah. So it's about finding consensus where there'd be unlikely and saying, hey, actually, you know, you Joe interest on you typically you agree, you disagree on these six things, you agree on these three things. And of things that we're going to encourage you to talk about on a menu, we hand you a menu of the things you agree on. And how do they manipulate the? Honestly, we did a great interview with her on our podcast that people can listen to. I think you should have her on. She's honest. I would love to. What is your podcast again, tell people? It's called your undivided attention. And with the interview is with Audrey Tang, it's her name. And I think that's, this is one model of how do you have, you know, sort of digital media bolted onto the top of a democracy and have it work better as opposed to how do you just degrades into kind of nonsense and polarization and inability to agree. That's what we need. That's what we need. It's such a unique situation too, right? Because China doesn't recognize them and there's real threat that they're going to be invaded by China. Correct. And so what's interesting about Taiwan is there's we didn't we haven't talked about the disinformation issues, but it's under, like you said, not just physical threat from China, but massive propaganda disinformation campaigns are trying to run there, right? And so what's amazing is that their digital media system is good at dealing with these disinformation campaigns and conspiracy theories and other things, even in the face of a huge threat like China, but there's more binding energy in the country because they all know that there's it's a tiny island and there's a looming threat of this big country. Whereas the United States were not this tiny island with a looming threat. Elsewhere, in fact, many people don't know or don't think that there's actually information warfare going on. I actually think it's really important to point out to people that the social media is one of our biggest national security risks because while we're obsessed with protecting our physical borders and building walls and you know, spending a trillion dollars we're doing the nuclear fleet, we left the digital border wide open. Like if Russia, China, try to fly a plane into the United States, our Pentagon and billions of dollars of defense infrastructure from Raytheon and Boeing or whatever will shoot that thing down and it doesn't get in. If they try to come into the country, they'll get stopped by the passport control system, ideally. If they try to fly, if Russia or China try to fly an information bomb into the country, instead of being met by the Department of Defense, they're met by a Facebook algorithm with a white glove that says exactly which zip code you want to target. Like if the opposite of protection, so social media makes us more vulnerable. I think of it like if you imagine like a bank that spent billions of dollars, you know, surrounding the bank with physical bodyguards, right, like it's just the toughest guys in every single quarter you just totally secured the bank. But then you installed on the bank a computer system that everyone interacts with and no one changes the default password from like lowercase password. Anyone can hack in. That's what we do when we install Facebook in our society or you install Facebook in Ethiopia because if you think Russia or China, you know, or Iran or South Korea or it's going to be North Korea, influencing our election is bad. Just keep in mind the like dozens of countries throughout Because if you think Russia or China or Iran or South Korea, excuse me, North Korea, influencing our election is bad, just keep in mind the dozens of countries throughout Africa, where we actually know recently there is a huge campaign that the Stanford Cyber Policy Center did a report on of Russia targeting I think something like seven or eight major countries and disinformation campaigns running in those countries. Or the Facebook whistleblower who came out about a month ago, Sophie Zang, I think is her name, saying that she personally had to step in to deal with disinformation campaigns in Honduras, Azerbaijan, I think Greece or some other countries like that. So the scale of what these technology companies are managing, they're managing the information environments for all these countries, but they don't have the resources to do it. So they... Not only that, they're not trained to do it. They're not qualified to do it. Correct. They're making up as they go along. They're 20 to 30 to four. And they're way behind the curve. Right. When I had Rene DeReston and she detailed all the issues with the internet research agency in Russia and what they did during the 2016 campaign for both sides. I mean, the ideas that just promoted Trump, but they were basically sewing the seeds of just the decline of the democracy. They were trying to figure out how to create turmoil. And they were doing it in this very bizarre, calculated way that it didn't see... It was hard to see like what's the end game here? Well, the end game is to have everybody fight. Yeah. I mean, it's really what the end game was. And if I'm, you know, one of our major adversaries, you know, after World War II, there was no ability to use kinetic, like nukes or something on the bigger countries, right? Like, that's all done. So the... What's the best way to take down the biggest, you know, country, you know, on the planet, on the block, you use its own internal tensions against itself. This is what Sun Zoo would tell you to do. Yeah. And that's never been easier because of Facebook. And because of these platforms being open to do this manipulation. And if I'm looking now, we're four days away from the U.S. elections or something like that, when this goes out, Jesus Christ. There is never... We have never been more destabilized as a country until now. I mean, the most destabilized we've probably ever been, I would say. Um, and polarized. Um, maybe people would argue the Civil War was... Well, the worst, but in recent history, um, there is maximum incentive for foreign actors to drive up again, not one side or the other, but to drive us into conflict. So I would really, you know, I think what we all need to do is recognize how much incentive there is to plant stories to actually have so physical violence on the streets. I think there was a story... Wasn't we talking about this morning that, um, there was some kind of truck, I think in Philadelphia or DC, loaded with explosives or something like this. There's such an incentive to try to, you know, throw the agent provocateur, like throw the first stone, throw the first, um, you know, Molotov cocktail, throw the first, uh, you know, make the first shot fired, uh, to drive up that conflict. And I think we have to realize how much that may be artificially motivated. Very much so. And the Renee duress to podcast that I did, where she went to depth about all the different ways that they did it, and the most curious one being funny memes. Yeah. There's so many of the memes that you read that you laughed at. I thought, yeah. Well, there's, it was just so weird that there were humorous, and she said she looked at probably 100,000 memes. And the funny thing is you actually can agree with them, right? Yeah, you would have to say that. You would have to say that. Yeah. And they're being constructed by foreign agents that are doing this to try to mock certain aspects of our society and pit people against each other and create a mockery. And, you know, back in 2016, there was no, it was very little collaboration between our defense industry and CIA and DOD and people like that, uh, and the tech platforms. And the tech platforms said it's government's job to deal with if foreign actors are doing these things. How do you stop something like the IRA, like say, if they're creating memes in particular and they're funny memes? Well, so one of the issues that Renee brings up, and I'm just a huge fan of her and her work, uh, is- as a matter. Yeah. Uh, is that if I'm, you know, China, I don't need to invent some fake news story. I just find someone in your society who's already saying what I want you to be talking about. And I just like amplify them up. I take that dial and I just turn it up to 10, right? So I find your Texas secessionists and like, oh, Texas, that would be a good thing if I'm trying to rip the country apart. So I'm going to take those Texas secessionists and the California secessionists. And I'm just going to dial them up to 10. So those are the ones we hear from. Now, if you're trying to stop me in your Facebook and your the integrity team or something, on what grounds are you trying to stop me? Because it's your own people, your own free speech. I'm just the one amplifying the one I want to be out there. Right? And so that's what gets tricky about this is I think our moral concepts that we hold so dear of free speech are inadequate in an attention economy that is hackable. And it's really more about what's getting me attention rather than what are individuals saying or can't say. And you know, again, they've created this Frankenstein where they're making mostly automated decisions about who's looking like what pattern behavior or coordinated and authentic behavior here or that and they're shutting down. I don't know if people know this. People Facebook shut down two billion fake accounts. I think this is a stat from a year ago. They shut down two billion fake accounts. They have three billion active real users. Do you think that those two billion were the perfect like real, you know, real fake accounts and they didn't miss any or they didn't overwhelm and took some real accounts down with it? You know, our friend Brett Weinstein, he just got taken down by Facebook. And he saw that. That seemed calculated. The Facebook is shut down 5.4 billion fake accounts this year. And that was in November, 29. Oh my God. Oh my God. That is insane. That's so many. And so again, it's the scale that these things are operating at. And that's why, you know, when Brett got his thing taken down, I didn't like that. But it's not like there's this vendetta against Brett, right? Oh, I don't know about that. That seemed to me to be a calculated thing because, you know, Eric actually tweeted about it saying that, you know, you could probably find it two weeks. I retweeted it. Like basically it was reviewed by a person. So you're lying. He's like, this is not something that was taken down by an algorithm. He believes that it was because it was unity 2020 platform. Whether they were trying to bring together conservatives and liberals and try to find some common ground and create like a third party candidate that combines the best of both worlds. I don't understand what policy his unity 2020 thing was going up against. Like I have no idea what to say. It's going to be a two party system. The idea is that it's taking away votes from Biden and then it may help Trump win. The fandom off Twitter as well. You know that too. They blocked the account or something from them. They banned the account. They banned the 2020 2020 account. Yeah. Unity. Yeah. I mean, literally unity. They're like, nope, no unity. Fuck you. We want Biden. Yeah. The political bias on social media is undeniable. And that's maybe the least of our concerns in the long run. But it's a tremendous issue. And it also it for sure sews the seeds of discontent and it creates more animosity and it creates more conflict. The interesting thing is that if I'm one of our adversaries, I see that there is this view that people don't like the social media platforms that I want them to be more like, let's say I'm Russia China. Right. And I'm currently using Facebook and Twitter successfully to run information campaigns. And then I want them, I can actually plant a story so that they end up shutting it down and shutting down conservatives or shutting down one side, which then forces the platforms to open up more so that I then Russia are trying to keep manipulating even more. Right. Yeah. So right now they want it to be a free for all where there's no moderation at all because that allows them to get in. And they can weaponize the conversation against itself. Right. I don't see a way out of this Tristan. We have to all be aware of it. I mean, I even if we are all aware of it, it seems so pervasive. Yeah. Well, and it's not just pervasive. It's like I said, it's weird. Ten years into this hypnosis experience. This is the largest psychological experiment we've ever run on humanity. It's insane. It is insane. And it's also with tools that never existed before evolutionarily. So we really are not designed just the way these brightly lit metal devices and glass devices interact with your brain. They're so enthralling. Right. We've never had to resist anything like this before. The things we've had to resist is don't go to the bar. You have an alcohol problem. Stop smoking cigarettes. It'll give you cancer. We've never had a thing that does so much. You can call your mom. You can text a good friend. You can receive your news. You can get amazing email about this project you're working at. And it could suck up your time staring at butts. And the infusion of the things that are necessary for life like text messages or like looking something up are infused in right next to all of the sort of corrupt stuff. And if you're using it to order food and if you're using it to get an Uber. Right. But imagine if we all wiped our phones of all the extractive business model stuff and we only had the tools like your. Have you thought about using a light phone? Yeah, it's funny. I those guys just to be brought up in my awareness more often. For those who don't know it's like what it's like a mini. One of the guys on the documentary is one of the creators of it. Right. No, I think you're thinking of Tim Kendall who started. He's the guy who invented who brought in Facebook's business model of advertising. And he runs a company now called Moment that shows you the number of hours you spend in different apps and helps you use it. That someone involved in the documentary was also a part of the light phone team. No, no, not officially. No, I don't think so. But the light phone is like a basically a thing like a white phone thing. Text. And I think it does it plays music now which I was like, oh, that's a mistake. Right. That's a slippery slope. That's a thing. We have to all be comfortable with losing access to things that we love. I like, oh, maybe you do want to take notes this time but you don't have your full keyboard to do that. And are you willing to that? I think the thing is one thing people can do is just take like a digital Sabbath one day a week off completely because if you got several hundred million people to do that, that drops the revenue of these companies by like 15%. Because that's one out of seven days that you're not on the system. So long as you don't rebalance and use it more on the other days. I'm inclined to think that Apple's their solution is really the way out of this. The two opt out of all sharing of your information. If they could come up with some sort of a social media platform that kept that as an ethic, I mean, it might allow us to communicate with each other but stop all this algorithm nonsense. And look, if anybody has the power to do it, they have so much goddamn money. Totally. And also they're like that people talk about the government regulating these platforms. But Apple is kind of the government that can regulate the attention economy. Because when they do this thing, we talked about earlier of saying, do you want to be tracked? And they give you this option. When 99% of people are going to say, no, I don't want to be tracked. When they do that, they just put a 30% tax on all the advertising based businesses. Because now you don't get as personalized an ad, which means they make less money, which means that business model is less attractive to venture capitalists to fund the next thing. Which means so they're actually enacting a kind of a carbon tax. But it's like a, on the polluting stuff, right? They're enacting a kind of social media polluting stuff. They're taxing by 30%. But they could do more than that. Like imagine they have this 30, 70 split on app developers get 70% of the revenue when you buy stuff and Apple keeps 30%. They could modify that percentage based on how much sort of social value that those things are delivering to society. So this gets a little bit weird. People may not like this. But if you think about who's the real customer that we want to be, like how do we want things oriented? How should we, if I'm an app developer, I want to make money the more I'm helping society and helping individuals. Not how much I'm extracting and stealing their time and attention. And imagine that governments in the future actually paid like some kind of budget into, let's say, the apps, there's antitrust issues with this, but you pay money into the app store. And then as apps started helping people with more social outcomes, like let's say learning programs or schools or things like Khan Academy, things like this, that more money flows in the direction of where people got that value. And it was that that revenue split between Apple and the app developers ends up going more to things that end up helping people as opposed to things that were just good at capturing attention and monetizing zombie behavior. One of my favorite lines in the film is Justin Rosenstein from the like button, saying that, you know, so long as a whale is worth more in dead than alive. And a tree is worth more as lumber and two by fours than a living tree. Now we're the whale, we're the tree. We're worth more when we have predictable zombie like behaviors when we're more addicted, distracted, outraged, polarized and disinformed than if we're a living, thriving citizen or a growing child that's like playing with their friends. And I think that that kind of distinction that just like we protect national parks or we protect, you know, certain fisheries and we don't kill the whales in those areas or something, we need to really protect like we have to call out what's sacred to us now. Yeah, it's an excellent message. My problem that I see is that I just don't know how well that message is going to be absorbed on the people that are already in the trance. I mean, I think it's so difficult for people to put things down. Like I was telling you how difficult it is for me to tell my friends, don't read the comments. Right. You know, it's hard to have that kind of discipline and it's hard to have that kind of because people do get bored. And when they get bored, like if you're waiting in line for somewhere you pull out your phone, you're at the doctor's office, you pull out your phone. Like totally. I mean, and that's why, you know, and I do that, right? I mean, this is incredibly right. This is incredibly hard. Back in the day when I was at Google trying to change, I tried to change Google from the inside for two years before leaving. What was it like there? Please share your experiences because when you said you tried to change it from the inside, what kind of resistance were you met with and what was their reaction to these thoughts that you had about the unbelievable negative consequences of? Well, this is in 2013. So we didn't know about all the negative consequences. But you saw the writing on the wall. At least some of it. Some of it. Yeah. I mean, the notion that things were competing for attention, which would mean that they would need to compete to get more and more persuasive and hack more and more of our vulnerabilities and that would grow. That was the core insight. I didn't know that it would lead to polarization or conspiracy theory, like recommendations. But I did know more addiction, kids having less weaker relationships. When did it occur to you? Like what were your initial feelings? I was on a hiking trip in the Santa Cruz Mountains with our co-founder now, Azeraskan. Funny how our co-founder, Azer, he is a dad was Jeff Raskan who invented the Macintosh Project at Apple. I don't know if you know the history there. But he started the Macintosh Project and actually came up with the word humane to describe the humane interface. And that's where our name and our work comes from is Father's work. He and I were in the mountains in Santa Cruz and just experiencing nature and just came back and realized like this, all of this stuff that we have built is just distracting us from the stuff that's really important. And that's when coming back from that trip, I made the first Google deck that then spread virally throughout the company saying never before in history have 50 designers, you know, white 20 to 35 year old engineers who look like me to hold the collective psyche of humanity. And then that presentation was released and about, you know, 10,000 people at Google saw it. It was actually the number one meme within the company that have this internal thing inside of Google called MoMA that has like people can post like gifts and memes about various topics. And it was the number one meme that hey, we need to talk about this at this week's TGIF, which is the like weekly thank God it's Friday type company meeting. It didn't get talked about, but I got emails from across the company saying we definitely do something about this. It was just very hard to get momentum on it and really the key interfaces to change within Google are chrome and Android because those are the neutral portals into which you're then using apps and notifications and websites and all of that. Like those are the kind of governments of the attention economy that Google runs. And when you work there, did they, um, did you have to use Android? Was it part of the requirement to work there? No, I mean, a lot of people had Android phones. I still used an iPhone. Was it an issue? No. No, I mean, people because they realize that they needed products to work on on all the phones. I mean, if you worked directly on Android, then you would have to use an Android phone. But we tried to get, you know, some of those things like the screen time features that are now launched, you know, so everyone now has on their phone like it shows you the number of hours or whatever you said. Is that on Android as well? It is. Yeah. And actually that came, I think, as a result of this advocacy and that's shipping on a billion phones, but shows you you can, you can change this stuff. Right. Like that goes against their financial interest. People spending less time in their phones getting less notifications. Doesn't, doesn't work. Well, correct. So it doesn't actually work is the thing. Yeah. And let's separate the intention and the fact that they did it. It's like, it's like, it's like, it's like, it's a tell you it's going to give you cancer. Like, by the time you're buying the immunity hurt, correct. I mean, it's even worse. Imagine like every cigarette box had like a little pencil inside. So you can mark there was like little streaks. It said the number of days in a row you haven't smoked and you could like mark each day. It's like it's too late. Right. Like, yeah. It's just the wrong paradigm. The fundamental thing we have to change is the incentives and how money flows because we want money flowing in the direction of the more these things help us. Like, let me create an example. Like, let's say you want to learn a musical instrument and you go to YouTube to pick up ukulele or whatever. And you're seeing how to play the ukulele. Like, from that point in a system that was designed in a humane and sort of time well spent kind of way, it would really ask you instead of saying here's 20 more videos that are going to just like suck you down a rabbit hole, it would sort of be more oriented towards what do you really need help with? Like, do you need a buy ukulele? Here's a link to Amazon to get the ukulele. Are you looking for a ukulele teacher? Let me do a quick scan on your Facebook or Twitter search to find out which of those people are ukulele teachers. Do you need instant like tutoring because there's actually this service you never heard of called Skillshare or something like that where you can get instant ukulele tutoring. And if we're really designing these things to be about what would most help you next, you know, we're only as good as the menu of choices on life's menu. And right now the menu is here's something else to addict you and keep you hooked instead of here's a next step that would actually be on the trajectory of helping people live their lives better. But you would have to incentivize the companies because like there's so much incentive on getting you addicted because there's so much financial reward. What would be the financial reward that they could have to get you something that would be helpful for you like lessons or this? I mean so one way that I could work is like let's say people pay a monthly subscription of like I don't know 20 bucks a month or something. That's never going to work. I get you but like let's say you pay some you put money into a pot where the pot. But then we have the problem. The problem is like they cost some money versus free. Like there was a there's a company that still exists for now that was trying to do the Netflix of podcasting. And they approached us and like we're just going to get all these people together and they're going to make them people going to pay to use your podcast. Like why would they do that when podcasts are free? Yeah, like that's one of the reasons why podcasts work is because they're free. Right. When things are free they're they're attractive. It's easy. When things cost money you have to have something that's extraordinary like Netflix. Yeah. Like when you say the Netflix a podcasting will Netflix makes their own shows. Right. They spend millions of dollars on special effects and all these different things and they're really like enormous projects. Right. You're just talking about people talking shit and you want money. Right. What's the things we have to actually deliver something that is totally qualitatively better. Right. And we also have to be like someone like you or someone who's really aware of the issues that we're dealing with with addictions to social media should have to say this is this is the best possible alternative. Like in this environment you are you yes you are paying a certain amount of money per month. But maybe you could get factored into your cell phone bill and maybe with this sort of an ecosystem. Right. You're no longer being drawn in by your addictions and you know it's not playing for your attention span. It's rewarding you in a very productive way. And imagine Joe if like 15% more of your time was just way better spent like you was actually spent on you were actually doing the things you cared about. And it actually helped improve your life. Yeah like imagine when you use email if it was truly designed. I mean forget email if you don't really do that because emails in that popular but whatever it is that's a huge time sync for you. For me emails a huge one for me you know web browsing or whatever is a big one. Imagine that those things were so much better designed that I actually wrote back to the right emails and I mostly didn't think about the rest. That when I was spending time on you know whatever I was spending time on that it was really. My my more and more of my life was a life will live and time well spent. That's like the retrospective view. I keep going to Apple but because I think that the only social media company or excuse me the only technology company that does have these ethics to sort of protect privacy. Have you thought about coming to them? Yep. Have you? Well I mean I think that they've made great first steps and they were the first along with Google to do those. The screen time management stuff but that was just this barely scratching the surface like baby baby baby steps. We really need them to do is radically reimagine how those incentives and how the phone fundamentally works. So it's not just all these colorful icons and one of the problems they do have a disincentive which is a lot of the revenue comes from gaming. And as they move more into Apple TV competing with HBO and Hulu and Netflix and that whole thing where they need subscriptions. So the Apple's revenue on devices and hardware is sort of maxing out and where they're going to get their next about a revenue to keep their stock price up is on these subscriptions. I'm less concerned with those addictions. I'm less concerned with gaming addictions than I have information addictions because at least it's not fundamentally altering your view of the world. Right it's growing up democracy and it can get impossible to agree. This is coming from a person that's had like legitimate video game addictions in the past. But like my wife is addicted to subway server. I don't know what it's like a crazy game. It's like you're riding on the top of subways and you jump around. It's like it's really ridiculous but it's fun. If you watch like whoa but I don't fuck with video games but I watch it and it's those games at least are enjoyable. There's something silly about it like ah fuck and then you start doing it again. When I see people getting angry about things on social media I don't see the upside. I don't mind them making a profit off games. There is an issue though with games that addict children and then these children there's like you could spend money on like roadblocks. And you can have all these different things you spend money on. You wind up having these enormous bills on those. You leave your kid with an iPad and you come back and have a $500 bill. What did you do? This is an issue for sure but at least it's not an issue in that it's changing their view of the world. I feel like there's a way for going back to Apple but a company like Apple to rethink the way they already have a wall garden with iMessage and FaceTime and all this different. Come I can totally build those things out. I mean iMessage and iCloud could be the basis for some new neutral social media that's based on instant social approval and words. They can make it easier to share information with small groups of friends and have that all synced. And even in the pre-COVID days I was thinking about Apple a lot. I think you're right by the way to really poke on them. I think they're the one company that's in a position to lead on this. And they also have a history of thinking along those lines. They had this feature that's kind of hidden now but to find my friends. They call it Find My Now. It's all braid together so you can find your devices and find your friends. But in a pre-COVID world imagine they really built out the where are my friends right now and making it easier to know when you're nearby someone. So you can easily more easily get together in person. So right now all the to the extent Facebook wants to bring people closer together. They don't want to and again this is pre-COVID but they don't want to incentivize lots and lots of Facebook events. They really care about groups that keep people posting and online and looking at ads because of the category of bringing people closer together. They want to do the online screen time based version of that as opposed to the offline. Apple by contrast if you had little iMessage groups of friends you could say hey does everyone in this little group want to opt into being able to see where each other are where we all are on say weekdays between 5 and 8 p.m. or something like that. So you could like time down it and make it easier for serendipitous connection and availability to happen. That's hard to do it's hard to design that but those things like that that apples in a position to do. If it really took on that mantle and I think as people get more and more skeptical of these other products they're in a better and better position to do that. One of the antitrust issues is do we want a world where our entire well being is a society depends on what one massive corporation worth over a trillion dollars does or doesn't do. like we need more openness to try different things and we're really at the behest of whether one or two companies apple or Google does something more radical. And there has to be some massive incentive for them to do something that's really going to change. The way we interface with these devices and the way we interface with social media and I don't know what incentive exists more potent than financial incentives. Well and this is where the government in the same way that we want to transition long term from a fossil fuels oriented economy to something that that doesn't change the kind of pollution levels. We have a hugely emitting society ruining kind of business model of this attention extractive paradigm and we could long term sort of just like a progressive tax on that transition to some other thing the government could do that right. And that's not like who do we censor it's how do we disincentivize these businesses to pay for the sort of life support systems of society that they ruin a good example of this I think in Australia. Is there I think it's Australia that's regulated that Google and Facebook have to pay the publishers who they're basically hollowing out because one of the effects we've not talked about is the way that Google and Facebook have hollowed out for the fourth of state in journalism. Because journalism has turned into and local what news websites can't make any money except by basically producing click bait. So even to the extent that local newspapers exist they only exist by basically click baitification of even lower and lower paid you know workers who are just generating content farms. Right so anyway so that's an example of if you force those companies to pay to revitalize the fourth of state and to make sure we have a very sustainably funded for the state that doesn't have to produce this click bait stuff. That's another direction. That's interesting that they have to pay. I mean these are the wealthiest companies in like the history of human. So we shouldn't be cautious about how much they should have to pay because we also don't want to happen on the other end. You don't want to have a world where we have Roundup making a crazy amount of money from giving everybody cancer and lymphoma from the chemicals. Right glyphosate's and then they pay everybody on the other end after a loss of a billion dollars but now everyone's got cancer. Let's actually do it in a way so we don't want to world where Facebook and Google profit off of the erosion of our social fabric and then they pay it back. How do you quantify how much money they have to pay to journalism? Yeah it seems like it's almost a form of socialism. Yeah this is where like the IQ lead example is interesting because they were able to disincentivize and tax the lead producers because they were able to produce some results on how much this lowered the wage earning potentials of the entire population. I mean like how much does this cost our society? We used to say free is the most expensive business model we've ever created because we get the free downgrading of our attention spans, our mental health, our kids, like our ability to agree with each other, our capacity to do any more. Our capacity to do any thing as a democracy. We got all that for free, wonderful. Obviously we get lots of benefits and I want to acknowledge that but that's just not sustainable. So real question, right now we have huge existential problems. We have a global competition and power competition going on. I think China just passed the GDP of the US I believe. There is, you know if we care about the US having a future in which it can lead the world in some meaningful and enlightened way, we have to deal with this problem. And we have to have a world where digital democracy outcompete digital authoritarianism, which is the China model. And right now that builds more coherence and is more efficient and doesn't devolve the way that our current system does. I think Taiwan, Estonia and countries like that where they are doing digital democracies are good examples that we can learn from. But we are behind right now. Well China also has a really fascinating situation with Huawei. They are doing digital democracies are good examples that we can learn from, but we are behind right now. Well China also has a really fascinating situation with Huawei, where Google is banned Huawei. So you can't have Google applications on Huawei. So now Huawei is creating their own operating system and they have their own ecosystem now that they're building up. And it's weird that there's only a few different operating systems now. I mean there's a very small amount of people that are using Linux phones. Then you have a large amount of people using Android and iPhones. And if China becomes the first to adopt their own operating system and then they have even more unchecked rules and regulations in regards to the influence that they have over their people with an operating system that they've developed and they control and who knows what kind of back doors and spying. Tons. Yeah. It's weird. Yeah. When you see this, do you like, it feels so futile for me on the outside looking in looking, but you're working on this. How long do you anticipate is going to be a part of your life? I mean what does it feel like to you? I mean it's not easy, right? The film ends with this question. Do you think we're going to get there? Yeah. I just say we have to. Like I mean if you care about this going well, I wake up every day and I ask what will it take for this whole thing to go well? And how do we just orient each of our choices as much as possible towards this going well? A whole bunch of problems. I do look at a lot at the environmental issues, the permafrost, methane bombs, like the timelines that we have to deal with certain problems are crunching and we also have certain dangerous exponential technologies that are emerging decentralization of crisper and like there's a lot of existential threats. I hang out with a lot with the sort of existential threats community. It's going to take a lot of fun. There's a lot of psychological problems in that community actually. A lot of depression. It's still not bad. It's something suicide as well. It's hard but I think we each have a responsibility when you see this stuff to say what will it take for this to go well? And I will say that really seeing the film impact people the way that it has. I used to feel like oh my god how are we ever going to do this? No one cares. None of people know. At the very least we now have about 40 to 50 million people who are at least introduced to the problem. The question is how do we harness them into a collective movement? And that's what we're trying to do next. I'll say also these issues get more and more weird over time. My co-founder, Azeraskan will say that it's making reality more and more virtual over time. Because we haven't talked about how as technology advances at hacking our weaknesses we start to prefer it over the real thing. We start for example. There's a recent company. VC funded raised like things worth like over $125 million. And what they make are virtual influencers. So these are like virtual people, virtual video that is more entertaining, more interesting and that fans like more than real people. And it's kind of related to the kind of deep fake world. We're like people prefer this to the real thing. And Sherry Turkel has been working at MIT with the book, Reclaiming Conversation and Alone Together. She's been talking about this forever. Over time humans will prefer connection to robots and bots. And the computer generated thing more than the real thing. Think about AI generated music. Being more it'll start to sweeten our taste buds and give us exactly that thing we're looking for better than we will know ourselves. Just like YouTube can give us the perfect next video that actually every bone in our body will say actually I kind of do want to watch that. Even though it's a machine pointed at my brain calculating the next thing. There's an example from Microsoft writing this chat bot called Shao Ice. I can announce it. That after nine weeks people prefer that chat bot to their real friends and 25 or 10 to 25% of their users actually said I love you to the chat bot. Oh boy. And there's several who actually said that it convinced them not to commit suicide to have this relationship with this chat bot. So it's her. It's her. Yeah exactly. Which is what so all these things are the same. We're we're veering into a direction where technology if it's so good at meeting these underlying Paleolithic emotions that we have. The way out of it is we have to see that this is what's going on. We have to see and reckon with ourselves saying this is how I work. I have this negativity bias if I get those 99 comments in one's positive comments in one's negative. My mind is going to go to the negative. I don't see that. I see you in the future when an overcoat your you are literally Lawrence Fishburn and the Matrix trying to tell people to wake up. Well that's there's a line in the social dilemma when I say how do you wake up from the Matrix if you don't know you're on the Matrix. That is the issue right and I even in the Matrix we at least had a shared matrix. The problem now is that in the Matrix each of us have our own Matrix that's the real kicker. I struggle with the idea that this is all inevitable because this is a natural course of progression with technology and that it's sort of figuring out the best way to to have us with is little resistance and bet ourselves into its system and that our ideas are what we are with emotions and with our biological issues that this is just how life is and this is how life always should be. But this is just all we've ever known. It's all we've ever known. I saw him didn't write into the laws of physics that social media has to exist for human. Right. We've gotten rid again the environmental movement is a really interesting example because we passed all sorts of laws. We got rid of lead. We've changed from some of our pesticides. We're slow on some of these things and corporate interests and asymmetric power of large corporations which I want to say markets and capitalism are great. Because when you have asymmetric power for predatory systems that cause harm they're not going to terminate themselves. They have to be bound in by the public, by culture, by the state. And we just have to point to the examples where we've done that. And in this case I think the problem is that how much of our stock market is built on the back of like five companies generating a huge amount of wealth. So this is similar. I don't mean to make this example but there's a great book by Adam Hochschild called, Burie the Chains which is about the British abolition of slavery in which he talks about how for the British Empire. Like if you think about it when we collectively wake up and say this is an abhorrent practice that has to end. But then at that time in the 17, 1800s in Britain slavery was what powered the entire economy. It was free labor for huge percentage of the economy. So if you say we can't do this anymore we have to stop this. How do you decouple when your entire economy is based on slavery? And the book is actually inspiring because it tracks a collective movement that was through networked all these different groups, the Quakers in the US. The people testifying before Parliament, the former slaves who did firsthand accounts, the graphics and art of all the people who never seen what it looked like on a slave ship. And so by making the invisible visceral and showing just how abhorrent this stuff was through a period of about 60 to 70 years the British Empire had to drop their GDP by 2% every year for 60 years and willing to do that to get off of slavery. Now I'm not making a moral equivalence why are you really clear for taking things out of context. But just that it's possible for us to do something that isn't just in the interest of economic growth. That's the real challenge. That's actually something that should be on the agenda which is how do we, one of the major tensions is economic growth, you know, being in conflict with dealing with many of our problems, whether it's some of the environmental issues or, you know, with some of the technology issues we're talking about right now. Artificial intelligence is something that people are terrified of as an existential threat. I think of it as one day you're going to turn something on and it's going to be sentient and it's going to be able to create other forms of artificial intelligence that are exponentially more powerful than the one that we created and that will have unleashed this beast that we cannot control. What my concern is with all right goes. Yeah, that's my concern. My concern is that this is a slow acceptance of drowning. Like a slow, okay, I'm only up to my knees. Oh, it's fine. It's just my waist high. It's still a walk around. It's boiling water. Exactly. Exactly. It seems like this is like humans have to fight back to reclaim our autonomy and free will from the machines. I mean, one clear. It's okay, Neo. It's very much the matrix. It's new. And one of my favorite lines is actually when the Oracle says to Neo and don't worry about the vase and he says what vase and he knocks it over. It says that vase. And so it's like she's the AI who sees so many moves ahead on the chess board. She can say something which will cause him to do the thing that verifies the thing that she predicted what happened. That's what AI is doing now except it's pointed at our nervous system and figuring out the perfect thing to dangle in front of our dopamine system and get the thing to happen, which instead of knocking off the vases, to be outraged at the other political side and be fully certain that you're right, even though it's just a machine that's calculating shit that's going to make you do the thing. When you're concerned about this, how much time do you spend thinking about simulation theory? The simulation? Yeah, the idea that if not currently one day there will be a simulation that's indissernible from regular reality. And it seems we're on that path. I don't know if you mess around with VR at all, but... Well, this is the point about the virtual chatbots out competing on real-person technology. That's what's happening is that reality is getting more and more virtual because we interact with a virtual news system that's all this sort of clickbait economy outrage machine. That's already a virtual political environment that then translates into real-world action and becomes real. And that's the weird feedback. Go back to 1990, whatever it was when the internet became mainstream or at least started becoming mainstream. And then the small amount of time that it took the 20-plus years to get to where we are now. And then think what about the virtual world and once this becomes something that has the same sort of rate of growth that the internet has experienced or that we have experienced through the internet. I mean, we're looking at like 20 years from now being unrecognizable. Yeah. I mean, it almost seems like that is what life does. The same way, bees create beehives, you know, caterpillar doesn't know what the fuck's going on when it gets into that cocoon, but it's becoming a butterfly. Yeah. We seem to be a thing that creates newer and better objects. Correct. But we have to realize AI is not conscious and won't be conscious the way we are. Many people think that it's conscious and essential. I think so. Two us. I don't know. Essentialness and the words we only have it. No, I don't know that. Well, no. Well, the rap might be more things that have consciousness, but is it essential? I mean, it's the extent that choice exists. It would exist through some kind of consciousness. And it's choice. It's choice essential. It's essential to us as we know it, like as life as we know it. But my worry is that we're in essential. We're thinking now like single-celled organisms being like, hey, I don't want to gang up with a bunch of other people and become an object that can walk. I like being a single-celled organism. This is a lot of fun. I mean, I hear you saying, you know, are we a bootloader or the AI that runs the ones that's e-lines perspective? I mean, I think this is a really dangerous way to think. I mean, we have to. Yeah. So are we then dangerous for us? Yeah. But what if the next version of what life is is that? But the next version being run by machines that have no values that don't care, that don't have choice, and are just maximizing for things that were programmed in by our little miniature brains anyway. But they don't cry. They don't commit suicide. But then consciousness and life dies. That could be the future. I think this is the last chance to try to snap out of that. Is it important in the eyes of the universe that we do that? I don't know which feels important. How does it feel to you? It feels important. But I'm a monkey. You know, the monkey's like, ah, I'm staying in this tree man. You guys are out of your fucking mind. I mean, this is the weird paradox of being human is that again, we have these lower level emotions. We care about social approval. We can't not care at the same time. Like I said, there's this weird proposition here. We're the only species that if this were to happen to us, we would have the self-awareness to even know that was happening. Right. Like we can concept like this to our interview, we can conceptualize that this thing has happened to us. Right. We have built this matrix, this external object, which has like AI and supercomputers and voodoo doll versions of each of us. And it has perfectly figured out how to predictably move each of us in this matrix. Let me propose this to you. We are what we are now, human beings, homo sapiens in 2020. We are this thing that if you believe in evolution, I'm pretty sure you do. We've evolved over the course of millions of years to become who we are right now. Should we stop right here? Are we done? No. Right? We should keep evolving. What does that look like? What does it look like if we go ahead? Just forget about social media. What would you like us to be in a thousand years or a hundred thousand years or five hundred thousand years? You certainly wouldn't want us to be what we are right now, right? No one would. No, I mean I think this is what the visions of Star Trek and things like that were trying to ask. Right. Like hey, let's imagine humans do make it and we become the most enlightened we can be. And we actually somehow make peace with these other alien tribes and we figure out space, travel and all of that. I mean, actually a good heuristic that I think people can ask is on an enlightened planet where we did figure this out. What would that have looked like? Isn't it always weird that those movies, it's people are just people, but they're in some weird future. But they have really changed that much. Right. Which is to say that the fundamental way that we work is just unchanging. But there are such things as more wise societies, more sustainable societies, more peaceful or harmonious societies. But James, you know, ultimately biologically we have to evolve as well. But our version of like the best version that is probably the gray aliens. Right. Maybe so. That's the ultimate future. I mean we're going to get into gene editing and becoming more perfect, perfect on the sense of that. We're going to start optimizing for what are the outcomes that we value. I think the question is how do we actually come up with brand new values that are wiser than we've ever thought of before that actually are able to transcend the win lose games that lead to Omni lose lose that everyone loses if we keep playing the win lose game at greater and greater scales. I like you have a vested interest in the biological existence of human beings. I think people are pretty cool. Yeah. I love being around them. I enjoy talking to you today. I love you too. My fear is that we are, we're a model T. Right. You know, there's no sense in making those fucking things anymore. The brakes are terrible. They smell like shit when you drive them. They don't go very fast. We need a better version. You know, the funny thing is, there's some quote by someone I think like, I wish I could remember it. It's something about how much would be solved if we were at peace with ourselves. Like if we were able to just be okay with nothing. Like just being okay with living and breathing. Mm hmm. I don't mean to be playing the wu new age card. I just genuinely mean how much of our lives is just running away from, you know, anxiety and discomfort and aversion. It is. But in that sense, some of the most satisfied and happy people are people that live a subsistence living. They have these subsistence existences in the middle of nowhere, just chopping trees and catching fish. Right. And more connection probably. Yeah. It's authentic than something else. I think that's probably resiliency. That's probably resiliency. That's probably resiliency. Yeah. It's biologically too, because of the history of human beings living like that is just so much longer and greater. Totally. And I think that those are more sustainable societies. We can never obtain peace in the outer world until we make peace with ourselves. Dolly, llama. Yeah, but I don't buy that guy. You know that guy, he's an interesting case. I was thinking it was a different slightly different clip, but actually there's one clip that I would love to if it's possible. But one of the reasons why I don't buy him is just chosen. They just chose that guy. Yeah. Also, he doesn't have sex. Wait, how much can you be enjoying life if that's not a part of it? Come on, bro. You wear the same outfit every day, the fuck out of here with your orange robes. Can I, there's a, there's a really important quote that I think would really be good to share. It's from the book. Have you read it? I'm using ourselves death by Neil Postman. No. From 1982. No. So especially when we get into Big Tech and we talk about censorship a lot and we talk about Orwell, he's this really wonderful opening to this book. Have you written in 1982, it literally predicts everything that's going on now? I frankly think that I'm adding nothing and it's really just Neil Postman called it all in 1982. He had this great opening. It says, um, let's see, we were all looking out for, you know, uh, 1984 when the year came and the prophecy didn't thoughtful Americans saying softly in praise of themselves, the roots of liberal democracy had held. This is like we made it through the 1984 gap. Wherever else the terror had happened, we at least had not been visited by Orwellian nightmares. But we had forgotten that alongside Orwell's dark vision, there was another slightly older, slightly less well known, equally chilling vision of Aldous Huxley's brave new world. Contrary to common belief, even among the educated, Huxley and Orwell did not prophecy the same thing. Orwell warns that we will become overwhelmed overcome by an externally imposed oppression. But in Huxley's vision, no big brother is required to deprive people of their autonomy, maturity, or history. As he saw it, people will come to love their oppression, to adore the technologies that undo their capacities to think. What Orwell feared were those who would ban books. What Huxley feared was that there would be no reason to ban a book, for there would be no one who wanted to read one. Orwell feared those who would deprive us of information. Huxley feared those who would give us so much that we would be reduced to passivity and egoism. Orwell feared the truth would be concealed from us. Huxley feared the truth would be drowned in a sea of irrelevance. Orwell feared we would become a captive culture. But Huxley feared we would become a trivial culture, preoccupied with some equivalent of the felis and the orgy porgy in the centrifugal bumble puppy, Don't Know what that means. As Huxley remarked in brave new world revisited, the civil libertarians and rationalists who are ever on the alert to oppose tyranny failed to take into account man's almost infinite appetite for distractions. Lastly, in 1984 Orwell added, people are controlled by inflicting pain in brave new world they are controlled by inflicting pleasure. In short, Orwell feared that what we feared will ruin us, Huxley feared that what we desire will ruin us. Holy shit! Isn't that good? That's the best way to end this. Goddamn! But again, if we can become aware that this is what's happened, we're the only species with a capacity to see that our own psychology, our own emotions, our own Paleolithic evolutionary system, has been hijacked. I like that you're optimistic. We have to be. If we want to remain people, we have to be. Optimism is probably the only way to live in a meat suit body and keep going. Otherwise... Certainly helps. Yeah. Certainly helps. Thank you very much for being here man. I really enjoy this. Even though I'm really depressed now. I really don't want you to be depressed. I really hope people, you know. I'm kidding. We really want to build a movement and we're just, I wish I could get people more resources. We do have a podcast called Your Endivided Attention and we're trying to build a movement at humanetech.com. Well listen, any new revelations or new developments that you have, I'd be more than happy to have you on again. I'll talk about them and send them to me and I'll put them on social media and whatever you need. Awesome. Awesome. That's great to be here. Resist. Resist. You man, I mean we're in this together. Thank you Tristan. Good bye everybody. Good bye everybody.