Joe Robin Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. De-Rod. Free. Yes. Free re-head. What a fucking crazy story. So let's fill people in. So you were top contender in the UFC's welterweight division. And then somehow another, you want to get arrested in Mexico. Yeah, man. Right after the Kevin Holland fight, actually, I was celebrating. I was celebrating. I was over in San Diego. Had some drinks and decided, you know what? Let's go to TJ. See what was, you know, always a phrase that is for granted. When that part, Diego, you're drinking. You can walk there. Yeah, yeah, literally. So decided to go to TJ for the night. You know, go celebrate my win. I was obviously in celebration mode. And I had to answer weed in the car. You know, and I've been across a border 100 times, bro. Never had no issues. Never had no problems. Never got stopped pulled over. I was lasting. I would even think is that we was legal in Mexico. I thought I thought so too. Like here, everything's decriminalized down there. Apparently not, man. The laws are like crazy, crazy strict over there. You know, and I've been in situations before where I I could like just offer some money and get out the situation, you know, like 500 bucks at the most, you know, though just letting me on my way. But got pulled over at the border and the border inspection. Found the weed in my backpack. And I was thinking I wasn't going to be in that situation where I could bribe my way out of it. Because it's mexico I've been in before and I've been in these situations. And now, man, I thought, you know, they took me to jail that night. And I was thinking, all right, I'm just going to be here for the weekend. I'll get out Monday, you know, go to court. And they're like, no, we'll see you in a month. I'm like a month. You know, like why is just weed, you know what I mean? And yeah, eight months later, holy shit. Yeah, Jimmy, can you please look up what the laws are in mexico from marijuana? Because man, I was reading something just a few years ago how the here it goes. Marijuana is decriminalized for personal recreational use in Mexico, but there's no legal commercial market and buying it or selling it remains illegal for a tourist and visitors. Possession is strictly prohibited. Wait, what the hell? It's tourists and visitors. So for everybody else, you would be good. Like if you were a Mexican resident, you would have been good. It looks like according to this, personal limits can possess up to five grams and up to 28 grams is decriminalized. How many grams are in a, that's one ounce? Yeah, 28. Yeah, so it was a, it was approximately 28 grams. So approximately you should have been decriminalized. But the thing is I think it's if you live there, the border transporting marijuana, including edibles and concerts across the US, Mexico border is either in either direction is a serious federal offense. US customs and border protections strictly enforces federal laws prohibiting the import export of cannabis. But wait a minute, that's, that's US, but what about Mexico? You got arrested by Mexican police, right? Yeah, I got, I got. I got either direction. Wow, but, but I feel like if you got arrested by Mexico, anyway, tourists, while small possessions technically decriminalized for Mexican residents, the Mexican government explicitly prohibits tourists from possessing or consuming drugs. And you could face serious jail time. So that's crazy. Like people would go over there going, hey, no worries. I mean, Mexico, it's decriminalized here, but not for a fucking tourist. Yeah, they were trying to give me six years, bro. Oh my God. Six years. Oh my God. I have, we had to do all kinds of stuff for me to get out and do it like, did the UFC get involved? Hunter did, my management did reach out to Hunter and they couldn't do anything. I guess the reason why I think, all right, we'll get into that. We'll get into that. Cause I'm out. I'm right. You know, and so I learned real quick how corrupt the system is over there. Everybody's trying to get, trying to get paid. And the reason why that I was in there so long is I guess at the time where I got arrested, the, the, the whole judicial system was going through an election at the time. So it was new judges that, so all the, all the judges that were like taking pride and stuff before they had all got the, they switched out the judges. So the new judges were there were like, all right, we're just got here. We're not trying to take no, you know, we're trying to play it by the book and get comfortable. So I was supposed to get released in December and, and I guess I don't even know if I could even really don't get in trouble. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Don't drop. Yeah. Yeah. I'll be later. Yeah. If it's anything super crazy. It's very corrupt. It's very corrupt in there. But, you know, it's, it's crazy to do like even being in there. Um, so my whole experience, my whole experience in there was like so crazy. How well do you speak Spanish? I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm a expert now. I'm like fluent. Fluid because of that experience or before. I had already been. You're obviously, I had already known, I already know Spanish, but being in there, it's like became fluent. Yeah. So yeah. But thank God you could speak it. Yeah. Like I got arrested in my school. I'd be fucked. Yeah. So when I first got there, um, when I went to court the first time, when the guards recognized me, he's like, you know, I'm in handcuffs and shit. And he's like, yeah, I get a picture. I'm like, what? What? All right there, taking pictures with the guards. So surreal. Yeah. You're fucking top UFC contender in cuffs in jail and fucking guard what to take a picture with you. Why? I'm in handcuffs. And the other inmates were like looking around like, what the fuck is this guy? You know, because like the guard was like, yo, this is this session such, you know, so as we're getting transported to the jail, which is dewurst, I mean, I've been in jail before I've like, I'm like from the age of 15 or like 23, I was constantly in and out of jail, you know, from LA, you know, I was, you know, gang member and, you know, living in the neighborhood. And this time around was a whole different experience. One, I'm in a foreign country. And so I get there and they put us like in the processing area and the processing areas like probably about this, this big and like 20 dudes in there all sleeping on the floor, two dudes per bunk, three, three, I'm a three bunk, three levels of bunk. And I was there for like the first, like the first 10 days Jesus, hell bro, it was the worst. Like I had, I don't know what kind of bugs there was in there, but they were like biting up my whole body. I had like like just just bite. I don't know what it was. Dude, it was like, I don't know. That bug is probably something. Yeah, probably, probably bed bugs or something. And right when I had first got there, one of the inmates that saw that seen the guards taking pictures of me was like we were right there conversating the whole time. And he had just got released from there, but he had did five years. He was out for like two weeks, got arrested with the gun and then came back. So he's like, hey, I'm calm. It's like I'm gonna try to get you out of here. You know? And over there, the guards had tried to charge me seven grand, bro, to get me out of that to get me out of that cell and to move me into like a better place. Cause over there, if you got some money, you'll be all right. You know? And so right before that happened, the dude that was like, yo, I'm gonna come back for you. But I don't need to worry about it. So how's this work? Does the guard come up to you and go, hey, I can get you in a cell, put it across your 7,000? Yeah. They come up to you and tell you that? Yeah. So the dude that I that was that I got to the prison with, he comes back down. And he's like, yeah, he's like, hey, the guards came and they pull me out and they pull me, they bring me to a whole different like section of the prison, third, the third floor and second building. And I go up there and I'm escorted by the guards. And there's like a curtain, it's like a curtain covering like the tear. I'm like, what the fuck is going on? Like why is there a curtain? And I get in there and they pull me to this dude and it's dude's like, oh, you're a UFC fighter? You know, it turns out dude's like head of the cartel, you know, like a cartel leader and he's like, he's like, oh, he's like, I want to show you around a little bit, let you know how we're running things over here, you know, it's kind of just gave me the rundown. And this dude had it made, you know, I get there and just TVs and the fucking cell dude has a playstation. He has like a whole bunch of just all the amenities you can think of, you know, he's like, yeah, he's like, show me around and say kind of showing me off and like, hey, hey, guys, look, look, this guy, this guy, you know, as UFC fighter, you know, I'm like, all right, you know, what's going on here, you know, and like, you know, because it's jailed all you know, I'm like, if anything happens, I'm fucking use all my experience to survive this motherfucker. Right. And so he's like, just pretty much give me the rundown. He's like, yo, he's like, I run in here. This is like pretty much, you know, our, our, this is our home, you know, so that dude was facing some charges he got released and he was facing some charges. Him and his like 13 dudes, he got arrested with his whole crew. Him and 13 dudes were all in that tear. So he had all his whole, his whole squad with them. And they had got arrested for dressing up as, as, um, like government officials or like military dudes. And they would go like raid dope houses and, and, and pick their drugs, whatever. So they had got it all arrested for that and they were facing some serious time. And I'm, I'm over here like, too. I just got for a recipe or fucking ounce of weed, Rose is crazy. He's like, oh, no, you'll be out soon or anywhere about it. But if you want, we could get you, we can get you like a accommodated and you could come up here with us, you know, like you beat myself there or whatever you could be wherever you want. I'm like, all right, he's like, yeah, but it's going to cost you a little bit of money. I was like, oh, yeah, how much is like 3000 on the, and I looked at the guard, the guard was trying to charge me seven. I was like, he said seven. He's like, nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, nah, he's trying to get more extra money out of you. Like, but you do got to like, pay to get up here and like kind of like pay rent a little bit, you know, to the guards. So I'm like, yeah, yeah, yeah. So I'm like, all right, cool. So immediate. I was like, yeah, let's do it. So they give us brand new like Nike track suit. Oh, shit. Yeah. I don't know what. All right. He's like, well, couple, come up here tomorrow. So I get there. I get there and then he's like, yeah, just be my cellmate. So I pretty much ended up being like this guy's like, I ended up getting the feeling like I was like his protection kind of like or like, you know, like when we go to yard, I just be like, hey, walk with me like, and I'll kind of like just I got the impression like, like, like, all right, I'm his cellmate, you know, like I got this guy's back, you know, he got my back at his and I really trusted him, you know, and that's one hard thing to do in jail. But like he catches vibes off people real easy, you know, and he had to. It was just a crazy ass experience dude. I ended up, we ended up working out with the working it out with the with the guards to to get me some boxing gloves dude. I ended up getting some boxing gloves in there. Some some myths and it just so happened that the dude that I was cellmates with he had a little bit of boxing experience. So he had been a boxer before. So I was like, oh, perfect, you know, and he actually knew how to hold pads and stuff. So so I ended up spending this whole time like so many didn't spar him. You wanted to. No, no, that's how it goes south. Yeah. Yeah. I'm glad you're smart. You know what I'm saying? Like he said, boxing gloves. I'm like, oh, please tell me this doesn't end the way I think it ends. No, no, yeah. We ended up really cool. And, yeah, dude, I ended up pretty much spending this whole time like in a boxing fight camp, you know. Oh, wow. Yeah. I remember I even I even made like a makeshift double land bag. When I did it was like, I got balled up like a bunch of plastic bags like really like like made a real tight and like so it's like hard to do it in a sock. I was able to to buy from the guards like a bungee cord. Yeah, bungee cord and then set that up. Oh, nice. Yeah. And I made a heavy bag because they had like these big gallons of water. And I got the gallon of water and I wrapped it with like the the mat from the from the bed. So I was and I just threw it in the bag and we had like a pull of bar in our in our cell. And I made a I made a heavy bag out of that. And then whenever we go to yard, I would spend the whole time running at yard. And I was just trying to do everything I could do to try and stay in shape. And then just time went on, it's how I went on, it's how I went on. And we kind of food did they get you in his cell. It was all junk food dude still. Yeah. Yeah. It was all junk food like chips, noodles, damn soda, you know, water condiments. So no protein. None, none, none, none. None less. Whoever. And I didn't think about that part. You know, because I was working out like crazy. And I was getting shredded. But as time went on, my mother like like when I got out, I was skinny as hell, bro. I was skinny as hell. And the only source of protein would probably be soy. Jesus Christ. Yeah. So he was like, couldn't you bribe someone to bring in some fucking meat? If you're the cartel. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, that's the thing. Like it was crazy. Like so towards the end, towards like the final end of it, I guess the guard started cracking down on like a lot of the stuff that was going on. So we started to lose a lot of those amenities that we were getting in the beginning. And I was just, you know, when I got out, I was just malnourished as hell, bro. I saw you a picture later like what I looked like when I got out, completely different person. How much weight did you lose? Um, I didn't really lose that much weight, but it was just like more my muscles. We're just who you think about going to 55. We were like, damn, I might be able to make 55. I made one 55. I've made one 55 one one 55 once. Yeah. My dude, you made 55. The most man. Hell. Yeah. It was my it was the worst fight camp ever. It was all based on losing the weight. That's how. And then I was just so I remember after that I made one 55. I didn't want to go to the gym for like a month, bros like dude, I need to just this like my body was just done, bro. Yeah. You're killing your body. Yeah. What is this? Oh, yeah. That's some of the workouts I was doing while I was in prison, but no protein unfortunate. Yeah, but no protein. So I was getting pretty shredded like when in that like period in time, that was when we had like a lot of like we had food and everything was cool. And if you notice, oh, look at that, the double end back. That's nice, dude. Yeah, dude. And you can see the TV in the back. Right. With the PlayStation, but I mean, it wasn't doing looking good. Yeah. Tighten those hands up nice. Yeah. Yeah, man. And it's just like a whole experience. It was crazy because this guy he'd be like, you know, the guards will come in and be like, hey, leave my door open. Yeah. And the guards will actually leave this door open. So we were able to like walk around the tear and go talk to other people like me. I kept to myself a lot. Like I've been in jail like a ton of time before. And I learned. I learned easily that, you know, you'll, you'll go like a long, you'll get by if you just minor on business and not getting involved in shit and not getting involved in things. So I like, I would just stick to myself, you know, and just, you know, just get my work out on and avoid trouble, avoid trouble, you know, but it was crazy to see firsthand how the car till operates. And it's crazy. Man, they got their hand in everything over there. Of course. Everything. You know, there was 37 assassinations in Mexico last election. 37. Yeah. Different political people. And I was talking to Ed Calderon, you know who he is. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's a manifesto on Instagram. He was used to work for the Mexican government. And then he became an American citizen and he was involved with prosecuting the cartel going after them and stuff like that. And he was essentially saying that like the entire judicial system, all the mayors, everyone, if they get in their cartel members, like no one gets in. No one is a, no one is a mayor unless they're in the cartel. And when they're getting assassinated, it's cartel assassinations. It's one cartel, you know, wants their guy in and another cartel wants their guy in and they just shoot the other dude. Yeah. 37. Yeah. I was in America 30s. The last like the midterms. Imagine during the primary of 37 people got assassinated. We'd be like, what the fuck has happened to America? The final round of basketball season is here and only draft Kings has you fully covered. The draft king sports app is now available in all 50 states and includes all markets. You're in on games at the speed of sports, sweat every possession of the series all in one place with one app, new drafting customers sign up with the code Rogan spend five bucks to get 200 in rewards within 21 days. That's code Rogan in partnership with Draft Kings. The crown is yours. Bed with DK Sportsbook, gambling problem called one 800 gambler one 800 my reset new York call 877 8 hope and wire text hope and why Connecticut called 888-7897777 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of Budho casino in Kansas that text pass through may apply in Illinois. 21 and over void an Ontario event contract trading with draft Kings predictions involves risk of loss. Sportsbook bonus bets expire in seven days. $50 in predictions dollars issued weekly for three weeks expire in one year. D one on with Rob will reward availability varies predictions offer void in New York and June 28 terms at DKNG.co slash audio. So one of the guys there was actually actual hit man who was actual like hit man and he was in there like he's like yeah, man, I've killed like 30 cops in in my whole experience and he was in there for and they were they were just like telling me about all these things. I'm like dude, like everybody is involved in this. It's crazy, you know, and over here, like if you kill a fucking cop, they're like they're coming after you. But over there, you know, I guess it's just another thing killing killing over lower tier than the cartel. That's what it is. Yeah, cartel have my money more power more influence. Yeah. And it's crazy how like murders just they're not even that big of a deal over there. You know, while I was in there, I I I was reading or I saw that Mexico has the Guinness World Record for missing missing persons. Holy shit. Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy. There's so many like it was so many hit men in there. It was crazy. But you know, I didn't have I didn't get no shit from nobody. You know, everybody was like cool as hell. That's awesome. Well, you're an easy to get along with dude. Yeah. Luckily. Yeah. Did anybody ask you to train him to actually do there's some dogs in there, man. I bet there's just one guy in part taking out my dude. You got to fucking start fighting. You're like, and he's like, he's he was one of one of the military dudes. And he's just a little fucking machine dude. And in the time that I was there, he got he got really good really quick. You know, and I'm like, dude, you got to like go to the gym down in TJ that interim gym. I had mentioned like, yo, even when I got when I when I got released. That man, we we did a whole lot things to try to get me out, man. There's a ton of fighters even try to pull some strings from me like yarya, Rod Riggas, you know, Brandon Moreno, he's from TJ and and and nobody nobody to help me out, man. Everybody try to pull strings from me. And nobody came up with a number. Yeah. Eventually, what was how was the number? Can you tell? I want you to get in trouble. And I don't don't get in trouble. Yeah, but it was talk to me like it was hefty. It was I bet it was not cheap. I bet it was not cheap at all. I bet. Yeah. Everybody wants to get paid. Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy crazy experience, dude. And to get out of jail, you know, and then and then now I have this fight. I'm headlining, headlining, um, UFC Serbia, first time in Serbia, fight and you're also medic. What is that? August 1st. Nice. Yeah, to get out of to get to go through all that and then and then to have this opportunity is just crazy and to be here to be here is just is just crazy. Man, because I didn't I didn't think I was going to get I was in sure if I was going to get out, man. I thought good reason. A lot of people don't. Yeah. Yeah. You know, the United States prison system is fucked to but nothing like Mexico's everybody that I've talked to that is in any experience in Mexican jail and like dude, it's not good. Yeah. No, man. It was it was crazy, but I just can't believe the cartel can't sneak meat in. We did sometimes. Yeah. Some guys. Yeah. We did some. I we had to bring those groceries, bro. Oh, really? Yeah. Because that's the first thing that I would want. Man, I would like what do we got to do? These guards. What kind of car you drive, dog? Let's. Great. I'm on the fucker. We got to do something. I can't be noodles. Yeah, man. Especially as hard as you work out. Yeah, I was I was working out like two, three, three hard hard workouts a day, you know, do. So I'm kind of programmed like to just work out. You know, I think I think from a prior jail experiences before, the only positive thing that I think that helped me in that whole everything that I've been through is like when you're in jail, like I personally I might I would I would think like dude, you you got to be strong. You got to be able to defend yourself. You want to like that's that's my whole reason for for staying in shape. You know, when I started doing MMA, it was just to be able to defend myself, you know, in situations like if I ever did go to jail, you know, and the only thing that I positive that I that I took from that is like when I got when I when I will get released from prison prior, I just want to work out. I'm already programmed to to just work out all day, you know, so once I found MMA, I was like, oh, this is perfect, you know, and and how will we we first start training 25. Wow. Yeah, first. Very. Yeah, dude. Yeah, turn into a UFC contender. That's very impressive. I'm a guy started. Did you have any sports experience before that? None, bro. Nothing. None. That's crazy. No, but I had I had been in no bullshit. Oh, I had been and probably around 200 street fights already, including all my jail experience. You know, when I was in juvenile hall, I was a straight knucklehead, bro. I was fighting like every other day. Um, and it was just it became just fun. Just fun. Like if it's like you were like a like a tough looking dude, it was like, hey, what's up? I don't want to scrap or what, bro. Like, you know, I just thought why, cause you're big, bro. I just want to fight you. Yeah. And with no training, you had no training at all. No training, man. Just just just want to just want to learn how to fight. Just want to buy fighting. Yeah. Yeah. So it's a crazy way to learn. Yeah, dude. Just and like duty can I, I mean, I imagine getting in fight with your cellmate. I got some crazy shit. That's crazy shit. Yeah. You got to sleep together. Sleep with one. I open, bro. Like, yeah. And, um, yeah. So that's that's the only experience I had prior to, to start an enemy. And then I remember I stopped going to jail and I was like, 23. When I stopped going to jail, I started having kids. I'm like, all right. That was start, I got to stop gang banging because I said, thing going to jail is cool. Yeah. I used to think it was cool because you get out and you just have like a little more respect. Like, like I thought, I thought it was cool. I thought like, like, oh, going to jail makes you a badass, you know, but once I started having kids, I realized like, all right, I got to take care of. I got human beings out of looking. I got to take care of and raise, you know, so I started looking for every any possible way to try to live a decent life. And I tried everything. And I've had every job you could think of. And but I've even had good job before. And I've lost them, you know, by just being on the local head and going back to jail. And I remember I got out of prison one time and my cousin, his me, but he's like, yo, come to my house, bro. We're going to watch some fights and barbecue and stuff. All right. Yeah. I don't know. I was like, who's fighting? He's like, um, some dude rampage. I'm like, who the fuck's rampage? So I get there and that's when Forrest Griffin had fought, um, round page one, the, that I had to wait title. And I'm like, yo, this is amazing, bro. And then I started with Chuck Ladell. And I'm like, dude, this he's just like me, bro. He's like, knock him dudes out. You know, and I just obsessed with it. I just obsessed with it. So that was your first exposure to MMA. I had seen it before like when it was tank habit early days, yeah, in the early days, but it never caught my attention. Like because I had always been a boxing fan. I'm a huge boxing fan. And, and I grew up watching boxing like, um, all of them, like majority of my family functions growing up. They were all boxing events like Oscar de la Hoyo, Mike Tyson, uh, man, pack, y'all for Mayweather. And, and I was just, I loved boxing, you know, and I remember I mean, I did have a little bit of experience before going into MMA because when I lived in the hood, I would always have boxing gloves. And I would always make my homies fight each other. Like when we're all here, like, hey, you go, you go in here, because like, you know, we're all boys and I want them to like I always wanted them to, to, to like, in case, in case anything happened, in case wherever all out, when we get in a room, but with somebody or anything like that, like I tried to make my homies more tougher, you know, because like, hey, you guys got to have my back at that yours. And that's just, that's just something we just did, you know, or like, well, we'll just go body shots, body punches, you know, right? And just fight each other. So that's kind of my background, bro, to be honest with you. And, and yeah, man, I just, I just, I just carried that into the gym when I first went. I wrote first Jimmy went to it's called, it was called tap out in downtown LA. Okay. At the time, I think that's, uh, I was trying to with Eddie Bravo. And, and he had moved in 10th last, so that's when that first when I first started, I wanted to do box. And I remember the top about Jim very well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was great, Jim. Yeah. And I remember when I first started going there, I was working construction. I was, I was working on a, on a high rise in. Jim very well. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It was great. Yeah. And I remember when I first started going there, I was working construction. I was working on a high rise in downtown L.A. And I would pass by every day. I was like, man, I want to go in there. But I never would go in there. I would pass by and I would get home and talk to my baby. I'm like, man, there's this gym called Tap on her. I really want to go. You know? She's like, oh, yeah, but I was talking about all the time. But I never had like, I don't know. You know, there's a kind of nervous, it's kind of nervous walking into a gym for the first time. And you know, like what to expect. But I was just a fan. And so I walked actually the way I got started was it was our anniversary. And as a gift, she gave me a gym membership. And then I went to the gym and the coaches were like, yo, dude, like who is this guy? You know? But when I first went there, I was like, so raw and just so like street, street fighting experience. But I had power. I had some power. And, um, you know, I just fell in love with it. And the coaches were like, even the days I want to show up, because I'm in the beginning of it. I was still like, still had that knuckle head mentality. I'll still be out partying with my friends or not show up to the gym. And coaches will actually call me, like, yo, where are you? I just need to be in the gym. You need to be training. So I guess what would help me in the beginning was my actually my coaches like really noticing that I had like talent. You know, I had had potential. And I just obsessed with the amount of fell in love with the whole training experience. And and I remember my first time trying you did to, it was a skinny fucking skinny, dorky looking dudes like, you need to, you need to come train to just do man, come train to you. I was like, nah, cuz I remember right before watching, I was like, oh man, wrestling is gated. They do wrestling is gay. And we're trying to watch that, yo. And then obviously, like you go through that experience. I'm like, all right, so the skinny dude is like, come on, man, just try it out. But you can't, you know, but you could make a tap road of like, no, no, I went strangled me. You know, I'm like, oh hell, no, no, I hate losing, bro. So I was like, and there's there's two different kinds of people. There's people that will get their ass with him. He's like, no, it's not for me. Or um, they get your ass with me like, I'll never want that to happen again. You know, so I would show up every day, determine like one day, I'm gonna one day, I'm a win one day, I'm gonna get one day, I'm gonna get him. And that honestly kept me in the game. You know, it's amazing how little tiny dudes can fuck you up. Dude, that's the last thing I expected. I don't like what? You just is the only thing that like, you know, in martial arts movies, there was always this myth that the little guy can fuck up all the bigger guys. But with striking, that's hard. Powers, real, sizes, real, masses, real. This is too, you know, too many variables. If a guy knows how to throw a good one, too, you might be fucked. He hits you in the clench. You can't get away from his clench. He's too strong. He clubs you. You're fucked. But you jits you, man, there's no lucky punches in jiu jitsu. And that's what's crazy when a little guy just annihilates you. It's so humbling. My first experience was a dude who was a purple belt. I was a white belt. And he was my size. I was like, this is my size. Like, this is an ended bigger, dude. This is going to be, you know, competitive. No, he just raped me. He did whatever the fuck he wanted to do to me. Armbar made trying to me. And I remember leaving going, I am so delusional. I had this idea in my head, you know, that I knew how to fight. And then until I started doing jiu jitsu, I was like, I don't know anything. I'm helpless. Like, completely helpless. But, you know, like you, the smart thing to do, like what you did is just go, I want to learn that, you know, and you haven't the courage to do that, you know, especially as a guy who didn't have any martial arts experience at all. Just like throw yourself into it. It's very difficult to do, man. And especially at 25. Yeah. Because by 25, like John Jones had already been a UFC champion and defended it multiple times. You know, it's like, by the time you're starting out, so many guys are like in the middle of their career. Yeah. So that's one thing that I've always thought about. And those like why I work so hard is like, I feel like I have to catch up to these dudes that have been doing this their whole life. You know, like, like dudes have been in the gym since there were kids doing karate and bawd. You know, there's, there is a thing though about having a lot of street fights. There's a mental edge to being in a lot of conflict and a lot of combat. One things I've always noticed about you, when you fight, you're very calm. Like when you get in there and you're very relaxed. Yeah. And it's like life experience. Yeah. That's a factor. Yeah. I just feel like in an MMA fight, it's it's a safe environment. Like believe it or not to me, it's safe. Right. You know, because I've been in, I've been in sick because if anything was wrong, the rest right there, like, all right, there, that's it. It's done. You know, this is a fair fight. You know, I've been in situations where I don't know if I'm a live. Right. You know, if I don't survive this, I might die. Yeah. You know, and, and I think that I carry that a lot, you know, what, why, why I fight? And that's why I look so calm because I've been, I'm calming hectic sit like, yeah, it's not the worst thing you've experienced. That's not for a lot of fighters. It's the most dangerous thing to ever experience. Yeah. And they step into that octagon that close that door and they look across this octagon in another train killer. Like, oh boy, like, this is the scariest thing that's ever happened to them. Yeah. So there's a mental benefit that you have for having all those street fights and even though you didn't start until late, man, the mental game might be most of fighting. You know, man, when I step in there, I'm just, I'm just happy to be there. You know, like, I, I'm lucky to be out here. I'm lucky to be having my freedom. I'm lucky to be alive. You know, so when I'm, when I'm walking out to a fight, like, I just feel, I just feel happy, I'm just, I'm just just happy, happiness, like, you know, cause while I'm backstage, I'm thinking how did I get here, dude? You know, like, I'm just, how the fuck did I do this? How did I make it this far? You know, and, you know, like a situation like like this, like we're, um, fresh out of, fresh out of jail, you know, and, and I'm like, dude, like main event in Serbia against a guy from Serbia is crazy, bro. But, you know what? Just live, live that shit, man. I like, I told myself, like, dude, this is your opportunity to, to, to tell it like to, like, it's a movie, bro. Like, my life is crazy. It is a movie if you think about it. I mean, very few people live that life. In a jail many times, locked up in Mexico for eight months, never known if you're going to get out. Next thing, you know, your headline at a UFC card. Yeah, man. Sitting here. Yeah, sitting here on the Joe Rogan experience, you know, telling my story is just, you know, where's Euro's metage ranked? Is he above your book? He's number 13. What are you at? 15. Yeah, so both of you guys top competitors. I'm surprised throughout that whole process, they kept me in the rankings. Well, good respect to them, you know, also they probably realize you're probably working out in jail. Yeah. Yeah, man. I mean, well, it's not, you shouldn't be punished for something like that. You could stuck in a crazy situation. Yeah, man. Especially if you're coming from California where we'd legal, everybody gets confused. You know, you have that weed in California. Everybody is everywhere. It's totally legal. That's why it didn't even, I know, it didn't even cross my mind. I know. We can get in trouble for this. That's crazy. You know, I would have never known those laws because I heard that it was decriminalized. I thought, oh, they don't, they got other shit to worry about. They got cartel problems and fentanyl problems. They don't give a fuck of you bringing in weed. Yeah. Well, now now I have a part of the process of me getting out was like, I have to get like now I have dual citizenship in Mexico. Now you do? Yeah. Because of getting out? No, no. My lawyers, it was a part of me getting out. So like when you pulled up the decriminalized, the laws for the law for citizens. So that that was a process of oh, so you became a citizen. So the law was less for you. Yeah. That's a layer. It was a ton of stuff that we had to do. Brother is a crazy loophole. Yeah. So now for us day, everybody should become a citizen of Mexico. Yeah. I ain't ever going back to Mexico. I'm not going back for a while, bro. I cannot see myself. I don't even want to go back. So especially since I released the footage of me working out and prison and stuff, like I don't ever want to go to Mexico and for any reason they're like, get his ass, you know, bring him back. Yeah. And they probably would too. Yeah. At the very least try to get more money out of you. Definitely. Especially after headlining a UFC card. Yeah. And on top of that, like, like, like releasing that footage was like definitely like a no-no. But since how did you do they all have cell phones inside? Yeah. So we had cell phones. Yeah. So were you texting your friends? You could text your lawyer or all that? Yeah. Did you worry that your texts would be intercepted? No, no, not at all. Because I would text everybody or call everybody on WhatsApp. And I guess. Yeah. It's encrypted. Yeah. It's encrypted. And so when you're doing all this and filming all this, you just saved the footage. And then when you got out, now I would send it. I would send it to like my friends. So I send it to one of my buddies and I'll like, you know, save all this stuff. Because when I get out, this is going to be, this is going to be, it's going to be big, bro. You know, well, I'm glad they didn't release it before you got out. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The really trust your friends because that could have been fucked. Yeah. And the whole time, like, knowing you with knowing you were old, Zat, knowing you were old was going on. And there was a couple rumors going around that I was backpacking in Peru. Another one was, was one of my buddies like, it's crazy how the internet believes anything, bro. Like there's people thought I was building wells in Rwanda. Like when my buddies said that, oh, he's building wells in Rwanda doing God's work. And like people ran with that. Like, hey, actually people when I got released right away, they're like, oh, Kevin hauling, bailed him out. Kevin hauling, bailed him out to get a rematch. And people will leave that. That's hilarious. That's so funny. Must have been so weird. So when you're inside, did you did they have the internet? Would they could they watch fights? Yeah. Yeah. Actually, um, so they ended up putting like these self like scramblers, like these towers that like messed up the signal. And we ended up getting what's that? That that Tesla thing, Starlink, we ended up getting Starlink. You got started. Yeah. Yeah. Oh my God. That's insane. Yeah. We ended up getting Starlink and how Wi-Fi for a little while. And then I remember we ended up losing all that stuff because, um, like every every once in a while, they're like, hey, the guards will come to like, hey, uh, they're going to come to inspections. And you know, so they would like hide everything. And I remember this one time, they hit everything and they're like, oh, we're not going to give back to you guys. So we ended up that like, I'd say like by the fifth month, uh, that's when like they really started cracking down and stopped bringing us like the extra food and the food that like the prison food in there dude is, it's the worst. It's terrible, terrible, um tortillas like every meal like five tortillas, rice or beans and like some kind of like soup. But the soup is pretty much, there's no meat in it. It's, it's, um, majority of it is like potatoes and carrots. You know, like, so you're only protein you get in from beans. Yeah. Yeah. And it was just horrible dirty unsanitary. It was the first thing you ate when you got out. First thing I ate when I got out was, um, a double western bacon cheeseburger from Carl's Junior. I can't even the best ever. Yeah, man. And I couldn't even finish it because at the time, like my stomach was so like, I got, I got full as hell. And then like, I was crazy. And, um, man, I was so skinny when I got out bro. It's crazy. So like this whole time I just been like trying to, to just bulk back up, you know? So what did you wet? Did you weigh yourself when you got out? Uh, when I weighed my cell phone, I got out and I normally walk around around 200 and I was like around 180, you know, but I looked horrible bro. Like I look like I just cut weight. I look like I was like, I'm sure. Yeah, it was, it was horrible. But it was, it was like I wasn't shredded or nothing. I just had no muscle definition. And it was just, it was bad bro. And I remember, um, when I first got out, man, I was like thinking like, all right, I tried like when I got out, I hit the like, I got ready to just like, all right, I'm getting my life back. I'm, I'm gonna, uh, train my ass off bro. I was so out of shape. I was so out of shape, bro. And I was like really discouraged at the time, you know, I was like, dude, I don't know. I think my career is over. Dude, I don't know. How much, how am I going to come back from this? You know, I was so out of shape. And that's crazy because you were working out so much in jail. Yeah, but it was just, um, because of, of the lack of nutrition. Yeah. Nutrition. I was like so mountainary. Body was just destroyed. Yeah. It was horrible bro. And, uh, I almost thought like, dude, I can't do this shit anymore. Dude, like, I'm, I'm not going to, I think my career might be over, you know? And, um, I was just in my head about it for a little bit. And then, and then, you know, like, I was like, no, you know, I'm, I'm a fucking soldier. Dude, I could bounce back from this. And, you know, I just, I just really believed that through hard work, you know, I'll get back to it to myself. And now I'm, I feel great, dude. How long did it take before you start feeling normal? But, uh, I'm barely starting to feel like 100% now. Now. Yeah. And when did you get out? Um, it's been almost two months. Wow, that's not a lot of time. Yeah. And when is this, uh, the fight is August 1st? Yeah, it's another, not two months. Yeah. That's good. Yeah. And I feel, I feel good. Now that's crazy though. It takes you two months. And then now you're back, you look normal, like physically. Yeah. You look healthy. So it took you that time to just put the weight back on and get your muscle tone back and all that. Yeah. That's a good thing though that you were always in shape. So you bounce back quicker. You have muscle memory. Yeah. And actually, I've honestly been enjoying the process of of like when I first got out, I could only run like a mile when I was dying, bro. And through, through each run, I could see my progress. I'm like, okay, I'm getting better. Okay, I'm getting better. And I'm like, I'm in love with it right now. I'm in love with like getting better and better and better. One percent every single day. You know, I truly believe believed that through the work and to trust the work that I have ahead of me. And I honestly think that by the time the fight gets here, I'm going to be in perfect peak shape. That's awesome. Yeah. What a crazy comeback story. She had. Yeah. And it's really just like a really deep personal one for me because from what, what went up when I first got out to now, it's just like, it's crazy. It's crazy how I could the body can bounce back and like just get back into shape. You know, what's crazy? The mind too. I mean, you must be so thankful just every time you're training. Yeah, you might be tired, but man, you must be so thankful that you're out and free. And then you're working towards something big. You know, you got a big fight coming up and would a blessing. Yeah, man. And I'm just I'm just embracing the whole process. You know, and I'm just, you know, I'm all for I'm all in actually going to jail and going through all that actually made made me appreciate and value everything that I have going on right now. So, so I'm just like so grateful and so thankful that I even have this opportunity and just signed a new contract with the UFC six more fights. Nice. And and now I'm a main event. It's just crazy, dude. So if you go on to win the title for me or how crazy would that be? You know what I'm saying? Yeah, that would be crazy. And you know, you know, you know, you beat manage. You're in the top 13. You're close to the top 10 few fights later. Anything can happen in this. Yeah. And I would even tell dudes like that like realistically, bro, like I can like going four or five fights, go like four or five fights that could be fighting for your championship, you know, maybe in this sport. No, it all takes us a few spectacular results. A few spectacular results and people get behind you in the crowd gets behind you. And next thing, you know, yeah, I mean, if I go out there and smoke this guy and it's gonna be, it's gonna be so much even bigger just because of the whole experience that I went through. And like, man, you got out jail and just fucking knock this dude out and you know, why not? Like why not, bro? You know, why can't I be that guy? You hear stories all the time of these incredible stories that people would become champions from nothing. And then been through all kinds of stuff. Why not me, bro? Listen, you never fucking know. You never fucking know. That's the crazy thing about this sport. Yeah. Anything can happen, dude. Yeah. I mean, you got myker chav as the title holder, which is, you know, one of the baddest motherfuckers to ever do it. That's part of the problem. Yeah. He's got the opposite life. That's a guy that's been disciplined in training his entire life. You know, never never fucked around no drugs, no drinking, no nothing, just discipline. Yeah. Tough sell. It's different. Different levels, man. Yeah. There's different levels to it. How old do you know? 39. Yeah. Yeah. So that's like a couple more years left, man. So that's why it's crazy while they stole eight months of like very valuable time. Yeah. And that's one thing that's one, the number one thing that I was like, man, like I'm running out of time, bro. You know, I don't got, I've got a lot of time left, you know, so getting out. And like I said, like I'm just, you know, I'm just taking it a lot more serious, you know, I'm sure where you're training now. So right now, I'm in Vegas, training over at the PI at Extrilo. That's great. At Extrilo Tour, and right now, and freestyle in the name while I'm in Vegas and while I'm in California, I go to classic classic fight team, training over at Sonori and 10 planet, you know, so I'm just, but right now, I'm in Vegas right now. So much, so much easier. LA is crazy to do that. I'm on the road. When I'm in LA, it's just, I'm on the road all fucking day. LA traffic is just a nightmare. So that's why like, I'm in Vegas right now, because everything's so close together and so convenient and, and it's also so high level. There's so much high level training in Vegas. And the PI is an amazing resource for fighters, you know, as far as nutrition, cutting weight, I mean, they'll get your meals for you. They get your supplements for you. They make sure that everything is, you know, safe for sport approved. So you don't have to worry about testing positive for anything. Like the PI is amazing. Yeah. Such an incredible resource right now, it's a little bit crazy because they're, they're, they're letting like the slap fight guys go there and the Zufa boxing guys, I think. Yeah. So yeah, those guys are, are using the slap like I was train. I don't know how they trade like, how do you, how do you train for that, bro? You know, I do network out. I don't know. I guess that's it. Yeah. Swinging things with your arms. Yeah. I guess like cable machines. Like, you know, I'm saying like, get a cable. Yeah. Your wrist and do this a bunch of times. Yeah. So they have at the PI, they have like this, it's thing that gauges your, your power and your strike. And those, they use that all the time. The power slap guys do. Oh, that's so silly. Yeah. And then also the Zufa boxing guys are there too. So, so it's a little, it's a little bit hectic right now. It's like a lot going on. Yeah, I've got to imagine. Yeah. Power slap guys. That's a different thing. I've never been to one of those. I hear you have to go to one to like enjoy it. You have to be on acid. Yeah. To me, it's like, I don't know, man. I feel, I feel like letting someone just swing on you. And the thing is like, if you get the first swing, you have a giant advantage. Yeah. The first swing is a crazy advantage. That's dangerous, bro. That's it. Just getting, you know, just getting whacked in somebody's guys. They get knocked out. Yeah. 100% man. It's not less powerful than a punch. You know, this is the idea that you're slapping like this. That's not what they're hitting with the palm of the hand. Yeah. Right on your fucking jaw. Yeah. It's super powerful. You can only take so many of those in your whole life. You know, and you're lining up for those. Yeah. I mean, you can imagine like, they're nerfed at me during your face too. Well, I mean, look, I'm fair. Whatever you want to do, you want to jump BMX bikes. You want to ride bulls. You want a power slap? Have at it. This is America. Have a good time. Yeah. But it seems like edit MMA gym, it should be MMA fighters. I don't, I mean, the boxing is probably a good crossover. Like, you probably get some good work with some of those guys. Yeah. You know, and also seeing high level box or train is good. It's great for your technique. It's great for just raising the level up in the gym. Yeah. Yeah. Now it's, it's, it's really dope. I love, I love the P. I man. And Vegas in general, like there's so many killers out there. You know, it's one of the best places in the world for MMA training. You got extreme code to war. Think of how many killers are training out of there. You know, you got, there's so many, you got syndicate. There's so many places. Yeah. It's incredible so much jujitsu. Real bad. Yeah. There's so many guys that are there. 10th planet there. There's so much jujitsu there. There's so much MMA there. I mean, if you're a fighter, it's like one of the best places to live. Yeah. I remember when I first, when I first went out there, I was in about 2020, I went out, I was on Cowboys camp. And he went out there and that's when I saw first hand, all the, all the, the amenities from the PI and like all the, the whole Vegas experience. And so I decided to move out there. So I lived out there for like two years. And I've just been going back and forth ever since. It's worth living there just for the PI. Yeah. You know, and then there's so much Muay Thai there. There's so much everything. There's so much great training there. Yeah. Yeah. There's ton of, there's a ton of gym, like you said. It might not, there might not be another city in the country that's like Vegas in that regard. Yeah. Think about boxing. You got Floyd Mayweather's gyms there, which is crazy. Right. There's a bunch of other gyms there. They got high level boxers there. You got high level Muay Thai guys there. You know, one kick Nick has this place there. There's so much high level training in Vegas. This episode is sponsored by BetterHelp. Summer is great. Isn't it? It's the perfect season for adventures, but it can also be pretty exhausting, juggling chaotic schedules and trying to make the most of summer. That's why it's important to take a moment for you. Go out for a weekend without planning anything and just have fun or relax at home. Or if you're really struggling, try therapy with BetterHelp with a network of over 30,000 quality therapists, they can connect you with the right one just like they have for millions already across the globe. Together, you can work out what you need and how you can enjoy summer to the fullest. You don't have to say yes to everything this summer. Find support in therapy. Sign up and get 10% off at betterhelp.com slash JRE. That's better H E L P dot com slash JRE. Sometimes I even go to the Andrew Kwani gym. Oh yeah. Anthony and Cheetie, they have their own gym. Yeah. Okay. They were with one kick neck. Yeah. Fucking crazy town. Yeah. I'm training. And again, I can't say enough. I've been to the PI a bunch of times, but when I first went there, before they were really open when they were really getting rolling, I was like, this is incredible. Like if you're a fighter, you have a place that has all the recovery stuff, although like the high end top notch recovery stuff, cold plunge saunas, all the everything, like all physical therapy, supplements, they when they found out they make food for you. I was like, this is crazy. Yeah. I love that part. I love I'm always I'm always there. You know, you could go there order whatever you want. You know, I'm sure staying and taking rice, you know, yeah, well, they just want you to be healthy, which is make sense. Just it's so smart that they did that when they did that. I was like, what are they doing? Don't put all this money in that. Who's going to go there? And then when I went there was like, oh, I get it. They went all out. They went all out. And it's just if you want your fighters to be at the very best to compete in the UFC, what better way than provide the best world class facility on earth. Yeah. And then they put it right there in Vegas. And now they have a bunch of them, right? They have one in Mexico. They have one I think they have one Singapore. Yeah, they have a bunch of them. It's awesome. So smart. Such a smart move to do. You know, what would have been crazy if you were on the White House card? You got really dude, that's gonna be major. Dude, that's crazy. I wish it was inside, but it is going to be crazy. It's so funny watching people lose their mind over it. You know, and all sorts of different ways. Yeah, lose their mind over it because they hate the political situation in this country. lose their mind over it because they feel like it's a waste of money. Why they spend so much money in this country is in debt. We got problems. Why we having to fight. And then other people are like, fuck yeah. You know, I mean, there's no more American thing than having a UFC fight on the White House lawn. It's so American. Yeah, it's so Trump. It's so crazy. You know, I mean, UFC fight on the White House lawn is bananas. Yeah, man, even the fight cars are amazing as well. Oh, fight cards incredible. The only thing that bothers me is that it's outside. Yeah, that these guys are fighting for world titles. I mean, Iliya, Tarporia might be is not just one of the best right now. He might be one of the best that ever did it. It's very possible that he goes down in history as the all-timer. I mean, he's so good. And for him to have to defend his title, the world title outside with bugs and humidity and heat. Yeah, you have taken to account the weather. You know, it's a whole different environment. It could rain. It could thunderstorm. Who fucking knows? It's DC. It's the East Coast in the middle of the summer. I mean, it's it's crazy to have a fight outside in June in DC. Yeah, I've fought outside before. It's definitely a different different vibe, different energy. Would you fight outside? I fought outside for go about that medicos. It was some our near Arizona. It was a nighttime. That's camoma clearance organization. Yeah, yeah, I've also fought in the summer in the daytime and at a fair. Oh my god. Yeah, it's gonna take out for you in California. What was the temperature? It was hottest held with a mat was hot as hell. It was like got a fair in the middle of the summer. Oh, that sucks the mats hot. Yeah, I do. Was it canvas or was it like Matt? I think it was Matt. Oh, Jesus. Yeah, it wasn't. So not just that, but it gets slippery as fuck to then. Yeah, I do. It was hottest. Hell, bro. Did you ever see King of the cage wet and wild? You ever see that? No. King of the cage put on a fight in the middle of a rainstorm and just let people fight. Just like I think they just said, look, you know, if you want to fight, you get paid. This is it. It's gonna rain out and we're gonna have to fight because it was outside. Yeah. So this is back when California did not have M. said look you know if you want to fight you get paid this is it it's gonna rain out and we're gonna have to fight because it was outside yeah so this is back when California did not have MMA it was illegal but it was legal on Indian reservations so we would go to these Indian reservations for King of the cage so it's back when Eddie I think Eddie was the commentator at that event I'm not sure but he was one of the main commentators at King of the cage and my friend bud who's my neighbor back in California I actually sold him my old house real good friend of mine he was one of the owners of King of the cage and they were just putting on these events in fucking these Indian reservations when it was totally illegal in California so we would just drive to the Indian reservations and watch and one of them a poured I mean it was outside the whole thing was outside they just set up a cage outside and it's fucking pouring dude and these guys are slipping all over the place and it's crazy they fight with wrestling shoes on and it was just some of them did at least and it's fucking ridiculous like there's no way you should fight like this yeah my my actually actually my pro debut was for King of the cage outside on Indian reservations like here was this I want to say twenty twenty seventeen maybe ultimately so they were still doing them outside even then yeah wow at a subobo casino yeah yeah yeah that's what we went yeah see if you can find the King of the cage footage for wet and wild is one of the craziest events I've ever seen in my life I'm just imagine you're basically fighting on ice you're slipping all over the place everybody sliding this is it look they're trying to mop down the cage in between the fights I mean it's ridiculous like what are you gonna do you not gonna dry it out I don't know why they were trying but they were trying to at least give them some sort of like not stopping wet environment dude that must have been so hard to fight on oh look at their slipping slip it all over the place at least they had wrestling shoes on because I don't remember what year this was they're effort the punches kind of funny I know it's crazy all the officials have poncho's I mean it's fucking pouring right now I don't remember what year it was it's I think it's right there it doesn't one I think okay that makes sense so that I think that's illegal days I'm not 99% sure that's the illegal days of course it is because there weren't shoes but it was the whole event was just insane and imagine like trying to get a submission on someone who's literally soaking wet yeah I mean as impossible it's it's so crazy but I mean these people so remember this forever this event like everybody was there we're not you see the rake water oh it's pouring I mean why is it pouring but why are they bothering like sweeping the water off you're not going to dry it out and look at his feet man his feet are sliding all over the place with wrestling shoes on it's crazy in a situation like that you're almost like better off like immediately going to the ground but even then like how you can even get a choke people are still everyone would slide out everything it's like fighting someone's oiled up look at it's drying them off that's crazy yeah yeah but this is the white one I just I just hope it doesn't rain I hope they figure out a way to kill the bugs too I've been investigating online there's a bunch of different machines that they sell for like outdoor events and these they kill every bug within like a mile radius they set these things up and all the bugs just go to it and get zapped at the end of it they dump it out there's like a fucking like a big bag of bugs so if they set a bunch of those up around the perimeter maybe they can at least minimize the amount of bugs that are out there because you have in the DC area you have a lot of naps imagine fighting and you got an at your eye and you know they don't move it around something goes in your mouth and you know yeah is there a lot of them out there oh yeah yeah yeah it's moist that's the thing about DC it's humid that's a human environment especially in the summer and Jamie now checked was it 100 degrees there it's current I mean we're getting closer to the dates to the forecast is getting better it's currently set to be a high of 85 low of 69 69's nice no rain and well isolated thunderstorms the two days before that doesn't I mean that doesn't mean anything by the time it gets to June yeah and what is it June 11th what is it it's on the 14 14 12 13th both have isolated 13th that is on the 4th either fuck and the one on Friday it says considerable cloudiness and fog after midnight I think the fight to be over by them probably but well the fights are Sunday right I'm just saying like that means at night it's getting yeah well the thing is if it's the lows 69 that's nice so if it cools off by the time the main event starts or the the last few fights but the first few guys that get after it they're gonna probably fighting in the daytime yeah you know you never know they might just spray some chem trials and change the weather you know yeah they might you never know oh if anyone's gonna do it it's Trump do you see the thing that he posted he's got like this whole drone army on the roof of the ballroom now oh no you know they built what's up to will it's not done yet oh it's not no oh well he should posted pictures of the AI yeah well no I mean it's just a rendering oh that's all it is how far along is the ballroom I think they're pretty far I'm not sure you're the picture that they're posted but it's not it's a rendering of what it will oh that's fake yeah okay why would you tell people what you're gonna do well you can be able to see that they can't hide it that's not what I saw I saw one that looked like it was during the daytime yeah obviously that's yeah that's what I saw that's the one I saw so that's what it's gonna look like yeah drones are crazy man drones like war souls and guns flying around on the top all controlled by AI that's crazy what what could go wrong war wars a whole another whole thing these days yeah yeah it's boogie you ever seen some of that footage from Ukraine yeah drones is flying around bomb dudes just bomb it dudes just dropping down on guys and exploding and there's fucking hundreds of those videos now you get a point of those Instagram algorithms we watch a couple of them and then next thing you know they're getting recommended to you over and over yeah dude that's crazy um just two weeks ago the bar I'm so sorry you know one day I'm talking talking about something with my buddy next thing you know it's all over my phone my feed I know that's crazy it's weird we're just accepting the fact that our phones are listening to us all the time yeah you know what I got trapped in recently algorithm of schizophrenic people dude it's all crazy people that like one guy's like hi I'm Joseph Wilson I am the legitimate president of the United States due to constitutional right you know like crazy stuff like crazy people there's one lady this one lady is crazy she's like I forget what famous actor she was saying they're trying to kidnap me and put shit in my vagina and like she's just completely insane and every day it's like some new accusations someone's after her someone's tapping their phone someone's communicating with her through her ceiling fan like yeah just but I don't know how Instagram knows that these people are schizophrenic and keep sending me schizophrenic people over and over and over again because I know right if you're watching them you're out at things you want to be watching I understand but how does it know who's schizophrenic it must there's gotta be there's an internal tags on every post right but in that no I don't know how it's but it would yeah how it's gets so God in there but it is whatever that word is it's using the yeah I don't know what the word is but it knows these people are fucked up it's what's sending me all these crazy people like it's completely insane people one one lady who thinks everybody's a man wrote she thinks Rosa Parks secretly a man everyone's secretly a man she's like pointing out like collarbones look at that look at this is a man Kim Kardashian's a man everybody's a man it's fucking nuts man and it's just schizophrenic people and I'm like okay so Instagram must know these people are schizophrenic because they're all like I'm telling you it's like three out of ten videos Instagram recommends me are instant or people that are completely crazy so it must know these people are crazy and it's just setting them my way yeah same for me I was talking to my buddies well I don't know something about sardines or something next to you know I'm like look at my phone like dude what the hell is all this shit about sardines back to bags crazy bro it's creepy how the ads target you yeah which means it's a machine to pretty much meet the binds urning well it's like how much is it listening did you see that post also the tj me that Kim calm posted about palantir yeah did you see that it's from February where they got hacked apparently maybe is that what it is yeah it's what it's a I'm sure it's very recently that I saw it I didn't check the date on it though I could send it to you yeah I got it um I think it's good yeah it's from February 16th yes that's it that's the one when we send it yeah yeah yeah the thing I just had was a corruption website no my god uh yeah yeah click this no problems definitely it does another one like Brittany Greiner that poor lady oh yeah she did nine months they they wanted to put her away forever ever yeah they were they're like it's changed like some Russian arms dealers yeah the merchant of death guys responsible for thousands of people being dead so this is from Kim calm palantir was allegedly attacked uh hacked rather an AI agent was used to gain super user access and here's what the hackers allegedly found Peter Thiel and Alice Carp commit mass surveillance of world leaders and titans of industry on a mass scale massive scale they have thousands of hours of transcribed and searchable conversations of Donald Trump J.D. Vance and Elon Musk they have back door the devices cars and jets of world leaders and accumulated the biggest archive of blackmail material palantir is creating nuclear and bio weapon capabilities for Ukraine and is working closely with the CIA defeat Russia they believe they're one year away they plan to achieve this by keeping Russia busy with meaningless peace negotiations palantir is responsible of the majority of Palestinian deaths in Gaza they've developed the AI targeting for Israel palantir is an arm of the CIA and all data from international clients is copied into a seat so the problem is this is like alleged but is there a community notes on this at all really just Kurt Metzger he's the number one post when we see these hacked materials though what are the hackers doing with it if they're exposing the whole thing then fuck them yeah they'll I he was I know community knows I was a lot of things that sometimes are true and sometimes are not true yeah do you know his background do you know the story behind that guy me or yeah generally yeah so his back I first found out about him a long time ago he's a very wealthy guy who lives in New Zealand and he ran a site was it a super uploader yeah like one of those uploads mega upload I think that's what was that it and they targeted him because they said that people were uploading things that were copyrighted material and I think they were trying to they were trying to they were trying to get him out of the country extradited on I think this is the one to come back yeah fraud charges related it's on the screen to make it upload he denies wrongdoing Hughes US authorities are pursuing a vendetta against him on behalf of politically influential Hollywood studios 2018 New Zealand court of appeal upheld the lower courts ruling dot com appeal to the Supreme Court of New Zealand which ruled in 2020 that dot com could be extradited to the United States but that he could challenge the decision through judicial review his extradition order was eventually signed on august of 2024 he's remained free in New Zealand while continuing to pursue judicial review of his extradition order he launched another he launched another cloud storage service called mega although he severed all in 2013 separate all ties with the service in 2015 he also started and funded the internet party party contested in the 2014 New Zealand general election under an electoral alliance with the monomovament and contested the 2017 general election independently but failed to win any seats at either election he was a famous guy in the early days of the internet did you ever see those videos that he made like these cartoons yeah i'm trying to remember some things that i remember i don't yeah yeah there was like cartoons that he did where he was like killing dictators in the cartoons what did he call he could in an at-party moment of truth extradition see if you can find kim dot com early animated videos on the seth rich conspiracy here he should be the seth rich one is wild the seth rich one is one of the ones where i just i don't understand why anybody isn't think that that's crazy this guy gets assassinated after he supposedly gave wickie leeks all sorts of inside information on the democratic party about how they kept people out of the election how they were running things and then he wants to get whacked and they're like no it was a robbery attempt at three in the morning they left his watch they left his wallet they left everything his phone they just killed see if you can find his videos he has some crazy videos i want to say these are from like the 90s like late 90s or early 2000s he was uh that he i don't remember i don't even know what he was doing but he was very wealthy he had this crazy house and it's hot wife and show videos of it and shit and i think this guy has just been persecuted because of that site that he had and he's fucked now they just keep going after him i don't know if he's right about this palantir stuff so i probably shouldn't have been saying it but but you do know that like in worst case scenario a gigantic corporation could have the power to surveil everyone all the time everyone's online yeah i mean they can they can see you now with wi-fi they know where you are in a building at any given time with the wi-fi in the building oh that's crazy crazy they use wi-fi and they can get a literal image of you walking around your house they know where you are in a given time because the wi-fi so if they tap into your wi-fi they know where you are they're shh boom there's targeted strike in the summer right bedroom it's kind of grown after you it's crazy it's really nuts man because this is this wasn't here it is this is from like this is some old internet stuff this is a flash video yeah 90s flash video yeah this is it give me some volume just president even has sound it's gonna be a very person yeah this is what he did i remember this so this is the 90s so this is the same guy it's a very interesting guy he's getting a boat yeah it's called kim symbol special agent i mean it's probably just yeah it was made in the 90s this is 30 years ago you know screwing around with internet graphics and it lands on the ground he's standing on top of Microsoft what is he doing oh there's Bill Gates boy people hate it Bill Gates even back then that's crazy it's assassinating Bill Gates what the fuck it's so weird oh he didn't kill him just wrote Linux around him so he got in trouble for these nah no no not really i mean i think people just thought those are silly uh he got in trouble for that mega upload site so this the way it used to work as you remember do you remember napster yeah right so napster worked where you could take songs you could upload them and anybody could download these songs the way mega upload worked and a lot of these upload sites is you could take a film and you could turn it into a digital file and say you take like avatar turn it to a digital file and upload it and people could then download it and watch it on their home entertainment system through the internet just download the file plug an HDMI cord from a computer into the tv and boom you're watching movies yeah and you don't have to pay anything and the thing was it's like all this stuff was copyrighted material and i think his argument was like yeah but i'm not uploading it i'm just i'm hosting this service and they're like well this service is used to do illegal things so you're in trouble so it's like i don't know what the argument is there i don't know who's right do you understand it Jamie yeah you've explained it but i mean it's a most people would go like copyright law american copyright law only matters in america i don't know if that's the argument he was making but that's true too right because he's in New Zealand and this house this site was hosted in hong kong yes it's in january 20 it's 2012 they seized more than 300 million dollars of this our hong kong when it's 40 million dollars in american money damn son he did not any wrong doing i wonder how he's earning money now i wonder if they took all his money or i mean he did they did craft that may i just looked it up mega is like a cloud service website now i don't know if he owns it or runs it he's trying to crypto currency stuff i'm sure he was big in a bitcoin when it started he's probably doing okay yeah i don't know what the story is i'm kind of rooting for him he's an uncorrect online oh he's very fun online i don't know if he's right about the palantir stuff but forget about palantir we know that what's happening now in terms of you talking to your phone about sardines and then you your phone showing you ads like there's definitely listening to something as of february oh so this was grock kong kamata kim dot com's claims about a palantir hack and uh related allegations remain unverified major outlets like roders bbc and new york timeshow no coverage palantir's site has no statements some sources echo the post but no independent evidence confirms it right but you gotta think if you know a dude who's deeply connected into the hacker world it's that guy right like yeah i think he's the most public one yeah he'd be the guy that would know some shit i wouldn't be surprised yeah if it's not palantir and i'm not accusing palantir of anything but there's gotta be at least one point in time there's going to be a corporation that has the power to do those things and that's what's going on with all this surveillance shit that people are missing i'm sure i'm sure there already is um you know they're already doing that you know yeah i mean a hundred percent if i wasn't evil person running some hackers corporation i would do it some especially if i thought it was right yeah doing the right thing i can imagine like china probably has of course you know a hundred percent also i forgot what i was reading that um someone got arrested so i think uh some government officials and they got arrested and admitted to being a spy oh yeah china well yeah well there was a mayor in calle yeah an rkd at california yeah yeah spy for china she was a fucking mayor yeah mayor of a city was working for china yeah and he admitted it yeah it's crazy oh china's playing a long game they they infiltrate universities they give money to universities they fund programs they give money to research labs they sell cell phone towers at a discounted rate to the military and these dumb other fuckers put them around where their military bases are yeah yeah i've had guys that are you know see i a guys on the podcast tell me about that how dangerous it is that they've they bought farmland all around these military bases china has yeah what's up geez is um i thought you said something yeah that's crazy it's crazy that they are even allowed to do that like you imagine you you're in conflict with another country and they buy land right next to your house you're like hey yeah what you do forget about your house a fucking military base anybody buy in any land around a military base should be thoroughly vetted it should be there should be different laws if you want to buy land around a military base it should be like no you know yeah background check for sure not just background check like you should be american citizen a and you should have like a legitimate verifiable reason for owning this land like your farmer or you're going to put fucking windmills up there whatever you're going to do it should make sense it shouldn't be like all you have to do is have money and you could buy land right next to a military base yeah where they're doing who knows what yeah and you know china has like some of the top top uh you know some of the the like you never know what they're watching yeah the technology technologies off the charts yeah their drone technologies beyond hours and they they have like crazy drone displays where they have enormous dragons oh yeah yeah yeah flying over the sky like thousands and thousands of drones and they make a dancing dragon in the sky like whoa so they're all coordinated but some sort of a computer program and they all work autonomously it's not man like their tech not their cars are insane china's cars they have electronic or electric cars that are beyond anything we have here in america and they can't sell them here which i think is kind of crazy i think that's kind of fucked it's kind of i mean i guess we're in competition with china but like it should be survival the fittest when it comes to cars like if you're making the best fucking cars and you happen to be in china they should be over here right you know yeah i mean it would suck if i was forward and these chinese cars were way better than anything that we're making here but everybody that i've talked to and i've talked to some guys that work for major automobile organizations and they went over to china and like oh my god we're fucked like these cars are insane yeah yeah i mean just test a little alone i know i know it's not china but i mean call those cars are insane yeah they pretty do but they make them here and they make them in china too they made a look they they were making a lot of them in china during the pandemic because the pandemic didn't really close things down in china the way close things down here but they're they have electric cars now that have like these insane suspensions they go zero to sixty and one and a half seconds they're nuts yeah they there's this dude that i follow online god what's this name forest auto reviews i'm trying to remember but he does these quick reviews and somehow another he always gets these chinese cars i'll find his name what do you guess you know you know what else but i was there i mean i'll take this to this channel i'm looking at the jalemesu7 i can find his video if you want me yeah these cars are nuts man looks a test a little bit oh that's the dude it is yeah what is his channel this isn't his channel i don't think so many else have loaded it maybe i don't know maybe maybe somebody else uploaded it i think it's the same guy let me find it i think i think it's forest auto review no that's not him he's not that good hold on yes forest jones that's it so he keeps finding he keeps reviewing these uh just just scroll down for his videos go to his video section i'm not if you can just narrow it down more but uh it didn't really work when year i go a test of minivan or you try to minivans they have some crazy shit find find a good one i don't know if it's electric it's just electric car though yeah this is it this is electric look at these they're nuts that's playing in a Huawei sound system with this gorgeous speaker i also get two wireless charging pads with a fan to keep them cool i have this gorgeous drive mode selector i have cup holders right in here and i have a dash cam i can do this that's crazy you also have selfies for the blicky a big i have built in fragrances that slot in right here if i push this button i have more storage space and i can do this i push the button on the side of my seat that'll fold down my arm rest my seats are heated ventilated ambisaging i have an area right down here for my phone i've built in sunscreens shades if i push this button my cup holder comes out and i can do this this is 37 thousand dollars and these cars are not available no i want to watch a movie i want 37 is that one i don't know maybe i'm looking at the wrong video that sounds like it would cost one 30s it says luxury cars what car is that does it say doesn't say in the description no description has been added to this video so you go for the beginning see what it says inside i get a moon roof pillows my head rest you've been related to massages i get a passenger screen a mate yeah so they're doing wild shit over in china with technology and they have full surveillance on their population you can't say shit over there yeah they have like baseball recognition and it's crazy yeah you can't step out of line at all they'll they'll make you turn you into a handbag they don't fuck around over there yeah you know they have um you know that bodies uh exhibit do you know what that is yeah dead bodies exhibit uh i think there's one in vegas exactly they get their bodies most of them from china and they're yeah they're they're called like chinese i think it's undeclared bodies so like if you die within a certain amount of time if someone doesn't claim your body unclaimed bodies if someone doesn't claim your body within like 30 days they just can turn you into a statue wow well here's a problem with that in order to do this process where they turn you into a statue it has to take place within 48 hours of your death so there's no way they're waiting a month yeah so they have to start this process like pretty soon after you die and they have this process called plastination and they take the bodies and they basically strip all the fat from the body and they turn it into this plastised statue of all your muscles and tendons and ligaments and so you're out there like playing basketball and like you could see like the rib cage and all the ligaments that was a dude that was probably tweeting the wrong thing or he worked for a company and he fucked up or he was banging someone's wife or he was doing something and they turned the student into a statue and now he's at the Luxor in vegas playing golf yeah for real we looked into it it's there's not not just me saying this there's a bunch of stories online about these different bodies and how they've found ones with bullet holes in them they found one of them's crazy so this lady was having an affair with a mayor in this town in China and she was an online or a television broadcaster she was like a newsletter something like that and she was having an affair with the mayor the wife found out about it the lady goes missing she gets scrubbed from the internet turns out the lady was pregnant she was eight months pregnant she goes missing then all sudden this pregnant lady appears at the bodies exhibit with the baby inside of her same exact size same features everything as this lady the wife of the mayor who she was having an affair with the wife was the manager of the plastination factory where they turn everybody into statues damn damn and these bodies there's no skin on them no skin it gets even crazier years later she gets arrested for killing another person she gets arrested for poisoning some English businessman and then it goes to trial well the person who stood trial for her the person who stood was not her there's pictures of the lady on the stand it's a different lady so she must have paid someone off to get For her, the person who stood was not her. There's pictures of the lady on the stand. It's a different lady. So she must have paid someone off to get convicted and go to jail, like paid their family off or something like that. And she got free. So this is all alleged, by the way. Yeah. All alleged. But you could see the video or the body is still exhibited, the body of the pregnant lady. So there's a pregnant lady, and you see a cross section of her stomach, where she's like holding on to her stomach, and you see the fetus inside of her stomach. So we're supposed to believe that this undiscovered body, this unclaimed body of a pregnant lady with an eight month old fetus inside of her body that they find it. And then somehow or another, they know it's cool. So you just turn it to a statue. But you have to do that within 48 hours or someone's death, but no one claimed it, which takes a month. None of it makes any sense. Yeah. The whole thing is nuts. Some of them are people that like, I'm gonna die. I wanna donate my body to this exhibit. Okay. If you're crazy, that's what you wanna do, that's cool. But that's not all those people. Some of those people are, it's very sketchy circumstances. Yeah. See if you can find that image of the room. I wonder how often or how many times that happened. Like, because the pregnant body, like they never investigated it. The family wanted to, the family wanted to go into the weight and stuff like that. Exactly. They were trying to do that, but they wouldn't let them do it. These people obviously have immense power. She got someone allegedly, got someone to stand in line. And this is like in China. This isn't China. That's hilarious. So look at this. This is the baby. Pregnant woman and the fetus inside of her. And so the family looked at the face and they were like, Jesus Christ, oh, someone stole the fetus? Oh, so I was thinking, there's another scandal that happened in 2024 with a bunch of corpses and trying to too. Well, there's a video or this, where this investigative reporter visited one of these plastination factories. And there was bodies that were laying down. There's a video of it. You could watch the video. These bodies are laying down. They have sheets over their head and they have their arms tied behind their back and the sheets are bloody. So it looks like they all got whacked. And they're all at this plant, getting ready to be turned into a fucking statue. It's creepy, a shit, man. This body was, they just stole the fetus. Oh, two women in LA stolen. Two women. 20 years ago, probably stuffed it inside of their belly. Like, yeah, I'm pregnant. There's another, there's probably on my Instagram algorithm right now. There's another scandal. They had four thousand bodies where, in a court scheme they said, oh my God, they were being sold. They family stopped their body. Their family members being cremated was not. They were being sold into, I was trying to find out what they were using. Oh, that's a lot of bodies. Jesus Christ. I'm using for bone grafting. Oh. So, Aloe, Jenna, bone graft products. Oh, that's another thing where these kids are friendly ladies was telling me. And that is true that a lot of these women are getting fat that's taken from cadavers. So they take fat from cadavers and then they inject that fat in their ass to give them a BBL, like no bullshit. In Whitney Cummings, I told a sentence of Whitney, she's like, oh my God, it's literal dead ass. I do. I do. This is a funny line. Because that's what it is. I mean, it's dead tissue. You're taking a dead person's fat and there's stuff in it in their ass. Cadaver fat transfer, utilizing processed human donor fat. Oh, how can I? Has become a major emerging alternative to traditional autologous fat transfers, like traditional Brazilian butt lifts or BBLs and synthetic implants. How does it work? Instead of harvesting fat from your own body via liposuction surgeons use donated human fat, harvested via authorized tissue banks, allegedly. The fat is rigorously screened, sterilized and processed to remove all the donor's DNA, cells and genetic material. What remains is a structural, clumpy butter. So hot. Matrix of collagen, proteins and growth factors. When injected into the body, this matrix provides immediate volume and also acts as a biological scaffold that encourages your own natural tissue to integrate and grow into it. That's gross. Dead ass. Actual dead ass. And women are doing this. How many? See if you can find a video of them doing this. I was thinking like, how do you do that? See if you can find a video of them doing this. I was thinking like, how do you do that? What? You call it a comedy filler? Oh, so nasty. That's so nasty. How many? Just do some squats. You lazy bitch. But people like a real ass anyway. They're asking the legs. It has to match folks. It has to match. Can't fake it. It's like you ever see those dudes that don't really have muscles, but they get oil injected into their arms? Yeah, it's just like, it's not weird. It's always like a fake dude. It's always like a fake dude. I saw this Brazilian dude who had it on his biceps. And he tried traps. Yeah, it's right. Giant crazy shoulders, big tits, crazy. And he's flexing and doing all this stuff. But it looks weird. Because your body, it's like, doesn't fit. Doesn't fit your body. That's the same thing when a girl gets a crazy fat ass. And she's got these two pick legs, but she's lazy. That doesn't fit your legs. This is still so you wear it diaper. This is crazy. Don't do that. Yeah. Man, dude, we're in the process. Women who go to the extreme. Right now. Well, the thing is, I think if you do just a little bit, just a little bit of that ass. Maybe it's nice. Yeah. I bet there's girls that have done it that you go to the right doctor. There's Beverly Hills dude. He's like, I got you. Just enough. You're just going to prompt that sucker up just a little bit. Yes, that's a little bit of that. A little bit of that ass. A little bit of just a touch. Just a touch of that. That's pretty gross. Like for someone to put someone else's clumpy butter and it's fucking completely disgusting. How do your body even react to that? Or how to like not well? Yeah. Not well. And then to have all that sleep take out the DNA and all this stuff. What if they don't? What if that's bullshit? What if the DNA's in there? What if you just talk it in weird memories? You know? Yeah. Weird memories from ass tissue. Weird nightmares. Photos here. We're off. Let's go. Pull them up. Right here. Oh. Another really male fresh cadaver underwent a layered dissection of all that. So they're taking a fat from an elderly guy's face. Actual dead body. Whoa. Doesn't matter where the fat comes from. I guess not. I guess it's just fat. So this is a dead guy and they're pea. So who sold his body to some fucking laboratory where they do this? Yeah. You have the clumpy butter in this. Look at that in the upper right corner. A whole crazy. So this is pre dead ass and post dead ass. That's not bad. It's not bad, but that lady could have done that with the gym. That lady could have done that with, she didn't go crazy there. That's just a little dead ass. Just a touch. That probably is good on the side if you turn it sideways. Does there any photos where they show? This video there says one shot cost 20 grand. Let's see that guy. He looks like a demon. Well, these videos are. That's not even realistic. That's a AI. That's not yet. It falls down a weird path here. Oh my god. Yeah. I'm not showing those photos either. It's just so thick. So they're just sucking fat at a dead people. I had one of my knees reconstructed with a cadaver graft on my ACLs. I got to use a Achilles tendon. Because at Achilles tendon, it's thicker and stronger than the actual ACL. And they put it in my right knee. It's never been a problem. Holy. Works great. Well, put it from your own, from your own. Not enough from a dead dude. Oh, OK. Oh, what's that? That says a gluteal augmentation. So that's butt. Right. Right. It says fat grafting. So that would be putting fat into the butt. Oh, where's that scar? That scar's gigantic. Look at that. There's got a fork holding it open. Look how green everything looks in there. Oh, that looks so nasty. It looks like bad cheese. That's disgusting. That looks like, you know, when you go to see like dry, dry aged meat and you pass by those. Yeah. They don't even look nice. They stay cased. They have the dry aged meat container. So you're going to get your fat put in your ass or an implant. But then you have this massive scar. Oh, I mean, these pictures are really early. That is another head. Look at the ear rate. So that's where they're getting the fat. How much fat do you have in your head? Oh. Well, that says temporal augmentation by intermediate fat pad filler injection. So that's someone getting that done to their head. Maybe it's tightening up the skin? Yeah, maybe, right? Like a filler. Oh, yeah. There you go. She looks good. That actually looks good. So that's from her fat, fat graft. I can't show these photos. Guys, you have to google your socks. Sorry, folks. Some of it's disgusting. But if you look at people's face when they get older, that's one of the things that happens is you lose collagen and fat in your face. And that would does make sense that putting it in would be better. See, that looks like how both of them look like hell. Don't do that. Go to the gym. Yeah, easy bitch. And what is that one to the right of it, though? That one to the right, yeah, like there. So she got a little bit of a bubble butt from that. But again, go to the gym. Yeah. Jesus Christ. Yeah, look at the rest of the body. Yeah. Go to the gym. This is crazy. Yeah. Questionable choices. You get dead ass. You get dead people's tissue pumped into your butt so that more people want to fuck you like, hey, find Jesus. Go find Jesus. OK. If you are out there, I don't give a lot of advice. But this is my advice. If you're out there and you're thinking about getting dead people's fat pumped into your ass, you probably need Jesus. Yeah. Yeah, I mean, BBOs are kind of going out of style, man. Yeah. You know? I think the naturals are coming back. They should. Natural, they're making it to come back. Yeah. Just work out. Like there's a lot of ladies that have flat butts that they put in the time. They put in the effort and now you're like, damn. You can do that too. Everybody do. It's just the process. Yeah. People don't like that process. You just want to quick results exactly. And they don't want to work for it. They want to zempic. And then they want dead ass. They don't want to lose the weight. You think they're like a nice combo they could put together? And now they're sailing. And then put it back where you want to. Yeah. We're true of tide. What is that called? Redditrut tide. Redditrut tide and dead ass. They should have like a one-stop shop. Yeah. Now they're saying, oh, zempic eats up your bones. Oh, yeah. So definitely. So everybody's, everybody's fucked. Who's been taking it? Well, it's not just that. It also kills your desire. This is what's weird. Like people are falling out of love when they get on a zempic. Like they lose their desire. Really? Yeah. The people lose ambition. They lose desire. They also lose addiction. Like people that are addicted to cigarettes, people that are addicted to alcohol and gambling. Apparently, a zempic helps that. Because you're basically killing desire. Like your desire to go and smoke a cigarette. You're desire to have a drink. Yeah. It's killed by a zempic. It also changes your whole face, right? Oh, yeah. It eats up all your fat profiles. Yeah. Yeah. That's a problem. Especially for ladies as they get older. Like the more fat you have in your face, the better you look. Like when your skin gets real thin, and starts draping over your bones, like, ah, you know, that doesn't look healthy. Yeah. Looks like a problem. You like to cut weight. I know. Yeah. It's fucked. It's fucked that that's a part of our society now. And it's just praying on people's lack of discipline and lack of understanding of the benefits of going through a process and achieving a result. Because of all these ladies that want to do this, instead, if they just went to a gym, started eating healthy, they would feel better, they would think better, their body would look better. Everything would be better. And they wouldn't have to get that ass. Yeah. Yeah. It's just people being really self-conscious, you know, about themselves. Like I know a hot ass chicks, I'm like, wait, you take a zempic? Why? Like, oh, just like a little, you know, I'm like, you don't need it. I think some women say there's a real benefit to taking a micro dose after a certain age. I was watching a video this lady is talking about how micro dosing these GOP ones is actually beneficial for some women after a certain age because it helps reduce inflammation. It does a bunch of different things to them. But I don't know. Do you gain the weight? Like say, if there's people that are just, I'm just going to do it like really overweight people. They're just, who obviously have to do it, struggle, with diet and working out. When they get off to like, they gain all the weight back like everything else. Most likely if it's a psychological issue, the moment you get off of it, that psychological issue is going to return. So I like shrink your stomach or something, right? Yeah, well, it does. But it's basically your starving yourself. Just like when you go out of jail, you barrel can eat that double cheeseburger, right? It's because your stomach shrank, because you weren't eating much. That's kind of the same thing that happens with those empics. I mean, what happens to them when people say, oh my God, it makes you lose bone mass, it makes you lose muscle mass? Right, but so does starving yourself. That's one of the things that happens when people go on these crash diets. They go, I'm just, I'm 30 pounds away, I'm just not going to eat. Okay, well your body's going to find food somewhere, so it's going to eat itself. And yeah, your body will eat fat, but it's also going to eat muscle tissue. It's also going to eat bone tissue. Your body's going to consume itself to survive, which is crazy. So these things that you're getting, these side effects of like bone loss and muscle loss, that's what would happen if you just stop the eating too. It's your body doesn't have any nutrients. Just like when you were in jail, you weren't getting any protein, you weren't growing any muscles. Your body is not getting the nutrients that it needs. So it's just shrinking. So, red or true tide, as I said. So that, the difference between this red or true tide, this one is a different one in that this one allows you to have all the weight loss, but you don't lose the muscle loss. It's not the same thing. I want to show you a picture of what I look like. Oh, yeah, please do. It was horrible. You got my number sent it to me, and I'll send it to Jamie. All right. If it's shocking, bro, you're about holy hell, bro. If this red or true tide, am I saying it right? Red or true tide? Red or true tide? Whatever it is. This one, they think, is going to be incredible. Because this one is going to give you all the fat loss, but none of the muscle loss, none of the bone density loss. And I wonder if it's going to be the same for like desire and whether it's kind of fuck with addictions and all those other things too. Because I was reading this thing where employers are they're getting upset at people taking GOP ones because it changes their ambition. I saw it too. I've been trying to find that article over since I saw it. And I keep find it. And it's not that it is, but it makes me wonder if it's like propaganda against it from the people who are on, like you know, selling the good stuff now, they don't want to no longer replace. It could put it into perplexity. See what AI, our AI sponsor, our people working. Yeah. Have its chains. Do employers who are having a problem with their employees taking GOP ones because it affects their work or ambition. I think what they were saying was ambition. It's making people less ambitious. Which kind of makes sense. Because I think a lot of people, their ambition is probably an addiction. They're probably addicted to kicking ass and doing things. Here it goes. Yes, but the main employer issues with GOP ones today are cost coverage and side effects impacting attendance and productivity, not a clearly documented widespread loss of work ambition. It'd be the same thing kind of probably. Yeah, productivity, sure, if you're not as ambitious. But attendance is if, unless you're injured, you're hurt. That was my mind. My decide to show up. You might feel like I don't even feel like going. Right. Right. So side effects and performance, common side effects are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, plus headaches and fatigue can result in comfort, increase absenteeism and are tied to workplace performance issues if unmanaged. Legal and HR complexity, employers must balance cost control with ADA, HIPAA and non-discrimination rules when deciding coverage and when asked about employee medication use. Evidence of motivation and ambition. There are anecdotal stories, media and personal accounts of people feeling less driven or shifting life priorities on GOP ones, but these are not yet backed by large workplace specific studies. So employers are not treating lost ambition as a primary policy issue. But I bet they're thinking about it. Yeah, I bet they're thinking about it. I mean, it makes sense. Did you find it? I mean, it sends me to her number. Okay. Would you look like right when you got out? Yeah. Yeah. It was crazy, dude. I can't find her. I'm not having someone send it to me though. Okay. No worries. Kind of embarrassing to show you, but I got it. No, I don't see this. Because if you see me now, I got Holy Hell, bro. Yeah. Crazy. A good before and after is great. The people that are really brave are the ones that say, I'm going to get in shape. So here's what I look like right now. And they post out on the internet. Like, whoa, that's that's crazy. Yeah. But that's also a good way to hold yourself accountable. You know, yeah, a bunch of people to shit on you. Fat shaming works. And now it's not nice. People don't like it. When someone calls you up fat fuck, you're like, oh, man, come on, come on. Let me get you started thinking. Did you go to work? Yeah, no. Yeah. A little bit of hard work. You know, a little bit of hard work, get it, you know? Well, listen, if there's a way where massively obese people that are dying can get healthy and it's a GLP1, I'm all for it. But for everybody else, just get to work. And you'll respect yourself so much better. Like right now, like you could look in the mirror and go, damn, I look so much better than I did when I got a gel. Yeah. Because you could have stayed looking exactly that same way. Right? If you got discouraged when you were saying, like, I don't know if I'm going to be able to do this. I have no endurance. I don't know if it's ever going to come back. A lot of people would have just quit right there. Yeah. And if you quit right there, you wouldn't be able to appreciate the results when you kept going. And that's the case with everybody that's at a bad place right now. Just go to work. Go to work. Write it down. Go to work. Put it together. Yeah. And yeah, man, I think it just makes you that much like a stronger and like aside from the work, but like internally 100% you know? You have to value yourself so much more in health. Absolutely. Yeah. It's also good for your brain and your brain's ability to do tough things. If you get through something difficult, you realize like, oh, I've been here, like the next time some fucked up shit happens to you, like I've been here before. I know it sucks right now, but I'm going to just trust this process. Exactly. Keep on trucking. So right when I when I got back to work, I was like, man, I'm in the phase right now where it sucks. You know, like waking up source hell. I remember the first time I did leg day. I couldn't. I couldn't even fucking walk, dude. Did you have somebody walking you through it? Like how to do it correctly? Well, you don't overdo it in the beginning because like, did you work with a trainer or anybody? Yeah. Yeah. Like over at the PI. So when we first got started, we obviously didn't want to like, because I was so eager to just get back in shape and it was it was tough, you know, but that's like one of the things that that like while running, like I like I love to run. And it's like one of those things where like a lot of people, they reach to with a point where they get tired and then they just stop, you know, they're just quit, you know, I'm like, you got to push yourself more and more harder and more harder next year. You know, you catch a second wind and you know, you're jamming but when I first first started, I swear to do like I would like so when I first got out my oldest son, he wrestles for high school. And he was like, oh, you're going to rest. You're going to write. You want to rest? You know, he was out of shape. I'm like, oh man, he might. He might get me. You know, so in my mind, I'm like, all right, I got one good, one good take down in me. And yeah, sure enough, we wrestled and then shot for that take down, got the take down and got up and now I'm just like, whoa, he just ragged all of me after that. You just ragged all of you, man. And then actually a couple of days ago, I got back from Vegas and and I hit him up on like with stuff now, you know, like with stuff now. And yeah, I'm from that first, that from that first workout to this one, you know, we made it through a whole, a whole workout, you know, it's such a good feeling because I got really like really discouraged, bro, I'm not even alive. And it was points where I was like, got really emotional, like how am I this tire? Like this is crazy, you know, and then I just always told myself, like, dude, you made it through so much in your life that you could come back and you come bounce back for this. So that's this whole process has been like to me, it's like a comeback, come back, come back story, you know, of course. And it's just about trust in that process. It's just so hard when you used to be at one point. And now you're way, way, way below that. And you got to build back up to get to where you used to be. You know, but that's, that's kind of a blessing. There's a blessing in that because you realize like after it's over, it's like, wow, I did it. I did it. I pushed through all that bullshit. I got my body back in shape again and I'm back. Like when you get done with your camp, when you're peeking and telling that last week, you want to feel so good? Yeah, man. Honestly, I feel great now. And like I felt like I've done such a great job and actually recovering more, doing like a lot more recovery stuff. And I've been incorporated that so much. And before I should just go go on like now, like I take the time to recover. And, and I've been taking this stuff from regenerate. But is that? Regenerate is like an, and what is it? Any day or something like that? Okay. Yeah. Stuff like that. Yeah. So it's NMM. So it's like a precursor to NAD. Yeah. Do you want to define that stuff? You know, you see, yeah. Provides it. Yeah. Okay. So that means third party tested regenerate. Does that, um, who, who makes that stuff? Do you know? Um, I know, I know that they're, they're definitely USC approved. And like, I think they might even sponsor. Thorne is the main supplement company that you, the DFC uses, right? Yeah. Because they're all third party tested. It's like safe for sport. Yeah. The, uh, it's, uh, true shield certified products for professional athletes. And, uh, yeah, I started, I started taking that like about two, two fights ago. And I feel great. I guess it's like NAD like some kind of anti-AD nurse on the bench. Yeah. It's, uh, it basically lengthens your telemeres. Um, it is, uh, it sort of brings your body back to like a level of recovery that it had when it was younger. Allegedly. There's a lot of, there's a lot of people that take IV NAD and they take, um, NAD and, um, you know, you can get it in the sub, you don't, um, what's it called? Subcutaneous, uh, under the fat injections. They do it that way too. Yeah. Yeah, but, um, but I think some of the best ways is actually NMM. That stuff. Cause it, what it does is it, it's like a precursor and your body just makes more NAD that way. Yeah. Um, I take it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It works. I take it before I go to bed every night. And you know, Andrew Huberman was telling me about it. And he was saying it, he noticed that when he really felt like it was working, one of the things that he noticed was that his fingernails were growing quicker. And that's the same thing with me. I texted him the other day. I go, this is crazy. Like my fingernails grow way quicker than they used to. And I think it's because of that. That's crazy. I just noticed that too. If I may, then I would be going crazy too. Yeah. Oh, I think it's your body's ability to regenerate, you know, and, and heal. And like for fighters, like there's nothing more important than your ability to recover from hard workouts, so you can get to another one. Yeah. And, um, I spent a lot of time like in a hyperbaric, hyperbaric chamber. Now there's this thing, um, like this pimp, pimp, pimp. Pim, pim, pim, pim pim pim. Um, pi, pim, yeah. Pim effort, something like that. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. And it's like actually like a whole bed and just like, right. Just kicks up like, like just, um, some of like electric, like little pulses. Mm hmm. And yeah, I'll be taking knobs on that thing. And so some of this stuff. I don't even know what it does and I was like, oh, it's for recovery, I'll do it. Hyperbac works in the same way that NAD and NNN work in that lengthens your telomere. So I did this study out of a university in Israel, I believe it was, where they put people on a protocol of for 90 days, they did 60, 90 minute sessions at a hyperbabric chamber and they showed that their telomere increase was equal to a 20 year difference in biological age. So it makes yourselves younger because you're infusing them with energy, you're infusing them with oxygen. Every time I do it, when I do it for like a series of it, like I get like real consistent with it, when I have the time, I always feel better. I'm always like, why don't I do this all the time? Yeah, yeah, I'm in there like four or five times a week. That's huge. That is one of the best things ever for your recovery, especially as you get older, you know, because it makes your body react like a young body does. You know? Yeah, so I'm over here against, racing against the cloud man. So I'm like trying to do everything possible to my body, just to recover from these hard ass workouts, you know? How long was it after you got out before you started sparring again? I recently started sparring about three weeks ago to say to yourself, yeah, so what I wanted to do was, definitely get in shape, get in good enough shape. So like, if you go to extreme and you're out of shape, you're gonna, yeah, they're gonna be very demoralizing. Yeah. Yeah, so I definitely wanted to get myself in good enough shape. So like, this whole time I've been doing like a whole bunch of like weightlifting stuff and technical stuff and a lot of S&C stuff and all that. Just getting your body back and getting going. Yeah, so just recently on my guy, I feel, I feel good enough to sparring and yeah, I haven't pretty hard sparring sessions. Well, you were a guy that was known for your endurance before, you know, you're not a guy that fatigues and fights very much, you know? So it's like, and you always push a good pace too. So for you to get back to where you used to be and have that same style, like you have to be in shape first. Yeah, yeah. I feel like I've been getting ready just to start getting ready, you know? Right, right. Do you wish you had more time than August? But do you think it's a good enough time period? I think it's a good enough time, especially like the way I feel now. And you have two months to go. Yeah, I don't have like another eight, eight and a half weeks. Something like that. That's nice. Have you been to Serbia before? Never been. I've been watching videos of like, the Serbian crowd like in basketball Yeah, it's wild. Bro, that shit is wild. Why is he so, so in my mind, that's what I'm, that's what I'm expecting. I'm expecting I can be chanting in my days. Have they had a UFC in Serbia before? The first one. Whoa. Bro, we played those Serbian basketball games a bunch of times. Here we go. Outside one. Is it outside? Look, they got fires and shit. I don't hear anything. Right on. Yeah, so I had looked, I had looked this up because I'm a... I'm a big people. They treated like war. Yeah, so the audiences, they chant like they're like a war. They treat it like war. Yeah, so the audiences they they chant like there like a war is going on Yeah in the middle of a basketball game You know all these serbions that are coming over and dominating an American basketball well guess why? Yeah Yeah, so that motherfucker that's originally why I had looked this up a long time ago and Was it Nicole a yolk itch yolk is one of the top NBA players and I was like when I when I When I found found a family over like and I love basketball basketball. It's like one of my favorite sports I'm always like looking to like the background of the basketball player where he came from and I had already seen the Serbian basketball crowds Like man, I'm able to go to like a Basketball game in Serbia, you know, I'd be careful what I ate and drank You know what I'm saying? Yeah going over there to fight their main dude in the main event. Yeah, yeah That's crazy Like that's crazy. I don't think Especially they've never had a fight over there before you never had a UFC over there I'm not accusing the Serbian's of doom. I mean like it might be a few unscrupulous gamblers a few people Yeah, so this is the basketball game War drums they got war drums their pounding Pro this is Viking shit. Yeah I love it. So this is what I'm expecting when I love it. I love it. I want to go see a basketball There's gonna be nuts man for sure, but it's gonna be exciting It's gonna be so weird for you just to when they shut that cage like oh my god, I'm back Yeah, I wasn't jail in Mexico. I was in a different kind of cage. Yeah Like a way less preferable. Yeah, wild man. What a crazy fucking story You know, yeah, man, and I get to You know tell a whole keep the story going you know Make it even make it even better Yeah, does it does it piss you off because like you had so much momentum after beating Kevin Holland like that was a big victory for you Yeah, it couldn't have happened at a war at a war's time, man I know because Kevin's a tough guy and a tricky guy and that was a welterweight fight, right? Yeah And fighting him at welterweight that's where he's at his best You know Kevin at welterweight is really that's where he belongs Yeah, you to beat him. That's huge. Yeah, I do it in such a tricky guy. I too. Yeah, I was an amazing fight Good was I hadn't I didn't I think I don't think I've had a fight like that in my career where So so much going on. I was almost yeah, I dropped him in the second, you know I was blew my fucking gas tank Trying to finish them and then come to third round He drops me and almost finishes me and I bounced back and then end up on top It's like this these are those are the fights that I trained for bro. I want my mind That's what I'm training for you know, yeah, and it couldn't it couldn't that fight was amazing I had that's my third time in schedule to fight them and Finally finally happened. It was an amazing fight was everything I expected it to be in I expect this fight To be an absolute war as well, you know, dude, dude, dude's a You know, it's got a couple knockouts come You know, it looks pretty good. He's a very careful guy very skillful guy Euro's men it's just no joke. He's very good. Yeah, it's gonna be a good fight. Yeah, it's perfect Yeah, I'm I'm I'm gonna bring it, you know, I'm for sure. I'm bringing you always do fair Yeah, but for that man, it's gonna be so emotional for you like having that moment like Realize that you're fully all the way back. I can't imagine. Yeah, man What is the craziest shit you saw in jail in Mexico? The craziest shit I saw in jail in Mexico I'm really too crazy man. Really? Yeah, I want to imagine Tijuana jail. It was pretty fucking crazy Was it because you were in sort of a protected area? Nah, I'm I'll to bounce with you the the area I was in was kind of like it's like the VIP section bro It's like everybody was like there like someone with money or like You know, will we pay to be there? You know, it wasn't like there it wasn't like that protected. It was kind of dangerous in a sense where Like at night all the cell doors are open You know, so it's kind of like Look a little dangerous on that sketchy. Yeah, a little sketchy nobody got killed or anything. Why you were there? Not on my not in my section, but in other sections. Yeah, people got killed. Yeah How many in my since the whole time I was there like I take two or three You know, but um, I don't know the craziest thing I saw in jail Probably Probably some of this I bought it else weed people I also will eat it. I was that was the last thing I would buy if I was in jail for weed I bought it out of the weed. Well, you worried about they're gonna piss test you or anything. Yeah No, no Well the guards brought it in so I figured like oh my god That's crazy the guards bring it that's crazy the guards sold you weed that is wild. How much is ounce of weed in Mexico? About about $300 It's crazy bro. You could you could pay For girls to come in bro. Really. Yeah They have like a Menu shut the fuck up. Yeah, let me get a steak I feel like keep the ladies. Can you get me a ribeye? Yes Dude, we had a we had a barbecue one time. Yeah, yeah, we had we had a of again We literally had like a barbecue. It was like well not on a grill, but when I first got there we had like these hot plates and the leader Would always like do stuff for the whole tier, you know, I could always like oh today we You know like every once in a while I feel like once or twice a week maybe Nah, I'm not once or twice a week. I said I once or twice maybe and every couple weeks Like we'll get like pizza like the order pizzas and shit. Yeah, dude And and for like I think like a thousand five hundred The you could like order a chick bro like it that like a thousand bucks for like a thousand five hundred something like that and They'll put you in the conjugal in the conjugal rooms with some random chick and you could You know have your time order for like three four hours or something like that So you could basically if you have money and influence you could kind of do anything in there Yeah, I mean if you got if you got money you'll be okay. I guess Yeah, there's okay as you're gonna be in a T1 a jail. Yeah, but I mean you're still locked in the cell. I mean we would only go We don't only get two days of yard for one one in a hour and a half You know a hour and a half and the whole time I spent it running Trying to run trying to keep my cardio up and it was crazy to do because I was like the only dude out there Like working out, you know and and honestly by the time I left I had everybody like working out running or like doing some kind of like it was it was crazy how how I Might just me working out doing like my daily thing just like Affected other people, you know like sure. Yeah, and like how out I remember I like I would have like I would come out too on the tier and I've been like doing doing workouts with with dudes right there You know and like I said there's a couple dudes in there that are some dogs, you know and Yeah, hopefully hopefully you don't know if they do get out You know can they contact you if they get out do you have your information? Yeah, I'm still in contact with them That's cool Hopefully you get them set up. Yeah, you get the picture in oh Yeah, I'll send it to you. I'll send it to me. I'll send to Jamie the world needs to see this Wow Is it crazy looking at it. Yeah, did you send it? Yeah, okay wait for it to go in here, but yeah, man So the two you said a few people got killed. Did you know those people? No, no, I don't know but I know this picture is crazy. Yeah, when Stuff like that happens like there's obviously like You hear because cuz um, oh, you know what a lot of dudes were overdosing in there really yeah From fentanyl I think so bro a lot dudes were in there like doing heroin and stuff Yeah, yeah, I picture is crazy though. It is crazy. Yeah, then like to It's crazy dude. It's crazy. How I bounced back from you. Yeah Wow, you look so thin you had dude this malnutrition at its finest bro. Oh my god Yeah, you look like a dude. Just getting out of prison. That's what you look like Yeah, so that's the first we got a burrito there. Oh some tacos So that's like right after I had the burger I only took like two bites of those tacos like y'all I'm full Imagine you're stomach must've been super shrunk, but yeah, you could see what you lost all your muscle mass. Yeah Yeah, so to bounce back from that and to be to you know, I'm pretty being decent shape right now And he guys died of overdose over there About three or four of them down So you could kind of get anything you want really in jail. Yeah, kind of drug. Could you get steroids? I don't think so. I try to get protein Protein powder. Yeah. Yeah, some protein powder, but we never it was never able to happen That's crazy. They get your hair one. No problem. Yeah, protein powder. Oh, it's kind of an issue. Yeah That's ridiculous. That's crazy. Yeah, I had turned myself until like a little gym And I was like just trying to try to stay busy man, and I always told myself like For some this is there's got to be some way that there's gonna just gonna work out for me, you know and You know, I ended up I ended up having to you know pay a nice amount of money You know to get to be sure to be here today is a lot bro. I'm sure we'll talk about that later I'm listen. I'm glad you got out. You know, I had to only heard about it Maybe a few months ago I'd heard about it like I won't say three four months ago because someone had asked where you were like, you know Someone saying you know who I haven't seen a while is D-Rod and then someone said dude I heard he's locked up in Tijuana and I was like, oh no Like what a fucking hat like that could be it forever. You hear someone's locked up in a Mexican jail like That could be it forever. Yeah, we're here from you again. Yeah, man. Oh I'm so happy to be out dude. I can only imagine. I can only imagine I mean listen You don't appreciate the sunshine until you experience a lot of rain Unfortunately, that's how people operate. You know you get real accustomed to things being great And then you don't feel good about it anymore You need like a little bit of that in your life sometimes just a little bit of a wake-up call To let you realize like you should be so happy and so thankful that you get to experience this life Especially the way you're experiencing it. I mean what a dream to go from being a guy is in that a jail Fucking up your whole life to being a top 15 UFC Walter Wake contender And arguably one of the toughest divisions in the sport if not the toughest I mean the UFC welterweight division is fucking crazy. Yeah, Carlos Prottas you got Sean Brady you got Morales You know yeah, dude and before I got arrested we were I was gonna fight protest Wow Outify him in Brazil. Oh Yeah, that would have been wild. Yeah, dude and Yeah, I mean it's crazy to see like how the division has changed Like right now the top five dudes are it's in Gary Prottas Morales Mockshev's champion and it's completely top completely like different now from from from one half when I got arrested Did you see the JDM protest fight? No, I wasn't able to see that Prottas looks so good. He's he's so clever. That's a tricky striker man Yeah, and he's so long so long for the weight class It's almost like his arms belong to a dude who's seven feet tall You know, I mean like his arms and legs are so long. He's so slick. Yeah, when I am when I first got released We were we were planning to fight Leon Edwards Yeah, but um I think it would have been in July 11th and now it had been wait to see it would have been too soon You know, but I mean the August fights couple weeks after that but You know, that's a big factor though those couple weeks when you're dealing with like your body recovering from what you've been through That's that's August sounds right July sounds early. Yeah Yeah, so now I'm gonna I'm gonna be ready, bro. I'm be in super good shape And and I just got I just trust all the work that's ahead of me all the work that I have lined up and and all the recovery and and just just like like like I said, man Like just appreciating Everything, you know my black my life bro It's I've been out of jail before and no one ever gave a fuck You know like now I'm out and I have these amazing opportunities and sitting here talking to you bro Well, and more importantly you got a big fight coming up. So that's very exciting. I'm very happy for you brother Oh, I can't imagine what you went through. I can't imagine what it felt like Wondering if you're ever gonna get out, you know and thank God you had the resources and you knew the right people and yeah They figured out how to do it and thank God I'm gonna do a Mexican That dual citizen that's wild. Yeah Well, I can't wait to hear all about it off air, but congratulations on getting now I look forward to you fight. I'm really pumped. I'm really pumped for you. I'm very happy very happy You're out. Yeah, man big of fighting my life coming up. Man I'm just embracing all the work and just everything bro just everything I'm living the whole process Well, I can't wait to see the fight so congratulations. I know that people are rooting for you So thank you for being here man. There's a lot of fun. Thanks for having me. I'm late You