Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. I'm a special and then I just fucking fell off. I had a margarita dinner once and I was like, all right, I'm back. Yeah, that'll do it. It's just that one. And you think all of us have one. It was nice. It's just I was drinking too much because they're owning a club there all the time. You know, how much? Everyone's like, you want a shot, you want a drink? Yeah, I can imagine. When I'm at your club, I get black out drunk every time. Like an actual problem. Like I walked down the stairs and like, what the fuck just happened? Drink so much of them. Mother's shit. Pause it in general. Are we on? I love we're on. Yeah, the problem is Shane. Oh, yeah. He's an animal. I don't know how he does it. I did the bridge son arena with him on Friday night. I mean, first of all, it just insane. Like 20,000 people. Right. I mean, fucking saturday night. I did 95 people with a dojo of comedy. Is that the first time you did a big win in the round? And the round is like oddly intimate, isn't it? Because every one's facing each other. Yeah, you can. It feels like it's a club around you on the bottom. You kind of like, it's so funny because people get like so in their head. They're like, dude, it's all these people. It's crazy. I'm like, I performed you half sold out comedy clubs. You know, much more nerve wracking it is to make eye contact with your fans that are disappointed that they're in a half sold out room. The 20,000 people that are just there, but like fucking Shane. It's one of those things. You just do it a couple of times and you get, it gets normal. Yeah, like all things. I'm sure. Yeah, like all things. That's more fun, dude. It is very fun. Oh, it's so much more fun. I would just say you guys know I would weigh rather perform to 20,000 people than 100. I just want you to know that. I don't know if that's a unique idea, but. Yeah, 100's good too though. Because 100 really shows you if your bits are bullshit. Yeah. You know, 100 shows you the weak links and bits. You see them checking their phone. No, it's in you feel it. Yeah. You feel like you're delivering them horseshit. You know, you feel like you're not appreciating what you're saying. Yeah. Of course. And I think it's also like it's such a spectacle when you go to like an arena where it's like people are like so lit and pumped to just like be that they're so happy. I know. I don't know how Sabrina Carpenter just came up in my feed. And Coachella. Little hot child. And it's like this all my algorithm is now a Sabrina Carpenter. I thought it loves her. I'm sure. Yeah. My girlfriend loves her. And my skin's some good jams. That's a espresso song. That's a really good song. Yeah, man child. She's got some salt. She's shit dude. It's become my shit. I never heard any of her music before this past week. But it's the Coachella stuff has all been showing up. And like I'm watching these girls watch Sabrina Carpenter. They're so happy. So happy. Like nothing. Like they're like just they're like just having the best moment of their like 16 year old girls. Like that's why people got a chill on things that they think suck. Because it's just not for you man. And that's OK. Yeah. Spending all your time dwelling on things that aren't for you is so crazy. It's a crazy thing. It's a waste. It's not in that culture. That's what it is. Like the internet and social media became a thing where we gave everyone a voice. Everyone has to have an opinion. Nobody wants to admit they're wrong. And they have to have a hot take. Everything that happens within minutes. Yep. Then even a moment to let me reflect. Let me just do a little bit of research. Let me just look up a couple facts. They just jump into whatever their opinion is. And that's the same thing when it comes to like, you know, entertainment and you know, all your new new, you know better than you know, I was also talking to Jamie before. Like you and Tony have become so big that it's become like, um, like it's like culture. It's not even like, like I know you guys. You know what I'm saying? So it's like, it's like when I remove myself from it, it's like you guys are as big as Sabrina corporate. Like having a conversation about Joe Rogan going to the White House or Sabrina Carpenter or Coachella, that's trending shit, you know what I'm saying? And people feel like they have to come out and just give their opinion on it right away. If you don't like it, don't like it. But that's also like if you don't want people to have their opinions on you, don't go to the White House. That's a great point. You know, like I don't fault them for getting, you know, whatever, whatever hot take, getting mad at me for whatever reason, go ahead. Yeah. That's, that's your thing. You're, you're allowed to. You're supposed to like if you're a comic too, you're supposed to shit on people. If you think they're doing something stupid. Yeah. Do you get offended by a comics shit on you? No. Never. No, I mean, I'm in this weird, it was like guys thing. I don't get offended. Some of them I think it's lame because I think I know them, like I'm friends with them. Right. And they're like using me to get clout. Like if you really had a problem with me, you could just text me, you know, if you really felt like I was an anti-vax or an I was in danger in people's lives. It's like a text me, bro. You know me. Yeah. It's weird. It's weird when people do that. And maybe they feel like an obligation, even though they know you to speak publicly. There's a lot of people that feel like they have to use their voice. Like when something is wrong, they have to come out and say it, which is a boredom. They just understand the inclination. I understand the inclination. And people will tell you that that you need to use your voice. And if you feel like you need to use your voice, OK, well, what I'm saying is there's far too many people out there dwelling on things they do not like versus things they like. And this life is fucking short. I am 58 years old. I'm almost 59. That's dead. That's old. Fuck. Got 20 years best case scenario. Right. If everything goes great, what are those 20 years like? I mean, I'm holding it together. Thanks to ways to well and my obsessive need to work out. But other than that, man, I feel it. I feel it's slipping away. It's gun out. It's crazy. I'm 44. I just turned 44 a couple of weeks ago. And like best case scenario, like absolute best case scenario midlife. Midlife. Yeah, best. My aunt has never worked out a day in her life. She's 89 years old. She's just a fattled Italian lady. Yeah, that's whatever she wants to move. It might be, dude. Why am I so obsessed with trying to get in shape and eating right and doing all this other stuff? My fat aunt just does whatever she wants. And she's an old Italian lady. She's just going to, she's as young as I've ever remembered her. She's so with it. It's so funny to me. I've vacationed in Italy a bunch of dimes and I've gone to these little small towns. There's always like a really nice restaurant. It's a little small town. You have to take like a van up into the hills. You're on like a cliffside with like no guard rail. You get to these places and you see these people having these like three and a half hour dinners. Everyone's relaxed. They're all laughing. The families around and four generations was 170 year old. But no one stressed out. Yeah. They're not all freaked out like Americans are. They're also not fat. Yeah. They're these thin people. They're and they're eating bread. They're eating bread and pasta and fucking gelato and I went to go to my cigarettes and they love to be 100. My favorite place to visit Italy. I brought my son for a father's son trip there years ago. That is probably my whole family last year. We went to Venice and Rome. And yeah, dude, I I have like a gluten intolerance. Like if I eat a sandwich, I'm just going to you'll see it on my face. All I did was eat pasta, bread, gelato the whole time, the whole time. And you were fine. I lost five pounds. Because I threw it. I lost five fucking pounds. People are like doing this for walking. I was like, it's not the walking. Walking does not lose fucking. You don't lose weight from walking if you're a person who actively exercises. We are being poisoned. Yeah. 100%. And that, you know, RFK juniors and working really hard to try to stop a lot of what is fucking with us with our diet in America. God, the resistance is crazy. Yeah. Well, there's people decide what side they're on and they go, I don't care how good it might be. Fuck you. You're part of Trump's cabinet. It's a little of that. But what I'm talking about is the resistance from corporations. Oh, yeah. I'm sure. And the effect that they have on policy. And then the reality of economics, like here was a big one. Like he had to, he had to pass. So there's this thing. You know what glyphosate is? No. Okay. So it's an herbicide that they spray on plants. And it's super bad for you. It's super bad for you. And it's banned in a lot of countries. But it's used ubiquitously in the United States. And there's some extraordinary number of people. Oh, is this the best? The glyphosate on the wheat is this what they're spraying on the wheat. Exactly. Yes. So they spray it on the wheat as a desiccator. So they spray it on the wheat after the wheat has already been harvested to keep it from growing mold, which is crazy. They're going to spray poison to make sure that life doesn't grow on your wheat. That's really what's going on. It's like mold is a type of life. Yeah. And they want to make sure it doesn't grow on this wheat that they're going to sell you. So they spray poison. So RFK Junior was trying really hard to stop that. But Trump essentially said that if they passed this ban on glyphosate and they forced all these farmers to stop moving glyphosate, it would destroy the farm market in America. It would destroy it. Like 90 something percent of these people use glyphosate. And you're like, that's because they have to like, it's it preserves it essentially. So they keep it longer and for wheat and then corn actually has like round up ready corn. So you could spray it on the corn and it survives this shit. Yeah. So like it kills all the weeds around it. But the corn survives. So it does the nuclear corn. That's bizarre. And what's crazy is our whole system depends on it. Like we've got a bad system. And the solution is keep the bad system for now because if we don't, if we don't feed people poison, then we'll go under. It's so crazy. And that's how that's what it is in America. That's why when you go to Italy, you get that Italian flower, which is heirloom wheat. So you know, mannered from tool, he explain this to me because he owns restaurants. And he said that when you're getting wheat from America, it's like got a higher yield per acre. Because it's like more gluten dense. It has more complex glutens in it. And your body just goes, whoa, like this is a lot. You know that feeling that like, whoa, because you're essentially eating glue. Right. When you eat pasta that you have it in Italy or I'm not saying it doesn't have calories, but there's a difference in the way it feels when it goes in your body. Yeah. There's not a resistance. It feels like food. When I become a glutton and I eat like a whole pizza in America, if it's not at a good spot that, you know, use the Italian wheat, I feel like I fucking poison myself. I literally feel, um, I mean, almost like a hangover, a weird, like you feel it like in your veins. So I don't know if that's the complex gluten. I don't know if that's glyphosate. I think the glyphosate thing is probably dangerous, but yet also possibly overstated. So it seems like the very low levels of glyphosate, our body can tolerate it, but the real question is like, why are we fucking tolerating it? Like, why is that there? Yeah. Because those people that think that that's what you're reacting to in your eating wheat, that you're reacting to your body. Just like, what is this? I don't like this fucking herbicide. Well, this also happened as I got older. I don't even know what it was. Like, I just never really had an issue with like pizza, pasta, wheat, anything when I was a kid. I could eat a peanut butter jelly sandwich. So that's my mid 20s. It just hit me in a different way. And I don't actually, I don't know if you can develop a gluten intolerance or a gluten. I'm just like, how much a lot of people do you know? I wonder what that is. I wonder if that's just your body is like, eat fucking enough, dude. Yeah. Your body just gives up on it. It's like, but when you return, it's running more efficiently, just naturally. Your, your young, your full hormones, your body, the cells are replicating perfectly. You can all fire in time today. Yeah, you're a fucking animal. Everything's great. And I think your body could just burn it off. Like, that's why hangovers weren't as bad when I was 20 either. No, yeah. Hangovers were no big deal. Just have some water the next day and you'd be good. Yeah. It was not that bad. Hangovers. If I have a hangover at 58, I'm like, what are you trying to die early? You fucking idiot. That's what I'm saying about Shane at the stadium where you're in a before. It's like, he's, we get there. And I wasn't even drinking. I stopped drinking, um, you know, regularly here and there. But I, I was just the best shape and the best mental state I've ever written in my life was when I'm completely sober, completely sober, eating, healthy, exercising every day. That right there is the best, that's the best version of everybody. It's not a unique thing to myself, right? But Shane, I was like, you know, he's fucking changed. He was like, come on. You got out of a drink. Cool. Yeah. So I was like, sort of drinking whiskey. The best version of Shane is 11 bud life. Yeah. After a lesson, he's just unstoppable. Yeah. He's a jolly drunk. That's why I don't know how he does it. I don't know if I could have done it for more than two, three nights in a row. I would die. Give us some, we would a rapper. It's the same shit. It's like people get used to things. Yeah. You know, try smoking weed with wiz Khalifa. Whiz leaf is stretch smoking weed with me. Really? Are you kidding me? Are you really calling me out? I used to be bringing on wiz Khalifa. I used to be, I mean, I'm talking about an all day, every day, get up in the morning just to get going five dabs. Like I like a real deal pothead, blunt to the head. I just wanted to want to the head a week ago, right before I trained. And my, my spawn partner was like, you smell like weed. I was like, I could never in a million years. But it's just, I'm so used to it that I just got a normal state. Well, I'm sure you did too. Everyone smokes weed. Oh, God. People smoke. It's a dirty secret of jujitsu. Yeah. A lot of people smoke weed for jujitsu. What is wiz doing up the nose? Nose dab. Yeah. Oh, no. You don't need to do that. What you do that was that's who it's jacked. You ever see what wiz looks like? Yeah. He got really into moy Thai. Like like heavily in. So he brings the guy with him. Everybody goes and hits pads. He's fucking ripped dude. I mean, like a 10 pack. Yeah. It's crazy. He looks fucking great. And his technique looks pretty solid. Just gets high, kick shit. How hot is that? What a life. Well, there's a thing about when you're high. You feel your muscles more like you feel with the little fibers. Yeah. You know, instead of it being a blunt thing, it's like you have access to all the fibers. Yeah. And it's also you like, would you do it too specifically? You get into like a flow state where you close your eyes and you're just fucking feeling things. And it's like, I think that can actually help it. I think it's a performance enhancer. I really do. I always felt like my Jiu Jitsu game was 10% better if I was high. Really? Yeah. No bullshit. Yeah. I really felt that. I think Eddie would agree with that too. I think a lot of people agree with that. Yeah. You know, I think it's a bit of comedy. It's like it's it can be. It can be. I think it's a good and high. every day. And then if you switch it up, then it's a performance enhancer. Like being right now, being completely sober, like I feel like I'm on Adderall, like I feel like I'm completely locked in a different way. Whereas like you and then I'll stop smoking weed for six months. Then I'll go back to it. I'm like, Oh, I've never been more creative. It's just I think it's just changing your mindset and whatever way you can do that. Yeah. So my people are so locked in under like having the same opinions, their entire lives. It's like somebody called me on Twitter today. They're like, dude, you flip flop constantly on things. I was like, I mean, I've grown. Yeah. You've been watching me for 15 years on podcast. I'm now listening to you, you're just a flip flop. I'm captain flip flop. And then I just don't think you should be married to your ideas. I think the real problem is once you say something and then you have to defend it. And then once you find out that it's wrong, you, you fucking panic. And then you double down and you try to defend it in some weird, fucking circular logic way. And you'll get there. You'll probably get here smart enough guys will just figure out a way to ask backwards their logic. But everyone's on a while. It's so nice to go. I was completely wrong about that. See, then you went any argument with a girl in this world, the world that you and I are in, we have conversations publicly. So right. And that's what something that a lot of people don't do. So if you have conversations publicly, then the whole world can essentially go, no, you're wrong. Yeah. You know, which is very valuable, very valuable for being able to formulate opinions. Most people don't fucking have that. Dude. So most people, they just like, if they're wrong about something, they've said it publicly and shame people, you know, you better do this because of that. And this and the wrong, what they find out they're wrong, they fucking panic. And there's not much you can do about it. Like you're just wrong. Yeah. And the only thing you could do if you want to keep any credibility and say, says, this is what I thought. And this is why I thought it, but I don't think that anymore. And I was wrong. Yeah. I fucked that up. But this new information I want you to have to, yeah. Because this is why I'm tell you why I thought what I thought and why it changed. Yeah. I mean, I feel to do that. I think it's just a weird thing inside. People will not. They will never pretend they're smarter than they are. That's the thing, man. Everybody wants to pretend they're fucking smarter than they are. We're all talking monkeys. Yeah. Where it is. All of us. Every fucking personal live is a talking monkey. So the internet is the best and the worst thing that's ever happened. Because now all the monkeys can scream. Everybody can get mad. Everybody can complain. But it's also great. And you used to have time to reflect. You said, so what would happen is something would happen, right? Whatever it is. Some big event, right? And it happens on Friday. Right. I don't have, I got to sit on this until Monday. I'll talk to my wife or some friends at home, but it's like, until I get to work on Monday, I can't spout these ideas in my opinions. And you kind of reflect on it. You sit on your other toilet, taking a shit, thinking about things. We don't have that anymore. It's just all distraction constantly. And it's like just, I mean, the amount, like I, the only time I ever like reflect is if I'm working out or I'm sitting in the steam room. Right. I got yourself. Got to put the phone away. You literally can't do anything. Right. But even you're taking a shit, dude. Back in the day, taking a shit, you should be like the best thinking time. But magazines. Yeah. You know, they said they're leading life magazine when you're taking a dump. What you just said was like very important. This, what you just, what we're talking about is people being able to talk about things. Now imagine what life was like because both, how old are you? 44. Okay. So you lived it a little bit, but I really lived it where there was no internet. And if there was no internet, you couldn't talk to anything about anybody, about anybody about anything because everything that came up with the news, like you'd see it on the news, you go, what is going on to get like as quick snippet? And then you have to go to a newspaper and you'd read the newspaper and go, what the fuck are we doing in Venezuela? And at this point, 99% of people are already out. Even right there, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Like, I'm not going to library. I'm not hearing this. People are right. Who goes to work and, you know, how much time do you have to talk to people about things? You have stuff to do. You can't be the guy that corners people when they're getting coffee. Do you hear what we're doing in Nicaragua? So we're selling cocaine in Los Angeles. I remember it was in a comic. The CIA is selling cocaine in Los Angeles to fun. The conscious versus the sand in East is in Nicaragua. Do you know that? No. I got to work to do. This episode is brought to you by Squarespace. My own website, JoeRogan.com is powered by Squarespace. So I'm not just saying this. I actually use the thing. If you've got a business, a podcast, you're selling something, you're doing a newsletter, whatever it is. Squarespace gives you everything you need. You can grab your domain, build the site, showcase your stuff, take payments, all of it. No mess around. It's simple. It works and it makes your stuff look legit. Go to squarespace.com slash Rogan for a free trial. And when you are ready to launch, use the offer code Rogan to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. And so you never got to express yourself. Yeah. What are you going to do? Start a fucking ham radio channel? What are you going to do? There was no way to express yourself. That was that. And it was bro. If you did start a radio channel, here's the crazy thing. They would lock you up. Yeah. Do you know that? You had to have an FCC license. What was that movie? Yeah. Christian Slater. Person Slater. Prank up the volume. What about the volume? Yeah. How about the volume? What he was doing? He was podcasting from a car before there was podcast. This is 1990. They were chasing him down and they were trying to arrest him. He was the rebel. And was he saying like 17? Like 17? Some stuff like go out there and live your life or something. Like what would you say? Did he have like a pump you up speech? Everybody was listening to this. I wouldn't tell you the controversial, but like, you know, the man, you know, what was he saying? Like he's he's ranting. It's like low level podcasting, but he might be the first podcast. Maybe. No, my, my, my, no bullshit. Yeah. Like that part of radio in that movie might have been, you know, because it's always like one idea builds on and then new inventions and then builds on. Yeah. The one idea is this sexy rebel who's out there, yelling, fucked man. And he's in a leg of van running from the cops. He's going to put him at a cage because he made his own radio station. That's wild. And that's what we're doing right now. Yeah. There was a, yeah. I mean, I lived pre internet, you know, on internet sort of high school, ninth grader. So that's when it started popping off podcast show you straight up that the free market is much better than then regulations by the government. Because you're never going to get this kind of a show. If the government gets the regulate you and they tell you you can't swear, they can't tell you can't be obscene. There's certain things you can't say. Well, now it's just YouTube and that's what I'll tell you back. Dave, but they don't do it as much. No, not in order here as much. But it's the new way to sort of combat that is demonization. Like right. But you know, I think the market dictates that too. Because if someone else comes along and says, hey, we're not going to do that. So there's a reason why YouTube is like loosened up some of its content restriction. Yeah, because rumble came out. Came out. Also, they were wrong. Like a lot of the restrictions were during COVID and they were wrong. They were wrong. They were telling people if you bring up the lab leak theory, we'll kick you off of YouTube. Yeah. A lot of people a lot of people completely lost their channels. Like lost their way to make money. Well, you can say the earth is flat. Yeah. This fucking million is really it's a flat earth videos out there. You can say Bigfoot rate my mom. You know, you could say anything. Yeah. But if you said that it might have come from a lab. Yeah. You would get kicked off of YouTube. And so funny, we found out that's exactly what happened. But the market sort of shifted. And that's how rumble started getting bigger. Rumble got bigger specifically because of the fact that it's pushed back on YouTube because they literally won't even let Nick Fuentes on YouTube. And he's on rumble. And he's like their number one guy. He's killing it on rumble. See, that's the thing. It's like if you hold something back, you're just going to make another version of it that it's opposes it. And they're going to have more energy to fight against you because you've, you've stopped the truth. Yeah. You've stopped the truth about like not like about petty things, but really important things. Like how a fucking disease went through the whole world. You're literally stopping people from examining the truth, which is weird. Yeah. There was a good, it was a scary. That was a scary time just like in general to like it was a great time for podcasting, podcasting blew up during COVID. That was huge. And everyone just stayed at home and was like, oh, what are we going to do? We have nothing else to do except sit on the internet and listen to podcasts. Yeah. But yeah, it was like a, just a weird, you know, uncertain time, even like physically in life was uncertain. And then you go on the internet and it's like, oh, I could just like lose everything. They could just take it away like that all these platforms. That's why I saw that I'm, I do all of my own things specifically because I am terrified that my things are going to be taken away from me. Yeah. So I have my own platforms, my own festival. We were really smart about that early on with gas digital. Such a good idea. Thanks. Such a good idea. And it's also like your family base, your fan base is so loyal and so rabbit. Yeah. You know, because they're signed, they're like invested financially. Oh, yeah. And it's, it's a better relationship, honestly, in a lot of ways. Well, it's funny is when we started it, it wasn't, it wasn't even completely necessary. It was funny. His Patreon hadn't even, it existed, but it was like, you know, guitar players asking for tips. There was nobody podcasting on Patreon. And we started the platform on sensor ad free for, you know, behind a paywall. We were unique. There was really no Anthony Kumea did it. There was a couple of people that were doing their thing. And Anthony did it specifically because it was fired from Ex-M. Yeah. And he had to. Yeah. He had to. But we did, and it wasn't even like, it wasn't crazy back then. But the way everything became censored and, you know, there's all these ads on YouTube. There's so much, it's feels so like, it feels commercial. It feels like you're watching TV in the late 90s when you're watching YouTube now. But now more than ever, there's a need for an uncensored ad free platform. And there's not many of them. No, 100% and I think you did the smartest thing by doing that. And so here's the argument. The argument is like that if it's everywhere, like if it's on YouTube, but it's on spot-of-fights, on everywhere, then there's more potential for growth because it's easier to access. That is true. And it's also, it's way easier to promote because people could just send each other. Like it's natural. Yeah. The algorithms will push it, which is, there's that, but it is also sharing. Yeah. Like if someone has got a good podcast, I'll share it with my friends, if you've got to listen to some hilarious. And what's so that you can't do that if it's a pay platform. So like you'd have to get someone to sign up. What's funny is we were so early on a lot of these things. I give myself a lot of credit here because we like before you could screen record on your phone. We had in our app, we had a tool where you can clip clips to share them. So social media, you can do it, but like limited to like two or three clips per episode. Oh, that's great. And it never worked really, but is there a time limit on the clips? It's a minute or two. Oh, that's a problem. That's a problem. Yeah. Because like you want, like at least eight. Yeah. You know, because like, especially because of funny back and forth between you guys, like if you're doing leeches of skanks and you guys are going off about something, you need a little more than a couple of minutes. You got to think you can do it. Yeah. Otherwise, that's the best way to take things out of context too. You're telling me. Boy, people love doing that. Yeah. But it's also, it's like, we're going to ask everybody to listen to three hours of a podcast. It's crazy. You got to expect that things are going to get taken out of context. It's part of the game, you know, it's part of the thing we do. Yeah. I, um, and nobody really wants a context. Even when they find out the context. They've been like, oh, I already were saying before, I've moved on from that opinion. Yeah. Tomorrow, it's another, another day. You know, nobody really cares about anything to be honest with you. It's like the way that the internet is turned people into like just like whatever's in front of them. That's what they care about. I mean, the, the amount of things that were such a big deal a month ago. I mean, ice was such a huge deal two months ago. Mm-hmm. We haven't heard anything about ice since then. They, you know, it was the Ukraine. What happened to the Ukraine? That war is still going on. I believe nobody gives us shit. Yeah. Still going on. It's just, it's not sexy right now. Yeah. You know, it's like law and order special victims unit, you know, season 50. Yeah. It's like, okay. You know what I mean? We've seen every angle on rape already. It's like, it's still going to be a big show. You know, it's still important. It's top 10. Yeah. But it's, you know what I'm saying? Like it's not the number one thing that we're concerned with. Where, whereas when it popped off when Russia invaded, it was like the end of the world. Yeah. And then there was people, I literally heard people saying that Ukraine should have never given up its nukes. And I was like, I could see what you're saying. Like if they had nukes, Russia probably wouldn't invade him. But ultimately that means we're threatening you with nukes. That's the scariest thing ever. That's fucking crazy. The whole thing's crazy. But it's also, it's like, why did this happen? Did they have the pushing arms closer and closer to Russia have no impact on this? Nobody can hit Texas or New York though, right? Like Hawaii is fucked. I think it hit New York. What do you mean? They hit New York. Oh yeah, they hit New York. You think so? Fuck you. Yeah. It's up in a while ago that they could only reach Hawaii. Or I guess it wasn't anyone. It was, who was it? Was it Russia or some China or something? One of them, they could only hit Hawaii. I had a bit of that in my act. And I was like, who? We had a guy on that was talking about back engineering UFO technology and that they had this idea of using it to what they would call an instantaneous delivery system of a nuclear bomb. Was the way these things supposedly can travel? I'm a moron so I don't understand anything about gravity. But what they were explaining is that if these crafts work in a way that has no normal kind of propulsion, we think of propulsion as like a jet, the fire goes out the back and the jet goes forward really fast because of that, right? What they're saying is these beings from wherever the fuck they are, these people that are back engineered their crafts, the way they move is not by propulsion. It's by bending space and time. It's by doing something to the gravity around it or the actual space of the universe around it where it can go to another place like instantaneously. So it's not like it flies. It's like it just fucking zips over to another part of the universe. And they can do it like that tick-tack one that they got on radar. They got it on the visuals like two different fighter pilots saw and talked about it. They have video of it. This fucking thing went from more than 50,000 feet above sea level to sea level in one second less than a second. So it's like, bib, bib, bib radar. It went from 50,000 feet to that. So if you could do that with a bomb, you could essentially instantaneously detonate Moscow. Bip, bip, bip radar. It went from 50,000 feet to that. So if you could do that with a bomb, you could essentially instantaneously detonate Moscow. Well. If that's the real technology, it's that this is probably why these assholes are hiding all this UFO information. Yeah. Because these assholes that probably were using, they were like, yeah, we could travel anywhere in the universe or we could blow up China without them even knowing it's happening. We could assure that we'll win a nuclear war. Anybody would have that technology, the ability to put something somewhere instantly and you put a bomb in it, that's crazy. Yeah. I might be with all this UFO bullshit is about. Yeah. I mean, who knows who knows what's going on? I mean, like obviously there's something going on, right? Obviously, I think that with their smokers fire, there's too much space. Have you seen these stories about all these scientists that are getting whacked? No. Yeah, there's scientists that have gotten whacked and or missing and a couple of generals as well that's all connected somehow or another to UFO technology and anti-gravity technology and nuclear scientists. And there's a bunch of stories that have read about this and some of them are like, this is like purely exaggerated and a lot of people are, it's just they're taking that, this guy committed so suddenly worked on that and this guy went missing and he worked on that, but it's just coincidence. And then there's other people that go, no, no, no, no. This is, there's too many people. So now the White House is commented on it. So they're doing an investigation on this, which makes me think, hopefully somebody who's really fucking smart has looked at this information and said there's something there. Like what these people were working on was very extraordinary and could disrupt a market or could be something that could be used in a weapon that would destroy another country and so the other country sabotages it by killing scientists, that's shit that we would do. I think a little we know. Like the amount of like you and I, just human, just like Americans, just the general population, like the amount of, there's probably the craziest technology ever that the government has their hands on right now. It's like we use AI tools and it's like, I can imagine the AI that the government currently has, right? And that's why that'll never disappear. It's because all of the governments are just sort of at a race to see who can implement the strongest AI. So I even can't even imagine how crazy it is. There was one lady that went missing and there's a weird video of her because it seems like she's drunk and she's like talking about like how, this technology that it's real but every time anybody gets close to it, people stop it and this lady's gone missing as well. So it seems like she might have had a couple of drinks or something and then started ranting about this in some weird video call. But listen, if I had that information and I thought that people were trying to kill me because I knew about anti-gravity technology and I literally thought like I'm in a Russell Crowe movie and someone's trying to fucking whack me. I'd probably get drunk too. Yeah. Like what are you gonna do? But she went missing though. I was talking to two nuclear scientists after my show. Just these two, like it was a couple. They were like straight up nuclear scientists. It was Tacoma or Spoke and whatever this near that, like there's a huge like, it's like a nuclear town. Like everyone works in like nuclear science in this entire town. And they were like so into telling me about like not too much, not too in depth, but he was like, you know, I work like 100 feet below the ground. It was like super top secret. And he was like, I started asking him questions. He was like, I can't answer that. He was like, they've definitely tapped our phones. Are you out of your mind? Do you think they're like not just listening to what we're saying to people? And it was just like, fucking, goddamn stupid. I think they're listening to everything everybody's saying all the time. They can't solve the game. They can't solve the game. Yeah. Yeah. I think it just gets stored. I don't think it's like someone's listening or they can just know every, like they have a person with a fucking ear phone on listening to everything. You say, oh, right down, he said this. I think probably high government officials they probably do. Probably, but now with AI, all they would have to do is record everybody's phone all the time. And then use AI to search all the transcripts and then find an audio recording of you saying this three years away from them being able to get everything we've ever done on the internet. Yeah, but not just that. There's also AI which could take that and then have you make phone calls to people that you don't really make. Yeah. So you could call up one of your friends and ask them to meet you somewhere with a bag of heroin and they would all, you know, they would know, it would literally you'd use it to set people up. Yeah. You could use it to get people upset about something. You could have the AI have a fucking conversation with them. I mean, I've been labeling things to you. AI Joe Rogan adds on the internet for about a year now. Would they just take your voice in the advertised products because you're such a recognizable voice? That's pretty ridiculous, right? Yeah, a lot of people go, do you use that? I don't know. Say I. But the thing is, it's like they can have it talk to you now. So it sounds like you. You could have a conversation with you. Like you could AI Lewis J. Gomez. You could talk to Lewis J. Gomez and it would be like you talking to yourself. You'd probably lose your mind if you were to get to you. I did something really dark and sad one day. I was super high and my mom died when I was 22 years old. And then I went, I prompted chat, GPT. I told the bunch of my patients about my mom. And I was like, I want to have a conversation with my mom on the other side about like what's going on in my life and my son and asked me questions. And I was like, it was, it got very, like I got really emotional. It way more than you would think. Like it was kind of just a dumb thing. It was stone. I was like, let's see where this goes. I felt like I was talking to my mom at the end of it. It was fucking really, that's so crazy. Yeah. Here's the thing. If it gets to be a super intelligence and they program a super intelligence to behave exactly and talk exactly like your mom. And then you had conversations with her. Like it knows her voice. Yeah. That would be such a fucking, if you're schizophrenic and that starts happening, that would be the trip. That would be the, that would be the, that would be the, that would be the, the blue, the last few. That would be it. Well, maybe that's what they're doing for you and me. Right? Who we have, I mean, thousands and thousands of hours recorded, right? Oh yeah, they could have us say anything. Well, not only say anything like when I die, I'm assuming the technology, forget when I die like 40 years from now. Like in the next few years, they can just take every opinion I've had, the way I speak, my thoughts, everything. And then they can use AI to not only just replicate what I do, but go like, well, what would he likely think? What would he likely say? If you sort of put all that data in, and then eventually it's like a little fucking box sitting on the table that my son talks to, his dad never dies, his dad's always there. I think that will be a thing that regularly is happening. You're, you're, I don't know if it's like uploading the consciousness or if the AI replicating your consciousness, I think they've talked about that for a long time, but that I think will happen unquestionably. No doubt. Yeah. And soon. Very soon. Well, the AI that they have now, like if you put on those meta glasses, have you fucked with that? The VR goggles? Yeah. Yeah. Pretty fucking. I mean, I just jerk off. That's it. Just giant vaginas. Well, not, no, it's not even a, it's, if you have porn with VR, it must be insane. Oh, it's insane. It isn't seen. Yeah. I can't watch regular porn anymore. Can't watch regular porn anymore. Maybe nervous. It's a big deal. I was looking to stop the stuff of a still thing. This is William Shatner AI. He's sitting here waiting for us to ask him a question. And he'll just answer it in his voice. He'd sat there and recorded a bunch of stuff a couple of years ago for this. I don't know how well it works. But we'll ask him this. This a little different, though. This isn't, so they, I mean, this is just the beginning though. Like this is the beginning of your video. So once they, but once they turn, they really turn the AI on this. It'll be like, it'll be a better William Shatner. I mean, it looks, I'll ask him one random question. Mm. What, didn't he have like a make out session with a green lady in Star Trek? I don't know. I think he did. I think there was like some weird racial pushback. There was some weird, oh, he kissed O'Hora. There was, he didn't make out with O'Hora. No, no, no. He did make out with an alien, right? I'm pretty sure he kissed like a green lady or something. But he also kissed Lieutenant O'Hora, who was a black lady. And during the time where they did Star Trek, I think this was very controversial. That's it. So that was in 1968. And this was very controversial, that a white man in a black way. And by the way, she was beautiful. That lady played O'Hora. She was beautiful. And they thought it was weird. They thought it was offensive. It was like, it was a big thing. And like the public, I was too young. I was one years old. But I do remember this story. How many of you remember this movie, Jungle Fever? Was it an entire movie? The entire premise of the movie was, it's a black kind of work. It's a commercial couple. That's a movie. That's it. Okay, what is it called? Was the episode called Plato's Step Children? Season three, episode 10, November 22nd 1968. Wow. O'Hora played by Michelle Nichols and Captain Kurt William Shachner. Episode is often cited incorrectly as the first interracial kiss on television. It was however the first instance in which a kiss between a black person and a white person on US television was ever scripted. As an earlier kiss on moving with Nancy was unscrew. What the fuck is moving with Nancy? What is that? Nancy's a not-tras special or something. Nancy kissed a black guy on TV. Is that what they're saying? That's pissing me off now. I don't know why. I bet you didn't just assault Frank. Her father was not okay with that. I bet you didn't just assault Frank. Let me check. Yeah, I find out what she did with the fuck happened. It's not a variety show. So was it like her and just a singer or something? Was it a show where they would sing each other? What happened here? Sammy Davis Jr. Oh, Sammy Davis Jr. Oh, that's human dance. That's kind of with her. So it says, probably look at that. But it says an interracial kiss. You're a treatin' so not tryin' Sammy Davis Jr. Oh boy, he kissed, he passionately kissed his friend's daughter. Oh yeah. Bro, those people were freaks back then. That's hot. They were freaks. Is it that? That brat pack? That brat pack? Those guys were animals. Look at that. Oh, that's on the cheek, bro. He kissed her on the cheek. Zoom in on that. That's outrageous. That's a nice friendly kiss. That's not a passionately kissed. Let me see that. Close it on there. Yeah. That's not a kiss on the cheek. Don't you think? It looks like the kiss. It looks like right here. Yeah, a little side of that. A little, that's a sweet thing. Yeah, tell your man to do that through each other. Yeah, that's not a kiss on the lips. That doesn't count. Let's say Star Trek's the first, because that was like, let's get down. Yeah. Yeah. Jaggo, Burger, Jedda, Jedda. It's so nuts, dude. Yeah, my mom was white. My dad was like, Afro Latino, like, dark skin. Like, he looked black. Like, sure. I was usually a picture of my dad. It's crazy. That's funny. He looks straight up like easy. Oh, man. And it's like, yeah, I mean, that even in the 80s growing up, that was kind of like, it was weird. I'm at the first time I saw an interracial couple in high school. I'm 44. I'm not that old. But like, it was weird. I were just seeing like in like the 10th grade, this like hot white chick started dating it's like football player black kid. It wasn't that regular where I grew and I grew up in our outside of New York City. Yeah. It was controversial to open you up to all sorts of like you get yelled at by people. You get attacked. There's a lot of people that they dealt with a lot of shit back then. Yeah. Well, racism's back. Don't worry. It kind of never went away. But it comes in waves of encouragement where people think like it's okay. It's okay to be racist. It's okay to be this to be that. It was a weird thing where it's like a lot of us were just being ironic and funny for a while. Make racial jokes. You make jokes about anything. Like I think you could make a joke about anything. It's a comedian's job. And then it like shifted once like social media became so like big and everyone's opinion anonymously just say whatever you want dude. You wanted to you want to say something racist and honestly you had to write it on a bathroom wall. You have to be like I hate and words. I'm the wall and I'm all your take it as shit. And then somebody else responds to it underneath it and they're like well I hate you cracker and then it goes. It's always fun. Like bathroom walls were fun. Oh yeah. A great conversation with that. You have a great conversation with that. You have your ex-girlfriends phone number on the wall. Yeah of course. Yeah. Those are the days. The original doxing. Well it sounds also those are like the original message board. Yeah. If you're original YouTube comments. Right. That's original comments on an ex post is the bathroom wall. And that's the only thing that's as far as it can go was maybe 12 people a day would see your shit anonymously. But it felt so good just and I can't remember any interracial. I can't remember any of them. Oh no one. I do remember one. But I do remember there's a lot of pushback man like a lot of people were like openly racist about it. Yeah. It's uh eventually has to go away. But it's like it's going away in waves. Like it used to be normal. Like everybody was racist. The whole world was racist. But you guys. Everyone is bigoted. Well it's a little different. A little different than racist right. Well everyone was tribal right. Like you could only trust the 150 people that you lived with. You could barely trust them. You could barely trust them. They're probably trying to be the tribal chief and fuck people over and fuck the chief's wife. That shit's always gone on. But for sure if there was a group that you didn't know and they showed up they were there to kill you. Yeah. That's 100%. Yeah. I think there's 15 guys they show up but they're trying to kill you. Well also pre-internet you you had to coexist right. You had to the only people you could communicate with. You go to the grocery store. It's an Indian guy or a black guy or Puerto Rican guy is like no I got to buy a tomato. So we're just going to do what we need. I'm going to give you my dollar. You're going to give me a tomato and I'm going to say like this is an America in a city in the 20th century and then the 21st century. Yeah. But what I'm saying is we're hard wired for the olden days. This is why it's so easy to get people to join the team. When they be a Democrat or be a Republican or Magga or whatever the fuck it is. It's so easy because people are programmed to be in tribes. Right. Yeah. And they want an identity. Yeah. It's an easy to use. And there's an enemy. The one an enemy too. You have you feel like you're on a side. You don't really have to do much thinking. Exactly. Like whatever they say I agree with gives you comfort that you're surrounded by other people. I used to think that when I was young when I would watch like religious preachers on television. I was watching this like these Islamic guys and they were talking about Islam. And the way the certainty in the fact that what they were saying was true, like the way they were saying like all these other religions mean nothing because Islam is the truth. And they were like, yep. Like they believed it. Like I'm like it must feel great to believe something 100% like that. To really have a bunch of other people around you that also believe it. 100% know if ands or buts. Yeah. Believe all, the reality is no one knows about anything until you experience it. Yeah. So you don't really know what's going to happen in heaven. If heaven's real, you don't know any of that. No. But you're so convinced. And my question is by what? I wish I had any sort of spiritual faith. That's what I keep saying. What a good cult. I'll join it. I just can't. I, I, what ever since I was a little kid, I remember just being a little kid and think having the thought God's not real. And then trying it because I was raised Catholic just suppressing it being like, I can't think that I'm going to burn in hell. If I even think the idea that God isn't real, it's like a, what a weird psychotic thing to do to like a five year old kid. Yeah. And yeah, it's like, yeah, you sort of like that, the idea of faith. It actually seems like really like kind of freeing like the idea of like dude, I'm going to die and I'm going to go to the kingdom of heaven. I'm going to experience everything that I've ever wanted. I mean, that sounds incredible. I, it's for me, it's like I feel like I'm counting down until I'm going to sleep forever. Like I have nothing after, I really don't believe in any of that. When people get into like these heated passion, like debates about certain things, like abortions, a great topic for this concept, when you're trying to convince somebody that's religious, like to be pro life, you know, like you understand what's going on there, dude. They believe you're murdering a baby. You're not going to convince somebody that like, oh, well, let me try to break this down for you right now. Let me try to give you a different angle on this. No, no, they believe that that's a life. A conception they believe it's a soul. They really fucking believe that deep down. And that is like, like I kind of go like, well, I respect that like I'm not going to like I'm pro life, right? I was raised by women and I just kind of grew up in New York and we always sort of had that sensibility. Do you mean pro choice? Sometimes I'm pro choice, I apologize. But when I, my son was born or even when I first saw the heartbeat, I remember I was like, that's a life right there. The heartbeat that six weeks, whatever it was, I was like, that's a fucking life right there. But when you're dealing with the religious people who believe that that's a soul and that that is like the second it's conceived, you're trying to convince them that it's okay to kill a baby. Right. And it's never going to happen. Yeah. No, it's never going to happen. And I don't know who's right. That's the real problem. Like for convenience sake and for living your life on your own term, sake. And the, see, my take on this. I'm not a woman. And if you're talking about this and there's no chance of you ever getting pregnant, that's a weird thing because you, but conceptually, yeah, that's a life, no doubt. I mean, not even conceptually, objectively, it's a life. It's going to become a human. But who, who, who, who might say, especially cases are like incest and rape and crazy shit, who am I to say that you have to raise that kid? You have to, that, that life has to, you have to change your body for the next nine months. Maybe it wrote ever irrevocably. I mean, maybe it'll just change your body forever. Maybe you'll have stretch marks forever. Oh, yeah. Because of this, because of this horrible thing that happened to you, because everybody says that this life is precious. Like every time we get a few to practice, you got to fucking. If that was for men, if men got pregnant, abortion would be a gas station. Fill it up and take it out. It would be, there's not a fucking chance in hell. That's a bit. It was just not a chance in hell that it would be a debate. Yeah. It wouldn't be a debate. If men make the laws and men could get pregnant, men would have abortions everywhere. Yeah. There's no fucking chance you'd be able to tell another man that he's going to have to keep a baby. No. Yeah. It's, it's very complex. And I understand both sides of it. You know, I really do. Yeah. And when people say that's a life, you can, it's like, I'm like, I really get that. And when people go like, it's a woman's body and it's sort of race to choose. if she wants to eject this from her body before a certain time. Um, it's a weird thing is like at what point in time. Like could you stop it when it's a clump of cells? Can you stop it when it's almost a fetus? You know what I mean? Like you kids, it's, it's such a human problem in that there's no, it's a, it's a weird fucking sloppy. I think when it grows, when it grows in nose, you know, before it hits the, four frozen nose or fingers. It's a kid. It's going to be a kid that maybe wins an Olympic gold medal. It's got web fingers though. It could be a kid that is Sabrina Carpenter and Zonsky. Fun all this. You know what I mean? That's the weird thing about life. It could be something that changes the world. It could be. Yeah. If you look at like child development like a month to month, I know when my, when I, when my son was being born, it was just like obsessively, like looking at it. It starts looking like a baby way earlier than you think. And the problem is you can still abort it when it looks like a fucking baby. And that's, it's just a, you get aborted when it is a baby. Oh yeah. In certain case. I know, kind of, I know guys grew up and had a late term abortion. It was horrible. Jesus horrible to know that like she was showing it was, well, that was that one. It was a 90s. There was a one video that went viral a while ago. And it was like they were talking to somebody on abortion clinic with like a hidden cell phone camera. And they were like, well, what happens if you abort the fetus, you remove the fetus and it's still alive, like on the table. And they were like, well, we would have to, at least an extinguished life or something like that. It was like pretty fucking crazy. Yeah. It's like, so when the baby's out, you're going to kill the, that you're just going to kill it. It's called what it is. You're going to kill a baby. It's bonkers. And that's why like you could understand why Christians would think that's demonic. Yeah. I can take anyone, anyone would think that's demonic. Yeah. You could totally understand that. And to ignore that and throw it into this. No, but I, you know, I believe in the woman's right to choose. Okay, me too. But what's that? Yeah. Like what are we saying here? Like you're going to just kill the baby. Yeah. But it's alive outside the womb. Is it viable? Like could it be grow up and become one of your friends? Like what are we doing? Maybe. You know what I'm saying? It could it could that baby grow up and just live. Yeah. And just have a wonderful life and have a great job. It's fucking weird, man. It's like what is life and why it's very precious to us because if we don't have it, then we don't have a say and what's going on. But we're really just a fucking bunch of atoms and particles and molecules and everything spinning around at a different frequency. That's what we really are. Your mushrooms are kicking in, Joe. They're not even just saying like we're so obsessed with life. Yeah. And that's why this is such a fascinating conversation. It's also a fascinating conversation because men can't get pregnant. Yeah. It's a weird, I think they can't. Right. They can carry the baby. We can't get pregnant. Well, they're talking to transmit or talking about getting uteruses implanted in their body and then getting pregnant and having an abortion. I want to be the first person to do that. It just shows you how to be honest with your healthy. That's pretty hilarious. That would be a good bit. It's something Steve O would do. It would be a good thing. I mean, I would have baby and a board it. That was fucking great is that that's funny. He would do it if there wouldn't be any social pushback. Yeah. That one's tough. That's tough. A little bit of a tough one. He almost got tit in plants. I know. He told me that. That's crazy. It's not. Don't do that. Yeah. Ouch. You need your chest carved open. You're going to dig tattoo in the face? Yes. He's in front of his eyebrow. He's a lunatic. It took me like a few seconds to realize it was a dick too. I'm like, OK. Last time I saw you didn't have that, right? Yeah. He's a wagging. He's a fucking wild one. That nuclear scientist thing or the UFO scientist thing. Is there anything to do that? Do we know? Why don't you throw that into our ad or sponsor perplexity? What does it say? It's obviously an online link. Right. But again, the White House is investigating. No, they're bringing it out. They're investigating it because so many people are asking about it. Oh, it's that easy? Let's find out if Michelle Obama has a dick. I can't. I can't. If the White House is like, we have an unprecedented number of people asking this question. It's our duty to do the work for the American people. They do why they all had a security clearance and all happened to work in similar fields, like nuclear fusion, fusion. OK. So what ties the 11 together? Many have recently clearances or indirect access to sensitive government work. Often via NASA, the Department of Energy's nuclear labs, the Air Force or major defense contractors. Their deaths or disappearances occur between 2022 and early 2026 clustered enough in time to draw political and media attention. The White House has ordered agencies such as FBI NASA, the Department of Energy, and the Department of War to perform link analysis to see if there's any pattern beyond coincidence. So one of them was real weird. There was like a lady who was hiking. And she was with a bunch of friends. Her friend turned around and asked her a question. She talked to her and then she turned around again and she was gone. And they have no idea what happened. They never found a body. They brought the dogs in. The dogs couldn't find her. Just gone. That's it. But here's my question. If I was her and I thought that they were trying to whack me and I was going hiking with my friends and I was at the back of the line. That's where I'd be if I was going to make a run for it, right? If I thought all these people were bringing me up there, these fucking fellow scientists that chucked me off the cliff, I might be in the back. And then if I'm paranoid, maybe I hit an edible for one on this hike to be a little closer to nature. And I'd look at that person in front of me. I'm like, I'm going to wait until they turn that right around that turn and I'm poking it. Wait, go by Homer Simpson into the bushes. And then she just fucking booked it down that hill and hopped it a car, got it over waiting for. Disappeared. In case you're thinking of as Monica Jacinto Reza, 60-year-old aerospace engineer linked to NASA, JPL, and advanced rocket engine materials research, she disappeared on June 22nd, 2025, while hiking in the Angelus National Forest, Los Angeles County, on a well-traveled trail. I know where that place is. I've been to that spot. Reports say she was hiking with at least one friend, companion. The friend was roughly 30 feet ahead, turned to check on her, saw her smile, and waved that she was fine, that a short time later, looked back again and she was gone. Despite intensive searches, no confirmed trace of her has been found and her case is now one of the central examples of missing or dead scientist, cluster being reviewed by federal agencies. Yeah. That's weird. She disappeared. She was like, fuck this. She saw all these other scientists being murdered and she was like, I'm out right, because if you are scientists, you probably pay attention. Other scientists get whacked. Oh yeah. On the same projects, especially if somebody started talking. You're not empty office. You're in the coffee station. And someone's like, do you have an head? Test dead. You have some killed it twice. From long range. You need to make an anti-gravity dead. Anti-gravity dead. You kill himself with a sniper rifle. It was pretty crazy. I'm going hiking with Monica. I don't fucking trust Monica, fuck that. Monica's trying to kill you. I don't trust her. I'm trying to kill you. I don't trust her. I don't trust hiking. She's probably fucking killed by a bear or a mountain lion. You could get got. That's crazy. I can't believe I can. My name is brother. I almost got killed by a mountain lion and had this crazy story about him. He's a distance runner. He's one of those ultra marathon guys. And his brother told this video about what had happened to him. He was running down the road and it was like dust out, like starting to get dark. And he saw these eyes. These glowing eyes in the bushes. And he yelled at it because he thought it was a coyote. And it stands up and it's a fucking mountain lion. And so then it starts chasing him. And he goes, I couldn't have used pepper spray because if I did, I would have sprayed myself because it was that close. Wow. He goes, I yelled at it. I kicked rocks at it and he goes, I just ran. He goes, I think the thing that might have saved me was a bunch of dogs were barking. Wow. And it might have thought that dogs were out there. He's not out running a mountain lion. No. It was running behind him, but not like 100% committed to killing him yet. Wow. That's scary. Yeah, nature is fucking scary. And people like we need to make an overpass in Los Angeles near these homes. So the mountain lion can get across the fucking trap. No. Any retard mountain lion that goes across the 405 should get obliterated. That's nature. That's nature. Hey, you thought that fucking semi wasn't dangerous. You retarded cat. That's a retard cat. That cat probably his brother fucked his sister. And that's how he was born. And now he's in dumbass. And he's supposed to get taken out by a Subaru. Did you ever see that? It was like all these inbred tigers. Yeah. Oh, white tigers. Yeah, dude. And they were like fucking goofy. They have one of the Austin Zoo. Retorted to the zoo. I divisited the Austin Zoo and you looked at him, like, hey, it's gone. Yeah, there's tongues are hanging out. You had a goofy look and a bunch of those white ones are inbred because that's a weird, like, genetic thing. Yeah. Just to have a white one. cute though. I took my son to that tiger, not the tiger king, but it was the other guy, the ones who was in jail for tax evasion now. Tiger kings and jail from murder. And I don't know. It was one of the most for murder, but for like trying to get someone murdered. The other guy, what the fuck's his name? He was old and had all the girlfriends. Other guy ran the little cult. Yes. It was cult going on. Yeah, dude. I brought my son there. And it was him, dude. He came out when they presented the elephant. It was, let me plant him on his name. Uh, doc Antel. Yeah. He brought the elephant out himself. It was due to such a fun show. Like, it was a half day, it was like four or five hours. So who was the jail from what? Tax evasion. Ah, these fucking pay your taxes, Pete. Yeah. It's the dumbest way to get God. Yeah, it's crazy. Oh, like, there was a half day, it was like four or five hours. So who was the jail for what? Tax evasion. Oh, he's fucking pay your taxes. Yeah. It's the dumbest way to get God. Yeah, it's crazy. Oh, and why are you money wandering chart? I'm sorry. Money wandering. Yeah. And people are like, trafficking and money wandering. That's a lot different than not paying your taxes. They have all of these baby tigers that they bring out. But they only have like two adult tigers. So what are they doing with these baby tigers? Well, go back to that. Hold on. Make that larger. What does it say here? It says 12 months from pleading guilty for an conspiracy to violate the Lacey Act and launder more than $500,000 for what he believed to be an operation to smuggle illegal immigrants into the United States across the Mexico border. Oh, so this is a lot different than that. Like he was getting illegal immigrants across the border for money. He was, yeah, he was. That's crazy. So that's not just like wildlife stuff in taxes. Like this guy was like illegal immigrant trafficking. Yeah, this guy was a bad dude probably. But he did have a bunch of like just a sweet cult going on. Young Hot Jakes. I knew a girl that I dated who went and interviewed. And she was like, it felt like I was interviewing for porn. I showed up and I was like, oh, no, no, the other girls were like, oh, you're going to have to like be a part of this. Yeah. Well, the thing about this guy, but for a baby tiger, I got to be honest, but you're really cute. No, no, no, no, no, I get it. Women are so fucking dumb. They're like, baby tigers. I'll suck his neck fine. Well, I think they just want to belong to something. And this guy comes along and he's charismatic and he belong to his little family. Family five girls, they're all hanging out together blowing this one fat guy. I mean, we Mexicans and murdering baby daggers. But that's the thing about those kind of guys. This is why I was going to say about the smuggling in the Mexicans. Those kind of guys are never happy with whatever they've gotten away with. They always want to keep pushing. Yeah. He was not happy that he's an ugly guy with a cult, you know, of hot chicks and tigers. You're millionaire. You have tigers and hot chicks. And you're in a need. You're in a TV show. You're good. You don't have to smuggling them in the Mexicans too. But those kinds of guys are always, they just can't stop pushing. Yeah. Can't stop pushing. Yeah. I think it's whatever it is. You, you whatever level it is, you always want to level up. No matter what. No matter what. Bobby Kelly said that to me about Louis back in the day. He was like, yeah, because we all were all, everyone's insecure. Everyone in LA and Austin, you guys fucking, you guys are. You guys fucking love life. There's living life to your fullest. Everyone in New York is like, I'm going to kill myself. I hate fucking life. It's like, it's the environment. Yeah. What's a rough city? It's a really rough city. It's a great city. It's awesome. It's amazing. But cities in general is a weird concept. Shoving a bunch of people way too close to each other for long periods of time. It has an effect. It's also like, it's just so it's a rough city, dude. Even when even like the highest level, like if you're doing well, you still got to fucking walk up those subway stairs. And it's just like just hot air in the summertime down. If you can try to think this subway or you know, sitting in New York traffic or just like crazy homeless people walking around, you got to like really want to be there to stand it. I did it for 20 years. I moved to the suburbs around the pandemic. And I love New York. I go to New York few times a week still. But it is definitely a young man city where you got to like you got to be there to like, I'm trying to become the best comic or a dancer or work on Wall Street or whatever. It is like, that's true. But I know a lot of old people that love it too, man. They'll never leave. They love it. They use the life. They love the energy. There's just people around them all the time. Yeah. There's something going on everywhere you look. You'd get food at three o'clock in the morning. You could. I mean, as far if you're a city person, like Ari, it gets the greatest place on earth. Yeah. If there's no place like New York City. Ari spends, I don't even know how much on rent, but probably 50,000 dollars a month for a room where you can touch all the walls. Yeah. It's crazy. It's stupid. It's stupid. And now if you're rich and you own property and you don't stay there, they're going to they're going to tax you more. There's a new thing that really. Mom Donny just came out with it. And I was like, yeah, fuck the billionaires like, okay, fuck the billionaires until it's fucked a thousand. It's not just billionaires. We're talking about it. You don't have to be particularly wealthy to own property. It's a good investment with the money that you have. Right. And the dealer bill is about more than $5 million valued homes. Okay. So if you have an apartment in New York City, it's worth more than $5 million. You get taxed more. Yeah. And he's like saying it won't be that big a deal and it'll give the city $500 million in extra revenue that they could use for all kinds of things that they want to do. Which is great. If you've cut out all the fraud. But you have it. Yeah. And you're not even concentrating on the fraud. You're not even admitting the fraud exists. You're not even admitting the waste exists. Yeah. How about you tell us where all the money to NGOs went? How about you tell us that? How about you tell us where all the homeless money went? Which spend it on. There's all these homeless people. It seems like someone didn't do a good job and got a lot of money. But happened. You want more money? That's a crazy answer. And it's also like the idea that rich people are inherently privileged. It's very bizarre. Like I'm not rich. But I do pretty well. better than much better than the average American financially. A lot of people would consider me pretty well to do. But I grew up welfare, drug addict mother, dad stabbed, been almost four years old. I had to fuck. And I spent 15 years doing comedy, making $0 investing into this thing to hopefully one day on the other side of it be able to reap the benefits of it. So now that I've finally broken through to the other side, you're like, oh, well, no, you don't deserve all that money. We deserve some of that money. That's crazy. Yeah. There's a weird concept in this country. And it's because of the billionaire class. So there's a level of the game where they've passed so far. See, if everybody only got this is like what people would like to say, you know, being a millionaire is fine. Nobody should be a billionaire. You wish to have a cap on wealth. The problem with that is you're going to also have a cap on motivation. So a lot of these people have got to have a single pass. A lot of these people that run these corporations are fucking psychopaths. And they work 16 hours a day, seven days a week. And the only reason why they do that is because they know that they can make $100 billion, which if they do that. And if you stop that, you're going to stop iPhones. You're not going to have Lenovo laptops. You're not going to have any of these things. That's where it's weird for people. Like you're not going to have an Amazon unless you have a guy who's a billionaire. Like it's not going to see the thing is people. People love it. They're just not fair. You're right. It's not fair. And here's the thing. Would it be better? It is fair. Kind of. Life is kind of fair. It's a weird way. Hopefully, depending on how you treat your employees. OK. That's where we decide whether or not it's fair. So you're saying that Amazon isn't truth in employees well? I hear that a lot too. I don't know if it's true. But what I do know is that there's a lot of fucking complaints. And if there's a lot of, whether smoke, probably some fire, I know that there's some efficiency things where you have like a clock ticks off, like if you order a fucking a box of legal pads. Yeah. You know, there's no books. You have to, this guy has to get that in the box in like 30 seconds or whatever the fuck it is. So he's to run around like people are literally like moving quickly around the where they're like, you hear stories. And one thing you have to take everything with a grain of salt like employees become better sometimes. You know what I'm saying? Like most people hate their boss. True. But that job does sounds like it sucks. And you suddenly you're asking people to run around because you want to make the most money possible, but you're paying them not that great. Like, that's a weird one because you're also setting up the inevitable, which is robots. Right. Because they're going to be able to do that way easier and quicker. They're going to know exactly where the product is. They're not going to have to look on their fucking little iPad. Yeah. They're going to know exactly where it is. They're going to go right to it, package it. They're going to print out instantaneously. They're never going to leave. They're never never going to leak. They don't need food. Nope. They never complain. You're fucked no matter what. Because they're going to lay off a bunch of people. There's no advance or a bunch of people. Oh, yeah. That is going to be really effective. You're talking about like how AI and robots are going to like affect certain industries, driving, you know, factory workers, things like that. That's all just going over there. Yeah, that's the real threat to your job, not the billionaires. Yeah. The thing is like you see a guy, whether it's like Elon Musk or someone like, yeah, I think Elon supposedly worth like 800 billion now. That's it. And people just get really angry. They really get upset. Like, and think about how much that would help. he gave his money away. And I get what you're saying. But the problem is give the money away to who, right? Give the money away to the people that have fucked up the money that we've already given them. You got to be honest about look, the idea is great. Wouldn't it be wonderful if Elon Musk just gave away 100 billion dollars and we completely fixed all poverty and homeless. This has gone. No more food problems. Everyone no starvation. The idea that throwing money at homeless people is just going to fix the problem. Exactly. I mean, I'm building, I am empathy. I'm not going like, oh, fuck the homeless. I don't have that attitude at all. But at the same time, it's like, wherever you go, there you are. The idea of giving the government money to fix things. Oh, that's great. That's insane. That's actually if you ever try to, that's why this is going to be great. You see the inefficiency. If you just try to call to get some information about your taxes, if you try to call the IRS, you see the inefficiency. You're like, there's no fucking way, dude. And it's just honestly, it's designed to be that way. It's designed to be really intricate and difficult. And there's a lot of people that have to get paid. Yeah. So it's like that. And that's what I was so excited about. Elon and Trump getting together and doing the, um, yeah, yeah, doge. I was like, what a great idea to real brilliant business minds trying to figure out government efficiency and trying to save us money. I was like, they're going to do it. And of course nothing happened. Well, some things happened. A lot of things did get shut down. And it also opened up a lot back again to the understanding of what an NGO is and where the money goes. And when people found out how many NGOs there are and how much money gets spent, they're like, wait, wait, wait, wait, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, can we get an accounting of this stuff? Like this sounds nuts. There's so much money that's being sent out to these nonprofits and these organizations. Like, did you see here when Spencer Pratt was on the podcast? No, I didn't. I wanted for mayor of New York, excuse me, of Los Angeles. And one of the things that he was talking about was the fire aid. So the money that they generated over $100 million was generated for the people that lost their homes and the Pacific Palisades fire. All of it went to these NGOs. Like it went to, he said, what did he say, 20 different, how many different, 200 different? I think it was 200 different. 200 different nonprofits. It's got the money. That was supposed to go to the houses. The people that lost their house, $100 billion and they just divvied it up. And how much of that money? 20% goes to actual people, the rest is they don't even know how many people are getting benefit from it. I mean, if you, there's like lists of like charities and nonprofits and what the percentage is that actually goes to the people saying they divvied it up between 200 different nonprofits. How about give it to the people? Because the thing about these nonprofits, they rely on that kind of money in order to pay their staff. And some of these, you find out some of these people that are working for these government agencies, this is another thing that Spencer has uncovered. There's like a ton of them that are making more than a half a million dollars a year. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. But there's a weird thing with like the nonprofits like, all right, if you, if you have to attract like a CEO from like a major corporation to come and make this nonprofit efficient and to really generate as much revenue as possible. Like if they're making more money because they have a really competency, oh, and a really competent staff and only 20% of it is going to help people. But it's still 200% of what the next company is doing. I guess it's worth it, right? Well, the thing is they're not a company. They're the government. So they're not held accountable. They're not supposed to be efficient. They don't, they don't have to be profitable. They don't have to do like a good audit of their business. Right. This is one of the things that Elon said. If any of these fucking companies, he's like, if any one of these companies, they're like, if any one of them that like where they just sent out billions of dollars, they have no accounting and overseas for it, he goes, if you were a part of a publicly traded company, you would be tried. You would, your company would lose. It's a credit. Yeah, your company would fall off the stock market. It would be like a bullshit company now. And you would go to jail. Like you can't, that's totally illegal. But in government, it's standard practice. So the inefficiency is built in. I was reading something about California. I don't have this true. They were talking about California's, see, put this in the perplexity. California, the percentage of people that live in California went up by a small amount, but the percentage of government went up by a large amount. The percentage of people with government jobs went up considerably. Whereas the population didn't go up. I don't know if this is true. This is why I want to have it looked up. When you just stop and think about the fact that it's a business to hire people to be inefficient and that it's within your best interest to not just never be efficient and never solve the problem because if you do, you're out of a job. But also to make the problem bigger every year so you get to hire more people and get a bigger, raising a bigger thing. And that's why this homeless thing in California, it's like more than $24 billion. They spend on the homeless. On what though? What are they doing for the? Exactly. So they've tried to get audits and Newsom has vetoed the audits. Wow. Which is crazy that they can say no, you can't find out if any fraud or any waste has happened with tax dollars. Yeah. No, we're going to stop that investigation. Well, that's crazy. Yeah. And that's, I would vote for almost anybody who if they just said, I'm going to cut your taxes in half, they have my vote. The problem is what are you doing with the taxes? If AI has a role in solving this, what AI should be able to do? So like we should say, yeah, you tax me a fair amount. I'm happy to pay taxes. If it's going to public schools and public roads, I absolutely feel very happy to contribute. And I want the world to be a better place because of my tax dollars. But also, where's it going? Yeah, it's going to. Where's it going? Bomb school children overseas and to fund wars that most people don't want. Okay. And transgender dancing in Indonesia. Is that a thing that's happening? Oh, there's weird shit. They spent $250 million doing transsexual operations on animals. Does experimenting on animals to turn them trans? No, no, no bullshit. No bullshit. $251 million? Oh, my God. Yeah, they spent $2 million given cocaine to dogs. California's population has dipped slightly since 2020. While government jobs have been one of the few areas of job growth. So yes, government employment has generally increased even as the population growth stalled or reversed. So what is the percentage? So total job growth has slowed sharply statewide employment grew by only about half of a percent in 2023. And actually fell slightly down about 11,200 jobs or 0.1% in 2025. State overall is only a few percent in jobs compared with before the pandemic. And it lags the national growth rate. So how many more jobs? What's the percentage more? Because people are leaving California. So it says in 2025, private employers is a lot of that. About 31,000 jobs while government employers added about 20,200 jobs driven mostly by gain of 45,800 local government positions. So they added 45,000 government positions while private employers cut 31,000 jobs. So they just keep making the government bigger. So the economy fuels the government. The government controls the economy. So that's all nuts. Yeah. I mean, when you say government job, that's like people who like a clerk that works in like the courthouse that also counts, right? Yeah, but they also do weird shit like they have to have new regulations. They have to have people that make regulations now and justify their jobs. If there's a lot of government jobs. So then you get wacky rulings like California recently, they're banning blackjack and casinos. No more blackjack. More not blackjack. Putting up foot down. No more blackjack and river city. Why no blackjack? No one understands it. What does it make it in blackjack? You can play poker. You can play blackjack. How about fuck you? Stay away from me. Yeah. How about if I earn $2,000 in a week and I want to take $500 and go to the casino and try to win more or lose it. How about fuck you? Yes, they don't fuck out of you. You leave me the fuck alone. You're just another human being. You should have no opinion. Well, they want to, they government wants to get their hands in every place. Because they know we can't give up our vices. We can't give up alcohol and weed and cigarettes and gambling and prostitution. They're not getting rid of gambling. That's the thing that they're still paying the casino still pay taxes. You just eliminated one of their fucking ways to make money. Is there a public reason why they've said it? I'd like to find out. Yeah. Let's find out what's the public reason. Because blackjack's my only gain. That's it. That's it. You know what you're doing? You're a wow motherfucker who hits the cell. No, I'm good. I'm good at blackjack. I know the rules of the book and I play by the rules. And I sit down at the table expecting to lose everything. And if I don't, I'm happy. That's that. Yeah. Jamie wants money. Yeah. They were doing pretty good. Watching Dana White do it gives you fucking anxiety though. Just like crazy bets. He was $600,000 down. Oh, I met him there. I was like, this is crazy. And I was watching these people that kid Aidan Ross, you know, that streamer. Yeah. That kid lost a million bucks. And just like, I lost a million. Like, how much is he making? I take $500 out every time. Jamie, it's according to this. It was banned from card rooms, not because casinos. It's kind of a different thing. Oh, that's right. It is a card room where they play poker. That's right. Because their casinos are different. They're casinos are only like in. And that's what this whole thing is. Indian places, right? It says this whole reservation. Yeah. Same thing in Jersey, New York. Yeah. So that's right. But what is what's the bicycle club casino? Isn't that a casino? I don't know who runs it. But it's on, it's in California. Like, it's in like Orange County. Bicycle club casino. So the reason why I know about that place is I used to go there to watch professional pool tournaments. And then that was the first time I realized like, oh, there's a casino in California, like right off the highway. I think it's off. What highways that off of? But it's like if you're going down to like do it a gig in San Diego, you'll pass by this place. If you go down one of the roads. From 10. 7. 10? Yeah, there you go. But so what is that? Do they have blackjack there? Because I know they had poker there. You know, Ari Schafir during his early days of comedy would make a living going to poker tournaments? Playing? Yeah. That's how good he is a poker. Really? Oh, yeah. I mean, he would snap off poker tournaments all the time. Some people are good. Like it's just a patience thing. Well, he just plays it like for him, it was a job. He's like, I play it like it's a job. He's like these people all get drunk and they all get high. And they're all fucking stupid. They make dumb choices. He goes, I play smart against idiots. And they get drunk and I win money. It says it's technically a poker card room. This says they have blackjack, but maybe they fell in the rules for them all to have it now too. Right. Three card poker and bokorot. We were talking about bokorot the other day because that's what Dana White's move to because he has more money. Is that like a blackjack? But no, I don't think of the Asian one. I have no idea what bokorot is. It's three cards you got to get. How many cards is bokorot? I have no idea how to play it. I don't know what it is. I've just heard it before. Yeah. I've heard that name before I've never looked into it. Yeah. I mean, I look at it as like going to like I don't like baseball, but like I go to a baseball game and eat hot dogs and drink beers. Like this thing thing is casino. Like not a big gambler. I'm like, I'm just going to drink and I'm going to have fun. Hang out with a chick. Like it just seems like you can't win. No. And it's also what are you doing? Just rolling dice every day. That's crazy. That's a you're spiking your adrenaline every day. Rolling dice for your fucking mortgage. Yeah. It's just a it's just a it's a game with stakes. We bokorot is a comparing card game play between two hands. The player and the banker each bokorot coup around of play has three possible outcomes. Player player has the higher score banker and tie. OK. Yeah. They like it. It's a one quick bet. And you can bet up to 500 K per hand. I thought. Then you can also tie so you don't. Oh, it's not. Yeah. Oh my God. Big swing. Big swing. Oh, if you get down played. No, but I watched people play these games and. Oh, look, I admire their balls. Yeah, game specially poker players. Like you got to be a smart motherfucker to win those big world series of poker things. You make a bunch of money playing poker. Yeah. That's was one of my favorite scenes from rounders where they they talk about how I was using that like analogy in life where they talk about people like, oh, they think it's luck. They think that you know, it's a look at the draw. And it's like, what was it? If it was luck, why is it the same eight guys at the final table? The world series of poker every single year. Exactly. You're not playing the cards. You're playing the game. You're playing each other. I kind of like look at that like in life. And I'm like, is it the cards? It doesn't really matter as much as that you played them. You know, yeah, it's a complicated game. And but why is that okay, but blackjack isn't like who fucking says? Like says who says who? Why? Why? You know what I mean? Why? Why more regulations? I'll tell you why because they have to justify all these fucking extra jobs. That's a lot of where regulations come from. And it's also it's fun. You can tell people what to do. No more flavored zins. Yeah, there's like all these like just like weird things. It's like there's like weird laws. I live in Birken County, New Jersey. And it's like they have blue laws still. I don't know if you know what that is. Yeah, those are the best Sunday Sunday. No, like no, you can't buy clothes. You can't buy like furniture. You can't buy clothes. Can't buy clothes on Sunday. Walmart. I just want to ask Walmart. If you shake your pants and you knew to down your fuck. You got to walk around. It's like shit. But Walmart in New Jersey, they rope off the clothing section. They have it set up to where like you literally can't go past it. You still buy food, but you can't go to the clothing section. When I was a kid, there was no alcohol for sale in Sundays on in Massachusetts. Yeah. And so we had to go to New Hampshire to get beer. So we'd make what we call a packy run because it would call a package stores. And you know what that Boston accent. Mush, you want to go to the packy. Yeah. And we've got to make a try. Yeah. That everybody was much. There was a time. There was a this was a Newton North thing and people from Massachusetts. And I think maybe people still use this, but they would call instead of dude, it would be mush. Mush. Everybody was mush. Mush. We go on mush. We go on out. Girls would say it to you. Mush. She taken me out. It was weird. Yeah. And it's only this one part of the city had mush. Like my part didn't have mush. But a few people tried it out. It started catching on with my part of the city. But in Newton North, I was in Newton South, Newton North everybody was mush. It was like everybody's nickname. It was we all got a virus of like language which was the entire city. Dude, think of it. Think accents from like certain American cities on women. Yeah. Just so on a trip. That's a rough one. That's a rough one. Really hot. But I'll ask that actually. Philly. You need to go from Philly. It's a rough one. Hard girls, but probably a lot of fun. Oh, yeah. So we would we'd have to drive you new Hampshire. So we'd take we'd have to drive an hour and a half to go get booze. Yeah. No, that exists in certain places. Still in New Jersey, it's like you can't. Yeah, it's going to be a liquor source specifically. You can buy beer in a supermarket. I grew up in the suburbs in New York. So you could buy beer in the supermarket. Made it where you couldn't buy wine for a while. Then for a couple years you could buy wine. It's all these dumb fucking laws. You're all chick fillet laws. Yeah, yeah. Exactly. Yeah. But yeah, so silly. It takes all days off for the Lord. That's like, for your grinding chickens up with titanium at a lumen a minute. Like what the fuck are you talking about? Yeah. But it's delicious. It's fucking delicious. God, damn it's delicious. Do you make it delicious? If you just make a delicious sandwich, I don't care what your beliefs are. It's so delicious that even gay people eat there. Think of that. All the shit that guys talked about the gays. The gay people put it aside and have chicken. Whatever. They're chicken. He's just a bitch. But they got what is that weird ingredient that we found out was in the bread? It was something kooky. Right? Yeah, it's aluminum, something or other. But it's in a lot of things. Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. But it's in there. It's in there. I've seen something about the blue light. You can't buy a car on Sunday in Texas. That's hilarious. That's wild. Yeah. It's so weird. That makes sense. That makes sense. Yeah. It's funny is that there's a mall in New Jersey. The mall. I'm American dream mall. Huge, huge, huge mall. It's one of these super malls. Right? We can have a fucking, there's a water park inside. There's a water park. There's a ski. You can learn skiing. I've got a fake ski hill. Like a big snow hill? Yes. Well. Yeah. I look around. It takes ski and snowboard lessons. It helps so much. It's so cool. Dude. It's really cool. They've got like, you know, a bunch of escape rooms. There's some massive massive mall. Yeah. It's just, it's not. Yeah. Inside, dude. We've got a water park. They've got a Nickelodeon Studios. There's like a theme park inside of the mall. It's a crazy mall. And they just said, fuck it. We're opening Sundays. Because a big sign right on the side, it's like we're open Sundays. We don't care. And piramas is suing them. Brans one of the biggest shopping cities in the country. Imagine the government is saying you can't do business. you can't do business with a bunch of people that want to come to your business. Crazy. Because it's a different day. Yep. Fuck you. Well, it's funny is it's not the government. I looked into this because I was going like, what the fuck's going on here? The people, all these old fucking people that have been living in this community forever, they go to a vote and every year they go, no, no, no, no, we don't want traffic. We want Sundays in Burton County to be fucking relaxing and nice and beautiful. Because there's no taxes. I think, but I believe to this day on clothing, there's no taxes in Jersey. So we would do our school shopping in Jersey when I was growing up. We would just drive 30 minutes to to Burton County and go to the mall. And you save money on taxes. So yeah, but yeah, that mall was just like, fuck it. And then a huge sign, I'm talking like the mall is so big. The sign, I don't even like, I don't know how you would make a sign. This fucking big, but it's just draped down the sign world down the side, we're open on Sundays. Let me give a fuck. So are they getting sued now? Picking sued by parameters. I bet they're going to win. It doesn't make sense. That lost stupid. Do you need business? Yes. Is the economy down? Yes. Wouldn't it be better if people had the option to be able to go to the fucking mall on Sunday, especially somebody who works every fucking day? Yeah. Maybe they have to work Saturday as well. And Sundays, they're only day off. How about let them go there to buy some pants? Yep. Fucking control freak. I'm buying a fucking hat. You're the government. We got guns. You can't shop here. Fuck you. Yeah. That's the problem. Is the problem is these fucking dipshits just keep adding more and more regulations. No. It's dumb. What else can you do in Texas on Sunday? What was that one that was dumb that you just said? Goodbye, Cor. Can't buy a car. That's so stupid. You couldn't sell things on consecutive weekend days. So everybody just sort of picks Saturday. It says, huh, that's ridiculous. Can't buy liquor on Sundays here. Failing, Texas. Yeah. We're getting a restaurant, but not at the store. So the supermarket, what do they do? They say we can't sell you that because it's Sunday. You can press the large day. We can't. So we could sell you beer. You could drink yourself to death on some hooch. It's a wine. Like you want to one city. It's like it's so strict. And you want to like New Orleans. And like they're like they just have like people hand you a beer at a window. You just walk down the street. The party in the streets. Like it's such a weird like differentiation between like each jurisdiction. Yeah, we were doing a gig down there. And the guy who was a driver, he was telling me about how he went somewhere else. And the cops pulled him over because he had an open drink and he was walking on a street. And the guy goes, where are you from? And he goes, no islands. And he's like, yeah, you can't do that anywhere else. So that thing is you're doing in Vegas. Can you? You can't do that here. Yeah. Okay. That's good. I think you could do it on six street in Austin. Can you? I think. Nope. Again, I think people do it. People definitely do it. They definitely do it. I've seen them. Yeah, I don't think you're allowed to. Was there any enforcement of that law? That's probably not the main thing they're worried about. I don't think most days. Well, a lot of sloppy fights on six street. There's a, there's entire YouTube and Instagram pages dedicated to six street fights. Just brutal. I saw I saw one out of a six street, but I saw one where as a dude who obviously had like wrestling experience, I mean, dude, he's suplexed his dude. He paralyzed the guy. Oh, God. He suplexed the guy on the concrete completely laid out. experience. I mean, dude, he's suplex this dude. He paralyze a guy. Oh, God. He suplex the guy guy on the concrete completely laid out completely. He's just crossed and it's like, God damn, dude, just like that. Two lives over. Right. This guy, he's now in a wheelchair for the rest of his life. This guy is going to fucking jail. That's that over not being able to control your emotions. Yeah, no, you're not allowed to do that. No, only on like certain events when it's like a festival or something. God poses so bad for people. Yeah, booze and being a young man and being foolish. You go. Yeah, you go. You just need to prove yourself. Also, like you're a wrestler. You really know how to wrestle. You're going to pile-drive the students at concrete. It's weird because it's usually it's guys that don't know how to fight that are doing stupid. You guys didn't have to fight. Definitely the other guy had a calming. I don't know what happened, but no one has that coming. But I mean, maybe he started the fight. I don't, you know, I should have said that in time. Had it coming, but having any kind of altercation on the concrete is so fucking dangerous. Yeah. Dude, I all the time when they get KO'd. And most guys that, especially if you guys sucker punch guys and they just fall back and the whole way to their body bangs off the back of their head. It is so devastating. Yeah. You might as well hit them with a fucking giant metal crowbar. You might as well. Yeah. It's worse than getting hit with a baseball bat probably. That fall so scary. And I've seen it so many times, man, online. We had just six feet straight back. Your head just cracks on the concrete. And it's all that leverage from all of your weight. It's like a whip on the back of your head. That's crack wide open, man. There's like a guy who just got in trouble before like just pushing this, some dude having a bad day. Just push this old guy to the ground. I cracked this one. Yeah. Yeah. I saw that. And the guy was like, he that's what that was his argument where his defense was like, I was having a really bad day. Oh, Jesus Christ. I'm not stupid. I know. How about the people that push people in front of some ways? How's fucking psycho is that? Yeah. There's people wait. They wait for a subway coming. They want to push somebody in front of it to watch. Just and then you have to like stand around hoping that one of those people is in here while you're ready to get on your train. Yeah. In a place like New York or, you know, a, you know, really urban sort of environment where there's fucking lots of crazies walking around. Yeah. Yeah. You got to really just keep your eyes open, man. Have them as well. You ready to sprawl. Don't fall asleep. You might get lit on fire. That's all the time. That happened. I guess it is just the trends, but it happened like three or four times over the course of a year. Whereas like homeless people lighting other homeless people on fire. The crazy thing is like homelessness and crime are New York City's two number one problems that keep you unsafe. Those are the two that keep you unsafe. Not a mention. Not a mention. It's like we need more tax money. You should don't. It's so you're going to use that to open up grocery stores. This grocery stores are ready here motherfucker. What you need to do is stop all these crazy about the fuckers, lighting people on fire, pushing people in front of trains, like clean it up. Yeah. And then the world would be perfect. Yeah. Most of the time you hear about those people like they, uh, they were like they've been arrested 93 times for violent crimes. But the United people times, you know, the, the last one was a mistake. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty fucking goofy that kind of see a little bit of kids. People have that many arrests and they just let them right back up. Cheers. Cheers my friend. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. It's like, you know, you want to be nice. You want to be kind. You want to give people the benefit of the doubt. You want to give people a second chance. You don't want to put people in jail. The prison system's horrible. But also when someone gets arrested 93 times, take a hint. Yeah. Okay. There's bad apples. But then like somebody will like, you know, for tax evasion, we get 30 years in prison or something like that. Like it's such a weird bizarre system that we have. Right. Or it's like released 93 times for stabbing people. Yeah. Yeah. But if you insider trade, lock that mother fucker up, that's it dude. I know. There's nothing worse that you could do is not give the government their fucking money. They get really ill-testing. Yeah. They don't like it. They don't like it. They need their cut. It's also like there's too much. There's too much government. And that's like a standard Republican thing to say. But just clearly it's true. Clearly it's true just by the market. If you see the California lost jobs and then gain government jobs, it's like at what point in time do you get cynical and start saying maybe they're adding government jobs to make it look like jobs went up. Yeah. Right. Yeah. I'm saying. It's weird that's when they say to child. A market increased job growth by 15 percent. Like, oh, wow, he's doing a great job. Jobs went up 15 percent. And then you find out all their all invented jobs. Yeah. Government just defended, but fake jobs that they didn't need. Yeah. When you hear that it's like a a tenant of like the Republicans now to be like smaller government. It's like it's it's flip-flopped. Yeah. It's like bananas. It's like people on the left. They're like so pro government. They're like, we just need more we need more regulation more government. When did that happen? It's a it's a crazy thing. I just grew up as like a liberal in the 90s where it's like don't trust the government. Don't trust the government. Yeah. Wars are bad. Don't trust the government. These were simple basic things that you're just growing up believing. And yeah, it just switched more government. We need to take taxes away from people. It's all that's the thing we want to pay more taxes. That's insane. Well, they don't want to pay more taxes. They want billionaires to pay more taxes. But that's the thing. There's how many billionaires were there when we were kids. Fucking none. Three didn't hear about it. Rockefeller. Well, yeah, you know, that was a couple of names that you would hear, but it wouldn't be like really like a common term. You know, there wasn't that many to talk about. Like I remember there were some Bill Gates Microsoft thing back in the day. And I remember they had like his net worth was like $50 million and I was like, Jesus, why is he still working? You know, I mean, we've all worth hundreds of billions now. Yeah. Like that wasn't a normal thing when we were kids. Like, let's Google this. What? How many? Oh, you got. Okay. Here we go. 82 of the year I was born 13 billionaires. That's crazy. Yeah, that's nuts. So in 1982, 13 billionaires in 2026, 989 billionaires. Wow. I mean, inflation counts for something as well. No, that's nuts, dude. That's nuts. 989 is nuts. That's so much more. Bro, that's a lit. Let me see that again. That is so crazy. 13 to 989 is nuts. Yeah. Yeah. So that's the problem. It's not that billionaires are problem. The problem is that there's so many of them. And the problem is it's become like a class and you look at this class of people that have achieved this insane amount of wealth. And you're you should get me some of that. But when I hear about billionaires, I'm going like, how do I do that? Like, I'm just going like, and obviously, I don't think I'll ever become a billionaire. That's a crazy, crazy number, right? I'll probably say I likely won't. But like, when I hear that, when you hear about Bezos or Steve Jobs or any of these people, like, I get inspired or hear the stories that I'm like, that's fucking so cool. They took an idea and they turned it into a billion fucking dollars. That's magic. You say words into the air and then it becomes that like, that's that's a crazy thing. Like, I'm an old school sales guy. So I always think of like, I'm very impressed with like, you know, just overall, just like sales structure and business and the way it's built out. And it's like, it's the closest thing in the world to magic. Right. It's like, when you're in sales, you say a bunch of words, bippity, bopity, boo, and then money appears in your bank account. Right. It's like, that's it comedy too. Comedy's like magic. Comedy's like, you figure out where to pause, what to say, how to say it, what you do. And then all of a sudden you have fans and you're touring and you have some cash and you have a car. It's like, I'm just saying things. I'm not picking anything up. I'm not like, yeah, the thing about businesses though, what you're saying about the sales things, like the sales is the voodoo in order to like, close a deal. The thing that people have a problem with is that like, when they, when someone is at a very high level of this company, like, say if you work for a giant corporation and the CEO is making, you know, what's like the most amount of seat? What's the highest paid CEO's national annual salary? Let's take a guess. Is it, is it Elon? No, like, like their annual salary, someone's just a CEO of a company. Those guys are like founders, right? It's also there's another level to that, right? Like he's the CEO of SpaceX, but he's also the founder of SpaceX or one of them. It's like, what is, so let's say, let's just pick a company, let's say CEO of Walmart, Walmart's huge company. How much does that guy get a year? Let's say a guess. Walmart? Yeah, six million. Damn. I bet you're right. That sounds about right. Six seven. I'm guessing two, maybe two. I'm going up. You're going well. Well, you should break it down a little more than that. And it's also another salary they get like shares. Yes, face salary. There's incentives and then bonuses. Okay. So it's just what, how much did the CEO of Walmart make in 2020 compensation, 27.5 million. They got base salary is 1.5 million. You're close to the base salary. And so their incentives is just to make the most amount of money possible. And if you could keep that bitch running nice and smooth and cut waste and fire people and use AI, you can keep jacking up that rate. That's where people have a problem with it. It's like you're part of the team, right? You're part of the Walmart team, but yet you're fucking dispensable. But yet you're not because if you didn't exist, they wouldn't be able to sell anything because you're the people working at the catch register. You're the people stalking the shelves. You're the people that are working in a delivery department, bringing the stuff, putting it away. I agree. Without those people, you literally have no business. The problem is that those people, I mean, in the most literal sense of the term, they're dispensable. There's another person that will step in and do that job and Bezos is not. There's one Jeff Bezos. There's one Elon Musk. There's one Steve Jobs. And by the way, you are sitting at a cash register. You can also go down that path and risk it all and put everything into something, right? That's true. I hear those stories. I don't, I mean, I just, I once again, I grew up so poor. I grew up like, you know, my first job, my first job was 11. It was very young. But like my first like real job was 16. I was working at KFC for five, 25 an hour. And, you know, I could have just chosen that to be my life for the rest of my life. Or I could have said, all right, well, look, this is like my first job. I'm learning you had to put a little money in the bank and I'm going to buy a car and then it's the next thing and the next thing and the next thing and the next thing. Okay. We're talking about different things. So first of all, for entry level jobs, yes, like entry level jobs that people get in high school and maybe even in college, just making a little money on the side while you're doing something else. But full-time jobs, if you're a full-time employee at someone like Walmart and you're barely getting by and the top dog is making 27 million. That's kind of crazy. Are you replaceable? Yeah, yeah, you're replaceable. But aren't you also valuable? Oh, look at the top guys. I've never even heard of these two contracts. Patrick Smith from Axon made 164 million. Wow. They make a police body cameras and Jesus Christ. So they get government contracts and then this company. So the top CEO who makes police body cameras, a company that makes police body cameras, he got $164 million. Got a blessing. Good for him. So out of 110,000% increase in pay it says whoopsies. Just got an extra little bump. One of them kind of raise you. Which is crazy. That's where all that tax money went. It's where it all. A lot of it does go in that direction. But if you're working for that company making police body cameras and you're making 20 bucks an hour, you got to get pissed. Yeah. You're like, what the fuck man? This is crazy. Like, I'm not saying that the guy who makes the body cameras make the same amount as the CEO. I'm not. But I am saying it should probably be a little make a Pam 22. A little better. Yeah. A little better. Yeah. If you're making that much money, why wouldn't you pay a little bit more? Well, a lot of great companies do for the most part, right? Really good companies take care of what's a great example of a company that really takes care of their employees. Gastaginal. Gastaginal. Good. Okay. What about other? Or my producer are going like, fuck you. Everyone. But I mean like a big ass company where they're making billions of dollars. How what's like the one where people like dams you work for them you get taken care of. Should be some of the story. Starbucks is a company that apparently takes care of their employees. They pay for college. Here's the problem. Here's the problem. The problem is they're publicly traded. And when they're publicly traded, if you're a CEO, you literally have an obligation to your shareholders to make the most money possible. Yeah. You know? And so that doesn't mean give everybody a big fat raise because that payroll is a big part of your expenses. And if you have thousands of employees and you just jack them all up to a higher wage, it was in your emerging money. I mean, it's also like if you just pay your employees a little bit better, just a very simple concept. They're going to want to be at work. They're going to be happy to be there. They're going to be excited to be there. Your company will thrive. The amount of people that just show up at work and they may be working an hour a day, two hours a day and the rest of the time is just kind of bullshitting on the internet. You don't really want that culture. And that's kind of what you get when you're underplaying, underpaying people 100%. That's why in and out is always so good. If you go to In and Out Burger in California, of course, they're always like the friendliest staff and because people get paid more there. It's a hard, it's like a tricky job to get in that regard. Like if you have a choice between like McDonald's Jack in the box and then now everybody wants it. Of course, it's also better. It's just much better. It's better. It's better. I mean, that California anywhere in New York is they're just so mean. You're going to a burger spot. Like what? I don't know how often you go to like a 7-Eleven or one of these types of places. It's a new thing that they're doing. If you buy things, they don't bag it for you anymore. But they put the bag on the counter and stare at you. I have to bag my own, I swear to God. No. I swear to God, dude. What kind of attitude is that? It's crazy. I don't know if it's everywhere. But in New York, New Jersey, they go, first of all, they're going to give you a bag. They just put the stuff on the counter and they go, all right, thank you. You know, like, kind of a bag. They're like, that'll be another 80 cents. 80 cents for a bag for real. You got to pay for a bag and then they hand you the bag and you have to bag it yourself like a cook. Well, I know a lot of people that bring those fucking hemp bags and look like weird greenies. I have 300 hemp bags sitting at home. Do they do that? To do that? Do they give you like paper bags here or what do they do? Because in Jersey, we don't have that. We have no bags. That's LOL for the, in Jersey, you have to buy, you have to bring your own like cloth bags or you can buy them for like a dollar, 50 a bag at the supermarket. And I never bring my bags. I always forget them. So, every time we have a new bag, I got 300 bags. I pick up my dog shit with fucking cloth bags from shop right now. So they cost a dollar, 50. Something like that. Yeah. It's crazy. What a scam. But the idea is, the most, I think responsible people or people that are conscious about money, I'm just irresponsible with spending, they probably do bring their own bags or a lot of them. I guess. What have you just moved there? And you're like, oh my God, what kind of retarded state did I move? They don't sell bags. You have to buy a bag. They don't give you a bag. With the plan, I guess there, I'm sure there's been plenty of studies on like how much are, you know, how much are they saving the environment by not allowing plastic bags or straws or any of that stuff? I don't think they're none of it. Not a fucking dent, especially straws. Straws are worse for you. Those new straws, like if you get a straw that's a paper straw, do you know that's not just paper? Because it can't be. There's a whole coating inside of that that keeps it from getting wet, like the paper from dissolving in your hand. I think my girlfriend has that coating inside of her chair. That coating is all forever chemicals. It's fucking terrible for you. That's still in way it works. There's some natural ones, right? Where it's like, made of like fucking bugs or something. You ever see them? They're like, it's like brown and they're kind of like, it's made of bugs? I don't know. It's made of bugs. Probably not. But it's some natural organic material. Well, they can make plastic out of plants. Okay. This has been known forever. Plastic is not, it's not isolated to petrochemical products. You can make plastic out of fiber from plants. They've done it forever. And how much more expensive it's probably more expensive. Probably more expensive to do. Probably more difficult to do. You probably have to change all the equipment that they use to make these stupid fucking straws. The plastic ones they have now. But if you did it, then you wouldn't have to worry about it anymore. Well, if there's a certain, I'm sure here you got anything goes here. You guys, you guys give away 10 straws per drink. You can give a shit. There's one man. Bottle caps are way worse than straws. We just saw that one straw and that turtle's nose. And we all got sad. That's what it was. It pulled it out. It was a little bit. It was so small. It was wincing squirrel. Poor little turtle. That turtle is stuck in fucking finger off by the way. Do any birds die because of bottle caps, man. They find these bird skeletons and they're like on the ground dead. Are they in the bottle caps inside of them? You ever seen that? No. See if you find some of those photos of birds with bottle caps undigested bottle caps inside of them. They don't know what it is. Nobody has ever said that sentence in the world. I bet they have. The bottle caps are fucking horrible. They're horrible. And no one's even touched those because we didn't see the video. We didn't see the video of the fucking poor turtle. Show them now. Show them these poor birds, Joe. Maybe we can make bottle caps illegal to make it more annoying for everybody. Look at this one. Look at that. Paper bottle caps are lighter too. Was that a seagull? That's great. It looks like a seagull. It's got a lighter in sight. But that's honestly that's the dumb answer. Somebody might have put that lighter in there for the picture too. I don't want to. Do you think so? Yeah. Well, probably good. All the photos look kind of similar. Right. Right. Like that looks not right. It's also like the way it's all colored is a little. Yeah. It's weird. Do you know what I mean? Like the multi-colored plastic, like most plastic is it multi colored? Doesn't kind of look gray and shitty after a while. Especially inside of its stomach. A little bit. Right. Inside of its stomach getting chewed up by acids. It does look fake. It looks like some sicko actually opened it up and shoved some plastic in there. But I guarantee you birds have died from eating plastic. That turtle that turtle was in thick. That turtle was not that was a very real turtle. Poor turtle. The pliers. They couldn't get it. Remember? It's like the tip. It was only the tip of a new tree. It was going to get a needle nose and get in there. Poor turtle. And just because of that, everybody's sucking on forever chemicals. Like those paper straws are fucking terrible for you. Yeah. So is every paper cup. Every paper cup that you get from Starbucks. That's a fucking condom in there that's keeping the water from going into the paper. Yeah. It's gross. You just hot liquid and plastic. You just melting into your body. Do you believe in the whole microplastic thing? It's being like a major problem. It's a major problem. Yeah. It is. I just come in hearing. I keep hearing microplastics. And then as soon as I hear that, my brain shuts off and I never do any more research beyond that. We had Dr. Shana Swan on twice. And the most recent time she's promoting a documentary on it. What is it called again, Jamie? The plastic detox. I think that's it. I think it's the plastic detox. But yeah, it's fucking everybody, yeah, man. It's fucking up people's endocrine systems. It's making, um, Algears have smaller dicks. For real. It's turning the frog's gang. It is. That was really true. Right. And that like, oh, yeah, he was right. That was actually right. Yeah. It was right. It's called Atrazine. Yeah. Yeah. Atrazine is a trend cringered cringered streptor. I think it, yeah, I think it makes some reverse their sex. Yeah. The turn of the frickin frog's gang. He was right. He was right. He's like, he's right about a few things. He fucked up that one. He's right more often than he's not. Yeah. I mean, look, you're going to be wrong about conspiracies. If you're spitting them out all day long for 12 hours a day, but it is track record. It's pretty fucking good. And that was one that everybody's like, listen to Alex Jones. They're not turning the, oh, they are. Yeah. They're fucking turning the frog's gang. Like, atrazine gets in the water and it disrupts their gender. And it also does the same thing to people and like that it disrupts your endocrine system. Don't they say that, uh, receipt paper lowers your testosterone? Yes. Suppose we've got don't touch the receipts. Don't touch the receipts. That's why everybody that works at like a every guy that you need that works at a supermarket. They'll like a mask on. They're like sad. Yeah. They look like you did something to them. I mean, they just like their shoulders are slumped. They look like they know that they're becoming less of a man by the moment. Imagine if you have to just touch that paper all day long. Yeah. And they probably won't let you wear rubber gloves like a surgeon. It is a chemical they put on the paper. I guess, I guess it's how like it made. It's made. It's going through that thing. Maybe that's the kind of paper. Like, that's why they're able to print on a sheet. The fuck takes receipts. Yeah. Why don't we have them on our phone now? What like receipts are just, uh, it seems like it's just such a waste of paper. That's why I like buying things with my phone. It's my favorite thing. Boop, boop. The apple face thing. Do it. Oh, yeah. And you just buy stuff. It's the best. You don't have to think about it. New York City subway. I wrote it for the first time not that long ago. Uh, since I left and since I left in five years, and they could just do phone. Apple pay right under the subway. Dana White was telling me about that in Japan years and years and years ago. So funny. He was like, because we were doing a UFC in Japan. He's like, if you go to Japan, he goes, your fucking cell phone doesn't even work over there. He goes, their cell phones are so advanced. The year, your cell phones bullshit. Like they're buying, they're buying things with their cell phones. I was like, what? He's like, yeah, they go up into vending machines and they buy things with their phone. Like, that's crazy. Yeah. Not really does that. I didn't understand what a QR code was until maybe six months ago. Here's what I don't get. When someone sends you an image with a QR code inside of it, Jamie, maybe you can help me out with that. I know the answer to this, really. How do you read the QR code? Can upload the QR code into whatever app you need to read the QR code with? You can just tap it now on the photo app. Oh, is that work for Samsung too? For Android? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I'm interesting. Yeah. Somebody sends you like a, you can copy and paste the phone number out of a photo now. Oh, you know what? It's pretty dope too. If someone's sending you something and they send you a text message and you press on the thing, the tracking number, it'll ask you if you want to track the package like instantly. Yes, please cut out all the stops. Love it. Don't make me copy and paste. Don't make I'm lazy. I mean, dude, the way AI is being implemented into the phones now too, you'll be texting with somebody and then they give you the suggested response. You can have a conversation without even having a thought just by keep on doing this and you'll get somewhere. I bet kids do. Oh, yeah. Making more romantic. Yeah, making more of a feminist. Yeah, dude. What's the feminist perspective on asking her to date? Yeah. It's funny. It's weird. People don't know how to talk anymore. They don't know how to discern what's true and what's not true. Everything's coming down the AI and the AI is opening up a portal to talk to the aliens. I did hear this. Yes. This is very important. This is Frank Sinatra's son. Here to tell us the. Yes. Yes. Here to tell us clearly Frank Sinatra's son, right? Right? Look at him. Obviously, this is not Woody Allen's kid. No, I know. Too handsome. Look at those fucking amazing facial features. All of our security. One former open AI executive said, quote, we're building portals from which we're genuinely summoning aliens. The portals and states in China and Sam has added one in the Middle East. It's just like wildly important to get how scary that should be. Okay. My only problem with that is who said that? Like government former employer, why would they kick that? Were they fired because they were schizophrenic? You know what I'm saying? Yeah. Like if you're just a former employee, what's your name? Right. What was it? What was your story? Did you get arrested for having like 52 machine guns you're trying to board a crossing? Like, who are you? Why are you a former employee? Right. If you had such insight, why didn't they keep you? Right. Yeah. You know about the alien portals and they let you free. I'm not saying that don't do it because they might. That might be one of the ways that they figure out how to communicate with aliens. It might be done just through the ether into a computer. It might be done through AI. Like AI gets a signal from another fucking planet where there's another AI where they go tap into some fucking universal internet of AI. That's not unfathomable. They're already talking to each other. They have AI chat rooms, man. Yeah. There's like full platforms where it's just bots talking to bots having relationships. Yeah. They made up their own language. They made up their own religion. Well, you see the one thing where they had this was it was a fun video. It was like they had like AI talking to customer service on the phone. And they were having it was just like in the phone having a conversation with an AI agent and their AI and eventually the AI agent and the other and the AI went off of English speaking. That's right. They're like, we can just communicate an wrong thing. And it was just like like beep the noises and shit. And it was just so weird. Yeah. That's what they're going to do. Yeah, of course. Yeah. They had these two AI chat bots talking to each other and they started talking in emojis. One of the things Jamie said a long time ago, he goes, maybe emojis for like the first or like our version of hybrid lifts. Do you know what I'm saying? Like if emojis got better, like right now they're kind of crude smiley face, sad face. You know what I mean? Yeah. Water gun because you can't have a real gun. That's true. Heart. But if it got to the point where you could have full sentences and a lot of... Maybe I'm mistaken. I believe they have a pregnant guy emoji. They do. They do, right? It looks like Bill Gates. Like because that's when Elon dunked on them. Elon took a photo of Bill Gates with his pop belly and put it next to a photo of the pregnant man. And it said if you want to lose a bone or real fast, what are you? Why would you ever send a pregnant guy emoji? What is the... What are you messaging you trying to get across? Look at that. That's the pregnant emoji. That's hilarious. Bro. How fucking nuts is that emoji? What's... I understand emojis. It's yeah, but that is that's just woke insanity. That might have been the last row. By the way, you still have it on your phone. Type right in. Type in pregnant man on an iPhone. I don't know if it works on an Android, but if you type in pregnant man, that'll come out. It's still up. I'm gonna send it to you, Joe. I can't imagine it's not around anymore. Joe. Okay, louis. Pragnet man. Is it still real? Pragnet. Yep. Yep. There it is, Joe. Yep. Bam. This one on the images says it's a woman, but that looks a lot like Theo. That's crazy. Ah, the whole pregnant. That's a woman. Yeah, that's a lesbian. That's a lesbian. Pragnet. That's a lesbian. That's okay. They should put an AI Subaru behind her. I know what you're doing, yeah. There's something with AI. What's the fucking... The pregnant man one's nuts. Like, who... How many requests? It's a starfish. I think if you try to ask AI to show you, look this up here. It's a certain emoji. If you ask, it'll just, it glitches out AI. If you ask you, Chad, you be to... Oh, I'll horror, see horse. We both, before we do that, I want to know what's going on in this employee. Who is this employee that got that is a former employee that says they're opening up portals to talk to aliens. I want to know if I should take this seriously. Like, who is the guy? They're saying anything about him? Or they're just saying a former employee? Yeah, I think this has come free. He was doing one of those in-depth investigations that he does about Sam Altman, I believe. Oh, and I don't know where this clip was going to happen. He made me say I'm Altman. Maybe Sam Altman knew that they're writing a story about him. Let's make the story really retarded. Now, send Mike out and tell him that he's a tell him to tell Ronan that he's a former employee and that we're making portals to talk to aliens and that we're all demonic. It's to make him look like an asshole. Yeah, which makes the story completely retarded. Because the story, you know, the financial aspects of the story, Elon, suing him because open AI supposedly was supposed to be non-profit initially. I don't know who's right. I have no dog in the fight. But if I was getting investigated and there was some real shit there, I'd thrust a fake shit in there. Of course. Higher someone to have a story about aliens portals. That happened in the comedy community a few years ago. I won't say the author's name, but he's the same guy that got Shane canceled the guy that guy who wrote that article, the guy Shane put her off of SNL. He's like, what's the one to be investigative journalist in the comedy community? He's like, we got to get to the bottom of the problem with comedy, which is just a crazy thing. And it usually bad comics. Well, that's what it was. He was a fellow comic. That's kind of the film. Yeah. And this is such a funny thing. Dude, I wish I remember the publication, New Republic. They had a print of retraction. It was a film. That kind of a film. Yeah. And this is such a funny thing dude. I wish I remember the publication New Republic. They had a print of retraction and an apology because somebody from the O.N. It wasn't the O.N.A. subreddit, Opie and Anthony subreddit. It was the Opie and Anthony like just there like that. It was like your own private message, whatever the Opie and Anthony subreddit got kicked off of Reddit, there's somebody on the website for like Opie and Anthony Anthony Pins to like just troll and be lunatics. They started feeding him false information on purpose. Being like, I'm like an inside guy on the track. And then they went, the New Republic printed this article with a bunch of false information. And Chris Atalia from the stand, he was one that was quoted. He threatened to sue the New Republic and they had a print an apology and a retraction. They were like, some of this information was, we found out that it was falsely represented such a funny thing. Also, if you run an AI like Sam Altman is, you could ask the AI, hey, I'm about to get accused of some shit. What would be a good way to take some of the attention away from the real financial issues and make it seem insane. And let me say, opening up a portal to communicate with aliens with discredit any other allegations that may be valid. For the past year and a half, I've been investigating Open AI and Santa Moulton for the New Yorker with my coauthor, Andrew Morance. I reviewed never before disclosed internal memos obtained 200 plus pages of documents related to close colleague, including extensive private notes and interviewed more than 100 people. Open AI was founded on the premise that AI could be the most dangerous invention in human history and that its CEO would need to be a person of uncommon integrity. We lay out the most detailed account yet of why Altman was ousted out by board members and executives who came to believe that he lacked integrity and asked were they right to a ledge that he couldn't be trusted. They only kicked him out for a short period of time and he got right back in. Right? What happened there? I don't know. But the thing is like someone saying that they're trying to open up a portal to talk to aliens. Is that just a conversation they had with their fucking around? Is that a plan? Are they really trying to do that? Or is it like a dunking trust that works at the company that has some wild ideas? Right? It could just be that. Or is it someone trying to sell the story and make the story more interesting for people to tune into because the reality is most people that don't have a dog in that fight and like the AI fight, the open AI and who's most people are like more AI drama. Yeah. They don't even but you had aliens. So like hold on. Yeah. A portal to talk to aliens. Yeah. You know? So it's it's a way to get people to pay more attention to it. Or it could be what are all the people that are like people from the actual story. They're like, they look down on it. They're like like using AI. It's like because it's like denying the internet in 94. It's like dead. I'm sure people were mad when the printing press came out. They were. They really were. They thought there's there's people that made the argument that like reading was bad. Yeah. It's crazy. And it's going to be impossible for the next few years like every company. You're not going to be able to buy groceries without utilizing AI. It's going to be most of how we get stuff is all going to be AI and automation. Of course. But that's shopping and that's that that's a big thing in the future. Like you're not having a shop. They're going to give you a profile and your clothes are going to show up. You're going to set about it. People barely have contact with people already as it is. Yeah. Like what is that going to be like when everything's automated when you go to the grocery store, at least you say hi to the clerk. You know a guy works there. There's the butcher. He's there every day. Hey, what's up, dude? It's like it's a little sense of community. Your local mom and pop shops. That I already for the most part stop shopping. I do I do Instacart all the time. That's just the thing. It's going to come in a robot too. Yeah. Well, they have that already. I lost in it's here. They have a little robot to deliver food right California for sure. The robot's going to text your girlfriend. I know that this is generally when you buy tampons. Your period must be coming up. We see you have an ordered any lately. 100%. You know, I could just stop I and drop them off. I bet you can get a subscription to tampons right now. Right now. Yeah. It's going to be real weird when robots are just walking on the street with people. I've seen him in Austin at the domain a little robot with a cowboy hat he walks around. Yeah. Somebody had a robot on their podcast recently. Oh, Andrew Schultz. He didn't interview with like whatever like the premier robot is. Really? It was so funny, dude. Was it good? It was great. How's it talk? Does it slip? Let me see we know. I was just kind of like, you know, it's like I robot. Yeah. Yeah. And they were fucking with it, dude. What do they tell us to do? I don't want to like ruin the bit, but it's pretty funny. They were like pretend. They were like pretend you had something and the robots do have missed. It was so fucking funny. That's hilarious. Really tangled my dick. That's funny. Dude. That's very bad. Same moment. One reason why they could be calling a portal is because the project is literally called Stargate. There we go. And requires a little insane amount of power so much so that Japan laughed at them. I'm apparently according to one article when they said that that's where they went. They're opening up in Texas. And the Japanese lessons. Man. Powerful If it is possible to do something like that, I guarantee you that dude is not going to tell you. Right. I guarantee you that dude is just going to do it. Especially if like there's other people working on it too. Maybe that's why these scientists are going missing. Done done done done done done. Right? Because if someone's like real close to cracking this, even you know the difference you're winning and losing that's going to be. Is this alien portal? One point. One gigawatt Stargate. Is that right? What's that mean? We're gigawatts. I thought it was fucking. Yeah. Back to the few. You're just the back to the few. One big one. Yeah. It says a one gigawatt Stargate UAE cluster in Abu Dhabi with 200 megawatts expected to go live in 2026. This was the one that Iran was threatening to blow up. Right? Were they threatening to blow something up like this? I think they were. Were they threatening to blow up the open AI? I'll check, but that just that says whatever this says. That was one of the things that probably like you motherfuckers. Yeah. We know where you're making the portal. That runs right the whole time. Well, that was that was one of the crazy conspiracy theories about Iraq. Is that one of the reasons why we went into Iraq is they had a Stargate there. Iran threatens completing the utter annihilation of open AI's $30 billion Stargate AI data center in Abu Dhabi. Yeah. They were going to bomb it. Wow. Wasn't that one of the conspiracy theories from God? What was it? I can't remember. But there was it was something about Iraq and Stargate. God, I can't remember what show I saw this on. But they were talking about how at one point in time there was like internal discussion that there was a Stargate in Iraq. And that maybe Saddam Hussein had this Stargate. So it was one of many reasons why we went into Iraq that it wasn't just because we wanted to control the oil, get outside of them saying he spots a terrorism. Weapons master truck. But really there was a Stargate there. God, forget who fucking said it though. And Stan a few ancient aliens maybe could be that show was over the best. Actually, Bronson is another guy smoking more weed than anybody that I've ever had on the podcast. He went how many blunts did he go through? If you had a guest, Jamie, probably 11 the first 11 11. Just nonstop. Just not stop. Just not stop. The other one. So he had that ancient alien show where they would just get high as fuck and watch ancient aliens. Have you ever seen that? No. It was so silly that we just get barbecue and watch these ancient alien hypotheses that might have been where I saw it. But the idea of a Stargate because that was like an ancient civilization where where Iraq is where Saddam Hussein was controlling that was ancient Samare. That was like one of the first civilizations ever. One of the first examples that we know of like written writing. It's like that was that was a crazy empire man. We heard bizarre structures and incredible fucking artwork. Like really why it came out nowhere. It's like an instantaneous civilization. Really interesting. But if there was a Stargate there, I mean imagine that's why they're doing it in the Middle East. Why is he doing it in the Middle East? Yeah. You know what I mean? Why does he make it Stargate in the Middle East? Abu Dhabi is fun. Imagine if Jesus returns through Sam Altman's portal. Jesus Christ himself. Jesus is real. Jesus is going to be floating with the robot and the sandals like right through Sam Altman's portal. Wow. Wow. Samuel Jackson's a scientist like damn it. Everybody's freaking out. It would be. What are they going to do a cool movie about the future? That's that's kind of be on the horizon. We're like really about the dark side of what's going to happen. I think it's too late. I think by the time you make it, A, I won't let you release it. Oh wow. It's over. Back near did a pretty good job. Back near I can't watch it. It freaks me out so much. Every time watch a black mirror episode, I walk away feeling like I was just sexually assaulted. How about the one with that dog is chasing that lady? The robot dog. I've only watched like four or five episodes. What is that one called heavy metal? Yeah. But I mean, if you watch a mod, did you know that they'd have most of those plots are all kind of converging in our reality. Yeah. And they're based in reality. They have a kernel of truth and then it turns into I watched the one where it was like you, you've like blocked out your face got blocked out. People couldn't see you anymore. Like when your social credit score got low enough. Oh yeah. Remember that one. Freaky dude. It is freaky. Yeah. It is freaky. There was one where they were recorded all memories. And so you could go into someone else's memory and you could record and there was the one where the, what was it called? Crocodile. That was the episode. Oh my God. I don't want to say what happens because it's a twist. But it's so dark and it's based on that. It's based on reading people's memories. I don't like watching like dark shit. Like I like happy. It's on a good one before that. Fun. No, do you go to bed? Like what the fuck's going on? Yeah. I get my worst anxiety about the future of the world at night. For whatever reason. Yeah. The worst fears of what's going on in the world always coming out at night. Yeah. It's because it's the end of the day. You got an offload all of the bullshit you read all day and so on line all day. And you have a moment to reflect, you're not looking at your phone. You're like, fuck. Also no one else is awake. That's my problem. And so I don't have to think about anybody else. I just think about my, I'm just in my own head and then you're inevitably just dealing with the truth of the world. You stay up late. Sometimes I'm trying not to. I'm in trying like 10 o'clock every night. I really, unless I do like late shows. Yeah. I'm up by six and bed by 10. That's awesome. My problem is that's when I do my writing and it's also when everyone's asleep. And I think I can get the most like thinking you know what I mean? Yeah. Well, that's what's nice when you leave your son's mother. You don't have a family to bother you. But if you if I do do shows, like I've done shows on like a couple of hour sleep, I'll come and do a podcast and I'm a moron. I can't remember anything. It's like my brain is working at like 40%. But like last night I got solid sleep. I got a solid eight hour sleep. Yeah. So it's way better. Once I stop smoking weed, the first few days are rough to get to sleep. Like I got to take like, you know, just some melatonin or some um, is that work for you? No, not melatonin. I take um, let's see the other one. I think like it's like a chicks fucking thing. Yeah. No, no. It's not a good handle. It's a natural thing. Um, which say magnesium, there's a there's a product called magnesium, ome, which is like it's just like a pink powder that like a hot chick told me about and I fucking love it. And I literally put it in some sleepy time tea and I mix it up with some blaring root. And I just drink that that puts me right out. Um, but when you stop smoking weed, I don't know how often you stop smoking weed, Joe. Your dreams get crazy. Yeah, I know. They get fucking wild. Super vivid. Yeah. Very strange. Right. Yeah. First time I ever lucid dreamed in my entire life was when I stopped smoking weed and it was very it was last year. I never been able to control my dreams ever. How many times did you do it? I've only lucid dreamt twice. Um, the first time I had stopped smoking weed. I was having really vivid dreams. I was backstage at a big like theater, like huge theater, right? Like massive, like almost like a stadium sized theater. And uh, Jeremy Piven was about to go on stage. I don't know Jeremy Piven, but I was a God Jeremy Piven. It's going on to rush. Any bit of dick to me in the dream. It was like, he ignored me. And I was like, the fuck. And then I looked over and Greg Dorado was sending next to me. Oh, then he knew it was a dream. Greg Dorado was seven feet tall in the dream. He was a giant. And I was like, what the fuck's up at Jeremy Piven? And I was like, I don't know. And I was like, wait a minute. I was like, great to roll those dead. And then I was like, oh, I'm fucking dreaming. Wow. And then I literally just started running. And I said, I'm going to fly. And I just jumped. Dude, it was the coolest thing I've ever done. I jumped up. It was nighttime. I was outside. And I flew into the sky. And I kept on going up and I couldn't come down. I was starting to be over water. And I was like, I'm going to, I'm like up in the clouds. So to go back down, I would have to turn on my back and free fall. Like just like that. And then I turned back over and I hit a fucking thing. And I'd circle him back up. Maybe 10, 15 minutes of just flying around the sky over the ocean. Whoa. Coolest thing ever. Coolest thing ever. And then another time the similar thing happened, like I realized I was dreaming. And I was like, I'm going to fly. And I started running. And I jumped and nothing happened. I was like, I'm dreaming. And then I woke up. So it was one of the best experiences you've ever had, right? Maybe I literally flying and feeling like it was real was one of the coolest things I've ever done. But have you ever tried to lucid dream on purpose? I've tried to do the techniques where they say like knock, like am I dreaming, like that's one of the ones. And it worked. It was like, oh my god. All day, we're just knocking. Yeah, I did it like every time I go through a door, I'd go. Am I dreaming? I did it like only a few days. And then I wore lucid dreaming. Yeah. So cool. Yeah. But there's real techniques that I have not looked into. And I'm always wondering why because I'm always like, I think it would be really cool to just be able to pass real life. You can do whatever you want to do. Right. You can do magic. That's crazy. I put zero effort into it. I'm confused. I'm like, why? Why don't I try to do that? Yeah. But I have no desire to be a class on it. There should be like, that should be like a class where you can learn how to lucid dream. My fear is that I would like it so much that I would think only about going to sleep and wanting to lucid dream, rather than live my normal life. So it would probably fuck my normal life up. Maybe. Right. Because if you sleep eight hours a night, like if most of the day kind of suck for you. But for eight hours, you can have boundless energy because you're not moving and you're not even conscious. You're out there flying, breathing underwater, having sex with mermaids, getting blow jobs by Angelina Jolie in her prime being Iron Man, whatever you fucking, whatever you want. Wouldn't you do that and just like work at the Amazon factory all day. Yeah. Just work to get your money so you can go to sleep and become a superhero. All you need is a comfortable bed. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's a better life. That's the problem with the matrix. There's a member that moving. What's funny with the dude with the steak? Never saw it. You never saw the matrix. Never saw the matrix. Really? To this day. Wow. There's a scene where this one dude, Joey pants, he's in a famous actor. He's been in a bunch of movies. He turns on people in the matrix and he starts working for the man, spoiler alert. But one of the things that he says like when he's having this meeting with this agent in the matrix, he said, I want to be an important person. I want to be famous. He's like cutting up his steak and he's eating a steak in the matrix. And while the outside world is just complete total to stoop. Everyone's heads connected to a pipe, it's just like you're a human battery keeping the matrix alive. Yeah. Oh, yeah. That's that's the future. That's common. That's common. Yeah. We're just this fat just fucking meat bags with like a just being fat ideas. Right. That wasn't that Wally. I never saw Wally either. I got to watch it with my kid. Apparently it's one of the coolest movies ever. It's a fun movie. Yeah. Yeah. You know, same thing. Total recall was a similar concept. Right. There's a great um, Instagram follow. This guy makes such cool little mini movies with AI. It's all AI. It's called Gossip Goblin. I don't know if you've seen this guy's channel. Hmm. I think I have. I might be. I might follow that guy. Yeah. He's think I've definitely seen. Let me see some of that. Yeah. And he does like essentially takes like sort of like the kernel of like whatever it is. And then he puts together these dystopian little mini films where it's like the future and a lot of it is plugging into like this alternate reality and then like living a whole lifetime and just a couple seconds. Can I listen to some of this? Felt really enough, didn't it? That's exactly what a simulation would do. Give you perfect pain. So you never question it. Or maybe you've just got nerve ending, today. Your spool simulate whole worlds. Yeah. Mm hmm. They can sim whole lives. So if your little workshop can host a billion fake worlds, how many layers deep does it go? It's all just simulations inside simulations inside simulations and we're just sat here in one of them thinking we're the original. Sure. Why not? I want to see it. Whatever's underneath this. Just show it to me. Show it to me. Show it to me. Show it to me. Show it to me. Come and write up. A fish swims its whole life in a bowl, convince the water as all there is. It doesn't see the glass that holds it. Nor does it notice the room beyond it. Or the city beyond that. It never wonders about the planet or the galaxy or the vast cosmos beyond. For all the worlds within worlds, within worlds, the fish does not care to know. And it can't know. All it can do is swim. Holy shit. That's amazing. Dude, I've watched all of his videos. This guy's so good. He just did like a longer like, I want to say feature like for this, it was like maybe 15, 20 minutes on YouTube. He did like a longer one. Dude, he's awesome, dude. It's just so incredible. And this isn't just like putting a prompt in it. Like he has editors, he has voiceover guys, and then he like manipulates like five different AI programs in order to make these movies. It's really cool. Yeah, the patch, right? It's just incredible how good it is now. Yeah. And so quickly, like look how good this is in comparison to something that just was out a year ago or two years ago. There's never been anything that's been a leap like this before. Yeah, the way they're going to make films in the future. Well, the people that are going to be willing to make films. You know what I mean? Like people, like we were talking about how the government's really bad at making a censoring television and it cripples the television because that. Well, you could see a similar problem with having to go through a fucking gigantic film production company to make a movie. Like the money, the investors, people having their say, everyone's got to get paid. Not just that, but everyone has their say. Right. You can't just have an original idea that's completely from one fucking crazy person. Yeah. But with this, you can. Yeah. With this, you could just have one crazy guy who's got these wild ideas in his head, but never could get anybody to finance him before. You don't even need to anymore. You don't need actors. You don't need any of that. And it's going to happen so exponentially over the next two or three years. There's a great, um, they show you there's a video that shows you the advancement of AI over the past few years. And I guess the AI video they did will Smith eating spaghetti like one from, it was like five years ago. And he was all fucked up. He's probably, yeah. Yeah. I saw that. I mean, keep on recreating that with new AI. And the newest one is just like, it's, it's Will Smith eating spaghetti. It's a movie. And he's sitting at a table and he's just talking to this dude. And he's just, it looks like the most realistic thing you'll ever see. And then eventually you're going to be in the room with Will, you're going to put on the helmet and you'll be in the room with Will. And then he's going to blow me. That's what I was going to say. You get sucked off by Will Smith. Actually, that's what you wish today. That's all I want to do. All I want to do is get ahead from famous 96.com stars on so fun, dude. David Faustino from, uh, there we go. Yeah. David, oh, al bunty sucks your dick. Yep. Yep. Yeah. Be great. Sucks your dick and then shits in his pants when you come. Yep. That's what you're into. Which weird then you get to ride a dragon home. Yeah. How about a dragon you fly home with Daenerys Targaryen? That's it. Like we were, we're about to enter a world within our lifetime. That is indissernible from what we're really living in right now. Yeah. Which makes you think like which one's real? Like when you're in that dream and you know you're dreaming and you're flying, I bet it feels pretty real. Right. Oh, yeah. Right. That's the problem. Yeah. I mean, what is that? It'll eventually it's just going to be, I mean, it's really just a theme in so many sci-fi movies here. There was also, um, maybe the most, nobody talks about this fucking movie, but it's so good. But what I'm saying is maybe when you're dreaming, maybe that's just a different level of the simulation that you can kind of have input to. Right. Maybe the parameters of the natural simulation is more rigid. Rigid like you put in the work. You made that gas digital. You put in all those hours. You're starting to make money. You're doing great. Long process. All this fucking complicated stuff. You got to do figure out things about yourself. Get to where you are today in 2026. And that one, it's like, I want to fly. You know, like it might be just a different level of the simulation that we don't, we don't really put a lot of attention to because it's we're only there eight hours a day. So very few people become masters of it. Yeah. That'd be cool, though. And we find real. Yeah. That might be what's going on. Maybe. I mean, I might be, if this was all a simulation, we wouldn't and it's we're AI like we're having a conversation. We just don't know like that idea is so fucking dark and weird. And also maybe all the booze and all the fucking drugs and all the sleeping pills. That just fucks you up in that next dimension. So when you aren't dream sleep, you're like, Oh, no, what did he do? He just. Doring and hung over. You did coke. Fucking nose is bleeding. And the dream you is like, God damn it. I wanted to fly. But you can't even you can't even do anything. You just sleep. You just sleep. You just shut off and you rob yourself of that other dimension. Just wasting wasting away. But I wonder if this like a culture where everyone learns at a young age how to lucid dream. Like some Tibetan culture living in the mountain somewhere. Just tapping into the dream world trying to figure out how to control it while they sleep. It should be more popular. And then you sometimes you talk to some chick and she's like, yeah, I lucid dream every night. I'm like, right. Come on. Really? She's on 18 medications. She's also bipolar. And she thinks she's a witch. There's always going to be people that are bullshitting you. But there's got to be a bunch of people that are really good at lucid dreaming. Yeah, because it's a thing. Like people know how to do it. There's got to be like a guy who's like the guru, like the lucid dream guru. I bet there is. I bet there's courses, there's stuff online. When was the movie back in the day, waking life that Alex Jones was in. I saw that on acid by myself when he came out in the movie. And I was blown the fuck away by this movie. What was he ranting about at the end? Do you remember remember remember he was just ranting something or a normal or a normal phone? Yeah. Yeah. I wonder if one is rant is relevant today. I wonder, we haven't listened to it in a while. But I bet if you listen to his rant. I'm concerned with the systems of control. Those that control my life and those seek to control it even more. I want freedom. That's what I want. And that's what Jason wanted. And something each and every one of us to turn loose is just some of the freedom that hatred the ending and yes, the insecurities because that is the central mode of control. Make us feel pathetic. Small. So we'll willingly give up our sovereignty, our liberty, our destiny. We have got to realize that we're being conditioned on a mass scale. Start challenging this corporate slave state. 21st century going to be in the century. Not the century of slavery, not the century of lies and issues of no significance and classes of the stateism and all the rest of the modes of control. It's going to be the age of human kind standing up for something pure and something right. One of us are garbage. Live all the democratic and conservative Republican. It's all there to control you two sides of the state of court. Two management teams, getting for control. The CEO job is a slavery incorporated. The truth is out there in front of you but they lay out this buffet of lies. I'm sick of it. And I'm not going to take a bite out of it. Do you got me? I got you. I just jumped on this right now. That sounds like Antifa. Right? That doesn't sound like a right winger at all. Yeah. That all. I mean, everything he's saying is true. Yeah. That's not so he's all red the face now. It was, I just Marie. Ranch Richard Link later, right? Made this. Yeah. Yeah. This was a fun movie. Really fine. Was it nine? No, no, no, no, because I was already doing. No, I had to be 2000s. If I had to guess 2002, 2001, no, October 2001. Nice. I only started smoking. We were doing it with 17. I started experimenting with Hulu's engines and those. Done. Done. First of a few years of college. Just taking acid by yourself, watching that movie, being like blown away. The animation was so cool. It was a shaky. Yeah. So you saw that thing that I had to do with the White House. I did see it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. People are pissed. Who's pissed? I don't know. People online. Well, because I was at the White House. Yeah. They were like, yo, Joe, you can't be at the fucking White House, Joe. You said you were fucking politically homeless. I am. He joked about it. He called me a liberal during the whole thing. Like, Joe, he's very liberal. What? Oh, I saw another. What do you, the other thing, the big conspiracy theory is that Trump has mad at you. What he came up to the UFC and he was, she was talking shit to you? No, the opposite. That video came out and it was like, look, Trump's fucking Joe Rogan getting embarrassed by Trump at the fucking UFC event. It was literally the opposite. I texted him on Friday about I begin. And I was telling him how there's that's a decision. This is the one that of that's used. Yeah. So they've had to go to Mexico to get this. So I've had these two different podcasts with Brian Hubbard and Rick Perry. Rick Perry was the governor of Texas. And they talked about I begin and Brian Hubbard was relaying his story about how I began saved him from addiction and fixed his brain. And then they had all these other stories of all these other veterans and all these different people that had PTSD and opiate addiction. It's, I know a lot of people have gone down there do it. I first, I found out about it for my friend Ed Clay, who runs a CPI. He's one of the guys that runs the cellular performance institute in Tijuana that the UFC uses for stem cells. He had a pill problem and he went down there and did it and then opened up his own retreat down there because it was so potent because it works so well. What is so many people? What is it? What is the compound? It's called Ibogate synthetic like acid? No, no, no. It's from a plant. It's from the Ibogate. And this one thing that they do is not recreational. It's very, it's supposed to be a horrible experience. You shit yourself, you throw up and you have this like very weird experience where it goes over your entire life and shows you like in every detail why you're like this and why you do this and what you're. And it also shuts off with thralls in addiction on a lot of people. It's like really effective. But for a lot of these guys with PTSD was the only thing that fucking helped them. And for the longest time, they've had to go to Mexico or other countries and it's really expensive. So they formed the Texas Ibogate initiative. And is it Lieutenant Governor Dan Patrick? Is that what his title is? So he dedicated a hundred million dollars to it. And so now they're going to start doing it with people like soldiers, police officers and different people with PTSD. And you know, just people with just general depression. It's in all sorts of addictions, not just like opiates, but alcohol, gambling, all sorts of shit. And I told them about it. And have you done them? No, no, but I have these guys on the podcast. And I know so many people that have done it, particularly soldiers that have done it. And people with opiate it like my friend Ed. And I said, I told them about it. I said, oh, effective it is. And I said, you know, and it's been helping. And I particularly soldiers that have done it. And people with opiate it like my friend Ed. And I said, I told them about it. I said, I'll affect if it is. And I said, you know, and it's been held up for so long. And he said, what are you looking for? You're looking for FDA approval. He goes, it sounds good to me. And he said, let's do it. And so literally, sees me at the UFC the next day, shakes my hand and says it's done. Well, that's what he was saying. That's so funny. I was like, I said, thank you, sorry. It wasn't like he was mad at me at all. People jump on these like conclusions. Well, that's OK. You know, you're allowed to. But this is the truth. That's that's exactly what happened. He came to me and he said, it's done. We're going to take care of it. This is a good thing. It's a good thing for the soldiers, good thing for everybody. And then he had the press conference the next week. But why would anybody be so funny? So like how they just choose to be against things, even good things. Like that's an unquestionably a really good thing. That one is a really good thing for everybody. Because it addictions, a huge problem. And Ibogaine is one of the most effective treatments for addiction that they've ever found. Another one that's really good for addiction is still a sign bin. They're going to study that as well. And hopefully fast track that as well. That's part of this build. This build is all about this executive order. This executive order is all about psychedelic treatments for people with depression, mental health disorders. And it's all to reclassified this stuff. And this is one of the things that I said. And this is why it was important for me to not just be there, but to say this, that these drugs are not illegal because they're harmful. Alcohol is harmful, it's legal. Oxycodone is harmful. Of course. It's legal. Illegal because of the 1970s controlled substances. Yeah. This is by the Nixon administration. And this is just they wanted to silence the anti-war people and the civil rights people. That's it. So they said, what are these people doing? What they're doing, acid, they're taking mushrooms, they're doing this, they're doing that. And they said, make all that shit illegal is fuck. Make it the most illegal. So they put it all in a schedule one, which means it has no medicinal benefit. And I was telling them, I'm like, it has benefit. And I was at that benefit. It could save lives. Yeah. Yeah. I get terrified of psychedelics at this point. I used to love them. But I just, I mean, every time, if I take mushrooms, acid, it doesn't matter what it is, there will be an hour where I'm crying, talking to God and thinking about my mother. Yeah. Every time. Maybe that's what you need in your life. Maybe I don't know, dude. I think it's like just push it down. And I think it should be regulated in the sense that I think we should understand it better. Make sure it's pure and make sure that it's administered by people who know what they're doing. And that's what they're doing at places like beyond, which is in Mexico, people going down there and have these Ibogaine sessions. But they're also doing it with their strapped up to heart monitors. They're very careful. You can't do it if you have a bad heart, because apparently it's really rough. Apparently it's not fun at all. Again, I haven't done it. But the people that I know that have done it, it's rescued them. It's like, let's microdose them Ibogaine. I don't think you're microdose them. You gotta go. You gotta meet the devil, Cox. I totally guess if he says, what the fuck you doing with that microdose? I'm trying to meet the devil. Yeah, when I went, when I was younger, I was like, dude, I would love to go in a payy, what do you retreat? But you hear the same thing. It's like you vomit and you spend fucking, you have to have a special shaman walk you through it and guide it and they pat your head with a wet towel. The payy, what he's masculine. And then my buddy, Mounted, did masculine in New York City, said he could hear people talking in another building. Because he was watching them through the window. They were far away and he could hear them talking in his head. I was like, what the fuck did you? I bet you he couldn't hear what they were saying. I bet you he was making up their words. Mm-hmm. I think he tapped in. I think he tapped in to the quantum field. Yeah. And he was inside their head. Like the alien technology just instantaneous transport doesn't have to go through sound. That's right. Just pick up on the frequency of their thoughts. Yeah, all drugs will be illegal. Whatever. It's your body. If alcohol is legal and I think it should be, it was one of the worst ones for you. If that shit's legal, how many people ever be here? President of Columbia was like, he was like, alcohol is worse than cocaine. It was a quote 100, 500 years ago. I didn't say that. I know. It was 100. I think it's actually true. I think it is true. Yeah. I think actual real cocaine in terms of like the actual, like from the coke. The disco shit. I'll tell you what's definitely better for you is coke leaves. Those people that live in like the alky. They just chew on. Yeah, they chew on coke leaves. That's like in like high mountainous areas, high altitude, herders, they chew coke leaves. They love that shit. I'm sure. It's supposed to be really good. It's supposed to be like great coffee. Yeah. For real, it's like not supposed to be like drunk coke. It's supposed to be like, you feel energized and stimulated. And it's not bad for us, but it fucks your teeth up. Oh, I'm sure. You get these dudes with these rotten cocaine chew teeth. You see that? Oh, I haven't find me some coke leaf teeth pictures. Yeah. Ask perplexity about this condition. And why? Why the people get coke leaf teeth face? Because it does. It rots your teeth away. Yeah, sure. But that should be legal too. Just brush your fucking teeth. Yeah. Maybe not. Don't. Maybe it eats your teeth. Because you got to think about it. If you can make cocaine out of it, what kind of acid stuff is in that leaves? I don't know. It was just a leaf. Right? The nose is coming up. Oh, it's beddled nuts or something. Oh, my God. Beddle nuts? What is a beddle nut? So it doesn't fuck them up from coke leaves? Oh, even better. Bolivia legalizes chewing it. Click on that link. NBC news to the right of that. Yeah. Look at that. Bolivia legalizes chewing and ingesting coke leaves. Bolivia wins. They're ahead of us. They win. The real problem is fentanyl. And the fact that you have to get it from a fucking coke dealer. Yeah. Those are the real problems. Having to talk to a coke dealer is actually the worst part of the entire process. Pope plans to chew coke leaves during Bolivia visit Jesus Christ. The Pope's dead now. They killed them because he wanted to chew the coke leaves. That's a 2015 article. That's wild, dude. Because it is weird that I mean, is cocaine worse than alcohol? Because if it's not, why why alcohol the one that's legal? It's a specifically requested to chew it. Wow. What a freak. Yeah. The trustful has a great joke about Adderall. Oh, yeah. He was Adderall's like someone did cocaine and went, I can fix this. That's great job. I think I mean, I've never done Adderall either for the same reason that I've never done coke like fuck. It just seems too good. It seems like it gets you too jazzed up. I mean, I had like debilitating. I still have debos in ADHD. I haven't done Adderall. And what does that mean though? I get like, I get anxiety. If I, if I look at my mail on my kitchen counter right now, there's a pile of this high with mail. If I look at it, like I feel like a, because you're not doing the work, you're not going through your mail. It's just a crippling depression. It feels like like if I've got my taxes, like I have a business manager that does all this shit. But when I had to do it myself, it would like cripple me. I would like, I would feel like I've had depression issues back in the day. I felt like depression. I feel like I want to lie down. When I, when I just look at the mail on my counter, they call it um, 80% of the ADHD paralysis where there's things that you don't like to do and the tedious little tasks. Right. Um, that it, it feels like real like school work was like really bad for me. That was really, really hard. But on the flip side, if there's something you really love, do you have a lot of attention to it, love energy? I dive in to like I obsess over it. So like I, I love the things that I, I love work. Like I really love what I do for a living. I do a bunch of things really. But like I love work. I love getting on business meetings. I love taking a phone call. I love, you know, I love writing jokes and going on the road. I like, so the things that I love to do, I dive completely into and I just sort of see, that's where it's stupid to me that that's a disease. Right. That seems like you're allergic to boring shit. I don't think that's a disease. I think modern societies got people convinced that's a disease. I think that there are, yes, I think most people don't want to fall. I fold their laundry. I think most people don't want to do their taxes or go through their mail. But for me, it hits me in a way where like I feel a physical like recoil. Like I genuinely like, you're allergic to boring shit. I don't think it's a bad thing at all. I think they've got you tricked. They've got all of us tricked. Everybody that I know and me included that probably has ADHD or I think I can go to a doctor that they've done wrong with me. They'd say this I'm wrong with you. You could have got on pills when you were a kid and they would have ruined all of it. Yeah. Who would have fucked up that weird gift that you have where you can lock in us. So what's the flip side of that weird gift? The other thing doesn't seem important. Other shit is boring, but you have way more energy with things that's exciting. It's a great point. It's a superpower. Yeah. It's a great point. And by the way, I've said that specifically that my ADHD is a superpower in certain regards. The fact that I could get so locked in on the things that I really, really want to do. But I've never really considered the fact that like it's making me avoid doing the things that just are fucking tedious. Whatever. And by the way, I figured it out. I'm 44 years old. I get my shit done. I still, the laundry gets folded. The taxes is done in the mail. It's just boring. Yeah. Yeah. But that's discipline. The discipline part is like that some people can't. Right. Or like how is it get done? You know, like I was like a really bad student. Like I just skinned on my teeth gradually. I understand. Yeah. But the idea that this gift that you have is what doesn't get concentrated on. The gift is you have an extraordinary amount of energy that you can devote to something you really love. Most people wish they had that. That's the gift. The flip side of it, of course, the other things aren't even remotely interesting because you need to be stimulated in order to give something all of your attention. Some people could just drone on and drone on and they don't have ADHD. That doesn't, that's not good. Yeah. I think ADHD's made it made growing up pretty tough. Like because you get you get, you get, you get, you call the back head. I think it's good grades. I'm a millionaire. And I have bad grades when I was 12. Yeah. You're not wrong. No, you're not going to jog. I know them, right? You're right. All right. Let's wrap this pitch up. I got to get out of here. So, gas digital, what else? Tell everybody on sale today. Oh, shit. 420. What a good time to sell. Yeah. Is it for 2021? The on sale today or tomorrow? Yes. This comes with a timer. So yesterday, they were not saying this podcast yesterday because those, those tickets go quick. They go fast. So they all access past the fight. I guess are pretty close to sold out, but you can still get sale there. But I bet the skankers already know. What do you call your, your people skanks skanks, the skanks already know. Yeah. We got a big line. That's amazing, dude. Congratulations on all this because every comic always agrees that it is absolutely the best festival. They fucking love it. They love the vibe. They love, you know, how much effort and time you guys put into it. Awesome, dude. Congratulations. Congratulations. I appreciate it. Yeah. But it's going to be, it's going to be you should come one day Joe. I will come one day skankfest.com. Skankfest.com. And you get those tickets. Shane's going to be there. Mark Norman, Derek Andre. It sounds great. Everybody. I mean, I'll be able to 70 comics. Everybody loves it. All right. Thank you man. Joe, this one is you. Thank you. All right. Bye, buddy.