the Joe Rogan experience. You heard of a guy named Pierre Popoff. He's a pastor, a televangelist guy. What did he do? Blow some money? I saw him the other day. I was sleeping on the couch and I woke up and he had one of the shows on. I paid shows commercials. And I was amazed what woke me up because I was half listening to while I was sleeping. What was amazing is how the things that they say in it just seemed illegal. Like they were like, we're going to use some miracle water. This water is miracle water. You're going to open up these envelopes. And then they start showing testimonials of people. And they're like, I sent in my, or I read the letters. And then just a week later, I got a new house in a car. And then the next person was like, I got $200,000. And then this other one was like, I just walked up and gave me a check for $15 million. And it was like the most fake issue ever. And so then I started really researching this guy. And there's all these videos about him online. I guess he's been ripping people off for a long time. And one of the best videos is one where he just goes up and he goes, where's so and so? So and so is here. Let's say Tina Fey, where are you? And comes up and goes, I heard you have arthritis. And you're here because you want to get rid of this arthritis and stuff like that. And the whole time his wife is just pumping for me. Yeah, there's a show that she had a thing on. It was on one of those 2020 or something like that. Yeah. I know we talked about this in the past. Pretty sure maybe he's on another podcast. But I was amazed that he's still allowed to do this. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, that guy, name one, it's not. It's almost like it's so ridiculous. It's like the most ridiculous hustle ever. It's like who are they tricking? The only people that trick in her, like they're almost like mentally challenged. Oh, yeah. People with no hope. When you're in your robots, when you're down to being convinced that there's a miracle water out there that is going to come in the mail via the postal service. And it's going to change your fortune. Right. Yeah. That's the one of these things somewhere along the line. They used to ask for donations. But then somewhere along the line, they realized that they could sell things. And they started selling like holy water and selling like prayer services and telling people that you would plan a seed. So if you'd like spend $90, you're the last $90, it would come back to you in 10 fold. The Bible says it would come out with some crazy fucking, what's that guy, Creflo Dollar? Who's my favorite? Because it's got a dollar in his name. Ha ha. I mean, you're a pastor and your fucking name is Dollar. What's your real son? They all have weird names. Like, that guy gives a Peter Popoff. Have you ever met any other Popoff's before? This guy's got to have a different real name, though. He must have a real name. What's his real name? Wow, his real name is Creflo Augustus Dollar, Jr. Wow. This is real fucking name. It's got a Bachelor of Science in education. It's out there talking shit, smacking people. My favorite of Robert Tilden, he is. He'd probably seen him. There's a viral video of him farting. Like he's like, he talks to tongues a lot on a show, too. He'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, he'll go, Robert Tilden talking in tongues. Because it's some of the most ridiculous shit ever. But I'll never forget this one thing, he said, he said every time you write a check to me, Satan gets a black eye. Wow. But doesn't part of you think that if you're dumb enough to send him that money? Like, so what? So a guy got you with the dumbest trick of all time. Like you really thought that money was going to gone. You really thought that money was going to give the devil a black eye. If you really thought that, you're fucking stupid. You know what I'm not looking after you. Right. One of the Scott things that the Peter Pofaf does, he also sends you a barley cake from the Bible where it's like kind of like the little bread you eat. And he goes, he goes in this commercial he goes, and we make it with the exact ingredients that they say in the Bible and blah, blah, blah. What then if you look up Ezekiel 4.12 in the Bible, it says, and you should eat it as barley cakes and bake it using fuel of human waste. So in the way to make it away. No, it doesn't. You want to be typing in the quote? Equal 4.12. OK. Well, easy, that's hilarious. K-I. Hold on, hold on. Easy, E-K-I-E-L. E-L-4.20. 4.12. 12. 4.12. Yeah, you're thinking about the weed law. But Ezekiel 4.12. So long time since I read up on my good old Ezekiel, so this is all new to me. Bake it with dawn that cometh out of man. In their sight. Hold on. So so he's saying the exact answer. You should are cooked with shit. Oh my god. And thou shalt bake it with dawn in the cometh out of man in their sight. Well, it's in the Bible. It's in the Bible. You mean to study the Bible and cook you bread with shit. Have you ever tried my poop? Who barley cake? Fucking imagine how dumb people are. That really hurts my brain. You know what Ezekiel might have been a tripper? Because Ezekiel was also where the first depictions of UFOs came from. Let me pull that up. Yeah, Ezekiel was known for there's a Bible quote that people bring up all the times of UFO. I have it that people were seeing a lot of things after eating a shit man. Yeah, they're eating fucking shit cakes all day. Throw it up almost time. There was a wheel within a wheel. It was God's chariot. There was guys with boats that had all the animals. You think we should prepare the barley cake in a different way? No, no, it's great. Yeah, I'm going to try and find a spot. Hey, what a stupid fucking culture. Yeah, I cook it with shit. OK, dad, try and write that down on paper. I put something for thou at my son. Because I got so obsessed with this minister that so when I found that out, I had tweeted something like all of garden was like Ezekiel 4 or 12 or something. Like all these people got pissed off that I was doing Bible scriptures. Oh, that's hilarious. Well, they read that though. Yeah, they figured it out. How do you not read that and just start laughing? You tell me to cook shit cakes. The Bible says cook shit cakes. That's just one more dumb thing in the Bible. God damn, I'm so tired of people pretending that book's awesome. I'm so tired. You stop. That shit's stupid. OK, here's a quote. And I looked and behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud and a fire unfolding in self, in brightness was about it. And out of the midst thereof as the color of amber out of the midst of the fire. OK, how's that UFO? Hmm. Somebody putting two points together that don't go together for a while. Oh, wait a minute. This is the hold up. Listen to this. Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance. They had the likeness of a man. Whoa. And everyone had four faces and everyone had four wings. And their feet were straight. And the soul of their feet was like the soul of a calf's foot. And they sparkled like the color of burnished brass. What a trippy book. People like, oh my god, it's so real. I hear God's words when you're saying these things. God is speaking to me through your words. Please read on. And they had the hands of man under their wings on their four sides. And they had, and they four had their faces. And they're, wait, somebody might have just made all this up. And me, like an asshole, is reading this fake Bible quote shit all over the Bible. And the alien is the same. But guess what? I don't care. I'm not reading any further. It seems like if this really is Ezekiel's, it says it is. God damn it. It's all nuttiness. They walked up with their four faces. And they said, why are you guys cooking things in shit? And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning. And now as I behold the living creatures behold one wheel upon the earth by the living creatures with his four faces, these guys were tripping hard, eating shit cakes. And yeah, losing their mind. What grows on shit? Mushrooms. That's right. Leave your shit cakes out. The cover with mushrooms. Eat your shit cakes. Trip your balls off. Start talking nutty, man. When those went, these went. And when those stood still, these stood. And when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up. That guy is, this is glossolalia. That guy's just, that's word salad. That guy's highest fuck. He just rambling, highest fuck on shit. I'm just thinking. Thing in Joshua tree one time. This is the stuff by the way that they capped in. Oh, it is already? What the fuck, son?