[Music] Tristan Scott. Nice to meet you, bro. Thanks for having me, man. So, uh, tell the world what you just did to my house. You just basically ran all your crazy meters and found out that me and my wife are are barbecuing ourselves every night when we go to sleep. Yeah, we did a little EMF testing. So I had a radio frequency meter um that is testing the power density of radio frequency EMFs. We had a multimemeter to specifically look at AC body voltage which is the electric fields from your electrical power inducing an AC voltage on your body which to me is a great way to test um how high of EMF exposure from the power frequencies you're getting. Yeah. You're not working at home. You're pretty much coming home, you know, lounging and then going to bed, right? So, eating and sleeping and is basically all I do at home. Yeah. So, the sleep sanctuary for me is is most important because you can not avoid EMF exposure at all. You definitely have less control during the day when you need to get work done. But if you can go home and get a restorative night of sleep, that's when you're going through cell repair. That's when you're mitigating the damage that you just incurred throughout the whole day. So if you're going home and sleeping in a super hot bedroom in regards to EMFs and you're looking at a blue lit screen right before bed, you're really not going to sleep as well. So you might be getting the numbers in terms of hours, but you're not getting the quality. And that's why we're seeing some of these chronic diseases younger and younger. So, what we did was we measured the RFS in specific areas and we found out that you the cameras you have for your children's bedroom, the baby monitor, especially in your bedroom, was a super high source of radio frequencies. I was actually shocked because unlike a cell phone which is very pulse like every 8 to 10 seconds let's say it hits this peak that baby monitor in your room seemed to be almost consistent and it was right on your wife's nightstand so it was at like 100,000 microwatts per meter squared which is very very high. Um, that's that's pretty much the power density of a, you know, output out outgoing cell phone transmission like constantly. Right here, it's at it's going from 75 jumping from 40 48,000 to 87,000 112,000. That was on the bed like a foot away. That was a couple feet away from the baby monitor. So, that's a problem because that's what you're sleeping next to. Oh, look. 403,000. Yeah, that was right next to the baby monitor. Yeah. And that's what you're sleeping next to pretty much all night long. So, we can get into why that's a problem, but we we did our best to mitigate that. And and what I was preaching earlier is that really distance is your best friend because electromagnetic waves and fields have inverse square law. So, if you put a 2x or a 3x distance between you and the source, you actually two square which is four, three square which is nine, reduce the intensity of that field. So even putting a foot, even putting a few inches away from the source like your phone, like that baby monitor, like your Wi-Fi router can make a tremendous difference. So we what did we agree on? We agreed to you should put the baby monitor across the room side of the room. Yeah. And then we're also phones on airplane mode. Phone's on airplane mode. But you have to turn it just it tricks you. You can't just turn on airplane mode. It doesn't do [ __ ] You got to turn off your Wi-Fi and then you got to go into the settings and turn off your Bluetooth to make the difference. You got to make sure that when you press airplane mode, they all go off and they have that striketh through on the setting shortcut cuz if they just go from like blue to white, they're not actually off, which I don't even know why Apple does that. It's insane. Um, but that's one or you just keep the phones out of the bedroom charging in in the other room. So, that's the radio frequency realm. We also experimented with putting tin foil and a Faraday beanie on your Wi-Fi router. Agreed that you probably since your kids bedrooms are closer to the Wi-Fi router. You can get like a $30 Faraday bag. If you don't want to turn the Wi-Fi off at night, which is best case solution cuz you have cameras for baby monitoring or security cameras. You can buy a Faraday bag which will reduce it like 70 to 85 90% to me is a lot is is a great in between um low hanging fruit. Yeah, I think we got to get I think we're we're going to upgrade to uh hardwired security cameras instead of those Wi-Fi ones. I think that would make probably a huge difference and as well as that Faraday bag. And then uh also definitely figuring out a way to turn off the breaker panel that connects to our bedroom and just use we found like in my bathroom we can plug everything into my bathroom, wire it into the bed and you know just move it into the bedroom [ __ ] that we actually need and it still reduces it by like what was it like 10,000 or something? Yeah. So what we were measuring there was, as I said, the body voltage. So that's the electric field inducing a voltage on your body and your body's like semiconductive. So that's why that happens. It's a great way to get an idea of the EMFs uh from from the power frequencies from the electrical power in your sleep environment. So what we did was we measured it before and after turning the power off. So you were between 2,000 3,000 molts on your bed, 2 to 3 volts AC. Again, this number in nature should be zero. Uh there's no AC voltage uh in nature. So, you want it as close to zero as possible. Uh I think my bedroom is like 100 molts.1 volts. It's hard to sometimes get below that unless literally all the circuits in your house are you're in Wyoming. Yeah. But again, I think what I you know what we talked about here is for me that stuff is important. What's external like Yeah. If there's a cell tower nearby, 5G tower, you know, if there's a substation, transmission lines really close by, that's a problem. But the immediate air environment, what you have with your own technology is more important almost 99% of the time because it's just that much closer. So, we turn the circuit breaker off to your bedroom and you went from 2 to 3 volts to 0.2.25 volts on your bed. a it's a 10x reduction in the amount of AC voltage being induced on your body and that's just by by flipping the breaker off. So, and what does that actually do to the body though when all that AC voltage is running through? Do we know? We don't know. We have no clue. We we know we have studies just talking about maybe it makes you live longer. Yeah, it could if you harnessed it correctly potentially. No, the the problem is that's that's crystals and you know it's high power stuff. um you know that's that's 60 volts or sorry 60 hertz and and pretty high voltage. Your body is operating on very small scale in in terms of the intensity of the fields the intensity of the currents that are running through it the intensity of of the voltage. So uh to give you indication the voltage which is a proton gradient across your mitochondrial membrane is around 150 molts. Um, so it's it's pretty small in comparison to what we have, you know, powering our lives today. And although that does sum up because you have trillions of mitochondria in your body, that's debatably what being alive means is that collective voltage across all your mitochondria and all your cells is like 30 trillion volts. But that's um, you know, divided across every single mitochondrial membrane. And that's why this is also fascinating because people might already be listening to this like what are they talking about? We're talking about how your electromagnetic environment is affecting your biology, affecting your health. And there are a lot of studies out there since, you know, across the whole 20th century showing potential biological effects that are negative and they span a swath of different end side effects. But it comes down to really like oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and the most like electromagnetic active energetic areas of our biology being compromised. And it just happens to coincide with this proliferation of chronic disease and chronic fatigue and and people are maybe not considering this as a large reason for that. And I would say that would be a big bit ignorant and I want to, you know, bring more attention to this topic. But the problem is it's very inconvenient. Very very very inconvenient for people to have another toxin to deal with and one that guess what they really can't do anything about and they probably have the least consent to overall and is what's powering our lives on. It's also the one that's the least obvious. It's invisible. It's invisible. You don't It's like it's so easy to forget about intangible. invisible. Unless you were an engineer or a physicist or took high level like physics in high school, you probably wouldn't even know what an electromagnetic field is. And that's that's kind of why this all gets buried into the conspiracy theory tinfoil hat woo woo subject. But in reality, it's it's pure science. It's pure physics. And what are these lights you brought here? I brought some portable incandescent lights because I wasn't satisfied with the lighting environment here. The idea that when I travel it's great because um incandescent lights my opinion healthiest lights you Obama banned those. Right. Yeah. They've been on the chopping block for a while now. So they're they're banned from manufacturing in the United States. There's a 45 lumen per watt um efficiency standard by the Department of Energy. So that is measuring the amount of brightness um versus the amount of power that's required to um uh power the bulbs. The Department of Energy. Yeah. Yeah. And that's the same the same company that was renamed three times after it was originally called the Manhattan Project. Sure. Yeah. Um the company that made the [ __ ] atomic bomb. Department of Energy. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I didn't I didn't know that. But um the problem is they have a standard that is completely ignorant of the fact that infrared light is vitally important for our biology and our health and all life on this planet. Sunlight is 50 to 55% infrared light from an energy perspective. 70% infrared light from a photons per second perspective. And when we switch to LEDs, that goes to zero. When we're inside behind energy efficient glass, all that gets a lot of that gets filtered out. So, what I like to do with incandescent and Steve is pulling up some nice spectrums here. Yeah, this is what you were showing me at the house a minute ago. Yeah, we measured it with the spectrometer. It's rich in long wavelength, low energy light that is very, very beneficial for our biology. It does things like stimulates melatonin production in the mitochondria to actually balance the oxidative response from higher energy wavelengths such as blue, violet, and UV. And we're deficient in infrared light. So the incandescent put that back. So I'm a much bigger fan of incandescent infrared maxing as opposed to blocking blue light during the day. Yeah. And so so you were just at my house and you gave me um a new incandescent bulb for one of my lamps. And when you when you first scanned the lamp with the LED bulb, it looked exactly like the one on the left with that huge blue spike. Then when he did it Yeah. with the incandescent bulb, it looked exactly like the one on the right. And we went outside in the sunlight. It looked more like the incandescent chart on the right. Well, it's it's it looked like the one on the left here that's showing the sunlight, which is full spectrum. So you get a lot of, you know, violet, you get ultraviolet, you get everything. You get everything from ultraviolet to infrared. And these spectrometer images don't even capture most of the infrared spectrum. It's the infrared spectrum goes from like 750 nm to tens of micrometers. Like it it's very vast. And the visible spectrum is very narrow. It's like 300 nm. So the majority of what you're taking in from sunlight is is infrared. There you go. That's Steve. If we lit our studio with these incandescent lights, what what would be the downside? It would cost more money. Uh yeah. So, I mean, I've lit tons of studios. It just takes like hundreds and hundred thousands of watts. Like, so if I were to use So, for the key light back there, I'd probably use a 2K or a couple 1Ks. Uh like minimum, I'd probably do like a like Yeah, probably a 2K or maybe 4,000. Get really hot, right? Yeah. that. So that is the infrared light. You know, it's it's not as great down here in in Florida, but in Wyoming when it's too cold for me to work outside or it's like a snowing or something. I have a 250 W chicken lamp, which is just a 250 W incandescent bulb next to my indoor work setup and I just blast that on me all day long. I It makes such a difference. Really? Yeah. Such a And you want to talk about red light therapy? Well, you were talking that a little bit about your house, the red LEDs and the red light panels. Those are great. Sure, photobiomodulation, but they're like two wavelengths or or three maybe, whereas sun is all of the wavelengths in the visible, so many wavelengths in the infrared. So, I'm a big fan of broadspectctrum light. And Jack was in here. He was like, "You guys areing up. You need to take the roof off this building. Open up that wall. You guys are blowing it. You could just open the windows." Um, there's no windows in here. Oh, we're in a spaceship. Have you noticed? Yeah, I did notice. It's kind of tripping me out. I tried the best I could. Uh we have full spectrum uh cinema uh LED. You know what I like here? That we're not being assaulted with some like highowered LED or fluorescent light. So just that light pretty much. Yeah. That and that's not bad at all. Like I I think this is much better and it won't be as draining as as being blast with those, you know, typical bright lights you have in like a studio setup. But yeah, that's the trade-off. And it's crazy because it's all about energy efficiency when that you know energy that's you know invisible and therefore contributing nothing to brightness which is driving those standards is so so important for for our health and those standards the DOE is going to 120 lumens per watt in 2028 unless the new administration changes that. So I would say the DOE is going to 120 lumens per watt. Can you what does that mean in English? It means it's the standards for efficiency are tripling in and how stringent they are by 2028. So even current solutions that just get by like warmer LEDs or um you know there's a optics engineer who I'm great friends with who's done a lot of this research on infrared named Scott Zimmerman. He has a company that does a hybrid LED and infrared bulb. That will no longer be legal because they have tripled the standard. So, even the current LEDs are not efficient enough. So, what does that mean? This episode is brought to you by Square, the all-in-one point of sale payment and inventory system. If people have to interact with your business, Square makes it happen. Whether you're running a cafe, a salon, or selling UFOs to people on the street, Square is simple, easy, and takes the headache out of the business. Who doesn't love Square? Everyone uses it, from small momand pop food trucks to big legitimate businesses. Even jewelry stores use Square. I love it because you can use your credit card, your debit card, your Apple Pay, whatever it is. It's simple, userfriendly, and super easy to interact with, whether you're the vendor or the customer. They started as card readers that plugged into your phone, but now you just tap to pay. That makes it super flexible with how businesses choose to operate. And of course, Square includes all the tools to manage and monitor your business, too. You can even set up an online store if you're selling digital products. Square takes all major credit cards, including Apple and Google. I'm telling you, it's super simple. Square keeps up so you don't have to slow down. Get everything you need to run and grow your business without any long-term commitments. And why wait? Right now, you can get up to $200 off Square hardware at square.com/go/danny. That's sq.com/go/danny. Run your business smarter with Square. Get started today. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. what are the most, you know, bright and most efficient wavelengths, the high energy blue, um, violet, um, green. So that there's going to be more of those wavelengths and less of the lower energy, longer wavelengths to balance that. So it's just going to be more distorted, more unbalanced, and worse for our health. Can you search for something about the Department of Energy with light bulbs and wattage output mandates? find find something about that because that's fascinating that that that they would be putting this stuff into play into place. US Department of Energy fin uh finalized new energy efficiency standards for general service lamps which include common residential and commercial light bulbs take effect in July 2028. Wow. For newly uh produced bulbs. These standards will require bulbs to produce more than 120 lumens. But you wereing spot on, bro. Up to the current standard of 45 lumens per watt. The updated standards are uh these updated standards are expected to save American families $1.6 billion dollar annually on household energy costs and reduce harmful greenhouse gas emissions over 30 years. The DOE project projects uh the DOE projects these standards will save Americans more than 27 billion on utility bills and cut 70 million uh metric tons of carbon dioxide emissions. Um, holy [ __ ] But that's nonsense because guess what happened in the last 20 years? We have so much more light at night. So even though we've switched from incandescent to LEDs, yes, they are more efficient. We're using just way more lights. So we're pretty much like just net neutral in terms of we haven't really saved any energy. We haven't saved any money. We just have more efficient lights and we use more lights like throughout the day. Whereas if we switch back to incandescent and again who needs that many lights on during the day not you shouldn't really let's get more you know natural light from the outdoors and then at night time you just have some lowowered incandescent it's it's really such a narrative spin and of course the entire energy efficiency um you know greenhouse gas situation is it it it's a giant ploy to just move to this like higher efficiency smarter life but there's It's at such a cost. So, the Department of Energy used to be called the Atomic Energy Commission and before that it was called the Manhattan Project. I didn't know that. This is the same people who made the [ __ ] thermonuclear bomb, bro. Well, it's not the same people. It's like seven years ago, right? Well, it's the same organization. Corruption. I mean, every threeletter agency we can we can talk about that. It's the FCC. They're all It's all the same. So, this is like, okay, I'm trying to I'm trying to see if I can play the devil's advocate here and see like what would be the downside. The devil's advocate, sorry to interrupt. I I asked a coworker in San Francisco. He said their price per kilowatt hour is 45. That's insane. That for these for no for electricity, they're paying 45ents a kilowatt hour. So, I don't know if you ever looked at your electricity bill. You're probably paying 10 to 15 cents a kilowatt hour, which is like a reasonable amount. So, they're basically paying like 3x what you're paying in electricity. So, to put incandescent in their house is going to cost a lot more money. Again, if they have their lights on all the time, like 45. Why are they paying 45? Because the utility companies and uh in San Francisco in in California are a joke. That's why. Oh, yeah. in utility companies in general, it's this weird, you know, public service utility for a p for a public good, but there they're quasi private companies. So the it's the same thing like in Europe right now, you know, with all the natural gas issues and and the Russia Ukraine war, like the price of electricity in like Germany is is similar. It's like 40 to 60 cents a kilowatt hour. So they've b they banned incandescent a long time ago. Um and that's all about energy efficiency. Um, but it's not practical. And that's where the whole energy generation and energy consumption conversation is so important for society. But we should not be compromising because no one is acknowledging how important light is for our health. And if we just spent more time outside or got more outside light indoors, then we wouldn't even have to worry about how efficient our our lights actually are. And at what cost? You know, $1.6 billion. Okay. How many people have chronic disease and how much does that cost? Right. Right. Way more than that. So, what is the lowest hanging most obvious thing that these lights are doing to us that we know of that's been like studied or is being investigated or has been written about whatever or that interested you originally? The good or the bad lights? The bad the bad lights. Yeah. Yeah. What is like the those? So if we do if they do implement that those lights um with the new the highest most energy efficient blue lights possibly ever created by human beings and we're not allowed to use these kind of lights, what would happen to to the human body? We would just have more oxidative stress, more mitochondrial dysfunction, which leads to pretty much all chronic diseases. Uh because it's unbalanced. Like I said, the the higher energy wavelengths are are higher energy. So they come at a cost at the cellular level. So blue light is is blue light's vitally important for our biology. We go outside in the morning. Blue light is what wakes us up. It stimulates cortisol production. It suppresses melatonin in the moment and it provides a more dopamineergic response like go and do stuff, sees the day, hunt, gather food, etc. So it's very important. But all of that and then the violet ultraviolet which is also extremely important for our biology. Uh but it happens to also have this oxidative response. The red and the infrared longer wavelengths penetrate deep into our cells. They stimulate melatonin production which is the master antioxidant and it cleans up all of the free radicals and a lot of the oxidative stress that's being occurred from the higher energy wavelengths. And melatonin even, you know, upregulates glutathione and other antioxidants. It's it's a miracle. I mean, it's agreed upon pretty much. And melatonin is like anti-cancer. But now what like Scott Zimmerman and these researchers found, it's it's not just about what you're producing at night from a melatonin perspective. It's about what you're producing during the day from exposure to mostly near infrared light. When you're inside all day, you're getting no infrared light. Is it true that when in in the morning when you're outside during the sunrise, I guess there's like a couple hours in the morning before the UVB light kicks in where you're getting that red light from the sunrise produces that uh the um melanopsin, is that right? Which also produces melatonin that automatically with our body with the circadian rhythm. When you get that light in your eyes in the morning, it knows 12 hours later you're going to start putting you to sleep. Yeah. So light is the main input signal to set our circadian rhythms. And out of all the light, blue light is the main sight gabber or time giver. So blue light is the main clock signal for our bodies. And that's because of melanopsin. That's because of the photo receptors, how they've been designed. And that's why it's so important. But so would it work if I just woke up at 6:00 a.m. and just put my phone in my face? That would wake you up. But because it's so stressful and not balanced. Yeah. So that's the cost here. It's an unbalanced spectrum. So you never get blue without red and infrared. You never get UV without red and infrared. And they've done studies in isolation looking at just blue light. And it it damages the mitochondria in the retina. Um like they they die off at a far higher rate. The oxidative stress, free radical production skyrockets. And then they've also done it with red light as well. And that has actually a positive effect. So, you never get one without the other in nature and that's all we need to do. And that's why like incandescents are great because they're adding back in infrared to the indoors. That's a crazy thing that I've re that I've noticed and read about over the last couple years is how that red light therapy, those light panels can actually reverse uh poor eyesight and regenerate visual uh neurons. Yeah, it's insane. And if we got outside and you can do that too. And it's just the whole indoor environment being toxic from a light perspective, EMF perspective, and just spatial perspective. Like our eyes, you could say that eyes are kind of the the most prevalent health issue in the world today because of modern technology. I mean, in East Asia, they have like 90% rates of myopia for for young kids. And that's 90 90. That's insane. And it's because we're indoors all day looking at devices six to 12 inches in front of us that simultaneously have a lot of blue light and no red and infrared. Right? So that's the cost really. And then there's a flicker component as well to LEDs. So that's an underrated stressor to me. But pretty much all LEDs are flickering at a certain frequency. I would say overhead lighting the flicker is not as bad as from your phone screen. Phones are above and beyond the worst. Right. So, if you've ever wondered why staring at your phone is way worse than staring at your MacBook, it's because of the flicker. It's not just because of the blue light because the frequency they use to the reason why it flickers is because um that's what's used to control brightness. So, they use a electronics control mechanism called pulsewidth modulation and that controls the brightness. So instead of just like lowering the amount of current they're pushing through the the diode, that light emmitting diode, uh instead they turn it on and then they turn it off. So that has a more consistent output of like color, especially at lower brightness and just a higher precision for control. So instead of literally the dimmer switch just turning it down in terms of current like you would um with normal things, it's literally just cycling it on and off and increasing the amount of time off versus the amount of time on to get to lower brightness. And on phones that's happening at a frequency in the hundreds of hertz range, which is just above visual perception and it drives your brain and eyes crazy. And this is known side effects. You can look up like electrical engineering standards even agree flickering LEDs cause causes ice strain, headaches, migraines, aggravates symptoms uh in ASD, autism children, uh panic attacks, anxiety, and guess what? Every single phone display, and pretty much every LED light is is powered or is controlled with pulse with modul. How did you learn about all this [ __ ] Uh, so I'm an electrical engineer by by degree who became obsessed with health because I had one too many concussions. Uh, how did you get concussions? Uh, I played soccer in college. So most of them from that and then last one that put me over the edge. I didn't even know I was concussed. Just like passed out and hit my head, did everything wrong in that acute recovery phase. So went down the rabbit hole. Um, and I was fascinated with health and you know, my mom's from Austria. I grew up in the outdoors. It's like I love the outdoors and yeah, just kept going down these rabbit holes and and realized quickly that we're just so disconnected from nature and that's a large reason why we're so unhealthy and that there's a big electromagnetic, you know, piece to this conversation. Like I started with the food. I started with the plastics. I wrote a book half about regenerative agriculture and food and then I just was like, "Hey, these people online are talking about like EMFs and grounding and stuff." And honestly, they don't know what they're talking about because they've never clearly taken a physics course. And I see these like pendants and neutralizing. Oh my god, dude. If I had a dollar for every [ __ ] influencer I talked about grounding on my Instagram feed, I'd be I'd have It's blown up now. And now, yeah, it's blown up now. And for me, I was like, "Wow, I have an opportunity here. I'm electrical engineer to actually bridge these worlds of, you know, electromagnetism and biology, which are so siloed." Um because all the electrical engineers and physicists are just in their lane and then the biology doctors practitioners are in their lane. They don't cross at all. And yeah, I just got really fascinated started reading a lot of this research on these topics and just it made sense as to why on my own healing journey, the more time I spent outdoors, the more time I spent in environment closer to what exists in nature, the better I felt. And then, you know, 14 months ago, I had Onjun on my podcast and he's, you know, talked about daylight. I was like, "Oh, this is what I'm meant to do." And then joined him immediately because I was like, "This is this is the last piece. We could eat cleaner food. We could wear, you know, natural fiber clothing. We can get outdoors more." But to me, technology is the most pervasive environmental toxin that exists, and we have literally no alternative. So, that's what we're trying to fix at daylight. Credit card debt has reached an all-time high and it's trapping Americans, making it harder to pay off. But there's one company that has become the light at the end of the tunnel, and that's American Financing. Prices for the last few years have been and continue to be high, and most people unfortunately have to reach for credit cards to cover bills and expenses. But this is not sustainable. American Financing is helping homeowners pay off their highinterest debt by using the equity in their home. American Financing is a family-owned mortgage lender that's been growing like crazy, and it's licensed in all 50 states. Their mortgage consultants are salarybased, so there's no incentive to put you in a loan that won't work. Their customers save on average of $800 a month, and they don't charge any upfront or hidden fees. You may be able to close in as fast as 10 days and may even be able to delay the mortgage payments up to two months during the process, creating an extra bonus in savings upfront. You can join hundreds of thousands of happy customers with meaningful savings by going to American financing. Pretty cool if you ask me. Go to americanfinancing.net/jones to get the best deal or call 8889952440. americanfancing.net/jones nmls182334 www.nmlsconsumerac.org. Thank you American Financing for sponsoring this episode. It's linked below. Now, back to the show. That's wild, dude. I mean, that's that's like like I said, like what we were talking about, like there's no there's no one who really knows a lot about this stuff. And as far as I'm aware, there's no like there's no like scientific peer-reviewed studies that have like happened in regards to exposing people to these radio frequencies, these EMFs. um 5G, all this stuff, right? There there's sort of that that's like partially false and and partially true, which pretty much means the same thing, I guess. Um they they've there's been so many studies on electromagnetic fields having biological effect like thousands. If you saw the clip from RFK talking on Rogan, oh yeah, said there are thousand Joe, there are thousands of studies. G crosses the bloodb brain barrier. Well, you that study was from Alan Frey 1975 was funded by the US Navy for 15 years because guess who was interested in radar and microwaves? The military. So that's where a lot of this research in the ' 50s60s7s was all from the military and they were interested and there was some you know like sidebar DARPA stuff to look at like what was going on in the Russian embassy which we can talk about but really um he found a lot of biological effects at low power density um and it just so happened that the frequencies he was looking at are the same exact frequencies being used for telecommunications today. There's no way like we would have known. But they're around 2 to four gigahertz. They're called microwaves. They're the same frequency as the radio, you know, communications we use, probably just different modulation techniques. Uh because they're not transmitting data like for cell phones. They're like radar equipment. And he found that it opens up the the bloodb brain barrier. He found that it made uh rats very docile. He found at a very low power density. He stopped a frog's heart like completely from just exposure to who was doing this? Alan Frey. He worked he worked for GE and he discovered he went down this rabbit hole cuz some like operator came to him was like, "Hey man, I can I can hear the radar." And he's like, "What are you talking about?" He's like, "No, I can hear the radar. Come check it out." And he could hear it, too. and they realized and they figured out that it it wasn't from the ears, it was a a neurological response from the microwaves and Allan Frey. And there's this whole debate, literally a microwave debate in the ' 70s uh about this stuff uh especially because the the Russian embassy crisis people kind of got freaked out syndrome stuff. There was a a GE uh another thing with ionizing radiation where TVs that GE made unfortunately had X-ray exposure by accident. And so then the public became like very distrusting of technology for a little bit and then they kind of like was a big deal. Well, someone wrote a book called Zapping of America, Paul Broaddor, and then it kind of just went away. Like they were like after the 70s just swept it under the rug and and no one's connected the dots since. And now they're like, well, there's been no studies on 4G and 5G, but a lot of biological effects have been studied for the same exact frequencies for decades. And there's thousands of studies even since 1990 that are showing harmful biological effects. Thousands. But they're mostly on rodents. A lot of them are epidemiological. It's really hard to do studies on people with electromagnetic fields. And some of the population-based studies that they've done have been, you know, pretty pretty damning. Have you looked how how far how deep have you looked into the uh Havana syndrome stuff? like the people that have these uh these symptoms of like really bad tenitus, their ears ringing and like hearing voices in their heads, crazy migraines, like unbearable migraines. People that that were in the uh the the embassy in Cuba and as well in Moscow that experienced this stuff. I'm familiar with the Moscow signal and the Moscow embassy. I've read a lot about that and that was basically it's it's funny. This was like a big topic during the cold war cuz Russia Russia was very much aware or like stringent on electromagnetic fields and they had a thousand times stricter thresholds for microwave radio frequency safety and they you know we're in a cold war and for whatever reason they decided to to mock the US and blast the the embassy the US embassy in Moscow for over 15 years. I think it was maybe even 20 years with a quote unquote low intensity. Yeah, here we go. Low intensity signal in the microwave range 2.5 to 4 GHz, which is exactly, you know, your Wi-Fi is at 2.4 GHz. Your phone in in 5G mid-band is operating roughly in that area. But these aren't So the difference is these were directed, right? These were shooting like a gun out of some sort of a device. No, it was just like on it was it was just being beamed from like a building onto the US embassy. Oh, like a big like a big wide blanket. But this wasn't like hey, we're doing this. This was like what? Like they never have admitted to this day that they did this, right? So this So we have no idea how they actually have to like it. It didn't necess like I would imagine that if I was some like the Russian intelligence agency KGB and I knew that the CIA was right across the street, we could go in the building and we could get some sort of like crowd control device that shot [ __ ] 5G right at the building at a certain because it was directed at certain floors. Yeah, I think so. Like there was only certain floors where people had those really bad symptoms. Yeah. Yeah. And they did some weird like the US kind of freaked out but they couldn't tell anybody because they were like well it's under our safety threshold. So they're in like a catch 22 and they started doing these side projects like project Pandora bizaar. Project Pandora was they they took a couple monkeys and tested it with like five microwatts per centime squared which was 50% of the US's current safety threshold. and they were just trying to figure out like is this actually dangerous? And that's a re that's really high by the way. That's like the maybe the peak transmission of your cell phone for 1 second. They blasted these monkeys for 10 hours a day uh for 10 to 12 days straight. And on like the 10th, 11th, 12th day, the monkeys would straight up fall asleep like standing up and not wake up. They would just be like zombies. They they were performing all these tasks apparently and then eventually on like the 10th, 11th, 12th day, they would just like basically be asleep but not asleep. And then every time they did it, like they let them recover and then they would do it again. It was a shorter time and then eventually they just stopped the studies and the monkeys like never technically recovered. But that's not I'm going to say that's not indicative of like normal cell phone exposure. But that's way more Yeah. But you should be pretty concerned like in any capacity that that exists. And then there was some more studies. They ran some blood work and they didn't really tell people. And eventually, you know, people figured it out and like broke the news and it was it was a big deal, but it was so inconclusive that no standards, nothing was was really changed at all. Right. And then there was also the Philadelphia experiments that were done in the US where they were sending shooting like frequency beams at some of the sailors that were on the ship, some of the Navy guys. Yeah. I'm not as familiar with that one, but there there's a lot a lot of crazy. The Cold War, dude, was like one of the craziest most sci-fi dystopian periods in America, bro. And that's where people are like, "Oh, there's all this like, you know, MK Ultra stuff." I'm like, this was for war. They were just trying to figure out and get the upper hand. And yeah, a lot of progress was made, but a lot of the moon crazy stuff was was going on. I I'll say that. But what I wanted to say is there is no shortage of evidence that there's potential biological effect. It's it's just the context. No shortage of evidence there's biological effect. I mean there is so many studies hundreds and hundreds of studies from that time period even more if you want to look at actually the Russian studies which are way more you know I I would say fair in terms of how they're measuring effects because what you're saying with like Havana syndrome Russia acknowledge I think it's called like aia or you what we call today hyper electroensitivity that there is a repercussion from overexposure long-term to electromagnetic fields and it's funny two of the pioneers of technology in the early 20th century. Um, Nicola Tesla and Maronei, the radio guy. Maronei at the end of his life had like five heart attacks in in 10 years and the dude was literally, you know, on radio transmission all day. And Tesla was always playing around with stuff and he literally went crazy in his later years, died poor. And if you look at it from, you know, an unbiased perspective, you would say that for sure both of them had electro-hypersensitivity or some sort of electromagnetic related condition because they were just their nervous systems and bodies were fried. Wow. What is this uh this phone gate thing this that you emailed me about in France? There's some sort of thing going on with phones being labeled. Yeah, there there's that. There's a lot. I would say the phone gate is they they basically tested all these phones and the manufacturing radiation emissions the S uh readings were were not accurate. They were higher than they should have been like 90% of the phones. Um so it was just a blatant lie from from the tech industry. And that what phone specifically do we know? I think it was almost all major smartphones. Um but the problem is there even that whole metric specific absorption rate how they go about that what they're doing is they're measuring the energy the quote unquote energy being absorbed by your body from cell phone radiation. Um and that I think came about in the 80s originally and then implemented more so in the late '9s as wireless technology emerged. And it's purely based on calculations of like tissues. And you know what they do the testing on? They do the testing on a 6'2 220 lb bio adult biodummy. So there's no real testing going on in terms of it being indicative of like a real human using the product. So to me that whole metric and that system is flawed in every which way possible um that you can imagine. And if you want to get even more like upset, if you go into your settings of your phone, you can literally go under like legal and regulatory guidelines, RF exposure, and there's a very cleverly crafted statement from every smartphone uh you know, consumer electronics product, device manufacturer that says like don't hold this product on your body like use 5 mm of separation to reduce RF exposure. Um, go into settings. Okay, let's see. Let's do it right now. And just legal. Legal. Okay. L E G. Legal and regulatory. Yeah. And then go to RF exposure. RF exposure. Okay. And you can read like to reduce exposure to RF energy, use a hands-free option such as speaker phone, headphones. Um, and there's a, you know, much longer. Okay. Yeah. The last paragraph. To reduce exposure to RF energy, use a hands-free option such as the built-in speaker phone, headphones, or other similar accessories. Cases with metal parts may change the RF performance of the device, including its compliance with the RF exposure guidelines in a manner that has not been tested or certified. Wow. Although this device has been tested to determine radio frequency exposure uh compliance in each band of operation, not all bands are available in your area. Bands are dep dependent on your service providers wireless roaming networks. That's another thing I wanted to ask you about. Um what about the like the AirPod headphones? Those wireless Bluetooth headphones that everyone use. Are those super toxic? They're 2.4 GHz as well. So, it's the same frequency as your Wi-Fi. Um, just below a microwave oven. I I I saw a clip on Huberman's podcast where he's interviewing I think it's a brain a neurosurgeon. Yeah, the Neurolink guy, right? Is that who that was? No, no, no. It wasn't the guy who had Neurolink or No, it wasn't the guy who had the brain chip. This guy was like an actual neurosurgeon and he was asking him about radio frequencies and he asked the guy like what he thought about the those headphones, those Apple headphones. Like, oh, it's not a big deal. He's like, they put out such a little bit it wouldn't make a difference. That's true. But guess where they're located? In your head on in your ear canal. Zero distance. Not not even zero distance. It's almost like even closer than your phone would be, right? Cuz it's in your ear. So, it's very true that Bluetooth is low energy, low power, you know? That's the whole uh glamour to Bluetooth. It's like low power. It's amazing. uh in electrical engineering like everyone loves Bluetooth even though it's it's kind of like for connectivity and stuff it's it's kind of a pain in the ass right like things are always connecting disconnecting Apple Apple has you know made it seamless because they have the hardware and the accessory every other Bluetooth accessory doesn't get Apple's um kind of protocols that's why they're a lot more annoying to connect by the way um so yeah but if you if you measure you know the EMF meter like we use today on on AirPods at the distance they are exposed to to your head cuz they're zero distance. Zero distance. It's it's like the same as standing like a foot away from a microwave oven or actually worse. So, it's very much really I would be concerned I would say because of the duration and the distance. It's all part of the equation here. You have the distance, you have the intensity of the field, and then the duration of the exposure. I've looked at a ton of studies. A lot of the studies have harmful effects over out over over some duration of exposure being like chronic. So again, if it's just like 10 minutes or 20 minutes, that's really not what we're talking about here. We're talking about 247 365. We're in a Wi-Fi bath. We never turn our phone off. It's always on our body. We have the AirPods in. It's a layer on top of a layer on top of a layer of an EMF toxic cake. And that's my issue with it. I could make the debate that says if you wear AirPods to take a phone call and your phone is on the other side of the room, that would actually maybe be better because the phone is typically the highest source of RF versus having it up to your head like that. Yeah, that that is the worst. The phone up to your ear is by far the highest amount of RF radiation exposure. Um wired headphones would be better. Um you could even say that wired headphones have some conductive material. They have a neodyinium magnet that has a DC static magnetic field in in them as well, which is not ideal. So they're So they're a little bit better, but not much. They're better. Um, Air Tube headphones exist, but they have like the most atrocious user experience. They're horrible. The ones you get on airplanes, right? Yeah. Yeah. They're horrible. So that's Look, it's it's imperfect everywhere. If you I think are more diligent about how you use your phone, don't keep it on your body when it's on, especially next to reproductive organs or next to your head. um and you want to use AirPods for a couple hours a day, like be my guest. All I'm saying is this all adds up. And we're never giving our body a break. But what we did at your house today was what we optimize your sleep environment. So that's when you actually have a chance to recover to repair your cells to get into autophagy to get into apoptosis, clean up the you know damaged cells. And that is what we're not getting because of the blue light at night, because of the disruptive circadian rhythms, and because we have all these stressors like Wi-Fi, our cell phone, you know, high amount of electrical power, EMFs in our bedroom all the damn time. What have you noticed as far as like a change? Have you can you like actually feel a change in your the way you feel during the day after getting rid of all this [ __ ] where you sleep? The opposite. I feel it when I'm back in an environment that is high MF. So, really? Oh, yeah. It's like with everything toxic, you typically don't feel an amazing response when you cut something out, but when you add it back in, your body's like, "Whoa." Yeah. So, right. So, like it becomes normal, right? You're just used to that feeling better. And then when you get back into the shitty environment, you're like, "Oh, shit." And then conversely, when you go back to the good environment after being in a in a bad one, you notice it. Yeah. So, for example, I live in central Wyoming in a 2,000 person town. So, very chill, low EMF, low stress, there's no traffic, there's barely any people. My house is hardwired. I turn the power off at night. It's great. I sleep amazing. And then our office for Daylight's in San Francisco. And I go there. I was there for two weeks last month. And yeah, you just feel it like you're more on edge. Um, you're just hyperactive, sympathetic dominant nervous system. Uh, you don't sleep as well. you're kind of just, you know, a little fidgety. You you're just stressed out and that's what you feel this anxious energy and it's probably a combination of a lot of stuff. And then I go back to Wyoming for the first time like 2 weeks later and I walk around the block and I was like I just took a deep breath and I was like, "Okay, wow." Like I actually feel like I can relax. And that's what this is. It's this background stressors that are really just keeping us on edge and that's so draining to our biology. It's so fatiguing for our cells to never actually fully be in a parasympathetic state and execute biological functions. We're always in fight or flight and over time that results in, you know, uh a bad outcomes uh at a cellular level. And it's it's a mitochondrial toxin is what most of these studies, there's thousands of studies, almost all of them point to oxidative stress, mitochondrial damage. And you see it because it proliferates in the most energetically rich, dense, mitochondrial dense tissues, which is your heart, your brain, and your reproductive organs. And that's where a lot of these studies and issues are. That's another thing that I was reading um was that there was a study that was based on these EMFs and heart cancer in I think it was mice or something and that was they were exposed to um just were they exposed to like 5G or was it 4G or do you know what that one was? Yeah, it was the national toxicology program. Um they ran a multi-year study spent $25 million to you there's been a lot of studies where people spent a lot of money on this and this is a government agency coming from the you know department of human health and services and they looked at it was two 2G and 3G uh frequencies and and modulated signals which is again we can talk about what 5G actually is but we still use a lot of those same signals so it's very much indicative of the cell phone exposure I I think it was for a normal amount of time per day like 10 12 And there was clear evidence of tumors in the hearts of male rats. There was some evidence of tumors in the brains and another area of the body. And that was the conclusion. And then guess what happened? Nothing. They just like cut the funding and no follow-up studies. There's so many, you know, conflicting media articles published on that. And that's just one that's happened so many times. People are always like, "The studies are inconclusive." But guess what's happened over the last 20 to 30 years? The telecom industry has funded so many shoddy studies. So Oh yeah. Oh yeah. So many. This is I think the worst industry where this occurs. And there's people like Dr. Henry Lie who from University of Washington put together like these comprehensive reviews. like he literally has a Google drive of thousands of studies where he's tried to filter out and one of the first reviews he put together he did like 350 studies and he found I think it was like 55 to 60% showed harmful biological effects. It was like kind of almost 50/50. But then when he subdivided them into who was funded independently and who was funded by industry, it was like 70% of the independent studies showed harmful biological effects and like 25 to 30% funded by industry showed harmful biological effects. And then more and more people did the same thing and they found the same conclusions. UC Berkeley in 2010 did a review of all the industry funded studies and were like these are inadequate. These are studies that are not even using real cell phones for their studies. They're using simulated frequencies. Uh so it's it's insane and geared to get better results. Right. Of course, because what what is the worst outcome for the telecom industry? And we're talking, you know, the OG ones like Motorola and now Verizon, AT&T, and of course the big tech, you know, device companies, but really the telecom giants. uh this could really hamper and it's happened since the 90s uh that Dr. Henry lie guy in 2006 found that radio frequency cell phone exposure causes DNA strand breaks and then Motorola went on this smear campaign was like no no no that's what was the name of this it was called what again Dr. Henry lie. L A R Henry lie. And then how would we find that on on uh the internet? Just type in DNA strands. Yeah. DNA strand bake or EMF exposure. Okay. Um summary. And the the reason why you've never heard this or no one's talking about this is so many of these researchers basically got cancelled. So every everyone like Alan Frey funding pulled. Um there was Milton Zarit before him in the 60s was proving that EMFs cause cataracts. That was like the first known cataract. Cataracts was the first known side effect of EMFs besides thermal increasing the temperature of your body. And then it was actually testicular damage in the '60s as well, which they covered up. They both got cancelled. Robert O. Becker, Andrew Marino, they went on 60 minutes or Robert O Becker did, they got cancelled. Henry lie Henry Li's research has shown that exposure to a 60 Hz magnetic field at intensities of 0.1 to 0.5 millla millesla for 2 hours can cause inc an increase in DNA single and double strand breaks in brain cells of rats. So okay, what would an what would a 60 Hz magnetic field in the 0.1 to.5 mill Tesla range be equivalent to in the real world? So that's 60 Hz is power frequency. So that's what's coming out of your outlet. That's um so what's that like 100 millig? That's probably being 6 to 12 in away from your power outlet. Like pretty close. Um maybe even close. So like where I'm sleeping in my bedroom. Yeah. you'd have to be really close to it or live very close to like high voltage transmission line. The more damning one for me is one that even goes further back is actually that there's a statistically significant increased risk of childhood leukemia at four milligals. So that's you know like 100 times lower. What is a milligal? Uh a milligal is just another measure of um power flux density which is magnetic field. So if I converted that um so they found out that childhood leukemia rates were how did they do that? How do they measure this? It it was epidemiological research like correlative data but it was reproduced. So it's actually a crazy story what happened because there was and it and it comes back to to Robert Obecker as well. So basically the Navy was trying to build this antenna in in Michigan and then Wisconsin. um for submarine communication and that was called project sanguin. Uh eventually like they renamed it four times because the public kept freaking out about it because the Navy asked Robert Obecker and a few other scientists to review the current research on low frequency EMFs and their biological impact. And they looked at that time in the 70s at the existing research and they concluded that there were potential harmful effects. mostly from, you know, power line data and yeah, there's some some correlative stuff. Sorry, I'm distracted. And they they recommended that the Navy, you know, not proceed forward or, you know, proceed with caution because there was existing evidence that showed low frequency EMFs could be harmful to biology. Although the Navy's antenna they wanted to build was like thousands of times lower intensity than all the power lines and exposure to power lines. And then the Navy kind of covered that up. They didn't tell anybody. Uh and then they just were like, "Yeah, this is safe." And then Robert O Becker went on 60 Minutes and like made this big public outcry about it. And you know, then the public kind of was freaked out. So they boycotted it, got moved to Wisconsin, etc. And then Robert Obecker went back to his home state of New York and started, you know, petitioning against this new power line project that was going to be built uh because he thought it would be unsafe based on the distance that they were putting into it. And he started doing his own studies on rats and they found some, you know, multi-generational issues with birth rates and and health concerns in rats. Uh, and then someone from North Carolina, I think her name was Nancy Worerheimer, something came out and it said four milligals is like a threshold for statistically significant increased risk of childhood leukemia um because of proximity transmission lines. Then the New York State Power Lines project were like, we're going to fund a study. It's going to be like $20 million to disprove it. They had this whole thing and then guess what? They came up with the same result. They actually and they actually admitted it. They admitted it and then you know what they said? They said, "Well, it's too late. Uh, we're going to set the safety threshold to 100 milligals because the public has already taken this safety concern. You know, that's their problem." And they then nothing happened. Jesus Christ. That was in the the late '7s. Yeah. I think I had it in my notes somewhere here of everything that happened. Yeah. NY's study at only three milligs was in 1979. The utility funded study was in 1987 which confirmed her results and then they were like yeah sorry um the public has accepted this risk. And then there was guys in the '9s um this guy RP Liberty that showed more studies for 60 Hz fields proliferating uh cancer cells suppressing melatonin. And then the the New York Times like said that this guy made up his results even though he like grafted one table like slightly incorrect. The results were were totally fine. So a lot of the every decade there has been a massive EMF debate and nobody knows about this. Most of the literature I'm reading I wish I could have sent you more stuff. It's all from the ' 60s7s 80s 90s and then so you just have to apply that today. Well, because first off, the power transmission exposure is exactly the same. Nothing has changed. Like we still have 60 Hz. We have the same exact power lines. We have the same exact power. Um, same. But guess what? We have So now we have 5G towers everywhere. Yeah. But we also have way more stuff like just plugged in and powered. And then on top of that, we have wireless technology. We have the [ __ ] we we have the AirPods in our ears and the Meta VR glasses on. I have I have a buddy who like he walks around all day with his he's got a prescription meta glasses and he films everything in fisheye like connects to his phone. Like dude, it's insane. And I wonder what those those um Elon Musk brain chips are doing to people. Well, I mean not many people have them, but like so say you were one of the medical people that got paralyzed and how to get that chip installed. I wonder how bad that thing would be because it's like in your brain inside the gray matter. We just don't know. And you know from reading Robert Obecker's work we know that the human body is operating at very very low intensity like currents and fields. So any of this exposure even this lowle exposure and a lot of this research actually it's not it's not linear it's not dose dependent like higher is always worse actually for magnetic fields and what really blew everyone's mind in my mind like 3 to four millig is is nothing that's like if I'm sitting in the front passenger seat of my 4Runner I'm getting like 2 to 4 millig from the alternator like that's that's what I was going I was going to ask you that too I was going to say do you have some super old car with like not a lot of electronics in there. If you want the lowest EMF car, you should buy like a 1999 Camry or something, you know, four-cylinder. What's the best truck that's low EMF, do you think? I mean, something that's older would have less electronics in it, but the older the better. The alternator is actually going to generate magnetic fields. And again, it's it I wouldn't worry about your car. I would worry about like your phone that's next to you in your lap if you're driving for a while, more so, right? I mean, there's little you can do about you're not going to go shield your alternator. They probably could figure out a way to do that, but um that's, you know, I'm not a fan of Teslas, of course, because they have a tremendous amount of magnetic field exposure, plus screens everywhere, plus the semiconductor content is through the roof. Well, the batteries have to be converted to run an AC induction motor. And whenever you're converting power like the alternator, like the inverter, traction inverters that are used to convert the DC battery to run the AC induction motor. Yeah. Tremendous amount of EMX EMF exposure. Even solar inverters, like you know, if you're running an off-grid homestead and you're converting DC to AC, you want to be cognizant of of your inverter because that's going to be high power. Converting um electricity is is high EMFs. Have you ever run your equipment inside of a Tesla? No, I've never driven in a Tesla when I had my EMF meter, but people have sent me videos. I want to. It would be cool, but it's really hard because like you saw in your house, measuring radio frequencies is a bit challenging. I'm like, is your Bluetooth off? Is that off? Like the baseline is very high. So, you you need to make sure everything is clean. And I'm not going to lie, I've seen videos online of people like measuring Teslas. And I'm like, I'm 90% sure their phone is on when they're recording the video. So they're recording it with their phone, right? So unless that's on airplane mode, people, and you've removed every other variable, you are not measuring something accurately from a radio frequency perspective. And then who knows how close like the the next cell tower is if you're in a public space. Yeah. But yeah, so you said 5G, right? It's just everything is additive. We're subtracting nothing and then everything else around us is getting worse. But there's so much correlative data. There's, you know, tons of studies actually getting into the nitty-gritty with like rodents. Um, there was a interphone study. So, people don't realize that the ARC, which is not some like end- all beall organization, like magnetic fields and radio frequencies, international agency of research on cancer, okay, they are both classified as possible carcinogens. And when they started first looking into radio frequencies in the late 80s, I think it was the EPA or one of these organizations, they did like a preliminary investigation and they recommended that it be classified as a as a probable carcinogen and then the White House did some like side quest and came up with some data and they were like, "No, don't don't do that." So, um, there's been a lot of back and forth, but the the study that the ARC did called the Interphone study, uh, was from like 2000 to 2004. They spent millions of dollars to look at cell phone users and brain cancer. And this was 2000 to 2004. Not a lot of people were using cell phones. So, there was mixed results. But for heavy users, which was up to 30 minutes a day, heavy user had statistically in uh increased risk of brain cancer. Wow. So that's what I'm saying. It's like you you kind of have to make extrapolations from the data that exists, whether it be from the 70s microwaves using the same frequencies from phone studies from 20 years ago, because guess who's not studying anything indicative of our actual EMF exposure today? No one because no one's going to fund the study. All the researchers who have got cancelled and definitely the industry is not going to publish something that could be potentially harmful. So 5G literally got rolled out with no studies, like nothing. So 5G is interesting. 5G is like one of the top conspiracy theories out there. All the craziest, deepest tinfoil hat people are like 5G, uh, Maderna vaccine turns on the nanobots. Um, but one of the cra like when I think I don't know if you've ever seen the show Westworld on HBO. Do you see the latest? It's one of the like few TV shows I've ever watched. It's one of my favorite shows of all time. uh the last season of it, they have these towers all around the city that like blast out this signal that frees all the robots so they can go in and make repairs and they can go in and make alternations to their simulation that they're in. And I like driving around this town now and I see 5G towers on every [ __ ] street corner. It it reminds me of that, dude. like it like it they look similar and it's like it's hard to avoid thinking about those just crazy cuckoo conspiracy theories when science fiction shows are literally like utilizing the same sort of form of a thing. Um, but like so so when it comes to 5G, correct me if I'm wrong, but in your Substack article, you basically explained that it's it's way of way higher frequency and far more dangerous, but it's more localized. It's less like of a widespread thing that blankets you. Yeah. So 5G is complicated because it actually operates in three different frequency bands. So it still uses the low frequency similar uh bands as 3G and 4G. It's called like the low band um like 800 900 MHz to 2 GHz. Then there's the sub6 GHz band which is kind of in between 2 and a half GHz to 6 GHz uh which is als which is new also new but kind of the in between. And then there's the millimeter waves which everyone was really concerned about because millimeter waves are like 30 40 maybe even up to 50 gigahertz. So we're talking about like a 10x increase in frequency. Millimeter waves and that's referring to the wavelength. So frequency and wavelength are inversely related. Okay? So the higher frequency you go, you get a higher energy of the wavelength and then you get a shorter uh sorry, you get higher energy of the wave and then you get a shorter wavelength. Okay? So that's just like when you get to 30 40 GHz, it's in the millimeter wave territory as opposed to the centimeter wave territory. Got it? So it's just yeah, different characteristics of EM waves and that's a big jump. It's like 10x increase all of a sudden. we've never done this. They're higher energy, so potentially higher energy is is a is a concern. And that's fair, but the problem is, uh, as you alluded to, it's more local. It's really, um, more challenging because the range on the millimeter waves is terrible. They can only go like a few hundred yards before they get eaten up by, you know, the water vapor in the air. And they get blocked by trees. is they get blocked by buildings because of the characteristics of the wave at that frequency. So that's why they have to build these repeater towers everywhere else this what's a repeater Oh those are the towers 5G towers. Yeah, the 5G towers, you know how like before you would have like one massive tower, it's like over town over there. That's working like almost omnidirectionally where it's just spewing out like 3G, 4G signals in all angles, just like your Wi-Fi router is. 5G is different because they went to this higher frequency. The only way to really like get anywhere, they have to have a narrow beam width. Um, which when it's more narrow, it's more concentrated. So it's actually higher power and then they have to have repeater towers. So these smaller towers, these smaller cell stations um all over. So that's why you see them on light post on buildings on like disguises trees like literally everywhere. And they have these different look. Look, there's a palm tree one. Yeah. They they try and like disguise it, right? And and they have these different looks because they have way more antennas on them because they're using a different frequency. Feel more in tune with nature when it looks like a palm tree. an electronic palm tree blasting you with cancer. And that's that's bad potentially because it's higher power. It's more concentrated. But they really only rolled out millimeter waves where it makes sense cuz it's a massive infrastructure problem and it makes no sense to have like that in the suburbs or in rural places for sure. Can you tell by looking at one of these towers if it's 5G or 4G or something else? Are there differences or are they mostly all 5Gs? Um, well, they're mostly now the newer ones with those like big white rectangular blocks are are definitely all 5G. Can I show you the one out back real quick and you can see what Tell me what you think. Sure. Let's take a quick break. All right. We just looked at the 5G tower out back and we put up your meter next to it and it looks like it's pretty hot. It is hot. It is not millimeter waves. Changed your hat. We got We got a hat change in the podcast. Hat changed. went from the Wyoming based organic cotton to Make America Healthy Again. Good. We got to cover all the bases. Yeah. Um, not millimeter waves because you're not in a urban downtown area. So, the good thing about 5G millimeter waves, which everyone was the most freaked out about, is because they're so range dependent and very, you know, get eaten up very quickly. Uh they're only ever going to be probably in downtown areas, entertainment centers, um airports, big venues, Vegas strip on top of the hotel for sure. For sure. Um where data throughput and you know bandwidth matters tremendously. Like if you're in a stadium with 100,000 people, they're going to need insane throughput and it doesn't have to go that far. So that's where they'll they have them on now all the stadiums, you know, the top of the stadium railings have like 5G repeater towers or um cells. So that's a good thing about 5G. Well, then how come when you're in one of those stadiums, you never have phone service? Well, that's what they're trying to fix. So I haven't been in a pro sports stadium in a long time, so I can't tell you if it's gotten any better. But um also the data throughput now, the amount of garbage we're posting on social media and downloading all the time is just always increasing. So it's like they're always just trying to catch up. And that's what people need to understand that 5G is just fifth generation wireless technology. It doesn't mean gigahertz. It does not mean gigahertz. It just so happens that 5 gigahertz is in the range of like where 5G mid-band is is used. So it's very confusing and they you know it's very confusing for the layman because even for me diving into this there's not a lot of information out there and there's a lot of people reporting on 5G in 2020 2021 and not a lot of updates since but I can tell you millimeter waves have actively been rolled out every major city in the US for sure downtown areas entertainment centers uh airports especially and they're probably never going to be rolled out in suburbia maybe in rural areas for sure not. So that's where the midband like 3 to 6 gigahertz you get the sweet spot of slightly higher frequency slightly higher data throughput but you're not you know dropping out every 100 yards. So I don't know for sure this measures my EMF uh meter measures 200 MHz to 8 GHz. So that could be mid-band that could be low band but for sure we went out there we measured it. We stood like 20 ft away from it. It's hot. But But what did you realize? You're like, "Oh, that's not even as bad as my bedroom." Right. My bedroom is worse than that. Next to my baby monitor. That baby monitor, dude, was like was like sitting next to a to Chernobyl or something. Not quite, but it was four. It was like 400,000 on that. It It was about 10 times higher than standing 20 ft away from the cell tower. So, that's what I like to tell you people. Distance is everything. And I would It was 10x next to a baby monitor than it was sitting next to a 5G cell phone tower. Yes, that's correct. That is insane. But also, our phones were off out there. If you like connected your phone and then it was pinging the tower again, your phone is the biggest source. The whatever is closest to you is going to be the biggest source. Like that baby monitor was so close to where you're sleeping. So that's that's the problem. And that's good. Why? You can't move a cell tower. You can change how you use your technology and how you interact with it. And it is really criminal, I would say. And something I learned and talked about on on the Maha podcast was the legislation side of things a bit more. And the Telecommunications Act of 1996, it actually took away the ability for state and local government to have any say in where wireless infrastructure gets placed. is purely a federal decision and if they give the green light to the industry, they can put towers wherever they want. And that's why you saw the 5G roll out. All of a sudden there was towers being built everywhere. Nobody could do anything about it. And to me, so he leases the guy who owns this, he leases that land to them for that tower. Yeah. And and it depends maybe on on certain agreements, but for the most part, there's pretty much no say. And that was the the most lobbyed bill of like the time here. the the wireless industry lobbyed like $50 million and that was back, you know, 30 years ago and nothing has really changed. That's also coincidentally the last year that wireless technology safety thresholds and guidelines were updated. Um, and that's what RFK and the Children's Health Defense successfully sued the FCC for being negligent in safety standards and guidelines because they haven't been updated in, you know, over 25 years. When did he do this? 2021. They won the lawsuit. You you could look that up, see more details. Children's Health Defense su FCC and RFK Jr. was a was a presiding attorney there and they won, but nothing's happened. So, I'm I'm really excited to, you know, I was talking to the Maja team like, is he actually, you know, you think he's actually going to do some stuff on EMFs? Because guess what? There's a lot of issues out there. This one's probably the hardest one to to tackle from just how sticky the infrastructure situation is. Oh, it's 2022. Um, you got to type in 2022 at the top, Steve. Oh, no. It's good. You got it. That was the right one. That was it. Okay. Oh, no, it was 2021. The article edition. Okay. Okay. Okay, so this is the article. Scroll down. And they made the case for for children um challenging the FCC's wireless radiation guidelines. On August 31st, 2021, the US Court of Appeals of the DC Circuit published decisions on the historic case [Music] um Health Defense in its landmark case against the Federal Communications Commission's challenging the FCC's decision to not review its health and safety guidelines regarding 5G and wireless technology. The court's decision states that the FCC failed to provide a reason a reasoned explanation for its determination that its current guidelines adequ adequately protect against harmful effects of exposure to radio frequency radiation and failed to review the extensive evidence um the extensive evidence scientific evidence and evidence of existing sicknesses that was filed with the FCC. So nothing's changed. So, so they won the case, but there's been no sort of extra regulations put on these people or maybe they just got a shitload more money from him. I Nothing's happened and that's why I'm really excited to see has he talked about has RFK talked about any of this stuff like in the last 6 months? He has a little bit, but not not a ton. And I don't think it's the place to start to be honest. Like this stuff is hard. What What is he going to do? You can't just like snap your fingers and all of a sudden red 40 die is gone. You know, that doesn't exist with with radio frequencies. Well, the crazy thing about him is like all before he got confirmed by the Senate, there was all these senators coming out saying like if he starts saying crazy stuff, we're not voting for his ass. Yeah. He's playing the game. So Oh, yeah. You have to play the game. You have to play the game. That's the unfortunate part of the whole of the whole thing because it's so I mean, it's got to be so I mean, who's to say he's not corruptible? We don't know that. He's never been in this position before, but just spending time with his team, they told me they're like they he is fired up about EMFs and the Children's Health Defense, like they're two big topics. Like EMFs is is one of them. The vaccines are the other one. And, you know, I'm stoked to see if there's anything that's going to come of of the EMF situation because it's so hard. What are they going to do? These towers already exist. We're operating on this wireless infrastructure. It's not like they can just switch to something different. They could change the safety thresholds and guidelines. You know, Russia, other Eastern European countries, they do have more stringent standards and they do have even more stringent standards for like schools and hospitals, etc. Um, but I don't think that would make like a meaningful change. What I would really like to see is better science, better research. Let's fund some studies from the HHS or the NIH. that's simulating what the actual exposure is. Okay, we have a 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi. Uh Danny just made a call on 900 meghertz and there's another like 6 GHz band over there. That's a real life exposure. And there's all these different input signals. There's been there's never been a study done like that. And all the industry funded studies are an absolute joke. And then the ones that people have skated by on really old are not exactly applied to how technology is working today. So, I think that's probably the biggest impact that that he can make in in the short term. And, you know, at daylight, I'm going to try and reinvent wireless technology. I'm just going to think of something and hopefully we can try it out. Maybe get some research grants to to look into like what if we use infrared uh range for wireless data communication. That's an option. Some LiFi actually is a thing. So people are yeah it's it's using uh infrared terraertz uh wavelengths to data use data communication but I'm skeptical that that even that would be nonharmful to humans. The idea is so radio frequencies Danny if I go if I go to the mountains where I hunt do you know what this says it says zero zero nothing nothing this 200 MHz 8 gigahertz is completely alien it doesn't exist um light fidelity whoa that's light fidelity wireless communication technology that uses light to transmit data over visible light ultraviolet and infrared spectrums Wow. So potentially uh uh transmitter is available from Hypersian Hyperion text tech which features a 940 NM 1W LED and supports a wide bandwidth 100 uh KHZ to 25 MHz. Okay, whatever the [ __ ] that means. That's one watt one watt infrared 940 nm. It's basically an infrared LED and they're using it to transmit data which is cool because the idea is we are used to infrared light like that's that's something the body has taken as an input signal for a long time. So it is it would be less harmful potentially than radio frequency which is completely alien. However, I'm not 100% certain that that would still be the the case because a lot of the research from the 70s from Alan Frey from folks like Dr. Martin Pal who has looked into like voltage gated ion channel activation from EMFs they all say the same thing that it's not just about the frequency it's about the modulation so a frequency is one component but in order to get the data through you have to modulate the wave to carry the data um to be received by um you know the the receiving trans transceiver and that is very pulseed It's it's very unnatural like sunlight and electromagnetic waves in nature are just like continuous waves. Uh they don't have modulation techniques applied to them. So you still are going to have to modulate an infrared wave because you need to there needs to be data on the wave or else like that's the whole point of wireless technology. So I'm curious. I would love to test it. I would love to see research on alternative solutions like that. And that's kind of what's what's exciting. But there's it's multiaceted. It's very complicated. We started talking about light. Dude, light's pretty easy. I'm not going to lie. We just need to copy the sun. Um, the rest of the electromagnetic spectrum is is is far more complex. And I we haven't even talked about like the Earth's natural magnetic field and resonance and, you know, fields interacting with each other having a biological effect. There's there's a lot going on. Yeah. Um, so when it comes to the daylight computer, h how did you guys get how did you and get hooked up about it and and then and then um what specifically are are you working on in regards to the technology and and everything you guys are doing at the company? Yeah. So I had an onen on my podcast last January. Um my old podcast where I talked about a year ago. January. Yeah. Oh wow. Over a year ago. Um decentralized radio. I always caught a lot of had a lot of these researchers that you know I I read their papers and I just wanted to ask them questions about kind of this electromagnetic health stuff and yeah halfway through the podcast I was kind of in between I left my engineering job like 3 4 months earlier I worked in the semiconductor industry for 5 years and uh I'm an electrical engineer but I went right into the more of the business side of product marketing management um of of the industry and then was building my you know health brand and podcasting and writing ing and coaching a bit was like ah I don't really know that's not what I'm meant to do I have this kind of very specific skill set and then I met onen I was like oh this is this is the most important company in the world to succeed cuz there there is no alternative no one's building healthier tech and I knew it was possible like I knew about all this stuff was engineering changes that needed to happen but you're competing with the biggest companies in the world so the barrier to entry is so high's like yeah we're releasing a product to the market in like 6 months or 5 months But you guys are going the opposite direction. Those other you're not competing with them. You're you're almost in a completely separate world. But I know how working in the chip industry, I knew how hard it is to get started because nobody cares about you when you're low volume. Nobody cares about you. Everyone's doing hundreds of thousands, millions and millions of units. So when you're a small guy, it's so hard to get started. So I knew it from that perspective as well. And then yeah, I jumped on board. I was like, I'm working for you full-time. I started like Well, I started just like health marketing stuff. He didn't even know like what exactly I did in the past, but I slowly just took on more and more. And now I'm head of operations and marketing. So, I'm kind of like, yeah, running the company with Hunin. And dude, it's such an exciting product. I don't think I've ever been so excited about a tech product in my life. Like, other when the other than when the the iPhone first came out cuz I remember when the first iPhone came out. I think it was like 20 2008, 2009, something like that. And like my buddy had one and it was just like, "Holy [ __ ] how does this [ __ ] exist?" This thing you just touch it, you swipe it, it makes these little sounds and it makes the ch the screen changes and it does things just with touch. It was like it was there's not been anything since the first iPhone came out that groundbreaking tech technologically consumer-wise in my experience. But like this, it's the same. It's a touch screen, but like it is the goal of it is to reduce all the negative effects of technology, which there's nothing else like that that I've ever seen, which is why it's so [ __ ] cool because you can do things like read a book, browse the internet, listen to podcasts, sketch on it, all this crazy stuff. And it is optimized to work outside, which is I love it because I'm I've literally been outside spending more time outside during the day reading, which is great. It makes me get my ass out there. And like, you know, everything about it is just is just amazing. I literally like I just told you before we started this podcast, I I take notes on this during every podcast now, which is like and it's cool cuz you can save it all and you're not dealing with this thing that's connected to this whole like Apple walled garden where all these notifications are connected to everything. My phone, my computer, my laptop, like it's just disconnected, decentralized, which is why it's so [ __ ] sick. And um you know, I don't know. I think that uh that there's got to be I mean a like I understand it's going to be really [ __ ] hard for you guys and I'm sure you could probably elaborate on that a little bit but um that vision that you guys have and like that the why behind your company is is completely genuine and completely unique. Yeah. And it's cool because people are ready for it and you know just talking to you know like the the Maha stuff is like is this real? like is this I've been doing this stuff for like six, seven years now and there's people who've been talking about this stuff for decades and you know I met some friends in Austin that have been living kind of this life for 15 years and it's like this is actually finally happening you know we we have so much momentum people are becoming aware of these problems it's kind of the benefit of of the internet and of social media to some degree and podcasts like yourself like the new age of media actually being able to elaborate on these topics like people can listen to this podcast and be like yeah this I he's pretty fired up about health and EMF. So, it's it's not there's nothing to fake here. Like same with Unen, right? You can get on a podcast. It's so genuine. Our our marketing is just it's real. And that's the company mission is let's return to what's actually real. Like get outside. Let's have real conversations, real relationships, not being sucked into the Apple ecosystem or the Google ecosystem. And especially for children, which we're most passionate about, they are just being set up for failure on every level because we're handing them devices at such a young age. And not only is there direct impact from the light, the EMFs, it's keeping them indoors and then that's the reality they grow up in and they're just missing out on all of that experience. And who is surprised when there's all these mental health issues and physical health issues that that stem from that? So for us, we're just so grateful and there is no one else, you know, doing this. There's no one who's ever made a consumer electronics hardware product that's like, I'm going to market this to be healthier. So, we think it's a massive opportunity. We're super excited. We're super focused on on building better solutions. And I'm actively talking about things we're looking into. Like, I hope someone else talks or looks into LiFi. and we want to add infrared LEDs to our backlight and maybe do a few other things and we're investigating but if you have ideas or you have experience like hit us up. We we want to collaborate with people because we're still a really small team and it's going to take some time to to keep improving on this. But even the first gen product I you know I use it for everything almost and uh at least every day for four to five hours taking notes and messaging and that's like you can send messages on it. Yeah. Like WhatsApp, Slack. Um Oh, really? Telegram. Yeah. Yeah. I should have known that you can you can do that when you connect a keyboard. It definitely unlocks more of the the full computer functionality, but yeah, it's great. I mean, I can't work on things that I'm not like super passionate about. So, I'm just so grateful that I have this opportunity where everything I've done the past decade basically can be channeled into making daylight a success. And if daylight's a success, then people have the optionality to make better choices in terms of technology that isn't harmful for their health. M Anren was explaining how this screen technology you could like only find it in Japan. Yeah. Yeah. That's where he pioneered it. He innovated with some researchers and we're manufacturing it. So the display is the innovation. Yeah. Cuz it's like cuz it's like a Kindle on steroids, but it's not because you can zoom in and out. It's super quick. But it looks like that ink. What is the ink? Electronic ink is what? Looks like electronic ink. all the e-readers use. So this is the only device that has that that special Japanese techn screen technology that utilizes that. Yeah, it it's out it's onen came up with that with the researchers and then they're imple implementing it from a manufacturing perspective. So it's the only you know 60 plus frames per second refresh rate e-aper product tablet. What does uh have you guys talked to anybody? I asked Anin this, but from your perspective, like how much time have you spent in like Silicon Valley around other people that are working for other tech companies and have you seen like what their reactions are to this stuff or this topic in general? Yeah. Um most of our investors and a lot of our early supporters are from Silicon Valley, I I would say. And there are people I think that are seeing what's coming. uh they and they've seen what they've created and worked on and how it's really not bringing out the best in people anymore and they themselves I think we're at a point now where if you ask the average person they're like yeah social media and my phone I don't really have the best relationship with with that it's I'm kind of addicted and it's true everyone l myself included probably you like we get in we doom scroll like it's designed that way it's so hard to not be sucked in and then those people a lot of them you know, they either have money uh disposable income because they did make some wealth from whatever SAS startup or other company they they had and they want to support something that seems a bit more meaningful. And yeah, I would say a lot of our early supporters they're they're big deep work people. So, productivity, reading, writing, and I would say overall from the individual perspective, the reception in Silicon Valley has been pretty great. I mean, I don't hang out there a lot. I live in Wyoming. So, uh, but from what I've, you know, experienced and gathered, it's it's been really positive. I think it's it's been positive in so many ways. And we just went to South by Southwest and we won like an innovation Oh, in Austin. Yeah. In Austin. We won an innovation award and bunch of people, especially parents were coming up to us like, "This is so amazing. Like, I've been looking for something like this. like, you know, can't wait to get this for my daughter because I just like don't want to give her an iPad, but I it's helpful to have something. And you could probably relate to that better than me, but that's what's cool about this. And and we haven't even spent a ton of effort on on marketing and we don't really have the bandwidth. You guys have the sickest website I've ever seen in my life. We we did we spent a lot of effort on the website and the launch videos, I will say that. But then after that, we haven't um we've kind of been quiet. If you can scroll through this website and not spend money on this iPad, then this healthy iPad, I call it a healthy iPad. That's what that's what my kid calls it. Acceptable. It's acceptable. Um, if you can't if you can scroll through this website and not buy one, you have enormous self-control. Yeah. Our team did such an incredible job on that. Um, it's it's it's brilliant. And that's the thing. We when we do things, we want to do it, you know, on brand. So, it's it's not like jumping out and having all these, you know, colors um in your face and any type of content. We're we're trying to be very true to our brand and and very authentic. But that's why um you know, discussions like this podcast is is so powerful because people can actually align with, you know, what we stand for and hear, hear myself talk about these topics and that's that's what it's all about for me. But we we've been building. So we're really excited at, you know, what's to come in the next couple years. And for us, um, this is just the beginning really. So does this obviously it's very unique screen technology cuz there's no blue light and you guys have this sort of like incandescent color, right? This like full spectrum color to it. Um, but like what have you done or what do you guys uh plan on doing with like the frequencies like the cuz does this put off the same radiation as a iPhone? Yeah. So, the EMFs have not been optimized at all at the hardware level. We technically have a weaker Wi-Fi chip because you're just like a startup with a worse Wi-Fi chip than like an iPad. Yeah. Um I've I've done like a headto-head of this versus my MacBook and it's actually like significantly lower for just that reason which is pretty funny. We're coming out with smart airplane mode which is going to be a software update which takes very little effort. Any company could do it where say right here this is connected to Wi-Fi but I haven't used it in like a minute it'll just go into airplane mode. Oh cool. And then instead of pinging the network every 8 to 10 seconds like right now like same with my phone like I manually put it in airplane mode like it's in airplane mode right now. If you're not a psychopath like me who does that all the time, you're never going to do that. But if it was sitting next to you, do you do you need it constantly connected and then maybe it just pings like when you have a custom setting every 5 minutes or on a daylight? That's not what this is for. So it can be an airplane mode much longer and we're thinking of what's the best way to do it. But that's such an easy lift for us. smart airplane mode and you know you won't have to remember to do that. Then in the next generation products we are definitely looking into how we can optimize EMFs uh EM EMI radiation RF uh at the hardware level. Mhm. But I'm going to say this is it's pretty complex. It's pretty tricky. Like we're the going to be the first company that's ever tried to do this. And we have some ideas like, hey, what if there's some sensors on the daylight computer to where it knows your position in space and then it's only outputting the radiation, the Wi-Fi connectivity like away from you. That would be cool and that actually wouldn't be too challenging to do. A lot of the newer chipsets have directionality functionality. Um, so that should be possible like theoretically in my head. So I'm going to explore that. And you know, Wi-Fi is all around the room, so it's not it it's not going to make your connection or your throughput any worse. So, that's something there's shielding, there's filtering potentially to look into. But again, if you're an electrical engineer listening to this and I'm not an RF engineer, but anyone has any ideas, hit me up. Tristancomputer.com. Or the LiFi thing, like long term, maybe that's it. Maybe in like a couple generations, we build a Wi-Fi router and we move our devices to that cuz cuz what I can tell you, Danny, no one's going to move to hardwired internet. I do that in my house. Um cuz um I I think for at home setups Yeah. I think for at home setups it's actually not bad because hardwired. Yeah. If you if you set it up to where Sorry to wake up. You want to try that? It's like this ammonia salt stuff. Just wakes you up. This is what the kids are doing now. Yeah, I have to do it every once in a while. Oh, wow. That was a light sniff. No Wi-Fi necessary. Let's go. Um Yeah. So, if you connect it like if you set it up the way it's not super um inconvenient. Yeah. It's better. You get better data throughput. It's more security and then you have lower EMF exposure as So, I think for like home office setups, if you're building a new house or getting a new setup and just pay someone to do it, if you have the means, you can make it pretty convenient. But if you're on the go, like your phone, no one's ever going to hardwire their phone. Well, that's like the crazy thing about like, you know, people talk about this internet of things with 5G, smart homes, smart homes, and you know, everything just being connected everywhere. And, you know, it's scary, dude. It's I just had this dude in here a couple months ago who was talking about how his TV was spying on him and these people these like hackers were like messaging him trying to extort him because they were like recording recording [ __ ] he did off of his TV like not just audio but I think video too. Is he like a prevalent guy like some random guy? No, just some random dude. I for No, he was working on a movie or something. It was like an actor in a movie and uh I don't know it was it's crazy story but like you know how like looking at China for example with all of the security state that they live in and the cameras everywhere and I don't know how much 5G they use but I imagine especially living in the dense metropolitan areas in China just bringing your little meter out there would make it probably explode with all the connectivity that they have. Yeah. You know. Yeah. And and do you need that? Do you need like your washing machine to talk to your smart meter to talk to your, you know, Amazon accounts or really like really do we actually need that or is that just a byproduct of the fiat economy and selling us more stuff that we don't need and collecting data that is just going to sell more product to us? So, we're we're big privacy advocates, too. Like that's where the tinfoil hat really starts to shine is when you think about all the things that they're all these smart products and this internet of things and government control because like the most of this stuff is in China where they have complete to total control and surveillance over everybody with all this technology that they have. So when you have your washing machine or your hair dryer that has a microphone built into it, you know, it's just like where does that road lead? Yeah. you know, and it might just be for collecting data so they can sell you more products. But even if it's just that, that's also even if it is just that, right, which it most likely is. It's most likely not. It doesn't even matter. I don't want that. I don't want that invasion of my privacy. And I definitely don't want to be sold more products. So to me, regardless of where we stand on the reason for all this, it's it's it's not okay. And it and it can't, you know, change. But we we didn't even talk about, you know, some of the the mind control or you said moving people around. Something that is very factual is like the military does use radio frequencies for like active denial systems they're calling. They use millimeter waves. So active denial. Yeah. It's it's this 95 GHz like crowd control stuff. That's a real thing. It's been like 20 years and that is straight up just a very high power 95 GHz millimeter wave. The videos of it are insane. And they can crank it to where it feels like your skin is on fire. It feels like your body because it has such an it'll heat your body up like 5 10° in a matter of seconds. So that's where this is not a conspiracy theory that exists. And there is definitely one Steve like like you were saying if they wanted to move people around like in Westworld, I'm sure they they could do that. If they actually wanted to do that, they could do that. And maybe that's like what warfare is is all about. So give us some volume on this. So these are volunteers. This is a military area. Move away from the perimeter. Their new active denial system boasts a reach far beyond any other non-lethal system. Well, it's a versatile system. Uh and it has a a range of uh non-lethal capability that we can't even come close to with any of our fielded systems. goes very shallow uh into where your nerve receptors are. Uh and there's no uh no permanent injury caused by it. Uh very safe system. We built in some safety margins and uh uh training for the operators. They even let any of the guests volunteer to test out its effectiveness and safety, including the assistant comedant of the Marine Corps, sergeant major of the Marine Corps, and assistant secretary of the Navy. Most described it as feeling like a hot oven or grill being opened up. It is something that once again probably the safest system that uh that developed as far as the non-lethal capability from Washington. I'm Sergeant Andrew Milner. The safest non-lethal. They put non-lethal and safe in there a lot of times. Yeah. But then these people having seizures the next day. They blasted it on someone and they moved them. So that's that's moving crowd control right there. So, that's not a conspiracy theory. And I think No, they've been doing this stuff since the Cold War. And I sent you, I think, a PDF. I haven't even I need to read it again, but there's literally directed energy weapon documents from the military that you can just look up. It's not conspiracy theory. This is warfare in 2025. It's going to be all drones. It's going to be all DDWs, lasers, and EM waves. Like, and that's real. if they wanted to use it on civilians. I think the other case to be made is, you know, some of these research um studies from the past that show like rats becoming docile from, you know, electric field or magnetic field exposure and things like that. There's like maybe a case to be made there, but then guess what? Everyone is consuming the same environment. So, would they would they be doing that to themselves? Maybe they have some crystal that protects them. They hire us. I I don't know. But yeah, it to me it doesn't matter. It's like we we we have a problem here and and we need to we need to think of what's a better uh solution for for wireless technology. But So, what was that thing you were telling me about that I could that you can install on your um your breaker panel to it's like a switch or something that you can use to turn off a certain room in your house. Like at night time when you're going to bed, just flip off flip off the power in your room. Yeah. So, we said that turning your circuit breaker off in your bedroom would have a drastic effect on reducing your AC body voltage. We turned the we turned the breaker off just for my bedroom and it reduced it by like a 100 thousand by like 10,000 times. The Yeah. Yeah. It was um you don't want to turn your breaker on and off all the time. Like mechanical switches like that were not meant to be like it's not a light switch. It technically could be unsafe after a certain point. So, uh you would never recommend someone do that. You probably could do it on a new breaker. Um, but the safe thing to do would be to get like a relay install and then uh there's companies that make solutions where they can hook it up to a remote control and then it just flips on and off. So, you could be like, "Hey, I want my bedroom, the kids' bedroom, uh, to be on this to where I hit the button at 10 p.m. The circuit breakers turn off and only the kitchen and the AC is powered on at night so that my uh, electrical power and low frequency EMF exposure is far reduced. So, you can get that. You can there's companies that make solutions like that. And there's also like you could just ask your electrician to to probably do something like that if if you have a good electrician. So, that's something to consider. Uh, save power and don't bake your bra. There we go. And then you can use that electricity that you're not using to power your incandescent. Incondescent bulbs. Right. There's a lot. I mean, I think there's a lot of studies out there. And I would say the vast majority, if not all of them, like n 80 to 90% of them that aren't funded by industry show harmful biological effects. And I would say this is kind of a very inconvenient truth for people. So I don't want to be like fear-mongering. You know, you're going to die because of all this 5G and Wi-Fi. It's just another stressor on top of this toxic cake. We have the food, we have the plastics, we have the water, we have the lights, we have now the EMFs. It is another thing. And in my opinion, the electromagnetic environment might be the most important if for if not the because it's what we're consuming 24/7, 365 days a year. And and the argument usually made against it is that nonionizing radiation isn't harmful. And we already talked about studies of weak magnetic fields increasing risk of childhood leukemia. We looked at other studies for, you know, cell phone exposure risk. That's all nonionizing. So, I think that's without foundation. And I think that's just something that people use because that's what they've been taught. And it's like a blanket statement that is like, "Oh, there's no way." And it's invisible. It's intangible. So, people really can't um understand the the the impact that it's having, but it's it's a low-level stressor that's present in the environment. It's disrupting your sleep. It's disrupting your your cellular communication. Like your mitochondria are really the the hub of communication and energy production. And think of it, right? Like think of it like me and you are in this room. We're talking to each other. We can hear each other very clearly. It's great conversation. Imagine if 50 people were in here. You think we'd be able to hear each other as clearly? Imagine if there's a hundred people in here. The signal to noise ratio because of this electromagnetic environment that's alien has never been lower. There's all this noise going on and our body is using electromagnetic fields to communicate to drive cellular processes and when we have these non-native input signals that becomes distorted and then we get you know timing uh interruptions we get just there's trillions of cellular um reactions and and functions being executed like every second. Yeah. And to me, that's how people should think about this is that there's so much noise going on. And it's constantly keeping us in this sympathetic dominant um fight orflight state. So, you really never have that chance to be in the state you're meant to be and fully relax and and executing functions normally. And at the lowest level, our biology is electromagnetic. You know, that that's what people can't conceive. And I'm like, what are we using to measure all of these things in the hospital? Use an EEG to measure your brain, an EKG. Those are purely electrical. Yeah. MRI machines for torn ACLs, cancers. It's magnetic magnetic resonance imaging. And there's just such a disconnect between medicine, modern medicine, academia, and this world of electromagnetism because no one's really taught physics. And then the physicists and engineers, they don't know anything about biology. So that's the only reason why people like talk to me is because I'm Yeah. You're the only one that's making the making one of few people. There's a lot of good folks out there, but a lot of them have been, you know, suppressed, had their funding stripped over the years, and nothing has changed. Like go and read a lot of these books. Um, The Invisible Rainbow is is an amazing one. Robert or sorry, uh, rest in peace to Arthur Fenberg, the guy who wrote that just died two weeks ago. What was that one about? um that was more high level and he correlated uh that the electrification of society directly correlated with the increase of of chronic disease. Now that happened across the 20th century um mostly in the ' 40s and then you know 99% of society was electrified in in this by the 60s. Chronic disease was there any like specification of like which disease was the most prevalent out of them? Heart disease. I sent I sent you a picture of like the one graph he had. I pull it up on my phone, but it's basically again this is correlation, not causation. I can text it to Steve. He could show it on the screen. Yeah. It's like rate of rural heart disease in in 1940, uh, which was when a lot only the the cool states had electricity. So, okay. This thing I should send. Yeah. Yeah. All right, Steve. I'm gonna email this to you right now. And basically Arthur Fersenberg just just talks about that and he talks about some crazy stuff that telecom cables when they were introduced in the late 1800s all of a sudden the flu went from being something that happened like every 5 to 8 years now happened every single year. And it used to be more tracked to the flu used to only be a phenomenon apparently that occurred like uh every few years like really badly and it correlated with the solar cycle. So there's an 11-year solar cycle and we're actually in a peak year right now. So if you're wondering why a bunch of crazy stuff is happening, you could say the solar cycle has somewhat of impact cuz there's a solar maximum and that means the most amount of sunspots are happening, the most amount of geomagnetic storms, which means the most amount of like magnetic variables and disturbances and that's been studied and looked at and having it's called a solar cycle. Yeah. 11 year and we're in a sol. Can you look that up? I need to read about this. How have I not had anyone tell me about this? July July 2025 is is the peak. So July 2025 is the peak of the solar cycle. Meaning there's more electricity. There's you can read it. Okay. The solar cycle which is approximately 11 years long is the periodic change in the sun's activity measured by variations in the number of sunspots on the surface. Okay. Okay. The cycle is driven by the sun's magnetic field which reverses direction every 11 years lending to fluctuations in solar radiation ejections from solar m of solar material and the occurrence of solar flares in and coronal loops. The 11-year period is influenced by the differential rotation speed between the sun's poles and equator causing the magnetic field to stretch and eventually reverse. So the the magnetic field of the sun reverses every 11 years. Is that what this is saying? Yeah. And that's having an impact on the magnetic environment on the earth. And there's studies that look at, you know, psychiatric patients and overall like mental health of people uh that are very sensitive and and when there's increased solar activity and magnetic disturbances that can be felt. Sometimes it's positive, sometimes it's negative, but there's there's more variation. And this is all what I'm getting at here. Keep scrolling down, Steve. Sorry, keep going. Is that we are electromagnetic beings. The only reason there's life on this planet, Danny, is because we have a magnetic field that protects us from all of the ionizing, a lot of the ionizing radiation from the sun. And we have a magnetic field in the Earth because the Earth has a molten iron core which is moving charges. And that moving charge is is creating a a powerful magnetic field that's protecting us. And that magnetic field is driving our biology. It actually influences our circadian rhythms. And that's why potentially these weak magnetic fields from power lines and you know other products are are harmful. Look at that NASA link because we are you know it's called electromagnetic interference in in electrical engineering. When when we have interference or noise on the line that's disrupting the real input signal and the real input signal we need is the earth's magnetic field, the Schuman's resonance which is a natural resonance phenomenon in the earth and the solar spectrum. The sun has a magnetic pole flip every 11 years. That'd be like north and the south poles swapping places every decade and the sun transitions from being calm to Holy [ __ ] dude. If that happened on Earth, we would not exist. It would exactly it wipe out humanity. That's also happening slowly. Magnetic uh pole reversal is definitely happening. The North Pole is moving and we just talked about this a couple weeks ago. It's like a couple feet per year, right? It was like 12 feet per year. Is that right, Steve? Yeah. Yeah, it was like a few feet. I don't know. A few feet per and it's increasing and the overall strength of the magnetic field is is decreasing. So, we're definitely in the early stages probably of a magnetic pole reversal, but these things take thousands of years to play out. So, this is what we should be studying more, not like going to Mars in my opinion, but we are learning a lot about the magnetic or electromagnetic environment by looking in space. So, I will say that. But that's what I'm trying to get out here is we are designed for this electromagnet magnetic environment that goes on into the earth. So I usually evolved here. I usually start podcast with telling people that, but we're doing the opposite here because I want people to know that we are electromagnetic beings. And the Schuman's resonance, for example, is a phenomenon where lightning strikes uh occur and there's an electromagnetic resonance in in the cavity in the atmosphere and the earth's naturally resonating like 7 to eight hertz uh in its first harmonic. That's the same frequency as our alpha brain wave. And you know that's that's not a coincidence that that occurs. And then when we have these low frequency fields from technology, it of course it's going to have an a potential effect on our mental states. Yeah. And that's something that again is is very esoteric for for mainstream science and and medicine, but but it but it's the truth. and the overall acknowledgment that that we just need to to study more phenomenons on on the electromagnetic environment. And the other point I want to make here is that this is all very localized. So if I if I were to give a recommendation for health, it's not only you know getting outdoors is beneficial and getting connected to your environment is beneficial because we are designed to take all the input signals from our local environment but that local environment is different depending where you are. So what you're doing in Florida and what I'm doing in Wyoming is different like and different modalities and foods and things will affect us differently because the electromagnetic environment is different. There's a different magnetic field coming out of the earth at different directional vectors and that's where all this gets really complicated because there are things such as resonance with certain molecules in our body uh that are interacting with with various fields such as the electromagnetic field of the earth and depending on your location it's going to have a different effect. So if we do research this stuff, there's just so many confounding independent variables to consider. And I hope someone has the foresight to think about all of that. But that's also why where you live and embracing the local environment and season is is very important because we're we're cyclical creatures and everything that goes on, even the magnetic field of the earth has a rhythm. Our circadian rhythms, the seasonality, um I'm I'm very big on on all of that stuff and it's kind of nuanced. So, even the mainstream health influencers, like, you know, they live on a beach somewhere in the tropics, you really shouldn't always follow their advice if you live in the Northeast and it's January, right? Um, okay. So, this says the magnetic uh the pole has been moving at a rate of 45 km per year northn northwest. You said feet. You're off by a little bit. So, what's 45 km to feet? A lot. Really? Yeah. What is it? That's like 30 m. Oh [ __ ] 45 km is like 30 m. That's That's crazy. If that's real. Is it that much? Wow. Yeah. Almost exactly. 27 miles per year. Oh my god. That's what we should be studying. Like I think somebody has to be studying that. Not not enough. Not that I've seen. Maybe they just don't want to let the public know. Because if you're in charge and you're figuring out that this earth's about to flip, do a pole flip. Are you going to tell the public? It's hard. That that would be the equivalent of telling there's an alien invasion. Do you think? I think so. Yeah. In 222 years, the pole will be flipped completely. I I don't think that's what if it's moving at that. Yeah, that seems off. That has to be off. Brave. I don't know. I like Brave, but Brave is the Bitcoin browser. Well, well, the the planet is uh 6,000 miles across. Is that right? I don't know. Try ask see what Chrome has to say. All I know is that these pole reversals do take thousands of years and then it can just happen like all of a sudden. So, it can it does accelerate over time. Yeah. Well, it has to do with like the ice sheets getting really heavy, right? And then melting and getting really light and then that has to like somehow like releases the the crust from the core or the mantle rather. and then makes the outer outer part of the earth. So, so okay, so 8,000 miles is the diameter of the Earth. So, so well, we'll figure out ask first 8,000 divided by 27. Find out if it's really 27 miles per year. That that might not be real. That would be what I would be. I would try another browser. You got to have two. You can't just have you can't we can't just rely on uh on Brave. But folks, like you can't just rely on Chrome. You got to you got to you got to hedge your bets a little bit. Check your sources. do your own research. Then then we'll ask China what they say our earth uh north pole is shifting their new was it deepseek oh yeah deepseek but that's something Robert Obecker even wrote about. He was like pole reversals have been correlated with like 80% of all extin extinction events and he wrote about that in the 80s. I don't even know if that's exactly true but I'd imagine it it would be. The earth pole is currently drifting at a speed of 31 to 37 miles per year. Wow. Here's the So, who is this according to? Hit show more. This is This is Google AI. It used to be six and now it's 30. That's frightening. Oh, wow. From 9 to 37. So, this is why Elon is trying to get us to Mars. I would be concerned. I didn't know is that that's insane. That means the compasses aren't going to work very soon, folks. Right. Like soon. Like two in a 100 years. It's going to be halfway there. I guess that's why in less than a hundred years will be more than halfway flipped. Well, at one point the idea is that it goes and then it just like the the ice cap gets so heavy just Yeah. just like that's that's that could be a chaotic uh and how are we going to get to Mars, bro? Dude, how how are we going to get to the moon? How are we going to get through the Van Allen radiation belt? That but that is another um example of like why our electromagnetic environment is so important. people they go up there they get osteoporosis they get all these chronic diseases what's that thing called that he was uh that Jack was speaking about the pregnalone steel syndrome so all the astronauts had to uh they all came back with like virtually no testosterone yeah hormonal dysfunction I guess that's legit I mean it's all regulated by electromagnetism at the end of the day at the lowest level and that's where even you know supplements for for example you know antioxidants oxidative signaling in our body is is so important because that's what's reacting with our electromagnetic environment like um free radicals and and oxygen in general um paramagnetic um molecules in our body. So if we just like blunt all of that all the time, you're really blunting the ability to take in the input signals of your environment, which could be problematic, could be beneficial if you're traveling. How [ __ ] are we going to be if we end up having to move to the Earth or the or I mean to the moon or to Mars? I don't Are you going to be on one of the journeys to go to the Are you just going to stay here and go down with the ship? I will stay here. I am not moving to Mars. Dude, that's hard. So unhealthy for us. Like it's going to it's going to like I can't imagine what it's going to look like, but human lifespan is probably going to go down so much. Do you know what I can't I can't believe how resilient we are in our current state. This is what's cool. I can't believe with all this stuff we're talking about, we're still walking around like, you know, people are drinking four cups of coffee and whatever stimulants and dep anti-depressants, but we're doing pretty good for how much toxic stuff is in the environment. And even travel like I can get on a flight to Australia and somehow my body figures it out. I don't feel great. Um, and the problem I've found is once you get hyperconnected to your environment, you become more sensitive to being uprooted and going somewhere else. It is hard to kill people. But it is hard. It is damn hard to kill people. It is hard to kill. I had the I uh there's this documentary called um Mr. Death. Have you ever seen it? No. It's this dude who um his dad worked for the Bureau of Prisons and they had one of their electric chairs went bad and they had to fix it. So he brought to his house and his son started tinkering around with it. Figured out how to make it work. Figured out how to make it work better. They brought it back at work. So now he became the repair man for the electric chair. Next thing you know, they're like, "Oh [ __ ] we gota the the states are making us come up with more humane ways of uh executing people." So, he came up with gas chambers. Then he came up with the lethal injections. And this kid that was just like had no background in this stuff, just figured out how to fix an electric chair, was now in charge of uh implementing all of the execution devices across all the prisons around the country. Wow. And he was in his book or in his documentary, he just he explains like a lot of them didn't [ __ ] work. Like people weren't dying. They were just getting like tortured. And he was like it like the human body is really hard to kill. Yeah. And that's where people are like, "Well, where is everyone dropping dead from all the cell phones or what? Name your toxin and like where's everyone dropping dead?" I'm like, "Well, this stuff takes a long time to manifest." And it's the death by a thousand cuts. That's the problem with any of these. There's so many like I, you know, we asked Steve to pull up that chart about electrification and and chronic disease or heart disease. That's a great chart. It's cool. Like look, um all the cool states in the Northeast, New Jersey, Massachusetts, New York, they had the most the highest percentage of electrification and they had the highest rate of heart disease um at that time period. But this is from uh Okay. So this is 1940. This is one year. One year. Yeah. So it's just a snapshot in in time. So again, but guess what else? New York, Massachusetts, New Jersey, maybe they had Crisco and maybe they had other stuff that was toxic. But it is pretty compelling. And again, it's just another factor to consider in your environment that is foreign and based on the research and our knowledge of how biology works, if you dig deep enough, is toxic or is potentially disruptive. And the thing about like the flu and the solar cycles like we are so disconnected from our electromagnetic environment. How is the flu connected to the solar cycles again? That's just like a maybe Steve can look that up too, but but apparently what Arthur Fenberg wrote about was before telecom cables were put underneath or in society in the late 1800s, the flu was more of a uncommon like it came around for a couple years and then left for like five six years and it was more tied to the solar cycles which I again I wouldn't be surprised with but you're going to have to try and find some very unbiased information. Oh yeah, it's going to be pretty hard. Um yeah. Um well like in general but in antiquity people were dying from [ __ ] plagues left and right. Like there was a plague every five years. That's something different. I think it was more so like the annual like what's known as the the common flu like every winter. Um not like the bubanic plague or you know some crazy infectious disease. So that that's something something different. But we're doing a lot better than we were back then. Yeah. And that's right. I don't want to romanticize the past totally because people yeah they were living outside but but they were they were struggling with infectious diseases but the thing that the mainstream likes to paint oh we're healthier as a society because of lifespan but you know they had kids dying when they were eight and that skews all the numbers mortality rate was like 50% back then child birth mortality as well and you can look at again like what is health span versus lifespan that's like a whole debate well I think it's always been the same as far as we The maximum the maximum. Correct. Obviously, people were dying from from hand to hand combat, plagues, famine, you know, all that stuff, war. But a healthy individual that didn't get murdered or didn't die from a plague would live the same exact time, same exact lifespan back in, as far as we know, like BC. Yeah. Than that we do now. Yeah. And that's where the longevity biohacking community. I'm like, I don't know. It's going to be interesting to see, but I'm focused on I always wonder about that guy, the Brian Johnson guy. I talked to him this past weekend. We were at the same like health uh event in Austin and I was like, what are you doing about light and EMFs? He's like, I'm pretty cognizant of light. You know, he doesn't go outside very much or he's in the shade. And but he was open to the EMFs. He's like, we've looked into it, but we're not convinced. I was like, well, try it out. We've looked into it. Oh, he has like a whole team of like people. Yeah, he does. I I think I like his intent. You know, I'm not going to, you know, talk bad about anyone. Like he's on his own wavelength. If he thinks he's God and like wants to live forever, by all means, at least time will tell, right? He's putting money into telling us like which products are maybe more using his himself as a science experiment, right? Yeah. So, at least we know what's going on. But I'm my goal is to convince him that sunlight is is is good for you, even though he doesn't buy into it. Not the ultraviolet. get him and Jack Cruz into a room. That will never work. You got to meet people where they are. But the EMFs he's open to. So, I'm going to send him some papers and it's like, dude, what do you have to lose? Like, you want to live forever? What? Do you need your Wi-Fi on a night? But he goes to bed like he is a he's committed. So, you have to respect that. But I don't think, you know, all these anti-aging expert experts, I think we know far less than we think we know. Yeah, I think so, too. about biology especially and what I am excited about one of the few things I'm excited about for AI is like how do you create a tool that can parse like there's thousands and thousands of studies on EMFs let's say there there are and I can't read all of them I could post one on Twitter for the next 10 years every single day and that wouldn't even be all of them and then you can't find all of them and then you you know have to piece it together so if there was a tool with the proper guidance I think we could learn so much uh about how biology is is actually functioning and then if we act if we fund real research that's what's promising but we're we're just we're not even scratching the surface. Well, how I mean that that the EMF topic seems like the most damned topic of all of them because just look at the lobbying in the food industry and then the pharmaceutical industry. Now the telecom industry like and guess what? How much money I'd be interested to find this out, Steve. How much money does the telecom industry make compared to the pharmaceutical industry? Like how much do they spend on And we can just do the math on how much lobbying they I got the lobbying numbers. Oh, you have it? Yeah, I have it written down right here. What is it? In 2018, it for AT&T uh was 18.5 million. Verizon 12 million. The CTIA and the NCTA, they're like basically associations that represent the telecom industry. So like vouching for them, fighting for the rights, was another like 22 million. That was in 2018. I looked up more recent numbers and it's about like, you know, 50 20 to 50% higher now. So it's a lot. They're probably lobbying like a hund00 million a year. uh which is nothing compared to what they make but it's it's pretty high. The global pharma industry um is estimated to be worth 1.2 trillion uh which will grow to more than 1.5 trillion by 2020. Okay, this is old by 2021. Um the pharmaceutical industry generates 550 billion in revenue in 2021. All right. Well, let's look at the telecom industry. Oh, here we go. By comparison, the telecom industry with a global revenue over five around 5 trillion is significantly larger than the pharmaceutical industry, which estimated to be worth 1.2 trillion. Uh almost five times bigger. It's way bigger. Wow. And guess what we said earlier is like and they're working for the NSA at the same time. So like we're [ __ ] dude. But the thing with the food and the pharmaceuticals, you actually have a choice. Do you really have a choice about your electromagnetic environment right now? Not really. Less of a choice, right? Because it's invisible. It's invisible. Plus, um there's no consent to where the infrastructure goes and we have to use it. You don't have to take medication. You can choose pretty deliberately about your food. Like you could go buy it from a farmer. Right now, there are not really great alternatives for tech. There's literally no alternatives for telecom. We all use Verizon 18 at like it's a monopoly um in all facets. There's no choice. Yeah. And then if you look at the FCC, if you want to talk about corrupted three-letter agencies, I mean, they haven't updated their guidelines since 1996. The former like heads of the CTIA and I think the general counsel of Verizon were their last two commissioners. I think the guy Trump put in now has kind of he's kind of okay. I've seen him reser referred to as like the 5G ZAR in a good way. Like he Trump I don't know Brendan Carr I think is his name. I don't know enough about him but I mean Trump loves 5G. He's like we're going to have the best 5G. He loves 5G. He just you know he's a business he's a business guy. So he just like he also loves the uh the warp speed operation warp speed. So it's um Brandon Carr is the senior Republican on the Federal uh communications commission having served so uh yeah what's his bent here? He's like a legal FCC like guy. Okay. So and he's anti- 5G. No, he's pro 5G. I shouldn't have said Zar. I should have said something else. But okay, I don't think we're going to I I'm curious to see because guess what? You got you got Trump who's like loves 5G and tech and 6G. He he just says 6G. Oh yeah, that's I mean that's next. Yeah. So we're going to have 6G. It's going to be it's going to be so big. It's going to be great. Like before we are somewhat behind China in terms of telecommunications cuz um the roll out for 5G did take a while. So you have those two. Well, at least we're not installing the Huawei bases all over here anymore. Yeah. That are just listening to to everything. So we're smart about that. The US military still buys like Chinese drones, but at least we're getting Do they really? Yeah, I'm pretty sure. Um, and that seems silly. There's no way we Who makes all our drone like not military drones? No, but Well, I don't know for sure, but anyway, we make all our products in China. So, yeah, like these are all made in China. Yeah, they are. So, we're kind of stuck in that regard. But what I'm saying is we got Trump who's pro 5G, 6G. We got Elon. Elon, you need to acknowledge that EMFs are potentially harmful for your biology. So, that's all I got to say because he's been on Rogan and be like, you could you could put something like a million times stronger than your phone up to your head and it wouldn't have any effect. Like, he said some stupid stuff. But again, look, he also says that there's no evidence for any kind of advanced propulsion systems by any aerospace industries. He don't thinks alien he doesn't think aliens are in interesting and he thinks that we can go to Mars even though we haven't been to the moon in 54 years. Yeah. He's also highly intelligent and highly strategic. So I'm I'm sure he's not just going to say what actually makes sense. Um very highly strategic for the public. But like I don't know it kind of like is he that like but but why are you on Twitter all day every day just like I don't know posting boring like not even funny memes and then you have RFK. So, I'm like, hm, how is this going to play out? I'm very curious to see if there is anything. Maybe they let RFK just do some research funding on EMFs, but this is where consumer demand, like consumer opinion and voicing of concerns is actually what drives change. And I think spreading awareness that this is a real thing. It's not a conspiracy theory. It's a it's a real thing. Go look at the studies. Go read some of these books. Invisible Rainbow, Cross Currents, Zapping of America, Microwave Debate. Some of these you can't even find anymore. You have to find the PDF and they're from 50 years ago. But but there's a lot there's a lot of great researchers. Henry Lie, Martin Powell, you know, Robert Obecker, um Alan Frey, Robert O. Becker was in that book, The Pentagon's Brain. There's a whole fascinating episode on him where he talks about limb. He was a guy who was about limb regeneration, right? Yeah. Yeah. It's f that's it's fascinating. And that's where he discovered like bone was semiconductive. That's where he discovered that there's little electrical currents that stimulate, you know, cell repair, cell regeneration, limb regeneration. And now they're studying how magnetic fields can alter that um as well. And it's highly dependent on the frequency, the intensity, the directionality. So there's there's so many independent variables there. But yeah, we're that was 70s maybe when he studied that. So there was so much like we could have made so much progress and that all just got shut down. And he was on 60 60 Minutes. I'm pretty sure Alan Frey went on 60 Minutes. So if you want to dig up some some fun archives, there you go. Tristan, thanks man. This has been a great podcast. [ __ ] mind-blowing stuff. Um tell people where they can uh learn more about you and Daylight and everything you everything that you guys are doing. Obviously I'll put links, but um yeah, thanks for having me, man. Really really appreciate it. It's been a fun time. Um, daylightcomputer.com is our is our website. Uh, you you mentioned you're a big fan of the website. Oh, yeah. Huge fan of it. Best website uh known to mankind um ever created. Daylight co is our socials. Uh, personally, I'm Tristan_health on Instagram and Bitcoin and beef on Twitter. That was a book I wrote like Bitcoin beef. Bitcoin and beef. Bitcoin and beef is a book I wrote four years ago talking about why decentralization matters. So, Oh, yeah. and now it's all come true. So, it's kind of hilarious. That's awesome, dude. Well, thanks again. This has been this has been super fun. I'll link everything below. And uh good night everyone.