the general gun experience. But the question is, why would we assume that it's a biological entity? It doesn't have any windows. This is this round thing that looks like a tiktok. If there is some sort of advanced propulsion system, some revolutionary way of moving through space and time that the US government has developed, in some black ops program, that seems very likely impossible. That seems more likely than aliens visiting us. But there's more than one incident, and there's a lot of these things. And the possibility of alien life in the universe, although we've never experienced it, seems rational. It seems very rational. And if you were going to study an emerging civilization that is both primitive and war-like and yet insanely technologically advanced, to the point where they have nuclear weapons, they could transmit video through the sky, they have propaganda, they have tracking of their citizens, like that's us. That's us right now. And while we are these territorial primal beings with fucking nuclear weapons, this would be a good time to start exposing yourself and to stop this nonsense. And Santa. And look, the reason why we named the rooms of our club, fat man and little boy, is because in UFO lore, that's when they started showing up. After the detonation of the atomic bombs in Japan, that's when the UFO sightings ramped up. And they ramped up mostly in the US, right? Yes. So that's interesting, because the US was the nuclear power. And we were the one who was doing a lot of fucking testing. Yeah. And also we have all these military bases. Who the fuck has more military bases than us? No one. Who has more nuclear weapons pointed at other people than us? We have them all over the place. And there's all these multiple sightings and eyewitness accounts of very credible people who say these things have hovered over military bases. It'd be pretty cool if these aliens were benevolent overlord. And they were like, hey, my children. Yeah. Or maybe even so advanced intellectually that the concept of an overlord is preposterous. And they're just biological management. They're just, there's just the gardeners tending to make sure that weeds don't get out of hand. And just like let this process continue to play itself out. Because this process of technological innovation is, it's the everything that humans do. Yeah. It's what we do at the pinnacle of our creation is we make better technology. Well, I always wonder about fractals and whether or not, like this idea of this being a simulation, this being, you know, like we are kind of replicating. We are creating machines and doing our best to create them in our own image. Right. And that's interesting. You know, that's because the mythologies that we subscribe to are the idea that this God that we pray to made us in his image. And we're doing the same thing now with robots and computers. And that's an interesting thing that we seem to have this sort of paradigm, this idea that that's the scaffolding for the way we think, right? And to what end and why are we doing that? Maybe a situation that has already happened. But has it already happened? Are we the result of that impulse? That happened way longer, a long time ago. I think we are the shit throwing chimps that are going to become the nuclear physicists. That's what I mean. We are the shit throwing chimps from 2001 that become Oppenheimer. Yeah. Yeah. And then I think this thing that we become is integrated with technology. It's probably some sort of a hybrid. It's some sort of a cyborg. That's wild. Because I think we're already like on the verge of merging, you know, all this talk of like neural link and all these various, and we watch this video the other day of this guy who is Googling questions and getting answers in his head with his headpiece on his head. Yeah. Yeah. That's so crazy. Incredible. Right? So how long before that is like that's pong. I don't know. But that's what. And then you have the Unreal 4 Engine in 2023 that looks like a movie. No, no. How long before that technology gets to the point where it's just supremely advanced. And we literally are like God. But my question really is also the idea that that's engineering. Right? That's a tool. It's innovation. But there's engineering. So there are two aspects. So one is getting information faster and stuff, which doesn't get you close to the truth, but it gets you information faster there and less facts. But more importantly, I always wonder why we are given this. I really believe that human potential is pretty much infinite. Whatever you can imagine and beyond we can do. And we are doing. We seem to be doing this. Like think about crazy that is. I can wear a headset and I can do things with my mind and look up the answer. That's insane. That's magic. It's crazier than magic. But there's a way to measure that and quantify that and replicate that. So it's not magic. I can do it and I can tell you exactly how I get there, which is even crazier. So what is that leading us to? It is nudging us closer. It's like the, I think it's very significant that we're getting a better understanding of what it's like to be someone else. We are. It's really hard to say that a Yanomomo Indian or whoever it might be is thinks about things differently than I do when I know so much about how all these human beings, like someone in Iran, someone in Jordan, laughs and cries, and bleeds at the same thing I do. Being prejudice based on what that person looks like over there is becoming harder and harder to justify. Where it was before we knew about that, we were like, well, those people over there are quote unquote savages are there this, that and the other thing. And I do think that we are getting a better understanding of what it's like to be each other and being nudged in the same direction. I'm not saying we don't think that's true too. But why? And it's interesting to think about where that's leading us to what understanding, to what understanding. And then when we have that understanding, what are we gonna do about that? Right. And are we gonna pull it together? And are the aliens here to make sure that we don't fuck it up? Yeah. Yeah. That's the beautiful idea. The terrible idea is that it's all us. And then it's all the big rues and it's all just drones that we're doing because we don't want China and Russia to know about it. But we have insane propulsion systems that operate on gravity. And yeah. I think it is. But I think it seems like both. It seems like us and it also seems like there's some shit that we just don't understand. And I don't know if those people are telling the truth. Because if the people that are telling the truth that there's biological entities, and this is what Jackie Gleason said that Nixon told him. And Nixon took him on, they were drinking. You know that famous story? No. Who knows if it's true? It's a legend. But the legend is that Jackie Gleason and Nixon were drinking and that Nixon said, you wanna see some fucking aliens? And they get on Air Force One and they fly to some Air Force Base and they go to a place where they have a crashed UFO and they have biological beings that are in freezers and Jackie Gleason sees this. And Jackie Gleason after that has a house built in upstate New York that looks like a UFO. He became obsessed with UFOs after that. It was actually for sale at one point on. Yeah. So he has this house that he had shaped like a UFO. And this is like who knows if this is a true story. Because it's like, it was kind of sort of disputed as ex-wife told the story or something like that. I forget. I think that kind of thing is actually impossible to keep secrets. No, I don't think so. Really? No, I don't think so. Like generations of government bureaucrats can keep something a secret. I don't think so. I don't think so. The people at the very highest level know about it. It's very few people. It's all very compartmentalized. They're always monitor everyone's phone calls, everyone's emails, everything everyone does. At a top-seeker clearance level. No way. I'm also talking. Totally impossible. Definitely not right. I think it's impossible. Listen, man, they can keep secrets. When? People at high levels of military can keep secrets. People are rotating out. They're retiring. They're dying. Yeah, and they probably want to fucking Hillary Clinton and a lot of those dudes. Hey, listen, dude. This is not the concern. This is not conspiracy social crimes. It's the trouble. I am not willing to relinquish the idea that they can keep that secret. Well, that's because it's fun to believe it. Yeah, but it's not just it's fun to believe it. It is possible. It's a physically possible thing to do, especially if you have the right people and they're indoctrinated in the right way with top-seeker clearance. And by the way, it's not like these people don't tell their friends. And it's not like there's a bunch of stories floating around. Because there are. There's a shitload of stories. I'm saying, but why would you, like, I would never keep that a secret. I'd be like, hey, you got fucking aliens. Here's the thing. When you have senators and congressmen who find out about this and they find out that military contractors are the ones who have access to this stuff. Because the back engineering program has to involve someone has the capability of recreating this. So who would that be? That would be the people that make chats. If you got someone who's making you a fucking stealth bomber and you have a crashed UFO, those are the people that you want discussing like what kind of things you've recovered from a fucking alien crash and can this be replicated? No, here's a problem with your wallpaper. Don't you know me, motherfucker. Because you don't know. You might be wrong. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, because you don't say you're wrong. Because you don't know the wrong. This is the problem with your theory. Ready? Sorry, and I love that you want to believe in this and so, Robert, here's the problem. Okay. There's no law. There's no written law that says I'm not allowed to talk about aliens. And I mean at the level, the top levels of clearance, like the most secret level. There is no world where if I'm a government official and I take a bunch of pictures and I come before Congress and I go, here's my evidence, I'm blowing the whistle. There are real aliens. You don't think that would go after you. I never go to jail. You're violating your top secret clearance. No, because it's not violating my top secret clearance. But it would be. No, because I never go to jail for that. Because I'd be like, you're going to put me in jail for exposing what everybody wants to know. The whole world would be like, holy shit. You guys get this secret. But that's assuming that you have access to that material to extract people from wherever the put maybe, maybe not. Maybe those are the kind of people that wouldn't do that, Brian. Listen, you fucking communist. I don't like the way you think. Hi, I'm blowing. I'm shredding your ear. No, you're not. Listen, you think you are. You're just using these establishment. You're allowed to talk about UFO sound like you got trouble. Sounds like you're dad. Come on, man. First day, I see a silver beam of the edge. Your CIA is. I call my dad right now. And you're in here spreading propaganda to the faithful listeners. Listen to me. Listen to me. There are no aliens. And if there are, we'd know about it. Because it's not the thing. If there is, you're going to come back on dress like a clown. Agreed. Agreed. That's my bets I'm making with everybody now. I'll dress them like a dress like a clown. I'll do it.