Joe Rogan, Mike! The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night! All day! Tracing my wife, I smoked one of these and I didn't brush my teeth. I woke up the next morning and my wife said, your breath is for dimensional. He did brush your teeth for you went to bed and he smoked the car. Of course, I didn't brush my teeth for that one. Give a fuck. You know what I mean? You're married. Your marriage was like, you're, I love you so much. Your breath is for dimensional. Ooh. You know these fires, I, uh, I have two small children now. Because what I want to do is, what you want to do is you want to get divorced and then you want to have get married again to a woman who's 23 years younger and then have two more kids. Because that's good. And, uh, and then I definitely takes a lot of financial stress. Oh, dude, there's no financial stress at all. It's great. You know what? If I hustle to I'm 80, I'll be fine. Anyway. Um, it's going to be really awkward when I call you at 75. I just need help this month. But anyway, so I, uh, fucking, um, I look at her and I go, um, she's like a girlfriend. Jersey. Like I was Italian chicken. No nonsense. You know, been working since she was 16. And I go, um, you know, we had an evacuation order that they sent out by accident to people even down where I'm at. Yeah. What was that? It was some guy who fucked up because I don't know if you know this is going to be, this is going to be shocking. Grab the table. LA's not run very well. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. We have to worry about, I know isn't the chief of fire department a lesbian. Hold on. Let's not turn this into this. Here's the bottom. It's one amazing. It's not about infrastructure. Infrastructure. I won't sit here while you disparaged a great people. Sir. Got a running loss. Sir. Infrastructure's got to take a backseat to climate change and social justice and homeless abatement, which hasn't worked. See the lady who's responsible for filling the fire hydrants. Kids paid $750,000 a year. Hey, your tax dollars going to good work there. You're going to have to do a lot of money. You think that's sitcom. You think? I said, I'm going to starve a sitcom. Oh, dude. It's star. But like, you're the third person. No, that's a high wage, sir. 750 grand. Oh, for a city employer who's so just like fill that one. How the entrepreneurs. How the aquifers today. Get the water in that one. You know what we got to protect the delta smelt. Whatever the fuck that is. So we got a Trump was talking about that on the podcast. I did with them. Trump was going on this long rampage about Los Angeles and the fires and how it all can be prevented. And they could have plenty of water. He explained the whole thing and he's right. Here's my whole philosophy. You guys know, you know that we have a tender box. Then you can say that there are a lot of people that live there. The fires are always a potential. If that's the case, then please make sure the fire hydrants. We've got to be able to figure out. You guys in LA California came up with AI. I mean, the Silicon Valley, it was pretty innovative people. Let's figure out a way to keep the firing. Very different people. They are very different people. People saying people in America are homeless and also Elon Musk. You know what I'm saying? Some people down in government who are innovative like that. What the fuck we want to do that job. Do you know the city council of Los Angeles? Four of the members of the city council are far left social Democrats. How about that? There's zero pushback on ideas. It's just all out. Yeah, it's all in it. Go chamber. Well, I'm hoping now that this is a giant wake up call for these people. I mean, there's no positivity that's going to come out of a horrific fire like that. But at least it'll wake. Because look, that area, you know, Adam Corolla was on someone's show talking about this. And he said something that's like very accurate. I think he was actually doing it himself. About permits? Yeah. Well, he was just saying that there's 80% of the people that live there are far left. 80% of the people that got their houses burned down from complete total incompetence and a lack of management. That's total incompetence. 80% of those people are far left people. And that's a giant wake up call when you realize like no, these fucking people, this is not the way to do it. Did you see that lady that the fire lady who's a part of this whole diversity thing? And they said, you're a woman firefighter. Can you can you carry my husband out of a burning building? She was like, well, if your husband's in a burning building, he already made him a mistake. So she's a big ol' sassy fat black lady. My favorite was that one of the women said, you want people to rep to look like you. Same lady. And I'm like, hey, lady, when my house is on fire and I'm trying to get my kids out, I'm not going to be like, hey, I got, can I get some people that look like me? Because this doesn't make me feel like Brian Shaw. So I'm gonna do it. So fucking good while I'm gonna do it. I'm like a little sugar. I'm a little sugar. If they look like a white walker and they can get me out of that fucking fire, I'm in. I'm a blind child. A giant dude can't be. With a mustache that goes like this. Yeah. Fuckin' handlebar. I'm so gay. I'm so gay that when I saw, they came by, I saw some firemen and I didn't know what to do. I wanted to say something like, go get him guys or something like that. And I literally went like this. I went, I saluted them. I went, that's good. It's embarrassing. It's an acknowledgement. Yeah, but my wife is so funny because my wife is very handy and I said, we had an evacuation or I looked at her and I go, I gotta go to Joe's podcast and then shoot my special at the mothership. I feel guilty about leaving you here. And she goes, what are you gonna do? You can't change it higher. I got this. All right. See you later. So. Yeah. I don't know. I would have felt weird about leaving them too. I know you're in your ass. I'm in your ass. Yeah, you're good for now. This is the thing about LA that, you know, there's a viral clip that's going around now of a conversation that I had with Sam Morrell a while back. And we were talking about when I was on fear factor, how this fireman told me that this was going to happen one day. So it's just a matter of time. Yeah. With the right wind, he's like, we won't be able to stop it. Yeah, that's gone viral. And then the Trump thing went viral too because Trump was saying that they need to do something to change this. They need to clean up the forest, get rid of all the dead wood. Yeah. All these things could be done. Get rid of all the brush, get rid of all the dead wood. Open up that fucking water from the north to come down. This idea that do you know that the whole center of California used to be a lake, a giant lake? No. Bro, I found out about it about a year ago. Really? It's crazy. Young Jamie. Where do you see how big this fucking lake was? And all of it. All of this is all meddling and fucking around by humans. Did I ever tell you the conversation I had with Arnold Schwarzenegger? I was with John Legos. Did he say screw your freedom? No, screw your freedom. This is before that. I was doing that for you. I was doing that for you. Screw your freedom. I had a... He said, this is a paid advertisement for better help. Life is kind of like a book and every new year is the start of a new chapter. Except in this case, the pages are blank. And you can write whatever the fuck you want. Maybe you're working towards buying a new home. Maybe you want to learn how to guard in or pick up hunting. Or maybe you want to work on your relationships. However, you want your story to play out. It's going to take work, dedication, and a little bit of help. Even the greatest author is having an editorial partner to bounce ideas off. And that's nothing to be ashamed about. If you need some help, living the life you want, therapy is always a great place to start. Therapy is for everyone, not just people who have gone through a major trauma. It can teach you valuable skills like how to cope with stress, how to communicate better, how to set boundaries, and more. One of the best ways to get into therapy is better help. It's entirely online. So it's easy to get started and more affordable too. And as the largest online therapy provider in the world, better help can provide access to mental health professionals with a diverse variety of expertise. Write your story with better help. Our listeners get 10% off their first month at betterhelp.com. That's better H-E-L-P.com. So I'm with John Ligaz. I'm where we were doing that movie right along. And John goes, hey, stick around. I'm going to have some dinner with a friend of mine. It's coming by. I know what it was. Arnold shows up with his assistant. It's kind of cool. And I'm a fan. So we're sitting there. And I just read a book on California politics by Michael Lewis called Boomerang. About sort of like how a lot of the towns like Stockton went broke because of the pension plans and all that shit. Blah, blah, blah. I thought it was D.S. brothers running around slapping people. It is that dude. It is that dude. It is that dude. It's that dude. It's that dude. Check this out. Lose size is like to layer lake. What? Largest freshwater lake out of the Mississippi. Largest freshwater lake west of the Mississippi. What? It used to be fucking huge. Show photo of what you used to look like. So it was all agriculture. They fucked it up. Oh, because they drained it, right? Look at the size of it. What the fuck up. It was the world. Look how fucking big that is. And now it's just gone. Gone. Apparently it's refilling. Well, I guess we needed it for to grow all the. Shut up. Fuck up. I mean, you know, you became needed for almonds. It's the only time we're on my milk. There's one amazing photograph of this guy who was squirting almond milk on the fire outside of his house because it's all you had. He had two quartz of almond milk. It's like this soy man. This literal human water balloon. Oh, look at that. Yeah. God bless. Dude, that's when you're really trying. That's when you're trying. That's God. That's just a last stand, bro. That's a last stand. That's now you should have been out. You got to get out of there. You got to accept. I've been evacuated three times. Have you really? Yeah. Yeah. I've been evacuated three times. You know, it burnt two houses in front in 2018. Two houses in front of my old house or burnt to the ground. Well, that video I showed you of my friend's house that just disappeared. And then you remember I said that video of him driving on the PCH. Those guys are coming to my house because where I'm at is the only place. It's where the air is breathable and all that. We have a barrier between the four or five and also the airport. So it's really we're pretty safe. Yeah, pretty safe. The thing about, I mean, this is from someone who's been through it a few times. You don't understand. You think it's just a fire. It's not. It's a storm. Yeah. So I saw fire tornadoes until you see the yeah, I saw fire tornadoes. When we were filming, we were filming on fear factor. And ironically, this was the same time where this fireman was explaining to me what's going to happen in LA. We're filming fear factor. And when we were driving back, the entire right, I watched the guy die, watch run across the highway and get hit by a car. What the fuck? Yeah, I didn't see him get hit by a car, but I saw him. He was and my producer, the producer of the show apparently saw more. He saw like graphic. People were panicking. There was asphalt in the sky like it was snowing. It was crazy. And everyone's driving and no one, everyone's got this like somber like 50 mile an hour driving the entire right side of the highway for an hour. Like what? And you can feel that heat right? Yeah, we were filming off the five. So we were like way up by you know, like as you're a big field. Vakers feel like that is a lot of the fiber the 10 whatever the fuck it is. We were we were pretty far away. And it was a whole hour driving back where the whole right side of the highway was in flames. It got me completely engulfed like a Lord of the Rings movie where you're waiting for Sauron to come riding on an evil horse over the top of it. It was nuts. It was fucking nuts. And you see fire tornadoes, man. The fire was fucking insane. There's nothing you can do. And it's flying through the air. So you were your cars can catch fire. One of the things that happens is people get stuck on highways, cars catch fire and the fire and the winds just roll through the whole highway and everybody burns alive inside their cars. Yeah, that happened. What is the camp park camp? What was the big fire that's right? That's not the California city. And the other people died in their cars. You know, I got to tell you the crazy thing about the Pacific palaces was that eight years ago, probably eight, maybe almost nine years ago, I looked at houses there with my ex wife. And we came so close to my house because it was such a beautiful place. We didn't buy it because it was a little too expensive to be honest with you. It was like, it was like, you know, just a little out of our price, you know, point. But even like for a smaller house, they was expensive, right? But it's beautiful. Maybe the last thing that's gorgeous. The last thing you would ever think, the last thing is that that house would burn down or there was a fire hazard, especially down like where Gelsons was or the whole town. That do what I'm saying. The town is gone. You know, the only structure of the standing is that guy Caruso, that mayor, the guy ran from mayor of narrowly lost to Caron Bass. He built that mall at a fire retard and material. And that's the only structures that pretty much downtown that are in the town of Calip Pacific palaces. Frank Grillo, our buddy, his old house burned right to the ground. Just John. Yeah, so Gurs house burned to the ground. Everybody's dead in the just the wind blew different directions. I don't know, man. It's got to be what the house is made of because that wind's blowing everywhere. No, I don't think any house stands that kind of fire. Are you sure? Yeah. How do you know? You're a builder. You're not a builder. That's bright. Calis. Nah. I don't think anything can make a house out of all concrete. It doesn't matter. How's that one house? Look at that one house. That's a question. That's a question. The fucking lot of sun. Nah, that's wind. Look at that though. But here's the thing. Look at that. You don't want to live there now. If you're that house on the corner and everything you look at as devastation, you don't want to. Right. Right. The schools are gone. But here's my other thing. Here's the question I have. Okay. So you see that right now. Who is going to rebuild there and who's going to who's in a finance it? Are you going to get what kind of insurance you're not going to get? So are you going to get insurance or is a bank in a finance that would you want to rebuild there when you have to wait for a gas station for a grocery store? There's nothing there. Right. So to me, I don't understand what I don't know what happens to that very valuable property. I don't know what happens to the entire city now because people are looting like fucking crazy. Gigantic groups of 100 men organized are pulling into neighborhoods that are being evacuated, smashing through doors and pulling out TVs. Film footage of them. There's also a bunch of people that are big caught setting fires. Yeah. I would I would I think they should be put to that one guy got caught setting fires and he had a UN debit card. What? And he had a bunch. Also, I'll send it to Jamie. The guy that got arrested for I'll tell you which which fire it was, but he got arrested. He had a UN card. I'll tell you exactly this kind of this kind of tragedy brings out the best and people and the worst in people. The one thing it does in these communities, it brings all these people together. You know, my buddy started a cry because I was on the phone with him. He lost everything, right? And they're going to come stay with us. And he said, he when I was on the phone, some of these people dropped by and dropped off clothes for them. And he's got a lot of money and he started to cry, man. He was like, I can't tell you how many people have reached out. He had five cell phones and he ignited nations pre paid debit card. I I'm skeptical. Is this course you are? You always skeptical. Is this conspiracy? I just don't want to be played. No. I think the New York Post did a thing about it. You know what I mean? No, I don't want to be played. I don't know what's true. Maybe the New York Post didn't post that he had the debit card. Yeah. I don't know what's getting it from the Texas Patriot. Two account. You see, I told you. I'm already like, I don't know. They said that the New York Post has edited the info out of their article. Thank you. Why? Because it's not true. You're going to count said that. Oh, so then you got played. Maybe not. Maybe the New York Post are a bunch of pussies and a bunch of live tards. The Post, the New York Post is very conservative. They are kind. Yeah. Yeah. But I got to tell you, this is I do think this is how this there's a sea changer. You got to have people with opposing points of view that are pro business, et cetera. You have just all progressives in Sacramento and in these, if you got on the city council. But you know what? Until Angelina's wake up and start voting for intelligent people who are not forget writer left. How about practical people who understand infrastructure, who put infrastructure? Like Rick's from Jerusalem. Yeah. Because if the roads, I live there, man. The roads, the fucking power line, it's all from 1950s. Okay. So it's all about ground by the way. Correct. Which is the real problem when the wind start blowing like that. Correct. But in Maui as well. Yeah. If you don't believe in direct energy weapons. Yes. I forgot about those space. Yeah. When it was controlling those. No, they're in the established. Like, there's both things. It's like, no, it's not that the Jews aren't the problem in the whole world. No. And when everything goes sideways, people always do start blaming the Jews. Oh, wait. Did we ever figure out who said that to us? Was it Jordan? Was it Jordan who started talking? Where's it Gadsat? Who started talking about it? It's one of the marks of a collapsing society when they start blaming everything on the Jews. They blame the black playground. They're like, you guys cover your wells. My thing about that is whenever people go back to the Jews and they're like, yeah. Do you like Hollywood? They invented that. Yeah. They any problem. And monotheism. That's not good. But then also. And stainless steel. The virtual reality? Yes. The virtual reality. Well, listen, they have laser war. Eastern European Jews have borne Nobel prizes than I think any other ethnic group. They're incredible. Nobody wants to. Incredible group of animals. Yeah. Let's just talk about art and everything else. Einstein, Floyd is going on and on. So you're going to have economics, economics. The economics of the Jews. Oh, my God. She's trying to fund these people all the time. One of the greatest of all time. Lenny Bruce, thank you. Thank ground breakers. the literal starter of this whole thing. Crown breakers. Yeah. So I always say that off. You're going to have very an eye though. Probably funding Epstein, but also probably running a gigantic blackmail ring where they have control over all the pop politicians in the country. I might be doing that too if I if I if I if my survive won't depend on it, especially if you're smart. And you're like really good at chess. Like I know what to do. These guys like the fuck. Shut him up. Let's set him up. What have we ever have? Has there been any what is the with the list? Might might here's my theory on the Jeffrey Epstein. What does it see we think? Oh, I'd love to hear this. Okay. I think that I think that the people are so powerful that I that I know I know in certain cases, the lawyers go to the lawyers of these powerful people and they go, how are you doing? Now we got some evidence that your client who's a family man and everything else was banging girls on Jeffries Island getting pissed on. Yeah, whatever it is, bro. It's nuts put in a sin. Sure. We got little kids are shit then as my old sure. Hey, dude. Hold on. I've got a podcast. This is what you're doing drugs. They're doing drugs that take it wild chance. As I put this shit cigar, he's a good cigars. Delicious shout out to foundation cigars. Yeah. It's great. But but I think what happened was there is a lot of money and every one of those fucking people got paid off. I think it just went away because there's there's money. They came to these really rich people and they're like, what, what's your, what's your privacy worth? What's your reputation worth? How about 10 million? How about 20? Well, this is the, the whole suspicion as to why the guy who was the CEO of Victoria Secrets gave Jeffrey Epstein a fucking $60 million mansion in Manhattan and control this whole estate. Yeah. And then there was the other guy who was some big CEO who gave him $150 million and had to resign. Yeah. The bunch of these guys resigned. Money got passed around and unbelievably the client list has not been released. I know. I mean, it's he was very good at laundering money. I guess. And he was also even though I don't know what he really did. You know, the, the person do I trust about those things is Eric Weinstein. Another Jew. Another brilliant Jew. I love Eric. I love my favorite people. He's amazing. Yeah. But when I talked to him about it, he actually met Jeffrey Epstein. And he said, and Eric is just way too smart. Yeah. He's not a guy that you could fool. Right. And he's like, this is a construct right away. That's what he said. He said this guy's a construct. He said that he had a woman like a 21 year old girl that was sitting on his lap and he kept kind of like nudging his knee up and down to make her tits bounce a little bit. He kept doing that while I was talking to him. He's like, what is this? And he's like, also this guy does not know what he's talking about when it comes to finances. You know, like Eric's a legitimate genius. Correct. You know, a mathematician, you can't lie to him about stuff like that. I would tell you his theory on, on what he thinks this whole thing is, this whole, you know, it's a simulation or whatever. You're here. He's because you know, so Newton, there's Newtonian physics, right? Which is this matter here. And then as quantum physics study, the electron that Einstein was the pioneer of and blah, blah, blah. So Einstein was working on what's called a theory of everything, which was the bridge. How do you, how do you, because a lot of times the rules in this ether in Newtonian in the world that we live in are different. What when it comes to gravity and light, then they are on a quantum level. So what is the bridge? How do we bring them together? Well, how do we reconcile both realities? Right. So that's the theory of everything. So Eric is obsessed with that and kind of works on the way. We made his own theory of everything. Yeah. So his idea is that maybe the singularity is already here. And maybe we're already machines. And we are so, so watch this. So we're already machines replicating better machines, better versions of ourselves. And it's kind of an interesting cause it kind of full, dove tails with Buddhism, right? So watch this. I'm going to do an experiment on you that a Buddhist rimpo shade will last some of them. Oh, sorry. Get, get, get, get in the load. Get in the load of position. There it is. Oh, there it is. Dude, good breathing. Good breathing. Too much in this guy. Too much. Doing, doing, getting DMT breathing today on Instagram. He was explaining how to spike your DMT and communicate with entities. And it was saying how you, you, you, you, you compress your, your balls and your asshole and all your sex organs. And then through your abdominals and you exhale all your breath. And you breathe like this. And then you come and you get that DMT flow. Oh, you get. I don't know. It doesn't work for me. It's not working with one. Did you have a boner when he was telling you? He's like, most of these things take a long fucking time. And I'm busy. I'm busy, dude. I'm busy and I'm easily distracted. I have a lot of ADD. I'll just like a toad. Well, that's like, but he did that shit. He did, he looked at toe. He did the toad thing. Oh, the toad things are he called me out because everything's different. Now I'm like, right, calm down. But that's five methoxy. That's five methoxy. You done it? Mental trip to me. Yeah. Legally. Yeah. The thing about Kundalini yoga and all these different ways where you can achieve those states. Like Terrence McKenna had a great line about that. He's like one time the Buddha came to visit this town and this month came to the Buddha and they said, I have practiced a city of levitation for 10 years. And now I can walk on water. And the Buddha says, yeah, but the ferry's only in nickel. And that was McKenna's time. That was great. That was McKenna's take on why would you do this when you could just take psychedelics? That's so good. You don't really have to fuck a meditate for 10 years, homie. You missed out on a lot of enlightenment while you're staring at a corner of the wall. Yeah. You hear those guys a lot. That's kind of why like then masters will say, I have nothing to teach you. Cause once you in the part of you, so the idea would be you can't improve yourself. What? Because because the part of you that wants to improve yourself is the part that needs improving. So until you get out of, until you get out of your own way and you realize that you this construct called yourself is an imagined construct. You've invented this. So like Sam Harrison, and he studies the Vedanta, right? So in his book, Spiritual Audience, where that religion he does, he does this experiment, which is the Buddhist world. They'll have you do it. I'll say so you're watching me right now. I'm talking now. Now there's this guy named Joe Rogan. Okay. And we know Joe Rogan's got this. But for a second, try to locate where you really are. In other words, where are you actually listening to me from? Where are you? Where is the seat of your attention? Are you behind your face? Are you here? And if you try to do that, it's kind of impossible to locate where you're hearing me from. There's this sort of echo, this idea that you're not a mental jerkin' off. I'm right here. I'm looking at you right here. I hear you. You know, I know I hear you through my ears. Cause if I plug this one up, it sounds different. And if I plug both of them up, I don't hear you at all. I'm assuming the sounds coming in here. I'm right here. I'm talking to you. You still attached to your physical cell. This is all like the children of rich kids who sit around pondering the universe. This is Buddhism. Man, come on. You're not even a good student. They take a backpack and they go on a trek and they stand hostels because they're amazing. I turned to my turn to the other render sheet. He's not ready yet. He's not ready. We have to break him down further. Yeah. No, there's something to that. All bullshit aside. Yeah. It's a really weird exercise. Yeah. Because the idea would be you can observe your brain. So you can observe your thoughts. You can observe your your body and you can observe your emotions. You can actually step outside and watch that stuff. And they get really good at that. Like they get really good at realizing that you're not, you're none of those things. You might be the observer whoever that is or whatever that is. And that's kind of where they, it's kind of an interesting exercise. That's why you see these dudes, whoa, that guy that monk who said himself on fire. Right. And 1963, that was the Vietnam. Now David Halberstand from the New York Times said he didn't make a sound. They watched him and he literally, they heard the air leave as long as he just fell over. So do the lady on the subway. She's that true. She was also probably asleep or something. She wasn't until she was lit on fire. Jesus Christ. Yeah. So I don't know. But the idea would never seen anybody. He never moved burning covered in golfed and flames. You might not be able to talk. You know what I mean? Yeah. But he also did a move. So he's staying in the car. Oh no. He was an incredible, so he's playing a little body. He was watching himself. That would be the idea behind. That's what they would say. Or he had incredible discipline and through insane pain. He sat there. Yeah. Well, have you seen those videos? How about that? When the Indian army went up, this is recent? That is such a fucking crazy. Jamie, bring up the Indian army. Hold on, pull that photo back again. See, crap. Look how insane that photo is. That guy is just sitting there. Completely golden plants. The way the president is out the end of the time. Who is a staunch Roman Catholic was treating Buddhists. And he said, please have some compassion and let himself on fire. One of bad motherfucker. Now, that's a good argument for celibacy because if that guy's getting a lot of pussy. But that's right. Because you're attached to a sensation so they they ribbed themselves again. Yeah, for it. I have a long waiting. If you burn me with this cigar, I'd be like, fuck it. You know, I can't, I can't do that. Playoffs. We're talking about playoffs. You bet we are get in on the action with draft king sports book and official sports betting partner of the NFL scoring touchdowns is key to winning the playoffs. And you can score big by betting on them at draft kings. The number one place to bet touchdowns. Ready to place your bet? Try betting on something simple like a player to score six. Go to draft king sports book app and make your pick new drafting customers can bet five bucks to get $200 in bonus bets instantly. Download the draft king sports book app and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $200 in bonus bets instantly. When you bet just five bucks, only on draft king sports book, the crown is yours. For new customers to get $200 in bonus bets instantly when you bet just five bucks only on Draft King Sportsbook the crown is yours Gambling problem called one 800 gambler in New York called eight seven seven eight open why or text hope in why four six seven three six nine in Connecticut help is available for a problem gambling called eight eight seven eight nine seven seven seven or visit ccpg.org Please play responsibly on behalf of Budhill Casino when resorting Kansas 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio Yeah, I think all those things are tools to try to break out of the ego Right, it's all the problem that most people have they think about themselves all the time and the worst version of it is extreme narcissism Sociopathy and then the the best people the people to think about others more than they think about themselves those are the people that we admire the most The people that like genuinely think about other people. That's right a lot. I think the one thing that I really genuinely do try to do is I try to not think about myself I think about things that I must do I do think about things that I don't like that. I did like I don't like how I handled that conversation Maybe I could maybe I was coming in like a little hot Maybe I was coming in at a five and I should have been in it too and maybe maybe the reason why I became a Like a contentious argument was my fault. Yeah, you know, and I'm very I'm so much better at that I know I was when I was younger and like I can have a conversation with someone that I vehemently disagree with and keep it very civil Yeah, we were younger both you. Yeah, we start shouting our opinion. Yeah. Yeah, yeah It's about winning also we were all retarded. Yeah, and we were young and stupid and we had bad role models Things go it on there You know and they like men would shut that fuck up. They like men would talk like men and I also like I grew up essentially Ferrell I I didn't have any like normal structure I feel like I did a little bit too Well, you certainly did you traveled all over the country all over the world you were in a boarding school when you're in high school Like like 13 like we taught I remember talking to you about your life store like you it's amazing You're not more fucked up. Well, you should be like really fucking We just can't believe you're not in jail if I'm drugs, you know Well, you became the best thing for someone is fucked up, which is a comedian. Yeah, right My parents were awesome though. They love the shit out of me. It's not they're not bad Look it could have my parents a nice too. They could have definitely been way worse It's not their fault They had a child in 1967 that's right and everybody was retarded back that And their parents went through the fucking depression So everybody was just it was a vile time Yeah, with so many different aspects of our society with violence and crime and it was you know no one knew what the fuck was going on They had just killed Kennedy. It was like it wasn't a time World War II was rash to Discussion Vietnam was ongoing. Yeah, right? So it was a time of Great confusion and I don't think you could ever compare it's like And we go back and we think about things that happen in the year 1200 like oh the barbaric Conquest of cities and sacking of of Countries by the Mongols and all its great stuff It's a different time. It's a different time. There's different people in a different time our parents grew up in a different time We are growing up in the most strange time because this is like coming out of this barbaric sort of primal history and Recognizing in some strange way that we're more connected than ever before and the electronics are bringing us connected But also disconnecting us at the same time So this is bizarre struggle for like interhuman communication and personal communicate and like learning how to like in an exchange Ideas with people and talk to people in a civil way while you're also You're you're more informed than ever before more informed on human behavior patterns and psychology We're seeing it play out right before our eyes where you've sat at a total polar shift of Some of the key tenets of the left in the right where the left is all for a war The left is for censorship the left is for Whatever pharmaceutical drugs they're trying to push hot down authority. It's crazy and fidelity took to authority too Blind fidelity blind fidelity left is also become very good at Destruction in a lot of ways. I'm not saying the right doesn't have its problems But the left has become like you and I were talking about this like if you disagree with the left They will come after everything everything the right kind of goes your an idiot and they'll make fun of you and do a meme about you Yeah, but the left, you know, and that that's that's what I call the maker break machine You know if you look at and this one of the things I talk about with my my specialists They just you take Caitlin Jenner who came out a Bruce Jenner has an operation for eight eight hours comes Is Caitlin Jenner a minute later hours it was Nate hour the first one was about eight hours Right on the face did a great job by the way by the way. How about this? Can I just say this? Like don't say you'd fucker no, no, no take it easy, but I'm just saying don't say it I'm just saying you think it is saying how about how about a little something for the surgeon He should have won artists of the year that Bruce Jenner 65 year old man. Looks like a 45 year old woman came out of it But in a minute later one woman of the year all right dude Listen, we all have our taste. Okay. I'm sorry. I like 45 year old ladies. That's why I'm looking at you this way I like me a hot 45 year old lady. I'm saying make up on glamor magazine. Look very good. I go well kept 40s lady goes the gym does what's good about yeah, we're last wait Taking on because she wants to hang on everything is to maybe six three when you're 23 You don't even have to hang on you're just there. You're perfect. It's why I don't take any advice on health from 26 year olds Yeah, show you more berries. It's off. Come out. Yeah, shut your fucking mouth Come get get into my body first set your hydrogen water. You shut your fucking mouth. I gotta warm my feet up to one four years old Exactly, he would just born do you just born a matter of months ago correct show your dirty mouth correct? I'm calcified motherfucker and then he or shit's gonna help my calcification. I'm gonna die have arthritis So do I yeah, so do I I gotta warm my feet up before I get out of the car, okay I have a whole thing about that, but you know that's that's the reality getting older Well, you're gonna be beat up, especially if you work out a lot. Yeah, there's just no offense or butts about it Yeah, shoutouts are ways to well for keeping me glued together though. I gotta Get involved You know you're gonna get involved and get some peptides and all this to I was talking to Zuckerberg yesterday And he's got his knee reconstructed. I said did you get on any peptides? He said no, I don't do you hate healing He looks great. He does looks good. He's got this neck now. I know he's got a thick neck. He's got a perm Yeah, he's actually handsome. He's got a he's wearing a jewel. He wears jewelry very expensive watch He looks great as watch those like that's prong saying how much wasn't I don't know I don't know I don't know a real watchhead He doesn't look at prices sir. Oh he doesn't have to no no, it's free. It's like I'll take one of those Please yeah, I'll just miles yeah, thanks for your data smiles I'm in the thank you. I like him a lot. I do too. I really do. I don't know I'm not with them Talk to him quite a few times. He's a good dude. He's a good dude with a very weird job You know being in control of what did he say was three point what billion people use god damn three Well, I was telling you the alien fucking people use Facebook. I was telling you this the other day I think his political transformation is Interesting because now there's a cynical view away from jujitsu. I agree When you do MMA and you're around others like men and you're out your testosterone goes up You start to feel your body you put your hands on the world you can have a different perspective for real It's gonna change They have done studies. I believe Jamie you can look as I'm where where when they raise a man's testosterone He becomes more conservative on or right. Yes. Yeah, well listen man And it's also a nice lesson to all those nerds out there that think they can never be a beast It's not true. It's not true. You don't have to hate people that are like physically competent and formidable you can be one of them and I always bring up Mikey moosey meaty just because he's awesome And he's a brilliant guy who's like where's his thick glass is always smiling. I think it fucking kill everybody in the room Correct It's like Zuckerberg's on his way to becoming that. Yeah, you know, and he was if you go back just a few years ago It's a fender nerdy guy You know who's like really smart but not not really physical and now it's whole life up here Yes, we're talking about it. He was talking about on the podcast yesterday He loves training because it gives him a chance to express the side that has been demonized in our culture Yeah, it sounds different even he's getting he's becoming a man Well fucking broke my women are raised by women in our schools and stuff and and because of this Pride past 30 years masculinity was always considered was was they were taught it's a liability your also your competitiveness All that's corporate environments, you know, which have really like put the brakes on masculine behavior And we talked about that yesterday too that like that's actually in some ways a good thing because it gives women this opportunity to excel as well You know, they shouldn't have to like become a man in order to get you should they should have that You know Sexist perspective right imposed upon them and so but it's like everything else. It's like an over correction Yeah, you know like you have things go completely this way and then they come back like woke like the woke ideology Went so far right or so far left now. It's kind of swinging back Well, the woke ideology has a major problem which was it was reductive Right it would reduce yes a complicated world to a binary world which which is ironic by the way But it would it would say to sort of say I can solve all this there are pressers and oppressed there's power and powerless Black and white and so there's no forgiveness Was zero for you zero for you apologize. That would really crucify you and you can't there's no Retribution there's no way to come back, but my 13 year old son you can see these kids now at 13 Don't start talking to him about this shit because these kids are like that they've already been they figured it out at 13 I'm telling you my son was like I don't feel I don't like this shit. I want to do you get to and wrestle all the time fuck also Podcast Correct, yeah, I get to hear actual men who've made it through the maze and aren't a bitch Yeah, and I go hey wait a minute that guy seems really nice and have it fun And he's an actual man like there's real men that's fun. Yes good enough. Good stuff. Good stuff has a good time Yeah, that's the point stop crying all the time Well, why are we fucking oversharing? Yeah? Why are we promoting and propping up people who fucking cry all the time listen? I cry I cry I cry from happy I cry from sad. I cry when I think about my dog sort of dog I have a whole joke about that. It's like I there are a couple things my whole joke is this I can't call my friends. I had this joke I was like if I call my friends and I'm like I'm sad my friends can call me you got you got the wrong number Pussy and it's like Joe Rogan. That's it me when you talk to me, you know, but it's true I remember one time I called you this fucking great I called you and I remember I My audition went bad and it was like the third I would get right there Was about to in back then remember if you got a TV show you you you your money problems were gone for a while Oh, yeah, all I thought about was I get to drink great wine and buy a fucking house and take it right You're thinking of a nice my mom. Yeah, I can call you and I go like this. I go fuck dude I don't know I was good because you can't be good. You gotta be great. I go. I know I know I know I just I don't know I'm just I don't know. I just can't I can't figure it out I'm and I was bummed right and I was basically saying I'm sad and you fucking go you go Yeah, and he goes you what do you want to do tonight? I go? I don't know. I just let it down He'll be all right This is fucking go out of the heat and do something you figure it out It fucking relax. Don't don't get all like mopie about the shit. I was like, okay, and that was it That's you to get mopie man. Yeah A lot of friends got super mopie when they didn't get things so think about the audition process and I've always talked about this This is a part of the whole problem with the entire psychology of Los Angeles because a giant percentage of people at least had Somewhere in the back I've ever had some some sort of an aspiration to try to get famous Yeah, so you move there you have already of Exorbitant need for attention because there's some hole in your past and you're that you're trying to fill up with I want to be a star Yes, I don't want to be so and then you're going somewhere So you're this need for acceptance and then you're going somewhere where people judge you and most of the time judge you poorly Most of the time they don't like you so most things you auditioned for you don't get and if you get one Oh my god now I'm in and so now these manipulative people that are in charge of casting you they can essentially mold your personality based on what they want if they want a left-wing personality if they want you to be pro Como-lun we need a black woman president you want you to say all the I took my eighth booster this morning Like I believe in science, you know, love is love like you don't turn you into that fucking thing Yes, they'll turn you into that thing because though the entire place is about the golden ticket Everybody wants the golden ticket. I was so lucky because I never had any aspirations about acting I had zero. I remember you called me. Do you remember you called me? Let me just let me tell you the whole story behind it when MTV when I did the half hour comedy hour and then I got a Development deal do a sitcom. I had never taken a single acting class and also didn't have this development deal And I'm over there and when the show that I was on got canceled I was ready to go back to New York to be a comic again. I was like fuck this place But I bought off I had a lease I had a lease on an apartment for a year. I'm like fuck right So I asked I was stuck in this I couldn't afford to not be in this because now I wasn't getting $20,000 a week anymore. Yeah, whatever the fuck I was like holy shit And I was ready to leave and so then I get another development deal and then I auditioned for the second show I ever do I only had two auditions ever Hardball in news radio and I'm on two TV shows. I'm like this is crazy. Yep And so I never went through that whole thing. I never went through that whole this could change my life my life was already changed I didn't none of it made any sense to me. I was making all this money. I had a I had a Toyota Supra turbo I remember like this is a very about that accurate the new accurately And I said yeah, dude. I loved it. He used to pick me up in that shit I was like a little jet fighter car. I loved it, but it was just like for me It was all gravy So I was watching everybody scramble for this thing and it was examining the psychology of it and how it affects Everything because when people didn't get auditions when they went on auditions then you went out to dinner with them at night They were so depressed me. Oh you You all the time you wanted it so bad. I remember And I remember telling you like why don't you just just stand up? Why just throw yourself in a stand up? Yeah, like you're so funny dude You're so good on stage, but when you get up there Sometimes you just like I feel like you're auditioning for a show. Yeah, that's what I felt like you were doing You're doing stand up. Yeah, you didn't want to be crazy But then off stage you would say wow you'd say silly things you'd be like one much more vulnerable and ridiculous And that was the funny break. I'm like just throw yourself into the phone I was doing that. I finally got my own show. I'm doing the shows I was like I fucking do it. I I don't like this I want to just stand up now. Yeah now I told you I've got either cool thing about being 57 I'm enjoying stand up more now than I ever have well you're smarter now. Yeah, and Dom Herrera said this to me years ago. He's like Joe, you know, he was like in a 60s at the time It's like Joe. I've never been sharper than ever You just keep doing it and you keep getting better. We're so lucky we're comics. We're so lucky And he was he was better in his 60s than he was in his he was always grace He's always 60s. Hilarious. I paid to see Dom Herrera before I ever did stand up comedy Dom is the best time. So did I so did I did you just I was in college and I was at the improv in New York and my father took me to we sat there and watched Dom Herrera I remember that's why when when I come off stage at the last factory And I was still a little in awe of Dom and Dom goes right I'm okay, and I was like, oh, maybe he's gonna give me some pointers, you know, and I go I go You know what I love about your act? I go what and he goes you don't go for the laughs That's the best of that the subtle diss the comedy diss I became friends with Dom well I think I'd actually done an open mic night or two before I met him but uh then I Before I was paid to see him rather but then not that long afterwards. So this is like Four years later like 92 I was working with him in Montreal We did the That's intimidating. Yeah, it wasn't though. He was super cool. Yeah, maybe it was a year after real comic man real comics So maybe was 93 so maybe it's like five years later So I'm like real wrong comedy, but I had my feet under me at that point in time where I had some material that could kill Like I wasn't a really good comic, but I had a few jokes, especially sex jokes that were bangers. They were bangers and So we did Montreal together and then I was in Amsterdam, Billiards This is in my almost became a professional pool player stage like if if pool was a real career like golf I would have become a pool player. Yeah. I just loved it. I love the pool You're looking and looking off you. I'm so lucky. Yeah, tear up your fucking crazy, but um I love the pool players. I love the this the hang they were just so different They were outcasts and they were loose and fun and we we said ridiculous shit to each other and everybody was laughing all the time It was always fun and I saw it's playing pool every night and so I had a gig and before the gig I think or maybe after the gig I went to Amsterdam and Don Maraire pulls up and he's got his home cue and I was like dumb You play pool. He's like, yeah, you play pool. I go. I fucking love pool. I go. Let's play some pool And he was good. Wow. We we're playing straight pool Just like the type of pool they played in the movie the hustler. It's very rarely played in America anymore But it's an amazing game You play with a stack of 15 balls and you knock off one the first break is like a safe break and everybody moves balls around So someone makes a mistake and leaves an opening and that guy smashes into the balls And then you run as many balls you can in order So it's called 14 and so it doesn't matter if it's solid. So you leave 14 balls in the table and The one ball like you leave a break ball and then you wrap the other 14 And so you shoot the break ball in the idea is to collide your cue ball into the stack and keep running So let me give a shout out to Jason Shaw because Jason Shaw who's one of the best pool players on earth One of the greatest of all time. He just broke the world record in straight pool this week And I think I think he ran eight hundred and thirty nine balls Jason with a wide J. He's a hundred and thirty nine. It a row. Fuck. Yeah He's trying to get to a thousand. So he got eight thirty two eight thirty two So the record before was set by Willie Moscone in Like the sixties and it was on an eight foot table with big pockets. That was like five hundred and something balls So he beat that he ran seven hundred and fourteen balls So that was the previous world record he also owned and then he just ran eight hundred and thirty two balls When I tell you like the concentration involved in doing that because you're talking about hours of play I mean, I'm not how many racks of fifteen balls is eight hundred and thirty two Someone do the math. I think when you do I think when you get that good at anything you learn about you learn everything about life When he's a wizard and about yourself he is a wizard. Yeah, but you but I'm saying when you master something like that I'm not saying your marriage is gonna be great I'm saying when you master something like that. It's a it's a very good way to really get to know yourself Here's how great professional pool is right now. He doesn't even win most tournaments That's yep. Is there a national he can't he he accommodates? No, Filipinos are among the highest level on earth. Why do you know well because the GIs went there in the 1950s and they brought pool and Filipinos learned how to play pool in very tough conditions because it's very humid over there so humidity affects the table cloth and The moisture in the table cloth slows down the role of the balls and so you can take two approaches to that you could either Hit the balls hard which is like the American way to do it or the Filipinos learn to use the entire weight of the queue and Have an elegant almost like artistic way of point. They have the most stroke Yes, they have the most beautiful strokes Especially at the time so there's a guy who came over in the 1970s and his name was effron Reyes and he came over under the Numb deplore Cesar Morales and he was this Filipino kid he was doing different Spanish name. Yeah Well, he went from Filipino to Mexican yeah because everybody would have known him right if they had ever gone to the Philippines Because in the Philippines he was already robbing everybody in like a legitimate wizard a chest genius Unbelievable widely considered if not the greatest of all time one of the You know, it's like MMA like is it could be visit mighty mouse is it John Jones It's one of those deals one of the absolute greatest pool players of all time and then from effron Reyes came all these other This Filipino invasion where they were just dominating pool Like and big money like giant money games half a million dollar matches Yeah, yeah a ton of them when you when you have a match how many games you playing it depends Some of these guys will play like a race to 120 whoever wins 120 games and they'll play it over three days And I'll do it for a hundred thousand dollars wait a race 120 games 120 games of nine ball That's a lot. That's a lot But that's really gonna find out who's the better player So like if you and I play 10 games and maybe I'm a little better than you you could win those 10 games You could get on a roll You could get a lot of rolls of the balls where I get safe a few times or I scratch on the break a couple of times And so that's two more games that you probably maybe wouldn't have won if we were playing you know even and you could win a race to 10 Like the odds of me winning a race to 10 if we were both if I was just slightly better than you it'd be like you know Maybe 60 40 or 55 45 something like that. Yeah, but when you get to a race to 120 Then your odds dwindle. Well, that's if the better player always that begins a physical game. Yes You're actually an athlete. Yes. Well sort of sort of I mean You had a duration for sure. Yeah, but your body can't break down Your body can't break down those good the best guys are all fit. You never got really big fazos that can handle Do you think what I love about the hustler one of the great greatest movies ever with Paul Newman is when Jackie The fox's name Lisa Jackie Lee's and said It really came down the character He he washed his hands washed his face and drew a blank and came back and beat him That was a really interesting lesson for me as a young man guys really do that too They clearly remind they're going to bathroom. They throw cold water on their face. They wash their hands They change their clothes It's something to break themselves out of it. It's a mental game like you know Jeremy Jones who's uh another all-time great won the us open good friend of mine We were talking about it's like I think it's the most Mental game in the world because it's not just about thinking about what happens It's about execution and depression and then it's also about your controlling the rotation of a ball Like you if you hit it this hard it goes that far This hard it goes that far and that's what you want You want the difference between an inch and an inch and a half. It's crazy Everything at the highest level at the highest is those micro adjustments There's a semi-magus Carlson wins all those chest tournaments When they say when when rough in the dial is one of the greatest tennis players ever when you won Wimbledon They're all clap and he comes in and the legend goes on off. It's true But I heard makes sense. He he's coming in. He's going like this. He goes I think my grip I think I want to he's not even paying attention. He's talking his coach I feel like my grip should be just a little bit like that Still making micro adjustments. You just want you have to yeah, that's what makes them so good in the first place I know guys who changed their grip all the time and they're cute Like sometimes they'll grab it like this with two fingers And then they change it and then they turn their wrist forward and they'll play for a year with their wrist forward Oh guys, well, we're just standing like I think so I'm gonna shoot the special and I'm gonna throw it away And I gotta start again. Yeah, and just because I've done five specials doesn't mean it's gonna be easier It's gonna be a motherfucker because I've got to come up with I gotta make sure I don't repeat myself I gotta make sure I'm not Have some sad you got some some say I can't get classified month off of stand up after I did my special because I don't have anything to say You have to I'm like I've got drained doing that thing especially doing it live Yes, this is so draining And then I was like let me like think about what I want to talk about afterwards like and then do you have any ideas now? Yeah, I've got like 25 minutes now. Yeah. Yeah, it's it's good stuff like it's fun I'm having a job. Do you ever get tired of talking to you ever get tired of doing this podcast even though you have very interesting people No, no, oddly enough at all the things in my life This is the one thing that I kind of net well first of all I choose who goes on it, right? So I'm always looking forward to talking to those people. Yeah, but I love talking to people man I like it like that's like the whole like moody-loner thing. I don't get it like people to me are awesome They're interesting. I like being inspired. I like being intrigued I like trying to make a problem solvers on this podcast. Oh, yeah, you know. Oh, yeah Well, I've definitely gotten a unexpected education. Yeah, you know if you go back and listen to me in 2009 when I started this thing I'll retard we all were yeah, I think what is interesting is we would I'd have these opinions I'd I'd state these truths and then like somebody would Google it and be like hey Hey, dude, no, it's like I had this hilarious Yeah, but the fucking typical Brian. I'm talking about cows grass fed all the shit Oh, okay. Hey, hey man. I've never been on the farm. Okay never never raised cows the farmer goes Hey, I love your podcast Brian's wrong about everything said, but it's cool I fucking the email the guy back, you know, I'm talking to him and he gave me an education He's like I mean what you're saying? It's just not true when it comes to how you raise cows and there was a thousand things of course I had no idea that's the biggest liability. I think in a lot of ways You know you should talk to you should have Will Harris on your show because that will Harris runs This amazing farm in Georgia where it started out as a Industrial farm that his family owned and he converted it to regenerative agriculture over 20 years And it took him forever to do it. What's the name of the farm again? White oak pastures and then there's Joel Salatin who's a similar guy who I think he was They were talking about him having something to do with farming in the Trump administration I don't know if that's come to pass, but if it does I really do hope that he'll be involved because he's another brilliant guy who Runs a regenerative farm and farmings no joke and what they do is essentially their type of farming is recreating nature So they just contain nature instead of like having people You know shut all these cows into these stalls and put a fucking trough in front of them and like no These animals graze out in the field. They just control where they go and they eat what they normally would eat and They make sure that they get plenty of new ground so they move them to new ground when they've used up all the grass They push them over there and then the chickens do the same thing They they have a chicken coop that's a mobile chicken coop. They push it out They open it up. They run around and then he's dealing with like hawks killing his chickens So he's got to come up with ways to that's like a soft. Yeah This is like Mike Catherine, you know Mike great guys, you know Mike Catherine. He was on love line. Oh Yes, yes, yeah, I know Mike and he lives in Austin so he called what's his name on the radio cycle my cat So Mike gets who might comes down with his wife who's an actress and they're like I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna be in Austin in the outskirts and I'm gonna I want to live on a farm say he's here Yeah, he's a kid from from LA he goes I get here and we got Guinea foul We got a little sheep. We got you know rabbits. We got and Fucking the snakes are eating all my eggs They're getting fella getting decimated by coyotes foxes wherever the fuck it lives out there Yeah, I mean everything's dying coyotes did the one was getting decimated by hawks coming in I'll take that I'll take your bunnies. That's adorable. You think you can raise bunnies So they're just getting decimated guess what they did. What's the one change they made? What they do? They got two anotolean shepherds. Oh, yeah, and bro He said even the fucking snakes are on nice. He's like those fucking dogs were just like the coyotes Excuse me sir. That's what they were bred for. Oh my god, and they're not prepared not into our pets No, those fucking things will just patrol your grounds and anything on four legs is gonna pay a very dear price good Yeah, I want four of them. Yeah, I don't fuck around. I'm gonna buy a ranch. Are you yeah, really? Yeah? Yeah Now, four legs is going to pay a very dear price. Good. Yeah. I want four of them. Yeah, I don't fuck around. I'm going to buy a ranch. Are you? Yeah. Really? Yeah. Yeah. I've been talking about it for a while. I'm waiting for the maybe, but at the very least, we're going to put the podcast on the ranch. Really? Yeah. Because I want to have a ranch. I also want to have a big piece of land in case things go sideways where I can have like a whole community on a ranch. This is where I start my call. I'm going to have just let people build on the ranch, like give them a few acres. I got some kids. I want to go. That's what I'm saying. Like imagine if you have like a 2000 acre property and on that 2000 acre property, there's like a literal community of you and your friends and you can go hunt on the land. Yeah. That'll be there. There's water. There's a lake there. Yeah. Yeah. I'll wear a tweed jacket. I'll smoke cigars. I'm not going to do any of the work, but I'll see if I do any of the work. Boy, there's no need for that. Go and take care of that. Hey, I think it's a crazy dream. Like it's a crazy idea to do, but isn't everything a crazy, like coming here is a crazy idea. Yeah. Building the mothership is a crazy idea. But what if you had like a big pond with fish? Yeah. So you can fish. You had land. You can shoot your own, you know, let me tell you about freshwater fish. Yeah. Can't eat a lot of them. Why? Because of poison. Oh, really? Yeah. There's a lot of mercury in freshwater fish. Really? Yeah. Um, there was a dude who, uh, lifted. He went, he won some big fishing derby. He was a big time fisherman. He started getting with some weird neurological condition. And, uh, it turned out it was because he was just eating freshwater fish all the time. And some lakes. So you got to think about rainfall. Like, remember when we were younger, acid rain, everybody's worried about it. I was going to rain. I was going to rain. I was going to rain. I don't know. Went away. But the thing about it is like pollutants in the air, when the rain comes down, it does bring all that shit into the water. And then it stays in that water. You know, so if you've got a lake, in that lake gets drowned on with pollution rain, you're going to have a certain amount of toxic elements that are going to be in that water. Mercury is not good for the body. Once you Google how much, oh, Jamie's already on it, eating one freshwater fish equals a month of drinking forever chemicals water. That's a problem. No more trout for me. See, that's the problem. These forever chemicals, PFA S found at high levels in freshwater fish with most concern for vulnerable communities. So like, this is a good point about the vulnerable communities, because I was filming a TV show once in Detroit. And we were on the banks of this river that was fucking clearly polluted. And there was all these really poor people who were on the banks of that river that were fishing for food and not just a few. Like quite a bunch of people that were trying to get their dinner on that river. And people that really, they needed that for food. They looked real poor and there was a white, black, all kinds of different nationalities, Asians. And a lot of people, and I was like, whoa, like Detroit is at least was in 2012 when I was filming this thing was fucking scary. Like, yeah, when you realize how a city, which was one of the richest cities in the country, thereby one of the richest cities in the world in the 1950s during the peak of the automotive industry. And then to see it just decimated. Decimated. And these people were just, and I was like, Oh my God, they're going to eat these fish. And then I thought, Oh my God, they have to eat these fish. Well, that's the great migration, right? So from the south to black, the huge number of black people went up to Detroit, looking for jobs. And the problem was when they got to their first of all, the auto industry started to get decimated because it started to move towards Japan and different countries. But also in the, in, I can't remember, see when the great migration was before that. I feel like everything started fucking up in the 70s. Well, they had jobs and there was a whole thriving community. But what really would happen also is that the auto workers union, I'm sorry, but it kept black people out of it. There's a lot of racism that went on. So a lot of people couldn't find jobs. The great migration for large scale movement across me. Six million African Americans from the rural south to urban areas in north and west because between roughly 1916 and 1970, driven primarily by the desired escape, racial violence, pursue better economic opportunities and access improved education in the north. escaping Jim Crow laws. Yeah. Yeah. Didn't work out. Well, it did for a while and maybe in a way it did because they thrived in those areas where they probably wouldn't have. Well, it's like the Puerto Rican exodus from Puerto Rico to New York. They went up there looking for manufacturing jobs, then the manufacturing jobs coincided with moving south. So you had this massive number of people who didn't have anywhere to go in the early 1900s, many African Americans migrated north to work in Detroit's booming industries. Yet they really saw the benefits. Many white neighbors actively denied African Americans access to decent living conditions and job opportunities. There it is. Yeah. So a lot of darkness and all that stuff. There it is. Well, the city that's left over now, you know, using Roger me, right? Yeah. Michael Morris film, which is like, I think is best one. It's like when he was pure. Yeah. You know, it wasn't like ideologically captured and editing things for a fact. It was pure. That was a bum I saw that he started doing that. Yeah. It is a problem because then it makes you question everything else. Well, the biggest thing that every mainstream publication is in crisis. And I think they've earned it. They've deserved it. The New York Times still makes money, but primarily not because of their articles that people read. It's primarily because they're crosswords. They're there puzzles. But you know, yeah, but when you take things out of context and you have journalists that are 26 years old and have an ideological bent, um, people just, you know, the rest of us are going, the news doesn't reflect the world. I live in whatever the fuck you're saying. I don't know who this is. I don't even, I've never seen this. I live in a very different world. And it's going to be interesting to see. I think there's a liability though, where podcasts take the place of mainstream media in some ways because then you have somebody who's very good at talking for three hours. And they, they can really sway a lot of people, but that's one side of their story. So now you have just that. So you have to be careful because sometimes it could just move things over here where again, the truth is somewhere in the middle of a lot of times or it's more nuanced or there's just more to know. It's definitely more neurons nuanced. I think there's always going to be a real problem with people that don't really know what's going on. Say they know what's going on. Yes. When they say they know what's going on, it confuses everybody and fucks everything up. And it's another version of gaslighting. So CNN and you know MSNBC, they gaslight you. They gaslight you and they they they actively promote propaganda and narratives that are not objectively true. And the problem on the other side is if you are in opposition of that and you say you know this and you know that, but you really don't. Like you got to be real clear with what you say. They have to people have to really be able to try like if you don't know, you have to say, I didn't know that. You have to say that. Yes. If you do not say that, no one is going to listen to you anymore. And they shouldn't right because the difference between someone who's completely independent and a podcaster and someone who's on CNN should be that no one is telling you what to do. So what is your ethical compass? What's the evidence to what's the evidence? But also what's your ethical compass? Are you trying to win and be correct? Or are you trying to find out what's going on? Well, it's also about ratings. Right. So you're not. You got to be. Yeah, but it's not because I don't think about ratings. No, you don't. I'm saying, but that's why I have them. That's right. See, I'm saying like it's not about ratings. Right. Like ratings come if people believe you. Like if you sit around thinking about the ratings, do you think you would be on? No. No. What do you mean? You be on this show right now. I just know about it. Like saying things. Yeah, how'd that come across? We did again. Let me do that again. You did it again. You did it again. You did it again. You catch it. Oh, you fucker. Oh, wait. Hey, you motherfucker. You saying that Mark Zuckerberg and Mel Gibson get better at better ratings than me? It's okay. It's okay. It's like, it's usually they do. You fucker. I like talking to everybody. I don't genuinely don't give a fuck like how the show's going to do. I don't think you can. I think if you do that, it'll distort what you do. And I think we've all seen people who fall victim to what they call audience capture. You know, they start getting a crowd. Like you see with a lot of guys like online, they start saying like a lot of wacky right wing things and they're like, yeah, finally someone's telling the truth. And then they become just like a fucking that my my my my compass for that is this whenever I hear somebody say on a podcast or whatever. When they say you guys, all those people over there are wrong. Um, I'm the one whistleblower. I've figured out. I'm the one. Now you do have Mavericks, but I always am weary of when I hear somebody go, all that the entire medical establishment is wrong. And I'm right. And I go, I don't think so. I think it's way I just don't think you know enough. I don't think you was one person. I'm not going to just put all my bags. Um, there is something called a scientific consensus. Sometimes that could be a bullshit consensus. We can be told, we can be told the clients, climate science, to all agree. It's not true. It's just how you get funding. So sometimes the incentive structures are there in the same medical style. Correct. Let's just be a little bit. Yeah. Let's be a little bit more. Yeah, you can't say you know things because I've heard people who are those kind of people say they know things about me. Yeah. Like, oh, you know, that you can't use your phone on his show. I've heard people say that like confidently. The guy is confidently saying that he's handled by the CIA. Listen, Mike Baker is my friend and I'm pretty sure he's still in the CIA. I like them. I like them. I have them on because like here's a guy with a CIA operative. Like let me ask this guy and I really do believe he's a patriot. And I really do think he's a great guy. And I think there's a lot of them. And I don't believe cops are bad. And I don't believe any of that bullshit. I think there's bad people in every fucking business. A lot of comedians that I think are rotten. Cons. Yeah. I don't like them. Yeah. You know, but it doesn't mean I hate comedians. I love comedians. But there's some comedians that fucking suck. And if you encounter those comedians, and that's your only exposure to comedians, you're going to be like, oh my God, this guys are all selfish assholes and narcissists. And they're rob people and yeah, it's just a few. It's just a few of those. I also know some CIA people like real CIA people and you talk to them. and it's like they're always like this. They're always like, dude, I wish we were as competence people say. I mean, if you were involved in it. Talk to Evan Haver. Like, he's one of those. I'm just, I breakfast with him today. Love that guy. I love that too. Death. And he's coming tonight. He's coming to my show. Yeah. I love him. Yeah. I just said this to him. He's that that was his business for a while. Correct. I know a bunch of those gone. Correct. And you need, you need, you want to know how the real world works. The real world works. Talk to Evan. I'm a conversation with Evan. Andy Ston said, it's the same thing with I said, oh my god, I went to his wedding. And I loved everybody there because they were all as close as friends. Evan was there on seven. I just, that was the first time I met Evan. And I'm just talking to these tier one guys and they just seemed so intelligent and they were so, and they were and John Dudley was there and a lot of like great guys. But I'm talking to some pretty cool people, right? Who have done a lot with their life and they were well rounded and everything else. And I said, man, I just think it'd be so fun to be in that in a tier one unit because they're just also they're so smart and they're just they just have such a wide breath of knowledge. And he goes, God, you're so fucking wrong. That's Andy. Andy's the best. Andy had one of the quickest past the black belt I think I've ever seen. Oh, is he a black belt now? Yep. Well, he lives with a black belt instructor. That's the thing. Okay. Your wife is a black belt. You better get your fucking peas and cues and orders. Yeah. And he's probably a cross. He's got it. That dude is so fucking smart. You guys are very smart genius but also obsessive. Like you got obsessive with bow hunting became very proficient at bow hunting very quickly. And then, you know, living with a black belt, those what a huge advantage you can just drill with your wife. So see a team six guys who's got some physicality. Also kind of hot. You know, your wife's triangle strangling. That's kind of like that. Yeah. And she could probably kick his ass in the beginning. Leah is built like a true athlete. Oh, yeah. You cannot be light in the ass. Yeah. She's quite. Which I think most black belts are. I think it's just, there's too many things you have to consider to get that good at you, Jitsu. There's so, there's infinite. Yeah, you could be a brute and just brute strength your way through a lot of it and, you know, be kind of halfway dumb and get to black belt maybe. Maybe we'll credit him. Real fast. Just going down that rabbit hole. I train now. I wake up every morning going. Ah. Yeah. Ah. Ah. Very much anymore. No. I want you though. This is the thing I'm trying to rehab my fucking knee. My knee is the thing that's keeping me from doing it right now. I twisted it when I was hunting this year. Yeah. Pretty bad. My joke is. I train at this, in, in, in, nonos MMA who I love it down in, uh, Hermosa. And I love doing it. But I, of course, I'm rolling with a 26 year old and I'm like, let's go. And of course, I'm 57. I see his ankle. Don't give me your ankle. My ankle guy, a pick his ankle, drive him to the ground, fucking, poop that ankle back. I'm back. I'm back. I'm a rest high school. High school. High school. Do a quick, a trouble looking left for 11 days. All right. Fuck and worth it. Yeah. Well, you got it when you're old, you got a role in a different way. You got a role like role with John Jack Machado. Okay. John Jack Machado who, uh, was, you know, my instructor since 1998. John Jack is still rolling and still dominating black belt on the mat. and John Jack rolls. He never moves fast. There's no fast. His knowledge is so wide. His understanding of Gigi, he's talking to you. Joga. Joga. Joga. And I'm about to pass your guard. He's talking shit. He was really, but it's smooth and slow. And because of that, he does not get hurt. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He's had a few injuries over the year. But when you deal with like high level black belt, you'll roll on a consistent basis. And John Jackson is 50s now. He is not hurt. He's still like looks fantastic. He's like filled with energy, trains all the time. Yeah. I'll try and do that. A shit that you did when you were 23 like, I don't get hurt when I'm rolling with somebody's really good. Yeah. Fuck that. Yeah. You can't be that guy. You got to, you know, you got to move slow. Yeah. Slow and strong. I like to talk shit to guys who are way better. That's fun. And you got to be flexible. That's the other thing. You got to really work on your stretching and your flexibility. You have to maintain your mobility. I was watching Armant Sarukian who's fighting Islam Makashif for the lightweight title next weekend. And he was doing this mobility and flexibility routine like this is insane. He's so jacked and so mobile. Like more than I think anybody I've ever seen. Well part of that also I think that one of the people don't talk about this. I think the dog's down. He's the Russian like the Rob look at those. Oh, Jesus Christ. That's the dude's fight. And by the way, they fought a few years back and it was. God damn. Dude, I thought I was I thought I was straight this whole time. Oh, that dude is in flexing right there. That's a good looking man. I mean, that's a strong man. That's what I meant. Good looking and strong. Correct on both Jesus. What a monster. Yeah, homeboys. Well, that the butter his coaches and gold medalist. I think his coaches are gold medalist on the big wrestler. Here's the thing about those guys. I think one of their advantages that nobody talks about is that when you get a guy that could be, you get these dog stonnies, you get these Russians, these are meenians and stuff. They've been training probably since they were six. And so what happens is your tendons and everything gets really, really strong. And also if you ever watch Alexander Coronne the way they would warm up, those guys like Coronne could do a backflip, go splits and all that. Those guys the way they warm up was it was scientific. And so because they knew that the micro damage that happens and so they would they would strengthen all the connective tissue first. And I think a lot of times like guys like Marab guys like, um, uh, uh, Nirma, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, um, since they've been training so long, their bodies are different. They feel different. They are different. They're more rugged. So they don't get injured. They don't deal with injuries. They're one of the biggest things that is true. Is all this is done. They all get injured. They might get injured. I think they get injured less. They probably would. Or they train, they train differently. You're definitely right that their bodies are stronger because they've been doing it since they were younger and that they get developed in that way. But they're all the opposite is true, uh, with striking like not the opposite. But it's also true with striking that if you start striking when you're 30s, you're never going to catch for you. I never never. You just you need that radar. Well, you need that your body needs to be sort of like developed to strike. Yeah, but you also have to be like, if you look at the boxers, like if you look for a Mayweather, his father and his uncle said to him, like they knew they were like, boxing is just about as much about not getting hit. Like you can be great and everything else. If your emphasis isn't on every time you throw, you got to be in a position where you're not going to get hit. Every time you start, custom on it was that way too. Every time you throw your step. And that huge part of that is it was all a foot game. And all of that is if you haven't been trained properly as you're learning how to box, you're going to get take a lot of damage and you're fucked. You're fucked after a while. You look at those really good coaches, those old guys, Eddie Foch, who taught who would teach the job your hand was here. Because instead of here, you were taking shots, you would be here. So if you watch him fight with Ken Norton, when he fought Ali, he said, when you fight Ali, Ali's here when he when he jabs, he's doing this. I want your hand here so you can see Norton catching Ali's jab and then boom, answering back and catching Ali in the face. Those little details make like literally all the difference in whether you box five more years or if you're done five years earlier. Well, the best examples Floyd, right? Because he got hit less than anybody ever. I can count him on my hand. Yeah, if you want to say like who's the best boxer of all time, I would always say Floyd because he got hit less than anybody. And that's the whole time. And by the way, it didn't have the kind of power that any of these other guys had. Didn't have that like that Roy Jones. When he's younger, he was a power puncher, but he broke his hands a bunch of times. That was part of the problem. And but even then, like he wasn't a robust guy. Right. Well, that's a great example of a guy which is preposterous power, you know, just preposterous power. Did you see Arthur better beve who is fighting Dimitri Beval? Yes. He did a hammer workout on a tire where he hit a tire for an hour. He did for an hour. What? He hit a tire for an hour with a sledgehammer. The stock stonks are made of different fucking. He's a chest. He's a chest. Mountain hums up to my savage people. And he's one of the scariest boxes of all time. The only fight that he had as a professional that went the distance is Beval. I know. The only fight. Did you see when people would have seen 19? No, with 19 knockouts. That's fucking insane. When you have your hands up with him, he'll still concuss you. Yeah. He hits that heart. Just basic two like ones and twos, maybe a hook once in a while. There's a great video where this boxer who was, you know, world class boxer, who's a professional, got brought in to Box bitter beve. And his coach said to him, just do your best. He's like, do my best. Do my, but what the fuck are you talking to? Do my, I'm going to fuck this dude up. And he goes and he hit me the first time he hit me. It was like nothing I'd ever experienced in my life. Like it was almost like my body left me. And I was like, that's your job, dude. Better be of is hitting people too like this. Yeah. It's all short. Yeah. Everything is short. And it's just, but he'll need to empower. But don't you arms. Oh yeah. Arms down. And then by around five enjoy that shit. Cannella does a lot of that. He does a lot of that. He smashes guys arms. I think the best box is. I think the best box is. I think the best box is. I think with him. Yeah. You don't want that guy punching arms. Well, I've always said that about look at his workouts with his wrists and fists. Yeah. And this is his warm up. Better be of is one of the craziest specimens because he's almost 40 years old too. So he had this endurance fight with beve all. So it's 12 rounds of super high pace, very endurance heavy. and he was the one that was dominating at the last round. Correct. Correct. That's February 22nd. I'm fucking pumped for that fight. They're going to fight again. Oh yeah. It's a rematch. I'm very pumped for that fight because beve all is so goddamn good too. What he did to canerlo like no one's ever done that canerlo. I think the best fighter I think you can make an argument for certainly top three fighters of all time. I'm right. It's not going to. It is. It is. Lucic. Yes. I think he's incredible. Incredible. He's such a different level. They're smaller than ever. He's fighting giants. He's fighting giants. When you're fighting a guy who's 60 pounds heavier with 10 ounce, 12 ounce gloves, it makes such a world of difference. Especially when the guy is fucking Anthony Joshua. You know, but please understand, Lucic fought it. I think 75 when he started out. He's not a big frame. Oh, God. He's like 225 to 30. A 20. A 20. Not big. And that's a lot of it with the other way. That was Tyson's weight when he was in his prime too. There's something to be said for that because a 220 pound man like Mike Tyson can knock out any human being that's ever lived. Your job. The amount of power he can generate is insane. So then you have the speed of being only 220 pounds instead of 290. You know, or like, remember when Andy Ruiz fought Joshua the second time and he got real fat? Yeah. So sad. Yeah. Because like you had a real chance of like carving out a legacy, the knockout in the first fight was fucking huge. Yes, speed. Oh, my God. And he's the shit. His fucking boxing combinations are so fluid. He punches like a middleweight. Yeah. He's a bronze medalist. I don't know. I think Olympics is. I think he is. I think he did metal. Great boxer. Great boxer. Super nice guy too. When he came onto the podcast after he beat Joshua, he had a fucking diamond across the watch. He came in a Rolls Royce. He did. Let's go. Let's go, Andy. Let's go. We got to get you an accountant. Don't spend too much your money. And probably don't get to 280 pounds. The problem is then all of a sudden you're a superstar and you're partying and you're having surveys and hanging with the boys. So I think there's also you've got to take the responsibility on of being a champion. It's hard to hold that. It's one thing. It's like certain a business. You can get people to know about your business. It's running a business. It's very different. Like you get in the building and staying champ. Maintaining champion. I remember Matt Hughes when BJ Penn beat him. He told me he goes, honestly, Joe, it's a weight off my back. I was like, really? And I was like, it makes sense though, because he was just smashing everybody and he was the person that everyone was chasing. And it's like, God, I'll fuck away on your psyche. That's why John Jones, to me, is just this game. What does this game mean? He didn't win. He didn't win. He didn't win. Oh, he didn't go to the Olympics. Okay. What he did win in Bunch of Others. He represented Mexico in the 2008 Beijing Olympic Games qualification tournaments losing to Oh, Cuba. Cuba, man. You ever watch how he has trained? The Cubans are amazing because they don't hit mids. Like you'll have a guy and they just move and move and move and move. And once in a while, the coach will lift up glove. Bot one shot, you know, moving. It's awesome. It's awesome. It's awesome. It's awful. You throw one punch, you know, they, they like the Russians developed a very technical and very technique oriented way of combat sports. That's why the Russians were so good at Olympics at wrestling rather because they were so tactical where the Americans would just try to work harder than everybody else. And the Russians like figured out like, no, there's a time you work hard. And there's a time you recover and you have to have active recovery. And they got real scientific about their physical training, real like Dan Gabel when he did the podcast was explaining to me how he learned sauna from the Eastern Black. Really? Really? They started incorporating saunies like this is another added element that raises your endurance because they would train hard. And then after training, you sit in that sauna for 20 minutes at 190 degrees, man. Your heart is hammering. So you're getting static cardio. Also it has an EPO like effect where it's like a mild dose of EPO. It raises your red blood cells. Really? Yeah, my endurance is raised significantly when I started doing so. What about co-plunches? That's controversial still, right? Well, co-plunches is not controversial in terms of the way it makes you feel. Okay. So the psychological benefits of the increase in dopamine levels and nor up in that friend, that is 100% of staff. Stop that. That is one of the most powerful aspects of the cold plunge. Also what's been established is that when you do the cold plunge before exercise, it raises testosterone. So there's something about doing the cold plunge and then forcing your body to heat up through a warm up and then going through your workout that raises testosterone for people. And there was a study that was done where it showed this guy went from having an extremely low testosterone level to having a testosterone level or his doctor thought he was juicing. Wow. All he changed was he started doing cold plunge before every workout. Put your body under stress. It's not good after workout. Really? No. Because you want hypertrophy and you want muscles to grow and strengthen and part of that growth and strengthening is inflammation. So that inflammation is actually good. Heat on the other hand is good after workouts. So it's good for the effect of it raises your red blood. So that's interesting. Dan Gable said he would do a sauna after working out because it raises his endurance. Yes. It raises your endurance. The Eastern block athletes already knew that. The Fador was famous for using sauna. Wow. Fador was used sauna and cold plunge. So they used hot and cold therapy. So Huberman recommends doing that once a week. And what you do is you go back and forth and back and forth. You always finish on cold though. Always allow your body to reheat itself up. Don't finish on sauna. You would do cold plunge or sauna, cold plunge, sauna, cold plunge. However many cycles you want to do it. But he said that raises your human growth hormone level. The Swedes do that. I did that fucking Sweden where I was with all these Vikings. It's fucking so funny. Well, those finish studies on sauna are amazing. What it's shown, these are long term studies over 20 years. It shows that people who took the sauna four days a week for 20 minutes at a time at 175 degrees had a 40% decrease in all cause mortality compared to their peers. 40% decrease in all cause mortality. Heart attack, stroke, cancer, 40% decrease because the heat shock proteins, the stress on your body, it makes you more resilient. It makes you more vibrant. You have more energy and you have less inflammation after it's over. Your body produces those heat shock proteins. You feel amazing when you get out. You feel loose and relaxed. You have sauna here. I have a sauna everywhere. I don't fuck around, dude. I even have a portable sauna that I bring with me. It's like a blanket sauna that's one of our sponsors. What's that called? What's that blanket sauna called? A sauna called? Find that sucker. It's really good. You got to be right now. We'll be right back. We'll be right back. There's a scene in a book called Blood Meridian where the guy chops the dude's head off with that fucking knife. Let me see that. Who gave me this? Someone cool. Don't fucking ruin it for everybody. I mean, that's a knife. I don't know what you'd do with this if you were, if you had to. Nothing good. Clear brush. Yeah, nothing good. Nothing good. So much clearer knife, son. What is this? It's a hacking knife. Yeah. Who gave me that? It's when you're coming in and you want to just clear out. Clear house. No, you're an asshole. You have a giant knife on your table. That's what it's for. What's the knife for? Just in case, bro. Oh, okay. When the president came, they had to take those axes off the wall. Really? Yeah. When Trump came in the crazy. I might go crazy and grab one of those and impale them in the forehead. What does the axes look like they actually would work to? Oh, those are real. These are the Jack Carr Tomahawks. They look like you can throw them. Well, I don't think you throw them. I think you're fucking sure. Yeah. Wow. You know? Oh, you heard me. I thought away, you're making me uncomfortable. Sorry about it. Yeah, I was going to grab it by the blade. Something aggressive about a knife. That's very aggressive. This is a very aggressive knife. Yeah, that's a ridiculous knife. That's like a little, that's overkill. Do we know who gave it to me? That's like somebody, if somebody wears that on their belt, I'm like, your dick is tiny. That's incredible. Or you're fucking complete psycho. Or you're a guy. Or you're living in downtown Los Angeles right now. That's right. That's right. That's what's going to be really crazy. Well, I want to see what happens because I think first of all, rents are going to go through the roof. This is going to be crazy. There is a major housing shortage. It's a major problem. Where are you going to live? Where are all those people in the palisades going to go? There's thousands and thousands. They have to find themselves. They have to find themselves. I think people who own, I'll say what's going to happen. I think people that own houses that are not in fire zones, even if they're small, are going to sell their houses for millions of dollars. Because you got those very wealthy people going, I need a place name a price. And your house might be worth $2 million. You're going to sell for four. Why? That's what's going to happen. I really don't get to be even more fucked. It's going to be completely fucked. And remember, Los Angeles has been the worst, the worst at building affordable housing or just housing in general. All the permitting you got to go through. All the red tape. Los Angeles has been the worst at building affordable housing or just housing in general. All the permitting you gotta go through, all the red tape, they can't do it. There's so many issues, there's so many issues, but especially housing, especially. We have what is it? I think poverty rate in Los Angeles is like second and none. The schools are terrible. The homeless situation is I think the second, but it hits, sunny. Yeah, some people are really pretty. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of TikTok stars there. There's a lot of TikTok stars and that's good for our culture. That's good for our culture. What was the name of that sauna blanket again? Spell it. Bunchard. It's a blanket. Yeah, it's a blanket. Yeah, you can carry it with you when you go on vacation and sauna the shit out of yourself. Anywhere you go. Yeah. Yeah, I'm not doing that, but I appreciate it. It's I believe by sauna, man. If I had to choose between one thing that I eliminated, yeah, if I had to take cold plunge or sauna, I would take sauna all day. I think cold plunge is very important. It's really good for just my mental state. I just like that I force myself to get in there. I like it. I win every day. I win. Well, I said to you when you signed that deal, I go, you I said to people about you, you've not changed even a little bit. Well, if anything, you've calmed down. You have peace of mind, but you've not changed as like in terms of like, you know, you become a very powerful, influential person, but I've never I haven't seen you change. I haven't seen you like it hasn't got your head. And I said, why? And you go, I think it's because I do something really difficult every day. And it just reminds me of what a bitch I am. Yeah, which I myself down every day. I think that's important. I think it's everything because I think mental health is attached to that. I think too many people have too much anxiety and too much like, success can do that. Yeah, well, the pressure and also, I don't read comments, which is huge. You know, because a lot of people out there reading comments and they're one comment. I was talking to Zuck about that. Yes. They're like, you guys stopped reading comments. Yeah, I'll tell them to stop it. Yeah, it's so bad for you. Comments. It's so bad for you. I've never read one five. You especially good ones. I don't want to hear it. Yeah, because it's going to have power over me. I don't want to hear it in the back. I appreciate them. I appreciate people. Even the bad comments. I get it. Look, you know, if I was 15, I would be the worst fucking poster on Twitter. He'd be a true. Of all time. I'd be a total troll. I'd be on for a chance. I'd be on all those things. I'd be talking mad shit all day long. Yeah. You know, I kid Mattame. Mattame. He's a kid, this really kid who's like 17 years old and a complete choice. I did his podcast. It was so fun. But he's just like, those kids at that age, they are about just, there's no reverence to anything. No. They want to tear it all down. They want to tear it all down. Also, it's all about making them a living, getting eyeballs on you. Yeah. Right. That's what their, their business is eyeballs. Yeah. So if they can slap someone at a supermarket or, you know, fucking scare someone in line at the grocery store or whatever they do to get attention, that's their currency. Their currency is attention. Yeah. And if you beat their ass, it's actually good for them. That's right. There's no, there's no way. Which is really crazy. Yeah. It's just a different, yeah. I mean, different time. It's the end of room. It's the end of room. It's the collapse of a, of a really sick civilization. And, you know, the thing that you're seeing like with this whole, like, woke fire department, which is, um, we're talking about that lady saying, if your husband's in that burning building, like that they want someone who looks like me, like, like looks like them. Like that's how they want. No. But this, this is all like this ideological, uh, bizarre cult that these people have fallen into, that leads to the collapse of great civilizations. Because the people that worked hard to make this like very easy life, those people don't get respected. And then the people that you think are the marginalized people that should be elevated through equity, these people that haven't done anything. Now you're giving them all the power. Yeah. And you're also letting them be the bullies of the bullies now. Right. So they got picked on their whole life. Now they're, we're, we're kicking ass now. We get things done. I mean, it was pride magazine in the, whatever website, I'll send you this because it's real. See, like, see if you could find that Jamie. So I don't have to look for it. But the, uh, the, the headline said the L. B. G. T. Fire Chief is showing that she can get things done. Really? Yeah. This is in the middle of the biggest disaster in the history of Los Angeles. And homes. And homes. But saying that she can get it done shows she can get it done. Like what has get it done? Yeah. What does that mean? Yeah. Right out of water, collapse society. What does it mean? I don't know if the blame lays in the fire department by the way here. I think you watch. I'm going to make a prediction. I bet it's just already happening. I promise you that the progressive government in Los Angeles and in Sacramento is going to blame not infrastructure, not government incompetence, not mismanagement, but climate change. I promise. Well, good luck with that. Yeah. Yeah. A mid palisades fire Los Angeles first L. B. G. T. Q. Plus fire chief is proving lesbians get it done. Excuse me. Lesbians get it done. Not she gets it done. I, it's even dumber than I thought. She's proving less. Her sexual proclivity is really what makes it. So what does that mean? Elon Musk is proving heterosexuals, Bill rockets. Is that what that mean? It's just identity politics. It's nonsense. It's nonsense. It's nonsense people writing nonsense things. It's so fucking done. It's placing a group above an individual. Right? So do that person like the individual. I don't give a shit that she's into women. I don't care at all. If she's greater than it, if she's competent, I'll fucking vote for her all day. I don't know. She is. I don't know enough about her. You can't call it climate change because LA's been like that forever. The reason why they filmed an LA in the fucking first place is because LA doesn't have rain. That's right. That's why they started to blow up. Until what happened, it got too expensive to do business, got too expensive to shoot an LA. Taxes and everything else. It got too expensive. It is too expensive to open restaurants or anything else in LA. So you've got this great sandwich chain. I'm obsessed with called Snarfs. I like just like they're, I think they have one in all. Yeah, you brought them here. I love, you mean you think you have. They brought them here. I love their sandwiches, dude. And you know, that company is so good that I literally was, I want to get involved in the franchise business because I think it's, it's, it's their crushing. And they will not open in Los Angeles. It's too expensive. There are too many. A friend of mine who you bought, you and I both know has businesses in Texas and businesses in Los Angeles and a lot of them. Okay. I'll tell you who it is later. Oh, I love us. Spence. So in his California businesses, he's been sued over 1,000 times. I think it's 1,000 and two times. 1,002 times in the 18 years he's been in business in Texas. He's been sued once once and in that case they were right to sue them because they did something wrong. And it's pretty interesting because there's literally a difference in culture. There's a difference in the notion of I'm responsible for my actions. Nobody else was responsible for the state I'm in. And that is a, that is a mine virus that has taken over Los Angeles, taken over California in my opinion. A lot of this is just mindset. And I think it's very ironic with all due respect because I have a lot of friends who lost houses in the palisades area and everything else. But and I, and I, if you had walked through the palisades, you would have seen a lot, most of them voted for Caron Bass. I'm not saying Caron Bass deserves all this blame, but I'm saying there was a lot of comma stuff there, very, very little club stuff. And it's ironic to me because I do think to an extent without having done enough research, but I've done some that you have to lace at least some of the blame for this total inability to respond to government mismanagement. And the fact that this government, this progressive government in California in Sacramento, Los Angeles put things like climate change and social justice ahead of fucking basic infrastructure, basic infrastructure. You knew that they were predicting and they knew how, how dry this season was, fuck an eight months without rain. Okay, guys. So we need to figure out there is a way to solve every problem. You got a, if you, do you need a term of fire fire? They cut, they cut 17% I know the cut 17.17.6 million dollars from the fire budget and Los Angeles. Wasn't it 17% or was it 17.6 million dollars? There you go. That's what I read. I thought it was percent, but maybe so I think it's 17.6. Maybe that's what it turned out. Million, but it's a thing. I don't know what that might be. I don't know what that might be. It might be they have a hundred million dollar budget and they cut it down to seven. Either way, obviously, with a hundred million dollars or something. Yeah. That's the whole budget. Yeah, it's a lot. So they only cut 17 million out of 800, but still why would you cut anything out of one of the most important things? Obviously, now you know, now you know that was a huge mistake. Well, now you know you should have increased the budget. Yeah. Well, to your, to your point, this was a perfect storm to an extent and there's a limit to what any fire department can do. There's a limit, right? We live in Los Angeles fires over reality. Earth quicks over reality. Mud slides over reality. We know this. It's a California is a tough place to live that. It's great, but there are a lot of liabilities. I just think if you know that that's the case, something went wrong and our infrastructure, right, the fact that our fire hydrants and it happened in Colorado three years ago, but the fact that the fire hydrants lost pressure, you can predict these things. Right. Well, again, I bring it back to Trump because Trump was saying that this all could be solved and he was right. What he was saying is true and that they are doing it to protect a fucking smelt that exist. It dealt a smelt that exists other places. I love the delta smelt. I don't. What does that mean? Okay. Let me see what it dealt to. She felt looks like. I don't give a fuck about those things. I was 17 million last year. She directed more for 2023, 2024 fiscal year Los Angeles allocated 837 million to Los Angeles Fire Department. The county for roughly 65% of the 1.3 billion dollar budget designated for homelessness initiatives. What? 65% for homelessness initiatives didn't work. Roughly half the budget for homelessness went unspent. These motherfucker. And let me say something else about that. This is motherfucker. The homeless thing too. You talked to progressives about the homeless thing. You know what they're saying? It's a housing shortage. No, it's not. It's a drug and mental health problem. Housing housing housing housing. Sorry. Housing housing housing. We can't fix it. It's a mental health problem. We need to run problems. We've talked to $24 billion last year. 24 billion homeless housing. A homeless housing. A homeless housing. Yeah. That's what it is. It's a bunch of people making money off of profits. Of course. Yeah. And so there's a vested interest in keeping homeless a problem. Yeah. And the problem is that there's homeless at all. Like how is that possible in the greatest society the world's ever known? But because we've put very little effort in the stopping it, very little effort into education and fixing people's mental health problems and mental health institutions for people that are sick and twisted and real solutions like I bagaine, real things that they can do to sort of reset people's minds and help them get out of it. Real programs to help people integrate back into society. I know, guy, who's meaning for one guy, who was dealing with real demons. And he did one session of I bagaine. And it changed everything. Yeah. Well, there's a lot of people like that. I had the former governor of Texas Rick Perion. And he was explaining it. And that's surprising that Rick Perry, who's Texas conservative, it was very reluctant. And then he knew someone who came back from the war and was suffering. And he got involved. And the play of the war prepares the neural pathways to do that. Yeah. It helps people with Parkinson's disease. Wow. Yeah. Crazy. Completely rewires the brain of addicted people. Damn. Stops the pathways, gives you an insight as to why you're addicted in the first place, like what little weird fucking patterns you have in your head. Boy, what are you escaping when you're trying to load up on heroin? It's crazy, but it's illegal. This is the nuttiest part of it. And this is the beautiful thing about what Rick Perry's trying to do. And explaining it very eloquently, that it was all established in the 1970s to combat Richard Nixon's political opponents. So the anti-war movement, the civil rights movement, they made all those drugs illegal, a sweeping act of 1970, the psychedelic drug act, where they were just trying to demonize these things that these people were using. That was like the flower child movement, the hippies, the anti-war people. They're like, we need to figure out what to lock these motherfuckers up. Well, they did a really interesting study on, or there was a guy, journalist, I came over, was talking about. They drew this comparison when the 60s music movement happened with Hendrix and all those guys. When they were taking psychedelics, incredible things were going on musically. Once they turned to cocaine and heroin, you're the 86 fucking diet. Hairbud. Yeah. Why was it being back to cars? Because I'm a car freak. The cars of the 1960s were the greatest fucking cars in America as ever created. In terms of the way they looked, the iconic, the image of those things, and it all died around 70, 71. Everything after 71s piece of shit, except a few core vets look cool. But because they needed to become, first of all, then there's the gas crisis. So cars started becoming less powerful and more economical. And then they started making them out of plastic, and they just looked like shit. And then they weren't doing the drugs anymore. So they designed sucked. If you go back to design, like one of the classics that I always put out, like let's look at a 1969 boss Mustang. So this is Prinette, acid, marijuana, whatever. These people that were designing these cars were like freaks. They were weirdos. You know? Because they were artists. And they designed these things. Just to this day, you look at them. You go, fuck, fuck. Look at that. Yeah, look at that. That's the reason why John Wick killed everybody. That's it is. They stole his car. They killed his puppy, and they stole that car. Oh, they're fucking crazy. And John Wick killed everybody. That is a fucking work of art man. With lash, fucking engine, car, damn, that's a work of art. That was safe. One of the most beautiful things human beings that fuck the Sistine Chapel, that's one of the most beautiful things human beings have ever created. Look at that goddamn day. Is that a catalytic converter or carburetor? Shut your mouth about that. This is Texas. Pull that stuff out and fucking roll, roll, cold, right on my highway. It gets like a block of gallon. Oh, my raptor, my Hennessy Raptor, that is a thousand horsepower. I'll get nine miles to the gallon. It's so stupid. It's so stupid. Look at that thing. That is a different one. That's a classic restoration. That's nothing for me. Classic recreations does a resto mod version of it. But that's the right from the factory version. Both of them are gorgeous. They're just coming electric. They do make them an electric. Honestly, yeah, there's a company that takes old cars and turns into electric. Well, a lot of people have a problem with it. The Everrati does it. I like pull a smap. I like people with that some martens. Those are all these fuck-orgias. Yeah, those are incredible. Pull up Everrati. Everrati is a company that takes old portions, and they do old Mustangs, and they convert them and make them fully electric. Wow. Yeah. And they look really cool, but you're missing the whole port. Of course. The whole point is it's a field of road. It's a work of art. It's a mechanical experience. I drove a 1985 Porsche Target. Dude, it's a stick shift. What a beautiful car. It doesn't feel everything. Yeah, damn, it's beautiful. I mean, just zip in. It doesn't feel you know. Well, it's so light too. Oh, so engaged. That's a great car. Oh, my God, those are the best. That's the only time I've ridden a car and I went. I get it. Like, I've never been in cars. I tried to try to test the three with white interior, white exterior. I wanted to gaze. I wanted to be as gay as I could. It's still an incredible car. It's a great car. So they do a bunch of different stuff. So let's go to the 19, portion 911, 964 signature. So look at that. So they take this 964 Porsche, which is one of the most beautiful years. And they turned it into this insane electric beast. Damn. Yeah, incredible car, man. I mean, sub 0 to 60, sub 4 seconds goes to 200 miles. I think it's beautiful. That looks too. I tried to do electric Porsche, which is a little bit of range. It's up to 200 miles. Shut the fuck up. That range is nonsense. That's not the 200 miles. That's not what you're driving really. So it's 100 miles. But I bet that thing is super sick to drive. And God damn, it looks beautiful. But wouldn't it be better if it went? When you started up, I think it should be. That's what you want to hear that. That's what you're going to ask. Yeah, you want to feel the engagement of the clutch. You want to pull the gear lever down in a second. You want to head off the clutch and hit the gas. I like the way that's all. I like what they're doing. I think it's cool, whatever. I'd rather, I'd take that car and I'd got it. I've got it and put a fucking real engine in it. It looks beautiful. But what can I pick one of those up for? Like a regular car? A regular one? A 964. There's a bunch of different companies. There's a company called, no, no, not electric. I'm not an old regular one. There's a company that specializes in air cooled porsches. Go to Sloan. What's air cooled? That's those, the old ones. The ones that you drove, the one that 1980s won. That's an air cooled one. The old ones are the ones that, yeah, that's it. This place specializes in porsches, but particularly air cooled porsches. They've got a lot of air cooled. Click on the available cars. Inventor, I would go to inventory. I don't know if that would. I don't see that where. That's nice too. It's expensive, more modern ones, like the 1963. Click on that one, 84 or 9-11 Carrera. Look at that, 26,000 original miles. That's a gorgeous. Oh, dude, that's a joy to drive. Yeah, it's beautiful. That car is a joy to drive. I'm a percent. Look how bad that is. Oh, it's gotta be very expensive because with such low miles, that thing's probably meticulously maintained. It looks incredible. So it's, you're not picking that thing. No, no, no, that's an expensive car. 100 grand. And by the way, not very fast. It's not fast. You're missing the point. It's the handling. It's the feel. It's the experience of driving it. It's so analog. It probably doesn't even have power steering. It's brand new. It's basically brand new. Whoever, so you think that that is amazing. They probably sell that for a couple hundred thousand dollars. A couple hundred. Yeah, at least. Okay. I would imagine. I mean, it says contact us for pricing. But if you want to get one like that, a stellar model with 20s. Look, if you get a 9-11 from 1970, like a 9-11 RS, a good example is a million dollars. What? Yes. Go Google 9-11, 1971 9-11 RS Immaculate for Sale. I guarantee you they're over a million dollars. Yeah. Because if your model three will blow that thing away in every way, shape of course, rolling, speed, especially if you have the model three performance. That's why I like my car so much. I like the test. They just go. So easy. They make every other car. It seems stupid. I know. But it's a different experience than driving that thing. That thing is an amusement park ride. Like that thing is a, it's like riding your own coffee. It's something about it. There's a manual. The sensation is a tacked out. It's a tacked out. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Lighting your own fire on the grill, cooking over hardwood cold. I think there's a huge value to that. Like cooking? The fact that it takes, you take time to get good at something like cooking the perfect beef stew or whatever you find. Oh, yeah. Especially if you're cooking over fire, it brings you this caveman DNA. A smel of your brain. Oh, yeah. Yeah. It makes the food take better. Conveons in abundance comes with a price like everything else. Sometimes that's a lack of connection. Sometimes just the, the actual process of doing shit, like the actual process of preparation and all that is a form of flow that you get into. Yeah. There's a great book called Beyond Board of Main Anxiety by Shixen Mihat. I don't know what the fuck his name is. He's like this, it's Hungarian size. He compares the flow state, the rock climbers, surgeons, painters and conductors get into. And, and it's all very similar because it takes incredible concentration. When you're rock climbing, you want to fall. I bet the rock climbers look at the painters like bitch, you are not the same flow state of the world. It's true, motherfucker. Because it's life and death, right? Cool site that shows the average sales like it's a stock almost. So five have been sold for an average of seven hundred and eight thousand dollars. Oh, my God. Isn't that crazy? My Lord. That's crazy. That's just $5 million. That's just $2.5 million for that one. Click on that. Can you click on that? I got a couple more tickets, Stan. Let me see what it looks like. Oh, there it is. Let's see if we could find it. God. Dude. It's a lot of that is like a dick measuring contest like that. I have a pristine model. Yeah. But this is like a Jerry Seinfeld type vehicle. He would he would own one of those. I have a 1993 RS America. It's a 964. I know you've seen it. That little red Porsche that I have. No manuals or no power steering. No air conditioning. No nothing. It doesn't have a radio. It doesn't have a jackhead. Raw. It's so rare. Raw. It's raw and rowdy. It sounds loud. You feel everything. Every time I drive it, I'm like, what? Do you know what? I used to have that. That fucking Bronco. Yeah. 1971 with a 350 Windsor, whatever the fucking was. Oh, no. Car operator. I never came to my house in that. Dude, I would get dizzy on the highway. I broke the gas. Fuck in the gas. I didn't know that. No top. Dude, I thought it was going to pass out. I went to the mechanic. I think I'm going to pass out. It was all panicked. You know what I mean? It's just the way it is. It's like, what do you mean? It's the way it is. Really. But you're living more. Fuck, so that thing for 500 bucks or so. I was like, get away from me. I was so happy when you bought it. I liked when you get irrational. I liked when you get irrational. I want you to be more irrational. I think it's good for you. I was like, what were the dogs too? Yeah. Oh, is it a fighting dog? Really? I think fresh out of the box. Yeah, let's do it. I think that a little bit of irrationality for comedians is very good for you. 100%. I think it's pretty irrational. So you've got to have a little bit of fun in you. It's a fun auction coming up in a month. Oh yeah. And these are for sale coming from Paris. Oh, that alpha-room-ale. That little thing like that. That little alpha-room-ale. I guarantee you that's fun is fuck to drive to. Oh, look, shitty. But I'm telling you, you feel every fucking bump on the road to your ass. Yeah. I never got any of those three five six porsches. I think those look like a fucking VW bug. They look stupid. But that right to the right of it, the 92 RS, that's what I have. I have one of those with a duct tail. I have a red one with a duct tail. So I love it. Yeah. I love it. They have a personality. There's something about getting into my, I had a girlfriend who had a vintage Mercedes. And I swear to God, I got to attach that car. It felt like an experience. I was getting there. Oh, yeah. And I had a personality almost. It was like a 100%. You know what I mean? Honestly. Because somebody had made that. Somebody had taken the time. A lot of that's just made by hand, I think. Well, they're definitely put together by hand. Yeah. Yeah. It's considered by craftsmen. A hundred by seven. But something's really considered by craftsmen. And you can't, you cannot replace the feel of like something that's been crafted. Click on that red one. The 1970 look at that sun. Oh my goodness. That's a beautiful piece of machinery. It's not considered as so gorgeous. It's an expression of gorgeous. It's an expression of gorgeous. That is such a gorgeous car. Yeah. That is fucking beautiful. That's European, brother. And it's so light. Those cars are so light, dude. That's like a 2000 pound car. Really? Yeah. They're so little. Yeah. When you're near them, they're so little. You know how much my three ways? Almost 6,000 pounds. Oh, they're very crazy. They fuck up those borders. They're fucking tank. What are they called? The rails, guard rails. They go right through those things. Because they're too heavy. My car. My car. Car. Car. Look at the guy. Gorgeous. That is. Look at that damn thing, man. It's so beautiful. Oh, that guy. That guy maintained that motherfucker. That guy knows how to drive. I bet. Look at that steering wheel. I'm in 2003. I picture my 10. 2003 restoration. Yeah. Oh, it's so gorgeous. Wow. I bet that's 150,000. How much is that? Yeah, it's going to be auctioned. Yeah, that's a bit more weighted for 180 euros. 180 or so more. So 180 euros is like 200 and something thousand. Which makes sense. It's fucking beautiful, man. And they don't make them anymore. You know, if you want one of those. And when you drive it, I guarantee you have a fucking smile. You'll have a fucking smile on your face. But only has 180 horsepower. Jesus. Yeah, they're not fast. Even minus 300. Mine only has 300. And I had a juice up a little bit to get to 300. I was going to say, yeah. It's not fast. And let's give you worms. It's not fast. Not fast. No, but it doesn't matter. It's just fun. It's engaging. What do you still like big trucks too, though? You like the denolities and stuff? Oh, yeah. Well, I have the Raptor. Yeah. It was a Hennessy Raptor. I still have. You see what's going on over there. I don't want to be at the same height as the cars. It's fun. It's in the break. You can't see what's going on. Well, up here, you can see something stupid. Five cars ahead. Oh, Jesus. And it's safer. Way safer. To be in a lifted truck is safer. You see things more. 100%. That is very important. Yeah. It's very important. Like the elevated viewpoint for a safety perspective is important. Right. Yeah. And you get used to that. You like it a lot. And that's a kind of card you take out on a countryside. Like, oh, yeah, man. And you were a scarf. You were gloves. Clothes, scarf. And you were the glasses. I want to be European so badly sometimes. And you're in your veins doing this. Do you go as fast? Yeah. You don't go with a girl. Go by yourself. Yeah, you don't go with it really? You don't want to hear that. Shut the fuck up about the truck. Shut the fuck up about the truck. Shut the fuck up. Shut the fuck up. Shut the fuck up. That's different. That's hard. That's preposterous. That's a four million dollar card. That's a Pagani. Well, I mean, even know how to say that. How do you say that? It looks like a fucker. It looks like an around. That's a monstrous vehicle. Yeah, but it's also ridiculous. I mean, does it come with a $150 horsepower? Here's the thing. That's all great. That's all fast. But that can't fuck with a new Corvette. Yes, a track car for sure. It's a track car, but it's not even as good as a track car as a new Corvette. The new Corvette ZR1 is one of the greatest cars the world has ever built. is over a thousand horsepower, a thousand over a thousand horsepower for the new Corvette ZR1. It does zero to 60 and under three seconds. It's going to break all the records. It's probably going to break Nurburgring records. It hasn't even been released yet. It's a fucking amazing car. It's the greatest American car. It's because it's just reliability. Everything or what? Everything. They're reliable. They're fucking incredible looking. They look like an exotic car. This is the new ZR1. Does it have volume? Can we hear what it sounds like? Hi, I'm Brad Franz from Chevrolet Marketing. Brad, you fucking knocked it out of the park, Brad. This is an amazing vehicle. This vehicle is faster, handles better than that stupid fucking $5 billion car. That thing's this shit. That's America fuck yeah in a car. I mean, it's so stupid. How can you go to a dealership? Look at that carbon fiber wheels. How can you go to a dealership and buy a 1,100 horsepower car? It's insane. Look at with a giant wing on the back of it. It shouldn't be, but it is. And that's why it's America. Well, the fucker. And is that the thing? Is that drag to rotate? Is that fan that was on there necessary? Yes. Yes. Because you want to leave it in asshole. That looks great. Yeah, you can get it without the fan. Because you want to look like an asshole. Yeah, that looks good. It's downforce. It gives you more downforce. Right. So it'll actually slow your top end speed so that the high end speed will be like 205 miles an hour instead of 215 or whatever the fuck goes. Like that. That's a good look right there. It's a gorgeous car. That is a fucking beautiful machine. Does the fin come up or something? Well, no, it's just downforce. It's adjustable, but it's downforce for the track. Yeah, I like that. That is an amazing car for the track. That's a good looking car. And they make them in a convertible. Check of the convertible. They won't break a bank probably, right? Are they very excited? It's about 200 grand before, you know, mark up and all that other jazz. I think it's 1, 2.3 seconds zero to 60. Right. Fuck. That's a 9 second quarter mile right from the factory mother fucker. A 9. That's what you need. That's what you need count. You do. It's very special kicks it and you start selling out giant theaters. Let's go, baby. Let's get a little over. You're buying a mama. You're buying a weight from looters. Once I start selling a theater tickets. Yeah, what you get the fuck out of Los Angeles? I know. I got to do that. You've been telling me that a long time. Listen, this might be the one I talked about. Hey, but I have my other kids. So I got my I have two families. You know, coming into it too. I know. They come out here. They'll realize they're on. Listen, this might be the one I talked about. I hope it is. But I have my other kids, so I have my, I have two families, you know. Talk them into it too. I know. They come out here, they'll realize, oh my God, what the fuck are we doing? What we're doing? One of the things that came here, like me traveling from Texas is way easier than traveling from fucking Los Angeles. Ron White told me that in 2018 when I started thinking about Austin. He moved here before any of us. Ron White was the original. He was the original, the Texas set up because he's from Texas. He was off the fucking love Austin. Foods, great, people are nice. He's in the middle of the country. He could travel anywhere. I was like, wow, can I leave in Texas? I started thinking about it. Can I leave in Texas? And then when COVID hit, Ron being here was one of the things that moved me here. Really? Yeah, it's like I love Ron. At least I can hang out with Ron. Like you want to talk about it? Like you want to talk about it? Like one of the greatest comics period. I watched that motherfucker and I'm like, and he's still doing it at his age. Hille and it. Hille and it. He's 1,000 years old. And he's better now than ever. I'm better than ever. I love that. And he's at the club every night. He's there all the time. All the time killing it. Killing it. Incredible. And just the best fucking human being. He's just the best guy. He seems like he was like, So when he was coming here in 2018, I was like, maybe I could go, I don't know, I can't live in Texas. Cause I'd always been trying to escape LA forever. But then it's like my business was there. The comedians were there. And the store was there. And there was like so many things there. It took something like COVID to make us all like just take this crazy chance and move to Texas. Yeah. Well, these fires, I feel like these fires are kind of almost like very much like the same thing. Oh, very much like the same thing. It's the same kind of experience. Hand me that bad boy. You're going to have one too. Yeah, let's go, Frank Helen. Hey, man, come on. Mr. Looking so guys like men. I like this new, this thing. Having a guy like Ron here though was like, Okay, well, at least I'll have Ron as a friend, at least we'll be, and then Tony moved here. I was like, Oh shit, Tony's here. And then I remember one time I talked to Chagura. And I was like, dude, it's fucking awesome. I love it here. He's like, fuck it. I'm moving. He was here quick. Yeah. Oh, you just hear you can use this one. You just do it. I'm like, I can't figure shit out. How can you can't figure things out? Because I'm bad with that stuff. Okay. That's why my wife was like, get out of here. You can't do it. And I'll take care of it. Like raise my kids, save them. Tell my story. I'll be in Austin. Sorry about the fires. Tell them to watch your special. Tell all the kids in schools that they watch Daddy special. Okay. Watch Daddy special. It's going to be good. False gods. I'm excited to be able to shoot YouTube. Yeah. I'm sure that's true. Yeah. I think so. YouTube's the move because you get the most views for sure. Like look at Shane. I'm proud to. You have a great, that's awesome. You get a great set. You put a great set and the club is the best place to film. The audience is so high. Well, that's what I thought I was like, I would rather like shoot it here. Mm-hmm. And because you did that club right, man, you did that club right. It makes such a difference. You know. Yeah. Well, a lot of it's because of Ron. It wasn't for Ron. And then one time when we did shows, we were doing shows at the Vulcan. And Ron hadn't gone on stage like eight months. And he got off stage to grab me by the shoulders. It was whatever the fuck we got to do. We're going to keep doing this. He goes, you got to open up that club. I was like, okay. I got open up the club. Wow. Because I was like, I got to open up a club. Oh, gosh. You know, it was one of those things. Like I'm so fucking busy. How am I going to do this? How am I going to handle this? How am I going to handle the stress of the business and 100 employees? And it turns out you don't have to. Just get really good people to run it for you. That's it. I get a kick out of you. Because I don't know. You still have like for this podcast. What three people to work for you? I mean, four. But you know, more than that. Well, yeah, we have Brandon, our video editor. We have Matt who books everything. Young Jamie and Waugh. Yeah. That's it. My buddy is going to start a podcast. And we got to get a production team. We got to get to set them. I'm like, hey, we're going to need a production team if you don't have Jamie. The thing is Jamie's a wizard. And he's also a little bit on the spectrum. And Jamie can. What's the good side? You're on the good side. You're on the fun side. You're like totally socially aware. You're fun to hang with. Stow X. He's like a stoic. But Jamie's just on the ball. And like his ability to pull things up while we're talking about him while he's managing the podcast. Like no one could do that. You need like a team of people to do what he does. But then you've got to deal with a team of people that are just like one of the coolest things about Jamie is how like first of all were friends. And he's the easiest to hang out with. Like Jamie's so easy to hang out with. So it doesn't matter who's in this room. There's no weirdness. Or like, oh, this guy is complaining about that guy. He's not trying to be. He's not trying to be. He's not trying to be. Anything is not. So what happens in that position is that that's kind of a big job. Right. And it'd be very easy to go. I'm part of this podcast. I'm a huge part of it. He doesn't get his ego. That's happening a few friends of mine where they had to get rid of their producer. Because the producer was like, you know, we did this. And he's like, hey, hey, hey. He pointed cameras at a comedian that was already famous. Like cut the shit. Like this is fucking stupid. We all have our role. We all do our thing to do. Yeah. But it's like what happens with a lot of these people's, they develop these podcasts. And then they have, I go to my friend's podcast and they have 10 people working for them. And I was like, what are all these people doing? What do they do? What are they doing? Like this is crazy. Like why you have all these people? And then they have interns. Like, well, you have people working. You're making millions of dollars. And they're working for free. Like I don't agree with interns. Like I would never have an intern. If I had an intern. Oh, pay them. 100%. I don't even know if you're allowed to pay certain interns. Because they're supposed to get like, I would break the law. I'd break the law to pay them. You're going to pay the intern. Can you have a paid intern? Can you have a paid intern in a college? I think what happens is it builds resentment if you're not 100%. You got to be careful with all that. Well, that's a problem with rich people when they have assistance too. Like, how magical how an assistant wants you. He was like, yeah, I got to get an assistant. I go, no, you don't. I go, listen to me. Do less shit. Just do less shit. If you need an assistant, you don't do less things. You don't want them. I remember when David spayed out an assistant, the dude tried to duct tape him and the guy he tasered him. He was going to kill him. Yeah. He got to jail. Henry VIII said something like that. He said every time I promote somebody, I create. Every time I promote somebody, I create eight enemies on one end. Great. Something like that. That was the quote. It's great. Yeah. But do you kill a bunch of his wives? He was terrible. That's a great story. He's just a business. Well, you know what he did, right? He said the Catholic church, he wanted a son and his wife was barren and he wanted an heir and the Catholic church would not be able to go out, codify his divorce. So he was like, Okay, I'm going to start the Anglican church. Buck off. I'm going to start my own church and it's going to. Okay, it's going to be okay with divorce. So he created the Anglican church and the great story of a man for all seasons. Thomas Sir Thomas more was Thomas more would not join the Anglican church and they killed him for it. And he said, I am more than my appetites. I am more than you know my body. I am my principles and my principles are higher and I'm going to stick to the Catholic church. It's kind of like, you know, I wish I was in trouble. No shit. Right. Well, we all would, right? Yes. Yeah, get a lot of shit done. All right. All right. I was an acting class. As you remember that and one of the kind of a famous actor he did the scene. This is so great. He did the man for all seasons. And as you know, so you do a scene and a lot of working actors in the class. This is Los Angeles and we all sit back and now the great teacher will now break it apart. And he, the actor began to weep. And this is why he's crying. He says because I'm not this man. I would have joined the Anglican church and it bothers me that I'm not the kind of Prince of the man that would stick to. At least he knows. That was pretty cool. At least he's not that guy. I wish I was a Navy. He's like kill everybody. He was one of my favorite actors too. And I was like, there you go. At least you know you're fucking limitations. Yeah. Never say what you would do in an emergency. Because you know, and also probably why he's a great actor because he was aware of everything. I think the differences between him and those other people. You know. Well, you better know your vulnerable. Like, you walk around like a tough guy. The real tough guys that have done a lot of shit who've seen a lot of combat or at least been involved and like Evan Hayford for example, has probably done a lot more than he never talks about any of it. You'll never hear him say anything. And for that matter Andy Stump's same way. They really tell you anything. They're very aware that first of all, it's very easy to be killed. Very easy. I don't care how strong you are. We can bench a tiny child can kill you with a go. Right away. So you get a real sense. Part of what's really good about just doing combat sports or doing any kind of like even a rough sport context sport is that it comes. You come in a contact with objective reality. It's very hard to start living this fake existence. And part of the problem I think with our society society is a lot of people controlling the narrative. Don't really pay a price for being wrong because they live a life and they live a job where they're working with their mouth. They're working with only their brain. And I think you get a lot from actually trying to grow your own food or doing whatever it is. You've got to kind of come in you own a farm and you realize that life eats life. And things, everything of nature, mother nature's a motherfucker and wants to kill everything you try to grow. It gives you a very different perspective on reality and what the world is about. Oh for sure. Well that's a giant problem with urban environments. That's why urban environments all get to the sort of esoteric, philosophical ideas about what society would be like because they're completely separated from the circle of life. They're buying all their food from either a restaurant or a grocery store. They're not farming, they're not doing anything. They're enjoying meat without any death. Right. Steve Pinker's book, The Blank Slate. Yes. The anthropologists came to their name. I think they're at Harvard and they came back from studying the Yanomami Indians or whatever. Amazon Basin. They were like, hey guys, I know you think just white, Anglo-Saxons are aggressive and we have a culture that rewards male aggression. Those people have never been in contact with anybody white or western and the guys that get laid the most are the guys that killed the most people in combat and have their hair on their daggers. So they have their version of a fucking all-star quarterback too and he gets all the pussy. And they were like, what the fuck? And they literally attack their reputations and everything. They drove them out of academia. It's crazy. It's like, it's true. It should be obvious. There's been a series of events that human beings have gone through that have developed certain people. We understand. It's an understanding that certain people are better at survival. Certain people are better at being the leader. Certain people are better at war. And life takes a certain amount of aggression and competitive spirit. Or you're going to fucking get eaten. You're going to get fucked. It's really what happens. That's right. So don't, it's great. I love that we're all, it's all utopian until your kids don't have enough to eat. And then I'm going to kill, that's what happens. People are really kumbaya until your kids have to struggle for resources and then they become genocidal. Jared Diamond wrote Gun's Jourms and Steel. Did the study with the fucking people up in that Guinea Highlands? The minute. The minute they started running out of resources, they would start coming up with stories about the other tribe over there that were basically, yeah, they eat their own kids. Yeah, they're fucking really evil. Just to whip up, just to justify what they're about to do that out of their tribe. Because they got their stuff. Human beings. I mean, there's beautiful things in urban environments in society where you don't have to struggle. You don't have to do that. So you can, you can get much more involved in art. You get more quiet. Finance. There's a lot of things that people can achieve when they have that sort of shelter. But there's a balance to be achieved in our society, the influence. And the problem is the influence of these people that are detached in urban environments is so significant because there's so many of them. There's so many more people that are detached than are connected. But we have this very weird appreciation and understanding of resources and of just how hard it is to just survive without modern conveniences. I had to, I think for what changed me a lot. When I was younger, I was accidentally around some pretty rough people, some criminals, people that were bad, violent. And I think I remember going, I remember, it's very scary when you're around people that are like that. And I never forgot because I was pretty naive as most of us are coming up because I'd been around a good family and stuff like that. And I saw how ugly and dangerous some men can be, especially when nobody's looking. And I never forgot the idea of this. Especially in the areas that you grew up in. That's right. Well, I lived in, remember also I was in the war and 11 on. So I think I left Lebanon when I was 11 years old. Yeah. So just imagine experiencing that as a 10 year old boy. Yeah. And then I went back. I went back when I was, I think, 15, 16, and I didn't recognize anything from my childhood. So I was living 11 on for five years. And so I had wonderful memories. And then the war broke out and we were stuck. My father couldn't get back in because he, he, he, he, he was, and then we got evacuated. But I was living in the, in the holiday end for six months. And we had to sleep on the floor. And then finally we had to, we had to go down into the fucking underground parking lot because they were bombing. And you would wake up and you would hear machine guns and stuff. So you felt very out of sorts and very, very, it was very scary. You know, you're a kid. You know, and I remember seeing on a balcony, I remember seeing planes bomb a gas station. I never forgot it. I never forgot seeing the planes come in and the, the missiles dropped and just, you know, and, and the sound dude, the sound. And I don't know if anybody, anybody's been in war knows this, but I was on the beach. I was on coral beach. And it probably was, it was in the 80s. I was a young, young, I was 14, 15, 16, whatever I was. They shot a rocket over our head. Okay. And I think it was a test fire. Dude, when I tell you that the sound was so loud that we all fell on the ground. I fell down on the sand. The sound was so disoriented that you, everybody went down on their hands and knees. That's how loud it was over your head. And I think that that, that when you are in that kind of proximity to violence like that. And then later on with I was older, I was around some, some people who were pretty rough, you know. And for me, I always, I knew that if the grid broke down, that those people were going to take over. And there was going to be no fucking mercy. And I've never forgot that. And so you could see with COVID the minute that, you know, law enforcement had to restrict their resources. You saw what happened, looting. You saw crime. You saw homelessness. And the fabric of society can break down so fucking quickly. People don't realize it until you've been in countries where it's happened. And until you've been around men who negotiate the world in a violent way. And maybe in ways that are a little bit outside the law, you don't know what you're doing, man. You got no idea. So all those people, and I love when the left starts talking about, you know, violent revolution. And you're in college, kid. You have no fucking idea. You don't know. First of all, don't wake up, and don't wake up the conservative. Don't do that. Let's not even talk about it because I know a lot of guys that should real straight. You know. And often. And often. And they're comfortable in those violence spaces. Kind of ready. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Let's not let those dogs slip. Have you seen John McPhee? Yeah. I have the mayor of Baghdad. I'd be a good example of a podcast. Like that is a guy. Yeah. Just, you know, his body just comes from enforcement. His traps. He just looks like a giant block. Yeah. He's a, he's a born enforcer. He's not going to win a Nobel Prize for peace. No. You ever hear a Tim Kennedy talked about him? Like, yeah. You put him in a glass case and break in case of war? Yeah. Yeah. Let's keep those guys on it. Let's keep that over here on the way. Thank God that guy found you jizz-jizz too too. And that's why I'm an outlet. Yes. And please understand that the base of our republic also is that we have civilian control of a military. And that was a huge, in the election between, I think, Madison and Jefferson. The idea was was it Madison or was it, uh, Adams? I can't remember. But in the, the, the, the, the election was, should we have a standing army? Because traditionally in a republic, if you had a standing army, a, a very charismatic general like Napoleon would take over the army and take over the country. So that was a huge thing. James Madison was a genius figuring out how to, how to limit that. And he said, checks and balances, but you have to have civilian government in control of the military. Because military people arrive at military solutions. Yeah. Fuckin' really important, man. Really important. You don't want to, don't let guys like, John McVee, you need him in war. But God bless. But that's just, you know, well, you've had Eric Prince on your podcast. Right. Very smart guy. Have you had him on? No, I haven't. Man, I really enjoyed him. He was, uh, another guy who was talking about like what to do with Africa. And it's like Jesus. Well, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He used the word vice-roy and he did it on purpose. It's like, he, he, but, but, but Eric comes from a position of how to solve problems. Yeah. When he was talking about the, um, when he was talking about the, uh, he said, we have the ability to frack. What that means is we can drill sideways. He said, you could have filled those tunnels with seawater. Instead of bombing the shit out of, you know, 70% of it and killing all those people, you could have flooded those fuckers out. Cause you, you, you, you drill an, I don't know if this is true. I don't know anything about fracking. But he does. And he said, you could have drilled fucking this way. Fill, take them in a training, fill all those tunnels with seawater and they would have had to come up and you would have to find and just position people, you know, when they come out of the water. Why didn't they choose that? Uh, a good question. The same reason that in Afghanistan, they had an oil, they had an oil reserve there in Afghanistan that was well-capped by the Soviets, well-capped. We could have taken that cap off and that oil, that enough oil to not only fuel the entire country, but the whole war effort right there for about nine cents a gallon. But instead, we would get our oil from Saudi Arabia, etc. And have to ship it through Pakistan with all the roadblocks that was about 900 bucks a gallon or some crazy shit. He was not my thing to talk about. Everybody says he presented a plan to do it. This is blocked by the Pentagon. Let's, um, hear this, but you have a very smart dude. Provided that Israelis a fully funded, donated ability to flood the water with water, with seawater to flood the 300 miles of tunnels blocked by the Pentagon. Our stuff isn't working that well in Ukraine. The Navy has been ineffective in Yemen. U.S. has given very bad advice, very mixed advice in Gaza, preventing the Israelis from finishing it or even preventing from ending that war in a clever way. Yeah. He's very smart. And Eric is, uh, he's a problem solver. You can say whatever you want about him, but I really enjoy, you know, he's a very smart guy. And I know people that work with him and for him. Well, if the shit goes down, you need people like that. You need people that know how to solve problems. Yeah. Yeah. But also, you know, you can't have some overweight lesbian that says that if you're trapped in the building, you already made a mistake. You're ready to fuck it up. You need to carry you. Is that really what she said? You want to hear it? Yeah. I do. Let me hear it. Jimmy, you could probably find it right. Just so you can outrage me. I certainly have it in here. I know I can find it if you just give me a moment. It's just, it's so ridiculous. You hear it saying, like, what are you even saying here? Did I found it? It's not AI, right? No. No, no, no. Here, Jamie. Say, I shit's getting crazy. I had to call you to ask you. I was like, call to you. I was like, is this AI hard to tell? I was here. Headphones on again because you're going to have to hear it because it's so crazy. It's so ridiculous. I'll see your emergency, whether it's a medical call or a fire call. That looks like you. It gives that person a little bit more ease knowing that somebody might understand their situation better. Is she strong enough to do this? Or you couldn't carry my husband out of a fire, which my response is. He got himself in the wrong place if I have to carry him out of a fire. Oh, wow. Oh, that's how that is. Such a crazy way to look at things. The correct answer is no, I cannot, but I can do other things. Right. And we are going to need people that can carry people out of buildings because that is a part of the job. It's not he got himself in the same way. Only if you want to save lives. Yeah. But again, this is not the justice. But they're not the justice. So justice. No, the ideology of rotation. Yeah. Ideology over effectiveness. Ideology over utility. One of the things we saw during the 2024 election is massive chunks of California turn red that had never been read before. And I suspect that that trend will continue and be even further and flip the top. That's a limit. I think you can do people, you know, they're not stupid Americans. They reach their boring point. Yeah. I think we're going to get to a point where they wake up and you're going to have to have someone commenting clean up the mess. I think the greatest, someone's going to have to be like socially liberal, but physically conservative and pragmatic and realistic. But they're going to have to like be a person like you or I, who like supports gay rights, sports women's rights, sports equal rights, of course. But also the thing is don't hire people that aren't qualified for a job because you don't want to hire white people. That's crazy. Hire everybody that's qualified and then make everybody else more qualified. Go to the bank. Everybody right. Right. Right. Yeah. My sports are great. Right. Figure out a way to fix all your fucking urban problems. If you have $24 billion every year just for homelessness, imagine what that could have been done to clean up communities. Exactly. Because you haven't done a goddamn thing about homelessness. And all those people should be held accountable. Well, that's because they again, they're framing the problem wrong. If you talk to those people, you talk to the people in charge of homelessness a lot of time. I'm not saying a lot of them are, a lot of them are good people and a lot of them are smart. And they know a lot more about it than I do. So I don't like being the guy who's talking about the guy, but I'm just saying I like to be fair. I want to be fair. But I think when you're framing it just as a housing problem. It's a lot. And any problem it's a fucking life. It's a bunch of people profiting. I mean, Coli on the war when he was on the podcast, explaining that to me for the first time. He said when he was in San Francisco, he said, but what is going on? Do they just need more money? He's like, no, you don't understand. It's the opposite. It's like there's a business now in keeping homelessness there. Yes. Because there's people that are making quarter, quarter billion dollars a year. And they're just working on the homeless problem and they're failing. We got 31,000 new homeless people this year. It's just failure. And you know, California was always, including under Democratic governors, California was always known as a a place that was run very, very well with really responsible civic employees for a long time, under Reardon and that and stuff. Yeah. Well, it's collapsing under the weight of its own bullshit. So I had, I was with Arnold Schwarzenegger and I asked him what was the light to be governor? And one of the things I got was that how little power he was not able to get a lot of things done. But I'll give you a classic example. He said, and I'm sorry if I'm paraphrasing, but he said something. There was a water issue and he said, these farmers over here are not using all that water. So here's ready. Here's what you do. Just take the water they're not using and give it to this part of the state over here. It's not be able to just pipe it over here. And his senators said, Mr. Governor, I can't do that. This is why he goes because now you're asking me to go and ask my constituents to give up some of their water. They're going to use that against me in my next election. So he goes, so Schwarzenegger was, so then what the fuck are we going to do? And he goes, here's what you're going to do. You're going to make a speech and you're going to say exactly what you just said to us. And we're going to say, yes, but then we're not going to really let it happen. And he goes, that's how this works. He goes, how you're learning, baby. That's fucking California state. Well, that is where Elon Musk and the big Ramaswami come in. The Department of Government efficiency, maybe for sure, maybe. I don't know what they're going to be able to get done. Let me give you an example. So Pete Higgseth seems like a great guy. I'm a fan. I don't know much about him, but I like that kind of seems like kind of guy. Like to hang out with him. I have a beer with sure. He's very smart. Princeton, I think Harvard, like Braun Star, row four books. Awesome. I'm sure he'll be a very effective secretary of fence. However, that job, this DOT, I think has, um, a million point one employees and a bunch of $750 billion, maybe $850 billion. Now, just that is a massive, massive company essentially. And that requires management on a different level. That skill set is very specific and very, very difficult and very strange. It doesn't mean that because you are a great soldier, you can necessarily do that. And I'm saying, I'm just using it as an example. So we have to get down to brass tacks and take politics out of this and get real fucking practical with all this stuff. I think with Elon Musk and with Vivek Ramas, how much do I mean? The US government is a very complicated organism and massive and does a lot of shit none of us even know about. You know, I always use this as an example. Who the fuck keeps geese out of the airfields, the Department of Agriculture? Who keeps, who keeps Falcons on hand at most airports, Peregrine Falcons, you know, who does the Department of Agriculture? You know why? Because they're territorial birds. They keep all the other birds out of the airfield. You know how to do that? Because I don't. Who gets sheep to graze at a higher altitude because of global warming and they don't want to graze when it's really hot. I don't know, but we have to do that if you want mutton and fucking wool. And there are signs that have to figure that out. They're not political. There's a thousand things. Who manages all that nuclear waste in the ground and make sure it doesn't get into the Columbia River and the waterways? Who manages our electric grid? This is all, who keeps track please? I'd like to know of all the spent uranium rods, sir, that are used in all our diagnostic machines. Because if you detonate one of those motherfuckers over the Super Bowl, you have to clear out that city for 20 years. The Department of Energy is the answer. That's a Buddha judge. He's doing a great job. That's neat. No transportation. He's transportation. It was the guy who stole women's clothes. Yeah, he's the nuclear secretary. He was responsible for that. That guy's like fuckers well. That's like a guy that's a they, piece of shit. Don't miss gender. That's the most important thing. That fuck don't miss gender that thief. Jesus Christ. Do you understand what I'm saying? Yes. So this is beyond complicated. Unbelievably complicated. And so Michael Lewis wrote a book called The Fifth Risk about this. A good book. Short, very worth reading. Very fucking worth reading. I walk around talking about being a libertarian. As usual, I don't really know what government does. It I was so kind of humbled by the book because I was like, there's a lot of shit I rely on. The people who are needy, people are very elderly. People who are disabled, who live in places where they can't get food, our food banks feed those people. Meals on wheels is a really big thing. So there's a lot of shit that the government does. And we feed a lot of people that couldn't feed themselves otherwise. So we have to be careful about not throwing the baby out with the bathwater. And once again, take politics out of it. Let's approach everything like it's a problem and stay agnostic about this shit. And sometimes you might have to be a little left. Sometimes you might have to be a little right. Respond to the fucking evidence and be humble about the fact that every time you step into a problem, you may not know anything. And that's what I try to do. Brian Cowell for Governor. Why didn't you, I hope you guys wrote that shit down. Where's my camera? You don't need to write it down, bro. You just said it from the heart. Fuck, yeah, dude. Yeah, bro. Fuckin' hilarious. Yeah, why don't you be a governor? My buddy, my buddy, my father, my father, my father. My father, my father, my father, my father, my father, my father. My father, my father, my father, my father, age, he goes like this. He goes from toe-hold, he goes, hey, dude, love your Rogan podcast. Next time you're on the biggest podcast in the world, make sure you talk about the fucking Bible some more. He goes, hey man, it's interesting. Yeah, I'm into that. I had that Wesley Huff guy on. There he is. Yeah, he was really interesting. And one of the most fascinating things that I can't stop thinking about is how the book of Isaiah, from the Dead Sea Scrolls, was verbatim, the same as the book of Isaiah that they found a thousand years later. Wow. A thousand years. Wow. And it was exact word for word. Yeah. Like that's incredible. It's not only incredible, but I always think the fact that the Bible endures is interesting. Yeah, it's very interesting. It endures. It, I always go back to like what were they trying to do? What was it really all about? I think I'm going to start. Yeah, have an opinion. Tell me. I think that if you read the Old Testament, which I've done three times, the, I would argue that so what I've done is I've done three times. I would argue that so what's a theme of any, anybody, any author writes a book. The theme is always the audience. Um, the, the, I would argue that so what, what's the theme of a, of any, anybody, any, any, any author writes a book. The theme is always the audience. The authors argument for how one should behave in the world. Okay. It's a good way of looking at it. And I think that the central theme of the Bible, of the Old Testament certainly is don't worship false gods. So what's that mean? If you try to worship false gods, if you, if you, if you put too much emphasis on money, on status, on power, on, on the other, on the, on ideology, you, you will, you will inevitably turn yourself into a circle. You'll, you'll, you'll be a snake eating its own tail. For whatever reason, human beings have a very hard time inventing and creating their own gods. And we always do it. What, what, what, what, there is, what the value of having a transcendent truth of something that you can't measure. It's very interesting that you can't measure it, that you even win. So, so, so what, why do the Muslims, why do the Orthodox Jews not have any kind of like picture of God? It's because you're putting a measurement around God. You're trying to define God and that's not for you to do. And there's something very valuable about not being able to do that. Because that transcendent truth is not for you to understand necessarily. It is for you to reach for. It is for you to be reverent of. It's for you to understand that something is watching you, that you will never get away with anything. And, and I'll quote Jordan Peterson, I love it because I've always thought this. And I think you agree with this. You don't get away with anything. You'll pay in full for everything you've done and haven't done. It's a great way of looking at things. Maybe it's wrong. But it's a good way to at least it's, it's keep that in mind. I think you pay psychologically no matter what. 100% when you're not telling the people right. And then the people that don't, those are the people that are the most delusional and the most disconnected because they put blinders on as to who they are and what they've done. Me see this when people get caught for horrible crimes and they, you know, they can't like Bernie made off type people. Like they've deluded themselves to a point where they've, they've, they don't look at their complete sociopaths. Which is a weird path that the mind can go into where you're never wrong. And it's always about you. Well, also, like I always, people talk about God, I kind of like replacing it with truth. So just, just try to stay close to the truth, man. It's hard. It's a nice truth. It's really fucking inconvenient. It's really, it's really, it might throw your whole life up in the air. You might have to burn off, you know, but, but I don't think, I think it's inevitable. And, and part of like, if you, if you see great stories, you know, what's the definition of a tragedy? It's the, the hero or the protagonist doesn't learn from his mistakes. And, and, and holds on. The Moby Dick is a tragedy because Ahab will not give up on this fucking white well that took his leg. And if you read the book, he just gets sucked in. You'd think it'd be some dramatic thing in the book. Ahab gets caught by the whale. And just, he just, he just dies this quick. It's the soundless. He just gets sucked in. Like, wait, dude, he's been in the book the whole time with the fuck happened. But that's how it happens, bro. You got sucked down and the universe doesn't give a fuck. You're not important. But you spent all that time trying to get revenge on a white whale. And that thing was like, he was just trying to run away. No, no, you're sucking in your crown. It's a great way of looking at life. And, and I, as I get older, the one thing I would have told myself when I was younger, the one thing I would have told myself is I would have said, hey, listen, listen, fuckface, you better tell the truth all the way, all the way across the board, all the way across. Let me tell you something. Yeah. You were in the lesson. You're so fucking right. You know what I was saying to myself, I'm one of God's favorites. These things don't apply to me. I'm clear also. You're charming. You know, what charming is a problem? Got away with a lot. Yeah. Charm and you're fun to be around people like to. You're fun. Lot of friends. Yeah. A lot of friends found my way through. And also we'd like that you were ridiculous. You like living your life completely chaotic. Yeah. But it's also why you're funny. Like, that's the balancing act. It is. As a comic, as a human. Yeah, I didn't want to be too. I didn't want to be the people I knew who got real famous actors. They were so buttoned down. They were so fucking afraid of everything. And I was like, hey, bro, I think sometimes you got to be willing to throw the whole fucking chess board in the air. And you know, it's like my favorite. You want to be funny. Yeah. Yeah. If you if you become too calculated, man, I just think you out think yourself, you lose the magic. You lose the matter. The part of the magic of being a comedian is these sparks of ridiculousness that have to pop into your head. So you have to be able to entertain that part of your mind. I also think when I was young that I didn't want to meditate, because I didn't want to become enlightened, because it would fuck up my comedy. It's true. Why I thought that way? Because I realized that there was a completely different mindset between me as a martial arts competitor and me as a comedian, where I didn't need anybody's approval before. I like that they didn't like me. I used to love going to places and fucking up the local hero. I used to enjoy it. Yeah. I just get a kick out of it all because I didn't have anybody in my corner. I never cheered for me. Nobody came to see me fight. So I was like, I'll go to your place. I'm fucking you up. I liked it. Yeah. I liked it. You're lying in the shower. There was one, there was a fight that I had when I was 19 and I fought in Anaheim at the nationals. And there was this guy who was the state champion. I think it was from Illinois. And I hit him with a wheel kick. There was probably the hardest I've ever hit anybody in my life. Somebody like that. Well, he went unconscious and he never woke up. They took him to the hospital. They took him out on a stretcher. It scared the shit out of me because I remember thinking that easily could have been me. That easily could have been me. But what I do remember was all these people were cheering them. Let's go, Johnny. Come on, Johnny. Fuck him up, Johnny. All these people were trying to fuck silence. Faceplant and then snoring Jesus Christ. And then I remember the satisfaction of that like shot the feels like nothing on your foot. It's going through. I was limping really? Oh, yeah. I hit him with your heel. I hit him with that with my heel and his cheek. Oh Christ. On his cheekbone. Yeah. I was that'll hurt. Yeah. Still are. But the back then when I I was 19, I was fast. So it happened in a breeze, a quick moment. And then I remember thinking afterwards or he went, is he getting up? He's not getting hit. He didn't get up. And then they carried him away in the stretcher and they took him to the hospital. And I never felt the same way about fighting again after that. Yeah, because that could have been you. Yeah. I thought it. I also thought about like if that was me, would I even be the same person again after that? Because I had a friend who fought in this tournament. He fought this guy Jersey long. Who was this Canadian national champion? And he got ax kicked in the head. Hard. And he went unconscious and real bad. And he was never the same guy again. He was timid after that. He never fought well. Yeah. He was he didn't show up for training a lot. He was just and he just like seemed depressed. That's why I think fighters who can who have longevity are very special because one of things you know if you like to box or type one of those specially people don't realize that people get would get knocked out all the time in our studio. But but also boxing like when you get hit hard and you have trouble chewing for like two weeks or you get hit like when I was sparring a lot. I would get hit man and I would get fucking gun shy and my trainer Wayne McCulloch would go your sparring today. And it was everything I could do not to turn my car around. It would almost turn me into a liar. I was like I have to I'm in the hospital. My car just got hit by a truck. Anything. But I would you'd get there and you'd have your fucking your I would wear a a bar because I'm a bitch and a mouthpiece. And I was still always nervous. And that covers them fighting good guys. If I can guys like me fucking weekend warrior it doesn't matter. I'm a person trying to hit you in the face is scary. You know what I think you know what I think meditation does. I think I think the point is and I don't meditate on it's to get out of your own to get out of the way like to get out of the way like a lot of life. Yeah. You get it to disappear. Yeah. I heard a sports psychologist say that he teaches baseball players. He would he would do this mantra which was one to get out of the way. So when you're trying to hit a box it's really precise. And you can't be overthinking. You've got to just be totally reactive. Right. Your your your your eye and your hands have to be married. And do motherfuckers have thrown a hundred mile an hour balls and shit like that. And you ever you ever done that you ever stood in at a plate and had guys throw a hundred miles an hour. I have been saying fucking terrifying. The idea of hitting that thing. Dude it's terrifying. Yeah. And but I wanted to try it. I want to see what it was like. And when you when your job depends on it when when everything rides on it you better get out of your own way. And guys get the yips. That's why guys will go on hitting streaks and then they'll go on long dry spells. They get their own way. But I think part of like all of that meditation. Jamie pull up the fucking Indian army. Did you see this? They were hiking. No in the Himalayas. And they came across a Bodhisattva or you know a monk who was meditating in the snow and it was 40 below. This is recently. Yes sir. You might want to bring this up so it can just. You know it. Custom on always tell Mike Tyson. You don't exist. Just the task. The task exists. I love that. Yeah. You don't exist. He's become a bit of a monk. Yeah. They found this guy. That's my brother's AI. That's a that's an a green screen. This is two or three years old. Shut up. It's fake. Look at that dude. I bet that dude's boring as fuck to talk to him. Look at him sitting there with a dog. I'm meditating covered in snow. Oh and it's fucking on the wheel. Whoa. Whoa. Whoa. He looks legit. Yeah they find these guys out there. Yeah he looks legit. They find these guys. Yeah. I like to see him. There's a guy called Robert Blair. And he's not moving. And the Indian are he's having fun. Yeah. What's the temperature like dogs having fun too though? Yeah but that's the thing that dogs are amazing. That's in Utah. Well like that dog's amazing. You think that's in Utah? I don't know. Come on man. That's real. That guy is. No man. He's he did the DMT breathing. Well you know those dudes in every day are Chandra. You know those guys who take a vow to never sit down. They stand up. Oh you've seen their legs in India? No. Oh bro. They're the standing yogis. How bad are their knees? No they get very close names. Their bodies, their feet start to melt like they but they smoke copious amounts of weed. I mean they're actually high constantly. Yeah. But they they take a vow never to ever ever sit. They are standing their whole life so they sleep standing up in slings. Oh that's what goes. What do their legs look like? You can look that up. Just to fuck you up somewhere. Standing yogas just show me all those things. With fucking. How would you describe it as standing yogis? Yeah they're like the standing, the famous standing yogis or something they're called. Where from? Maybe. Do you know where you're in India? India I think in Calcutta. Yeah sometimes the fairies only in Nickel. You know? You don't have to stand all day you fucking idiot. Have a seat smoke us a car. Exactly. Please. Relax a little bit. At the end of the day they're trying to get laid. I don't know what they're trying to do. They're definitely not trying to get laid right because they don't do it. I think a lot of people are dealing with trauma. I think a lot of times you're going to have a monster trying to or do something crazy right sometimes. Sometimes. Yeah you know. I don't think you become a monk or a shaman. Joseph Campbell did a whole thing. Every shaman he studied he was an expert at comparing western and eastern traditions and he said every shaman ever had gone through some kind of a mental breakdown usually in their teens and they came out of it because they had a society of village that helped them through it. That sort of like understood that it was it was a schizophrenic break but they were going through something and there was something on the other side of that. So they wouldn't medicate them. Standing Bobbaw. This is what is it standing? Standing Babas. Standing Bobbas. What are they look at the guy's foot? Go back to that other image that you had before. It's not a good. What did you have before? That's different. Oh that's Chinese ladies. Oh there's so much. That is the most disgusting thing. The Chinese foot binding like Jesus. I shot my own eyes in 1984 in China. So this is how this guy stands just propped up all the time. That dude looks like he has one leg. No they did. Left his arm on the air too. Oh Jesus. Look at his arm forever. He keeps his arm off 1973. Oh my god he hasn't brought it down since 1973. He sees as a devotion to Lord Shiva. Maybe Lord Shiva like hey hey hey hey hey. Why pit rest? I gave you two arms first. Why pit rest? You can't use the same arm to feed yourself and wipe your ass. You're gonna have to wipe your ass. That's crazy. Look at his arm. I bet I could arm wrestle a shit out of that dude. I bet everything I have. But that's not the point man. Everything I have dude let's go. You know who's into arm wrestling now? Right. Oh god. Yeah. That's a problem. He's been training hard for real problem. Look at that dude. Just high out of his mind. I tell you Brian fuck a white power. What does he do? What is that? No whatever. So that's black power. Black power. That's black power. Which one? White power is the hand? If you stand if you extend your fingers. It's a white power. It's a big slap. So white power is just basically a bitch slap. Black power will fuck you up. Correct. White power is just yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And Hitler did this. Yeah. Everybody else did this. He did this. He's running like when CNN was attacking me. One of the photos that they would use all the time was me at the UFC waving to the crowd. Like this ladies and gentlemen, welcome to guys. They would use me standing like this. This one is like ugly Justin Baldoni thing. Yeah. When you see what the New York Times did to Baldoni where they took every one of those things out of context. And Baldoni was like really? How about I see you for $250 million. Yeah. And he's got fucking 90 pages of receipts. It's going to be very interesting. Yeah. Very interesting. It's interesting how the mainstream media just continues to go down this road of discrediting themselves. Yeah. I don't understand it. It's well, it's the rise of independent journalism because there are the Michael Schellenberg or the Mattie B's there. There are the Barry Weiss. Barry Weiss. People in the world, Glenn Greenwald, there's people that you could trust that are going to tell you the fucking truth. No matter what. Yeah. That's why I like about the marketplace. The marketplace will find people that you, you can rely on. Yes. To actually is long as there's freedom of speech as long as you don't have censorship. That's Elon Musk. Yeah. That's Elon Musk. I feel like YouTube and now Facebook, they're all coming around. Well, that was one of things. Is Zuckerberg came on yesterday to talk about they've changed their content policy. They no longer have fact checkers and now they're going to rely on community notes. What is that? I don't understand that. These have fact checkers. Yeah. Like someone would say something and someone say that's not true. The vaccine is nothing but amazing. And they'll take off posts to what a community knows. Community notes is what X uses. So like say if you post something, it's not true. Community notes underneath it would, you could write community notes. Okay. So the community notes would be everybody would post it to it. This is not true. And it would come to a consensus, the fact state that this and that, it's amazing. It's the best way to do it because eventually the truth comes out. Yeah. The truth comes out. Brian, I love you to death. You're the fucking man. I'm so happy that you're filming at the club. It's going to be fucking awesome. Are you filming tomorrow night? Tomorrow night tonight, I'm doing two shows just to warm up. Theo von stop and buy, which I'm excited about tomorrow night, seven and 10. Seven and 10 tomorrow night. Beautiful. So that already all shows of course. She's exciting. Of course. Yeah. So excited. I'll pump for people to see your set too. Thanks. It's going to be very proud of it. I love you man. Thanks very much for doing this. Bye everybody.