Three two one boom We're live. What's up, Ray? How are you buddy? Pretty good great to see you man. It's been a while it's been Ten years no more than that really 2007 I moved out of LA Wow damn That's weird. I talked about you in the podcast several times though. You know what I never listen to the podcast until recently Someone told me the second time you said I think three times you've mentioned me probably Yoga Ray yoga Ray all these kids are contact me. They mentioned very yoga ray on the show Yeah, it was cool. I appreciate it. I appreciate you. I appreciate you. Yeah, I always thought truthfully. I always thought Joe Rogan's gonna do something good. I honestly I can tell you that and it may be embarrassing to say but I'm proud of you Oh, thank you. It's been nice. I'm so proud of all you've done. Thank you. That's very nice. That's a fine thing to say though and you've had great Just Joe Rogan time you've had done some great stuff first of all stand up comedian. That's a great gig It's a fun gig. It's a great gig and if I could pick a second thing besides stand up comedian It'd be the announcer. I want to be in the UFC Even if I was good because you get pounded on it's a tough job Right. Yeah, that's why you know what the Thailand see this kid's fight they're retired at 21. Yeah, they could beat up It could beat up the announcer of the UFC And you're also skilled at the stuff most people think the announcers aren't so skilled sometimes you're very skilled I just remember rolling around with you. Yeah, those were some of the greatest Memories of my time in LA is when Eddie opened 10th planet. Yeah, we had a lot of fun I mean it was such a special interesting time of jujitsu. I think That it was going to no no ghee. There's a demographic of jujitsu guys who didn't want to wear a gee anymore Yeah, well, it was a lot of people wanted to learn things that would transition directly into MMA and to not have the Clothes to grab onto it changed the grips and Eddie was one of the very first to really truly concentrate on using wrestling grips Gable grips over under things along those lines and then the other people were still really clinging to the ghee He was like a and I think the thing that I was attracted to about the ultimate fighting when I first saw I think the first one I saw was two You know UFC two and I was like oh man This is and you watch those greasy in action videos and it's like yeah, this is real stuff I want to real stuff. Yeah, and so I started even noticing in my ghee game I just played open guard and I was lax at days ago and I'd always have to tell the guys Hey, do me a favor just try to slap me because this is getting a little unreal I don't want to I want a real life situation, right? And I'm figuring okay I don't want to get by the way. I don't want to get caught up in the ghee no ghee thing right now But I always felt like you know real practical fighting them the guy may not be wearing a tuxedo I think both are good because like you live in New York New York gets cold if you get into a scuffle with someone I hope you never would do But if you did and he was wearing a jacket like yours you could manipulate him with that jacket and they really probably wouldn't know what to do Yeah, you know, this is a real benefit to like being a judo player if someone has a winter coat on yeah Like if you had a fight with caro Parisi and a ronda rouse or something like that and they they're wearing a winter coat They'll fuck you up You know, they just grab that thing Yeah, okay. Yes Well, I'm glad I learned that way. Yeah, it's good way to learn It's good it's good for defense to because the ghee keeps you from just yanking out of stuff and exploding out of things You have to be very patient you have to be you have to use correct technique anyway It was appreciation And it was one of my biggest lamentations of moving away was not to be around that whole posse and then I never Expected it to get as big as it did I know it's good to believe it because back then it was like the seed he used to bring my my big kids who are big now He used to bring them and they used to just box we used to do it at legends No before legends. Oh bomb squad at the bomb squad Wow, that's crazy. That's old school old school. Yeah, that's 2002 Somewhere on that was cool. It was a great time I just got my purple was super excited and then Eddie just got his black He got his brownest black super quick. Yeah, where that he got his brown and then he beat boiler and then he got his black Yeah, I was there that day. Yeah, that was crazy When John jock took it off his back unbelievable That was heavy. Yeah, it was a good place to be a good time It was it's like when you look back at those times. It's an it was an interesting era It was an interesting era for us as humans. It was an interesting era for martial arts There's a lot going on and that 10th planet was really a hub of exciting innovation And still is but it mean back then it was this really unique thing this this completely No-gy branch of jujitsu that's directly connected to John jock Machado Which is a totally very conservative legit John jock was is I mean I was so always impressed with him. He still rolls man He's a nigh and he doesn't get injured like he might have like a little tweak here and everybody's so intelligent And he's so technical and he's just so good that was I'm saying was only because I'm not there anymore But when I was going there I was like this is such an amazing place John jock Academy The quality of fighters you would get there. Yeah Huge I mean that was also at a time where there wasn't a jiu-jitsu in America I mean was you have to travel yeah, you know, you did you just yeah, you had to thought you have to be into it and go somewhere and To have that many black belts at a school. Mm-hmm. That was like unheard of It was in his class one day and there was like 11 black belts. I was like this is crazy And it wasn't like that back no there was a random rolled black belt somewhere and say you know Somewhere in Portland or something like that. Yeah, you had to find them It was a lot of purple belts teaching schools and blue belts teaching schools in some places even that was a great time to get into jiu-jitsu Oh, yeah, like I went I started with Henso in New York. Yeah, I went there the day that Matt Sarah got his purple belt Wow, that's crazy. It's not crazy. It was like it was and was I was such a cool Interesting time in jiu-jitsu that place is still the top place in the world It's pretty impressive and Henso is such a great guy too. He's the best. He's so nice. Sweet. I gave him a CD of my band Just as a gift I just met him and he gave me a crew gun ghee Wow Yeah, that's legit. We're super legit. Crews was the the ghee back. That was the ghee. Yeah, if you had a crew It was a fair trade I wasn't in trade. I just wanted to give him a gift and he just like without thinking just threw it back I mean you had a great attitude. Well, he still does. He's so loved Like I said, I mean that's one of the really nice things about you jiu-jitsu is the camaraderie and the friendship It's like it's very different than I was compared to other martial arts and that the problem with striking martial arts is that you hurt Each other all the time You never developed a sort of closeness that you do with you jiu-jitsu because you're always trying to kick each other's fucking heads off Well, you know, I did stunga yoga for years where it's sort of silent and you're just doing a set series of poses I could be with people like every day for a year and practically never speak to them Right, I remember meeting a guy at the DMV. I was like, I know you you're right next to me every morning for two hours But we've never spoken we're jiu-jitsu you become best friends with the guy that you walk out with like 20 new friends He know each other so well too like you know, and someone's breaking You know, and someone's exhausted, you know, and someone's getting better You know, and someone's really been consistent You know, you roll with someone they're super sharp like what you've been doing like what he's going four days a week now Right, oh wow you see it. Yeah, they become like your best friends. Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's also like We appreciate when someone's really good like if you roll with someone they're really good and they start getting you and they didn't used to get you before You like a pretty like you get excited like I got to ramp up my game Because you're doing something you're doing doing have a different metric with all these yeah Well, I remember you being one of the first guys that I knew that got in the yoga and yoga is a huge part of jiu-jitsu now So many people that train in jiu-jitsu. I think I'm j-by the way. I'm jiu-jitsu illiterate now I still know. Yeah, but what did you when you stopped? Will you brown belt? I was purple I was purple I was purple I was because I didn't I stopped going to John Josh's classes and we just wanted to And I think it's sort of before Eddie started giving out Actually, maybe he did he get he was giving out Actually, yeah, but I just wasn't It was confusing it was confusing because I was sort of with John Jacques, right? But I just I wanted to do the no-guise stuff. Yeah, and Eddie had this natural flex it has this natural flexibility That I related to and he's my size and I related to that and I'm not like I was never super athlete in high school Anything like that. I was short I couldn't but I was flex I was reasonably flexible and yoga got me really flexible And so I appreciate I was like, okay, he has a really great closed-guard game I want to learn that from him and I really sort of like Home day not what he could Give yeah, and so yeah, I never like approached him. Hey can I have a belt? Hmm, do you ever was a vulnerable weird time my life, but you know just don't feel the desire to do it again Yeah, I do every now and then I go back, but I tell you When I train because I trained with you guys and trained with John Jacques, it's hard to go to some It's hard to do it now. It's 20 years later all the stuff I just I just did some Jiu Jitsu the other day was at some school and Someone got mad at me for I guess it's illegal the some of the stuff I did what did you do? Um, I did a biceps scissors. That's not illegal. It's not legal. So no some complain that I sat on someone's chest I do a mount where I put the feet forward I don't remember how I used to mmm-hmm with that. Yeah, and I would crank their neck. Yeah, not to tap them but just to Have them react and give me an arm or something so I had my feet are forward I'm sitting on their mountain pull their head up in the panic or something and throw an arm up right and then I'll take a triangle Or an arm so I did that to someone until you can't neck crank Listen, I didn't know you're going to know that's not a good school It's that's those are legit techniques neck cranks are legit All right, I'm just crazy. You know what you just went too bad. I'm just a little literate. Yeah, but no, I don't think so and here's a deal I don't want to I didn't learn this stuff to win points, right? You know, I want to learn now I want to learn you know, that's how I know this other guy that's on your show James James Wilkes. Yes Great guy. You know, I knew him because I used to do some knife fighting with him. Oh Yeah, he's a tactical instructor. Yeah, he's a real he's super rounded guy Yeah, very round again, but I knew him right when he just started jujitsu You see his he did a debate with I saw a guy I saw about post-docman It's very interesting because that debate really should be like 15 hours long We only got into some points that the other guy fucked up and got incorrect and he get in the weeds with nutrition stuff You know because he was a part of that game changer documentary. Yeah. Yeah I know I heard it documentary was good. I sat down with my kids to watch it. It's interesting It's like there's a lot of it that's not legit and then there's a lot of it It is like you can eat only plants you can you can be healthy eating only plants But you have to do it right and it's not easy and it's different for everybody and some people it does not agree with their body It's not the optimum way for them to eat for some people when they get off of it and just started eating like more Paleo or they started eating grass fed meat. They feel so much better Like I just I just don't know if there is a perfect. I don't know. I do know There's not a perfect diet for any Like for every single human being on this planet It's not like one diet that you could lock in and if you ate that way you'd be fine Everybody's different and people have all these weird auto-immune disorders and shit and a lot of them are triggered by certain carbohydrates and plants and when you eliminate those things from your diet You find all these skin problems clear up and right people are trying to figure what's that all about and there's all these people To think that maybe it's there's certain toxins like oxalates and polyphenols and stuff that exist in plants That might trigger your your gut sensitivity or autoimmune issues in the gut this is so in the weeds man It's like you can go on and on and on and debate about details Mm-hmm and everyone has a point yeah, I'll have a point the the vegan people have a point when it comes to ethics When it comes to animal rights when it comes to like cruelty and factory farming They have a point and then the health conscious people the people that are like, you know, I don't give a fuck about that I'm just I'm just trying to be healthy and I cured up all my my diseases, but you're seeing grasshead meat I'm just gonna buy it from you know ethical ranchers. They have a point too right well last appreciation for Joe Rogan Okay, really for what is I Was appreciating your Independent thinking it takes a lot because it's really easy just to opt into one side And dig your heels in it's bad for you though. It's bad for you. It stops you from actually free thinking and that's a problem with Anything you get it to be so holtics or be it religion or spirituality or be it Ethics and diet Mmm everything everything the way behavior I think people have to realize that you are not your thoughts You are You know, you're not your thoughts You're your person and you you accept thoughts and sometimes become attached to them But they're it's not good to do Sometimes you should be examine those thoughts and don't don't hold on to them as if they're a part of you people argue points They'll argue subjects and topics as if they're arguing they're very value as a person They're very value to exist and it's crazy. It's not a good way to think if someone tells me I'm wrong Everyone's instinct when someone tells you wrong. It's like no you're wrong for you. You're going to this right petty world, but my discipline Reaction when I'm doing it correctly is to go. Hmm. Okay. How am I wrong? What did I do wrong and just do don't take it personally? Just these are not this is not I mean if you've made a mistake That's just a mistake people you're not a perfect person. No one is everyone makes mistakes So if you make a mistake about a fact or a subject or just pause just pause and take it go Okay, what what is wrong and then is this person correct? Are you wrong or are they incorrect and you know can you can you correct them? Without getting personal about it, too You can you that's another thing like can you tell someone that they're wrong or that you believe they're wrong without It getting weird. You know that's that's hard to do as well because then that other person is going to be very attached to what they've said I mean people dig their heels in it's yeah, these are all these are all points. I'm working on in You know my book I'm working on which is sort of extracting all these teachings of ancient yoga, but not Not getting lost in just philosophical thought not getting lost in How to make it relevant and practical, but it's exactly what you're saying. Yeah, it's hard for people It's hard independent thinking is it's difficult nowadays because it's it's it's not the easy way out Right, it's easy to have your clothes picked out for you and your idea How'd you pick down for how you're supposed to look and where you're supposed to and if I'm a Democrat? I'm supposed to be like this and not like this. Do you remember bud bud? Brutsman He was one of the guys that trained with us at Jen Jocks. He was a older guy. You're good. He's my age at the time You know he's in his dirty anyway, but only where's black He's been on this podcast before. He's a good friend of mine. He lives down street from me. He only wears black Okay, he wears black shirts. He wears black pants. I go why remember I go why do you only wear black? And he goes I don't have to think about this way it is good It's a nice way to think he goes in his closet. Oh my god. It's a crazy person It's like all black t-shirts all black jeans like what the fuck are you wearing? But he never thinks he just puts pants on like that's one less thing I have to think about I was like all right That's his thing everything's black easy. Yeah black sneakers check black pants check black socks all right That's his thing And he doesn't it doesn't have to spend time thinking about his image like it's just this is where it's a burden Yeah, that was the one thing I really was relieved from me as a monk I was a monk. Did you know that? Yeah, yeah, you know my bio or I do know I mean Just don't you jetsuit. I don't I don't even know how you called me up truthfully. I It was a weird situation. I was traveling with a bunch of student. I'm a yoga teacher by the way My name's rock enough Ray. Well, how did how'd you get that name? So rock enough was oh my name since about 91 Teacher in India gave it to me. Oh, and I work. I don't work. It works where You you approach teachers that you that resonate with you that sort of speak to you The universe sends you people that speak to you. I mean, I'm sure you found that in your own life There's certain people that explain something better than anybody and it might be at different times in your life And then the teacher feels you're ready and they want to like sort of like give you a mantra So they give you a mantra and the mantra is Montras sound and then sound is very powerful because sound affects the way we think they say as far as Transformation in yoga like we do of something very physical and it starts to transform the body you're into yoga now I've from what I know of you. We both I guess we're researching each other but so Then you have an appreciation for yoga because it radically starts to change your body and then starts to sort of slow down the pace of your thoughts and your mind And you're in and helps with your endurance and your cardio and all that stuff So the grossest way to change is the change of the body and the breathing start to also change your cardiovascular system Your endurance and then of course the sounds that we hear they say are the most transformational and It's almost hard to believe especially coming from the West because in the West we're thinking You know Sounds how's it gonna make me healthy, but it's all about sound that creates a healthy mind a combine a connected mind The mind can the idea behind yoga is it can go to a dark place The mind can go to a very dark place very quick and those thoughts You were just as we're not our thoughts But our thoughts can get us into trouble and get us in jail and get us divorced. They could cause they could the thoughts create an action And so we might have an external cleanliness, but if we don't have that internal cleanliness It's you're not actually healthy So there's a different metric of what health is in the yoga system and we've always taken it in the Western world to be well We're gonna you know health means fitness You know and so we're gonna become fit but you could be fit and be Angry you could be fit and be resentful You could be fit and be Un forgiving and so then the next question is what is actual health then? Where is where what is full spectrum health look like right and that's sort of what I love what yoga addresses? and I feel like what we are doing there in and these great martial arts teachers that we've had teach us is How to be sort of almost like you're fighting this fight? But there's no rage You're not actually even angry at the person. It's actually just You're just doing what you're supposed to do right now. Can I be completely relaxed and do this? Under stress under stress Guys trying to choke the life out of you. Yeah, literally. Yeah, I had I had you know I had a I had a fight back then. I don't like to fight. I'm not like I don't look at myself as a fighter I looked at myself more as a meditative right kind of fight Right at that time probably when I saw you last what happened a guy it was in Santa Monica The guy stole my car. Oh wow. It was my first date with my wife Let's see our first day. We've married 16 years. I stole my car and had you catch him well We are walking up the street and she said oh you left your lights on your car and I said no, I have a I have a sob you need the keys to open turn on the To get the light songs. I can't be my car But my top was down was a convertible sub and the top was down and I was like man, that is my car. How am I lights on and then I realized there is this dude in my car trying to start my car and my wife left her keys in the glove compartment and I guess he opened the glove compartment went into a convertible which was open. I had no longer was one of those old sob nine hundreds I used to have and you put the keys in and he just couldn't start because it wasn't the right keys So I don't I don't know if it was Because of yoga or jiu-jitsu or whatever it was, but I was so calm about it I just said hold my sweatshirt and I was super skinny then. I was like I don't remember my diet was I was a hundred percent raw foodist vegan like you know a buck forty seven soak in wet with a crystal in my pocket, you know And I just said in a very calm way just at home my jacket And I ran I jumped on the back of the trunk. I jumped over and jumped on his head and Then I and I'm small so I I drive real close to the steering wheel and I slipped behind him and tried to choke him But I couldn't get deep enough behind him to get the choke in and it was this big dude I couldn't really tell from when I jumped, but it was a big dude I just said and he said you trying to choke me. I'm gonna kill you But it was such a stalemate because he couldn't move I couldn't get the choke in deep enough and It was just a stalemate and it went on for like three minutes just there Whoa, but I was just breathing and then it went back to grab my face and you do that thing in jiu-jitsu We hope the guys arm with your leg so he had that I had that arm trap. He couldn't move I couldn't move my wife was looking at me. She's not calling the cops. She's just like looking there shocked It's midnight. It's our first date. It's midnight In Santa Monica right down like it's right in by the coffee bean or something. Yeah, and Finally we stand up in the seat or standing in the front seat my windows are up up the top is down I cup his neck and I punch him twice and he grabs me by the shirt He grabbed him by the shirt and we throw each other through the windows Oh jeez and they snap and shatter We fall out of the car over the door and roll in the street and I put him in my guard and then he just at that point I think he just turned and ran and I pulled his shirt off Check this out. I had his shoes His cuz of shoes fell off. They were sort of like untied Adidas His shoes fell off his pants dropped his ankles because they were low I can't sag in pants His baseball hat fell off and he pulled his shirt and I had a shirt and he ran away and We're both covered in blood because there's glass all over us and He runs away in his underwear pulling up his pants in the socks and And That's the story my wife looks I was like why don't you call the cops? She's like I don't know though Sorry, that's the coolest thing I've ever seen. I was like I was the coolest thing I've ever think I've ever done She's like he could have a gun. I was like yeah, I know I could actually killed me I've never you know I don't know how I would react again if that ever happened But that's just what happened I think is because it was sort of like in that mood of this is my duty I have to protect my car right and also the other thing is you are used to like pretty intense conflict when you're doing Judas all the time and then you know we did MMA Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, and all those guys at John Jox Jr. The cops. I'd call them cops or robbers They were speaking like one of well The thing about you did to is you do it full blast, right? You don't you don't break arms or actually choke people in conscious of the tap you let go But you're that trust moment. Yeah, you're going as hard as you can. That's the difference You're so accustomed to that so when you're rolling with this guy also people that aren't accustomed to that they they feel Vulnerable panic I'm gonna do feel it right away. They feel awkward. They feel strange. Yeah, like I've rolled the people that don't know how to roll You just joke joking around rolling with people like come on. I mean, do you do it with you? Let me see what it feels like they're helpless. They're helpless helpless. It's a weird feeling It's like what you look like a normal you look like my size You know you look like you and I should be but you're vulnerable. You're so vulnerable right? It's just like a this such a big learn a little the learning curve is so sharp It's so sharp. It's so sharp, but once you get to like blue belt purple belt like that area like a regular person is really helpless They really are you know, it's you know, it's interesting even with that fight I don't look at myself as a fighting guy Or I definitely don't look for fights But it's almost like you're learning a game. Yeah, and then you realize oh this game is completely deadly Yeah, it is a deadly game. I mean, it's exactly what it is. You're playing a game I'm trying to kill you. You're trying to kill me, but we're really good friends. That's the crazy thing It's like a lot of guys who have technically killed me, you know because I had a tap. They're my they're basically good friends Best friends. Yeah, they're really nice. You know, and I can't wait to try to kill them again It's like it's a very strange thing to practice, but it's very cleansing like the people that do it all time It's like therapy. Yeah, they're so peaceful. Yeah, I don't know if any other I didn't really study marsh other martial arts except a little Muay Thai in Thailand, but um But I wonder if it's you get the same feeling you don't have to pull. Yeah, you don't have to you know either go light or you I mean Thailand it was like I Went to kick a guy and he blocked it with his shin, you know lifted his knee and I got a bruise from my ankle to my knee That was like yeah, it's brutal. It's brutal. Yeah, you have to condition the shit out of your shins It takes years to yeah, that it's just a different sort of camaraderie. This real camaraderie was striking But again, it feels weird because you do hurt each other so you don't have that same sort of bond that you have in jujitsu Also, there's a thing in jujitsu's body contact like body contact is different, you know It's like you're old you're like like people who don't have good friends. They never hug. Yeah There's a lot of men who don't want to be touched by another man like yes I don't know why I'm Not giving a reason why but if you go hey, what's up? You go and hug them or just shake them. They like they're just grossed out Yeah, I'm touching of another man. Yeah, you got to get over that quick Yeah, I mean how many times have I talked about jujitsu with people and the people that don't do it? So you roll around with the guys isn't that kind of gay? People say that all there was a video out there at one time jujitsu. That's the gayest boy around remember that it was from some TV show. Oh Yeah, they're like I'm gonna learn Brazilian jujitsu. Yeah Yeah, well, I mean look some of the positions like being in the guard Or being on someone's back, you know Whatever so you were the first guy that I knew that was really in the yoga back then I knew Hicks and like when that documentary Choke yeah, it's great document. That was a great documentary and showed how much jujitsu and yoga together made Hicks in this really incredible force It was the yoga had affected his mind in this great way because he was able to meditate and he would do all these incredible yoga poses He was so flexible and he had such dexterity of his arms and legs. I mean a lot of people got excited about yoga because of Hicks and but you were the first guy that I knew that really went so Deep into it. You actually became an instructor because when I first knew you I knew that you were in a band and that you You did yoga then a little bit because everybody called you yoga ray But it's like I felt like you were on this path and this this yoga path could tell and then Pay attention to you on social media and following you. It's like well He's really into this shit. I remember when you were moving to New York We had talked online and you were going out there to teach jujitsu or excuse me yoga and I was like I don't even think he does jujitsu anymore. I think he's just all doing yoga now And that's what happened right you know I did music for most of my life With the youth of today youth of today was the band before I Became a monk and then I and at the height of that career. This was a New York City hardcore straight edge band we didn't drink we didn't smoke and we you know Strict that's me that's me more relaxed form So that's what I did as and and The idea of the band we were teenagers we're all teenagers me and my bed buddy Parmananda who also later moved into an ashram so we started this when we were 16 17 and It was a cool scene making our own music and stuff like that, but when we got youth of today together It was about sort of a message of Better living positive mental attitude these spiritual principles like karma and what goes around comes around and respect dignity controlling your senses in your mind and What what led you to that? Oh, no, really? I don't know. I've always been interested in controlling your senses and your mind. And what led you to that? I don't know. Really? I don't know. Really? I've always been interested in my idea of a good time was, this was like 80s in New York City, was you find these like Easty, Westy bookstores that have books on yoga and metaphysics and reincarnation, and just plop it down and read books all afternoon by swamis and sawdews and weirdos and palm readers and stuff like that. That's my idea of what a good time was. And I always felt like life is meant for our self-edification. That's why we're here. We're here on a mission of growth. And when I read books by stages or mystics and things like that, I was always like, I want to be like that. That's what I want to be. That's bigger than anything out there than I want to be. So truthfully, the band, I never really want... I'm not a musician. I play a little bit of everything. I wrote all the songs, but I always looked at myself as more like a seeker and it made me a spokesperson. But then at a certain point in the success of that band, I started realizing, okay, now we're big. And there's a lot of people who are following those sort of principles of controlling your senses. We don't drink, we don't smoke, we don't take drugs. We can care about what we eat. But that's not the goal. That's like a doorway to something bigger. And so for me, I had to step away from that. Even though it wasn't bad or anything, it wasn't what I wanted to become. And it was a certain point in my life. You get to a certain end of a chapter in your life. And for me, at the time it was the height of the band's career as well. We started touring internationally and stuff like that. But I realized there was no amount... And by the way, this was 80s in New York, which is a very cool time, run DMC, Madonna, the Beastie Boys. You never knew what was about to blow up. And you were with all these other people that they were your inspiration and they were your friends and stuff like that. So at that height and excitement, I just said there is no amount of material success I want. That's going to fill sort of like a God-shaped hole in my heart. There's nothing out there that I want. And it was also a very precarious time in my life where not precarious, but a time where my father went into a coma for three years. Oh, Jesus. I know. It's hard. It's so horrible to even say. Think about it. And what happened was he got some unknown lung infection. He was young, 64. The unknown lung infection and there was some neglect in the hospital and his lung collapsed. And so, Columbus are one of these places where he don't, is he dead? He's alive. And it's so confusing for a person that loves that person, how to even react. And I'll say in a humiliating way, I couldn't deal with it. And I sort of shut myself off. And I went and just started working on my music, something I could do. And then at his death, when he finally left his body, I was cultivating a strong desire to go to India and study more. And at that time, it was also studying yoga, Ayurvedic medicine. So he went into a coma for three years? Three years. And then when he died, I'd be... At the end of the coma. At the end of the coma. Never came out of the coma. And when he left his body, I decided, I'm going to India now. That was a sign for me. And I quit the band. And this is at the peak of the band. It was at the peak of Yuta today. Was that hard to walk away from all that? You know what? I was at a point where I was saying, and you've probably experienced this too and I'm sure Eddie probably does too. Sometimes when you become very successful at something, that same thing sorts... The thing that you love, so it can eat away at you as well. Sometimes the people... I'll share with you. I'll have my thought. I remember sitting in an ashram on 24th Street, as she went under ashram. She went under like a swami. He traveled the world. He taught the teachings of yoga outside India. And he wrote lots of books. And there's a library of books. Books store up on 24th Street, where he has an ashram in New York City. And I remember reading this one quote by him in the midst of my life as in a band and being a teenager living in New York City. And it was... The first one was really interesting. Where is your happiness coming from? Is it coming from your day to day living? Or is it just happiness from your ego? And I thought, Where is my happiness coming from? Is it from me being a person that I want to be? Is it from people nowadays they collect houses, they collect cars, they collect so many things. I collected records. I collected rare punk records. And in my brain I thought, oh man, you understand what the music scene was like that? If you're unfamiliar with it, there was a band that was great and they put out 1,07 inch records. And then a band broke up. If a punk scene always grew, so these records you bought for two bucks or now worth, people pay $100 for that record. And so me and my guitar player, per cell, we had like thousands of incredibly rare punk records. That if you remember the world of records, no one played their records because you could damage them. What you did was you put everything on a cassette. And so I started thinking about this quote by the Swami, who said, man, where am I getting my pleasure from? I'm thinking, well my records are pleasurable. I was like, well actually the music is pleasurable. The records are only pleasurable when somebody comes over my house and says, oh my God, you got that record? That record, so impossible to the game. And so once I've read that, it was the first shattering of my concept of self and what is joy and what is pleasure based on my ego. And all those records that I really value, and I have really valuable records. And we started our own record company at the time. So we would basically print limited editions of our band. We put out all our friends records, give it all, Gorilla Biscuits, these were all bands that we grew up with, our own band, Youth of Today. And so we put out these records. We'd make limited edition and then we trade these. It's like printing your own currency basically. To make a long story short, after I've read that one quote, my whole concept of pleasure changed. And I took all those records and I threw them out on stage to all fans, record collector fans. It was all the rare ones. It was so liberating for me to do that. And it was like the first attempt of shatting my ego. That was a roundabout story, but the second part of what that Swami wrote was, and I'm paraphrasing this of course, the diseases of the soul are not new. They're ancient. The soul is pure. The spirit is pure. But it gets covered by lust, greed, anger, and envy. And I started thinking, well not me, lusty. I'm not greedy. I'm not angry. I'm in a band. I have no money. And if you've ever been in a band, it costs money to buy a guitar. Got a guitar, it costs money to buy strings. Got strings, it costs money to buy an amp. So it's just like it's a money pit to be in a band. You get paid 50 bucks or whatever. So I'm thinking not me. But as my band got more successful, I realized, man, I do have, there is money out there that I want. And I remember I got offered money for the first time being in a band. Wow. I can get money. I should get, you know, I wrote these songs. I should get more of that money. You get in the fight with the drummer. No, I should get that money. We should split it four ways. No, wait, I just saw much more. I book everything. And I realized, wow, I wasn't not greedy. I just had no money. I'm covered with greed. All these people hate the greedy, hate the rich, hate the 1%. You gotta see what would happen if you were in that position. Yeah. So that was like my first lesson in like, actually, I'm complete. I thought I was above it because I didn't drink because I didn't smoke because I was a vegetarian. Big deal. Big deal. And it was the, and the spirituality starts to work on these subtle things that are plaguing me. And, you know, the people who really want social justice out there, it's very easy to point the finger at everybody and watch what everybody else is doing wrong. But in on the yogic path, it's about like putting the microscope on herself. Where am I wrong? If I really want to change, how can I start to really do some psychic surgery of my own ego of all these other things that are that are baked onto the spirit? So anyway, that was, I can't remember how you got on that tangent. Sorry, I'm going to tangent. So go up. Feel free to go on tangent. That was, that was my first like glimpse of like where I'm at. And so my point was my success, oh, you said, well, was it hard to give up the band? And I was like, no, I was so over it. I was over because here's another one, envy. That plagues the soul they say. So there's people that are looking up to Joe Rogan. I want to be like that. And there's people that maybe you're looking, oh, you're pretty big right now. I don't know if you're looking up to anybody, but, but they're, the feeling like in a corporate world, someone wants your position. And that plays a person, a person who's not gracious or a person who's like, there's a scarcity mentality. There's a younger, I know in the music world, there's a band coming up and there's a band I want to get to. And I realized that all these real subtle things they were plaguing my heart. And these are the things I wanted to work on. And so yeah, was it hard to give up? No, it wasn't. It was great. I relinquished it. You were on my kind of spiritual quest. I mean, I was at a West. A legitimate one. People talk about that kind of stuff all the time. Like getting spiritual or being on a spiritual quest, but you, you legitimately went on this quest. And that's why I found it so fascinating. That's, that was what it was so appealing to me. It's like, okay, this is a real one. Because there's not a lot of real ones. There's a lot of people that pretend to be on these spiritual quest, but they really just want everybody to think they're spiritual. It's like you were talking about the pleasure. What's the pleasure of owning records? Well, the big pleasure was people coming over your house and think you're cool because you have these records. That's a coolest record, man. That's the same thing with spirituality in a lot of ways. What people love is the fact that someone finds out that you do yoga every day. Someone finds out that you meditate. Someone finds out that you've read these books. The ego so damn sneaky isn't it? Oh, it's so sneaky. And sometimes it's fucking obvious shit. Like, you know, it's like a funny story. Brian Callan when I first met him. He's digitized with us too. Yeah. Yeah. I love that guy to death. When I first met him, I went over his house. He had a apartment in Venice, no door knob. So the door knob had been broken out. So you could just open his door and walk in. Anybody could open his door. And people would walk, he would come downstairs and there was a homeless lady cooking. And his kitchen, she goes, son, you got it going on. And he was like, what? He's just eating my food. She was just cooking food in his house. But I came over his house and he had a book. I forget what book it was. It was something obvious, like, catcher in the rye or something like that sitting on this. I go, it was just sitting on his coffee table. You're not reading that book. You put that book out here so when girls come over to think you're smart. And he's like, you're so right on the front. And we were both hounding laughing. But that's a thing that people do. Like people want a well stocked library, not just to read those books. Read the books then. But it's all books. Yes, but it's also there's an issue where people want people to think that you're this brilliant, erudite, interesting person because you have all these books in your house. Like, there's a factor in that. They say that Jiva or the Spirit has to go through eight elements and each element to leave the material universe is according to the yogis. And they get progressively double in size. And the last one, so the first one is earth. And then that last one is ego. It's the hardest. It's the biggest of all of them. And it's so refined. Even people, you do altruistic things, you do things for yourself betterment. It gets wound up in religion. It gets wound up in diet. It gets wound up in politics. It gets wound up in race. It gets wound up in animal rights. It gets wound up in against animal rights. You know, everything. That ego is the biggest thing. And you can sort of see it on a person too. And almost better than seeing someone else is to see it on yourself. That's the work of the yogi. It's trying to see, man, I was motivated by that. Yeah. That was ill-motivated again. So yeah, it's a constant checking in with the ego. I think that was part of my... Think about it. I came from sort of like a scene where everybody had to be cool a certain way. There was a certain look, a certain dress, certain sneakers, you wore, certain haircuts we wore. And now we're in a dopey robe. And I'm walking around and it... How long were you a monk for? I was a monk for about six and a half years. Wow. Yeah. And it was a great time of life. And how old were you? I was 22. So from 22 to 28, you were a monk. I was a monk. That means celibate, no masturbating, nothing. Seven years. Seven years. Where did you live? I lived in ashrams in India and in America. I traveled all over the world, actually. But it was... But I'll tell you what brought me to that place. After being very materially frustrated and I said those two main factors were some type of material success, I wasn't the Beatles or I wasn't, you know, Michael Jackson, but I had some materials, I had fans. And then realizing how life can get taken away from you in a moment with that precarious place. And my father was at, it just made me start thinking, what the hell am I doing in this short life? What am I supposed to do? Give me some GPS. Give me some where do I go from here? What do I want out of life? What is the home run? Is it just to be very famous? Is that the home run? Is it to be collect tons of stuff? Is that a home run? Is it to live a natural life? Is that a home run? Is it to learn some art? You know, some type of art. Is that a home run? This was my burning question. And now it's still in New Yorker. I was still sort of like, you know, New York in the 80s. I was like a little street smart New Yorker. I'm actually from Connecticut, but I started hanging out in New York City. My parents were New Yorkers and so we stood, my older brothers lived in the city, so I'd visit them. But some time it was 14, I used to just go to New York City. I'm just hanging out on the weekends. And when I became a monk, I went to India. I had saved about 25,000 bucks. Not a lot of money. Not tons of money, but it was, you know, some money I made. And I thought in my brain, okay, this is my cynical self. I'm going to go to India. I'm going to meet a guru. The guru is going to want all my money. This is how it works. But when I actually lived with the monks, in India, especially India, then 1988, there is no central AC and it's hot. There is no heat and it's cold. In the winter, the showers are freezing because all the water's kept on a tank on the roof of the ashram. In the summer, that water's super hot because it's all kept on a tank on top of the ashram. There's no creature comforts whatsoever. You go to bed early, you wake up super early. You go to bed, you know, 8.30. You wake up three o'clock in the morning. There's nothing to buy. There's nothing to purchase. All the fun things that we like to like ease the pain of existence are not there. You know, there's no movies. There's no television. There's no comedy. There's nothing. And so two things happen when you strip everything away from a person. They lose it. They hop the fence, so to speak. And I've seen that happen. Or they learn to find their pleasure from something more subtle. And so when I first went there and saw the joy of the monks, I realized they don't want my money. They don't want anything I have to offer them. I want what they have. That was sort of a game changer moment for me. I want to figure out how to be connected with nothing. What did these guys do all day? I don't know. They all have to do different stuff right there. Everybody does. And every Austroam has got their own thing. Did you have chores that you had to do to earn your food? Yeah, every Austroam is going to be different. And every spiritual path, just Christian monks and monks from different traditions around the world. I'm sure they all got their things, different things. Later I started doing my next band because the interesting thing about the Bhagavad Gita, Bhagavad Gita is your familiar with. It's one chapter of the biggest epic in the world, the Mahabharth. And it's the most studied and discussed and commented on by all the saints of ancient India. People even bring it to politics and stuff. But it's a real conversation between the spirit and divinity. And it's a conversation about just about it's just considered ancient wisdom for all people. So one of the ideas of the Bhagavad Gita is you don't give up what you're born to do. You do what you do, but in a spiritual way. You don't try to wipe out your desires. It's not going to happen. You take what you do and you do it in a way that is going to assist you in your liberation and is going to assist everybody else. So I'll say, I love comedy. But I want comedy that uplifts me and not doesn't degrade me. I like entertainment that when I walk away from it, I learn something. I feel like I'm growing. I feel connected. I don't want stuff that's going to just give me darker thoughts. Like the Joker? I've never seen it. You didn't see it? I want to say that. I live on a farm. I live on a farm. I rarely watch anything except comedy. I love comedy. I think laughing is important. But I don't watch so much TV. So I remember I'm pretty. If I do go to the movies, it's out of like with my wife, let's just, we want to get away from the kids. We want to do something. Right. But there's no plan on what to watch. But I'm open to good ideas. The Joker is a really good movie, but it's really dark. It's really dark. Like you walk out of there feeling really confused. I feel like did I like that? I don't know if I like that. I know it was awesome. I know it was really well done. But did I like that? And it's complicated. We could talk about the Joker for the next two hours. The mind is like a garage. And you become like what you store in that garage. So the thoughts that we put in the mind we got to be careful with. The words. Just what we were talking about mantras before. The mantras are repetitive sounds, but they're considered transcendental sounds. So I chant the Harry Christian of mantras. So the Christian of mantras, you might have known it from the sound track of hair. Harry Christian of Harry Christian of Harry Harry Harry. Harry Ramah Ramah Ramah Harry Harry. It's considered a transcendental sound for the mind. And it's sort of connects the soul with divinity. It doesn't matter what religion you are. It's considered a mantra or sound vibration that is a potency on the man, which where they get the word mantra from. It delivers the man or the mind. So what we store in the mind starts to create our external being. And if you don't believe in it, it's one of those things. We have mantras in our mind anyway. I have things on loop running through my mind that have been handed to me from parents, from elementary school teachers, from crazy young call, whatever we get things handed to us, and we play them on repeat. And sometimes they're mantras of self-deprecation, self-loathing. You're not good enough. And these are the mantras running through the mind. So the yoga system says, notice those mantras. That's part of self-edification or self-realization. You notice what's playing in the mind. And you replace those mantras with transcendental sound. Or at the very least, training the mind to see greatness in people. That's a big thing. Because the mind wants to see, what are those shortcomings? Because if I find your shortcomings, it makes me feel better about myself. That's crazy thinking. If you've got thousands of shortcomings, that doesn't make me better at all. So the material mind, which sees one as so insecure, that I have to lash out at other people to make myself feel whole. And it's just crazy thinking, thinking, where as the yogi trains, I specifically teach Bhakti yoga, which is it's called the yoga of connection or the yoga of the heart. And it starts to deal with all the essence of the teachings of the guita, which is you train yourself to see greatness in other people. And if I start to note, it's good. You could take this from a micro, like my relationship with you. I want to notice all of Joe's great qualities. Now, when you hear that, you might think, well, he doesn't really know me. I got some bad qualities. Immediately makes you a little vulnerable. And you start to think, well, but you appreciate it. And anybody in our life who appreciates us, sometimes they even see things in us, we can't see in ourselves. We want to become like that. That's why this idea of changing the world really starts with your self-connection, is I am a spiritual being. Joe is a spiritual being. And I start to train myself in not seeing what Joe does wrong, seeing everything he does right. And it's a great exercise for the brain. What does that do person do right? What is the good in this person that I'm overlooking? Because I've got these lens. It's a lens that we wear. I'm trying to find shortcomings in people. And it screws people up tremendously, even so-called spiritual people. I've just had a role to speak to you. You could quirk me anytime you want. So you spent six and a half years living like this in the sashram, just trying to sort things out. No sex, no masturbation. What kind of food they serve you? Strict vegetarian diet. And not only that, this is an interesting point too. And it's debated about it, especially, you know, I was a rough food. So these rough foods, everyone's got their take on medicine and healing. Let me share the yogi perspective of it. The missing ingredient in food. The vitamin, the superfood that has never spoken about is love. Food is supposed to be grown, prepared, and then offered. And the offering is not even to a human. The offering is to God. That's called Prashad. Food is first called boga. Boga means it's for enjoyment. And then you take that enjoyment. But before you enjoy it, you're offering it first back like in sacrifice. The idea is that everything in this world is not for me. Everything is, I'm not the center. I'm here to serve the center. So all the food takes on the consciousness of the preparer of the food. So to eat junk food or to have people in very low consciousness, cooking your food, you're taking that into your body. You're taking the consciousness of the preparer of the food. Do you believe that? I definitely believe it. Yeah. I definitely would feel a tangible effect if I walked outside that line. So for years, I'd only eat food cooked by brahmanas, like the priests of the ashram. Or I would cook it myself. Or later, I have a very weird story, which was I became a bunch of my friends that were monks. We started our own band. And we started a record label, a second record label in the ashram. I kid you not. It's almost an unbelievable story. And perhaps the first time historically there was a celibate rock and roll band. But this band ended up becoming bigger than the second band. This was my band, Shelter. And so what happened was this band, when we started though, we were all monks. And we would take a candy stove on tour with us. And we'd pull over the side of the road and we'd make a kitchery with rice and doll and, you know, fan of Greek and coriander and cumin. And we just cook them because we wouldn't eat outside food because if you did, you would feel it. You would feel it. You would feel it affect your mind. Really? I kid you not. That I can say. There's certain things like, I don't know. There's certain things they speak about in ancient Indian literature that I can say. Maybe. I don't know. So you're doing most people or certain things. I know. I definitely experienced that. I think most people are just numb to that. I mean, numb to the effect of taking in the consciousness of someone who is on a low vibration, who's cooking your food, just numb to it. You just eat the food because you're hungry. People are numb to it. The people that aren't aware of that concept. Yeah. Yeah. People aren't aware of the concept. I mean, that's a home cooked meal definitely feels taste better. Taste different or feels different. As opposed to some guy just making burgers at White Castle or whatever. Yeah. So I don't know. It depends on the visual. But is this a perception or is it an actual energy? And does it matter? I think it's both. It's almost like fire is going to burn whether I believe it or not. But there is a concept of once you get that food, you don't eat the food. You honor the food. So it's not going to be like me shoving stuff in my mouth, which I do occasionally. If you see my eating habits. But it should be more of the eating itself should be a meditation. And it's been proven. I'm not one of these guys. There's a thing that's there's a similarity that's going to seem like it's not like it's not a parallel. But in hunting when you hunt an animal and you kill that animal and you butcher that animal and then you feed it to your family. It sounds almost hypocritical. It's not like there's no way that would be a spiritual feeling. But there's a connection to your food that's very, very different. Well, we've divorced ourself from killing animals for the most part. For the most part. Most people hire people. Most people have no clue where their fruits come from. Their vegetables come from. What a what a Brussels sprouts look like when they grow. What bananas look like when they grow. What is ground round? So we've divorced ourself from our food. And that's sort of anyway, I understand what you're saying. Because we've definitely divorced ourself from our food, but even agriculture. I'm sure if you raised cattle and then killed them and ate them, you would feel differently than buying it in a supermarket. But there's something even more intense about the quest of acquiring a wild animal. You're going into this world. The first time I saw a wild deer that I was going to shoot, I swear to God it was like a psychedelic experience. It was like I was looking in the eyes of this thing in its world, this wild world in Montana. And I realized like, wow, this is a different dimension. Like I'm entering into this wild. This thing might not have ever seen a person ever. And it's looking at me and I'm going to take it's life and I'm going to eat it. And the way I was encountering this thing, because it was so intense and there was so many. It was nerve wracking. It was difficult. I was exhausted. We're in the mountains. We're trekking for hours and hours and hours to try to get close to a deer. But the locking eyes with the deer, I was like, oh, I didn't expect he saw you. Like he saw you. He saw me and I saw him. But it was also, there was a sharing of information. There was an acceptance of the roles that we both had that made me realize that this is his life. This is how he does every day. Every day he's looking at mountain lions and there's a wolf over there and there's a bear over here. I got to get the fuck out of here. Like this is the existence. And that bringing that meat home was infinitely more enjoyable than getting something from a store. And also just felt differently. It gave me gratitude. I had a connection to that animal and maybe... more enjoyable than getting something from a store and also just felt differently. It gave me gratitude. I had a connection to that animal and made me think about it. Every bite I took, I didn't take any of it for granted. I meant a lot. I wish that everybody that ate meat when I hadn't hunted. Yeah, it's just not enough animals. There's too many people. We fucked it already. We fucked it already with cities. We fucked it already with large-scale agriculture. We fucked it already with monocropping. We fucked it already with you being able to buy food any way you want. Is the reason why there's so many of us. You didn't like the end of the world, Joe? It's not the end of the world. It's a new world. It's, I mean, obviously right now, ready? Everything's fine. Feel it? Feel that? Everything's fine. We're in this room. It's sustainable. I mean, people look at it in terms of the extrapolate. Like if this happens and that happens, we keep going, oh my god, it's going to be awful in 10, 15 years. Guess what? They thought that when the car came out, they thought that when the printing press was invented. They thought that when people stepped out of the caves and started building huts, this has always been the case of people. We're terrified of change. I'm not terrified that the world is ending, that it's unsustainable. We have problems. We have challenges, for sure. But one of the big ones is that we're divorced from nature in a very, very strange way. And most people are urban population centers. Most people don't encounter nature. If you're in Manhattan, your best bet is Central Park, which is the most bastardized, zoo-like form of nature you're ever going to find. It's not real nature. Like where you live, you live in upstate. We got bears. We got boxes. We got real nature. We got nature. That's real nature. You guys have ticks. Do you get a lot of disease? I don't have Lyme disease, but it's a serious thing. It's a huge thing. I pulled off many ticks. I've got a bull's eyes on my arms. Did you get antibiotics right away? Yeah. Yeah. You got it. They're fuckers. And a lot of kids have lunch. Yes. These where I live. A lot of people have it. It's terrible. It's horrible. They said there's some area of the East Coast where something like 60% of all the ticks. Lyme Connecticut. Well, yeah, that too. Yeah. A lot of people think that that was initially some sort of biological weapon. I heard. Yeah. You ever get to the bot? I figure if anyone knows you do. I don't think anybody's gotten to the bottom of it. But there's enough inquiry that serious people have started researching this. And there's enough real concern that that was the original origin of it. That it really was some sort of a biological weapon that escaped from a lab. Because there's no doubt that they've invented biological weapons. No doubt they've experimented on different ways to fuck people up. And one of them is mass illness and sickness. It's just a fantastic way. Especially if you have an immunity, if you're vaccinated, you can expose other people to it. They had a vaccine for Lyme disease, but it wasn't effective. Not only was it not effective, it actually gave people Lyme disease. In fact, my manager's dad got Lyme disease from the vaccine for Lyme disease. Yeah. Fun times. Yeah. Like, I don't want to get this Lyme disease better get vaccinated. And then also, why don't I joint her? How come I sneeze her in fucking pain every day? How come I can't walk right? Well, you know, when I lived out here, you just have to actively look for nature. We used to go to Stony Point. Mm-hmm. That place. Sure. Pang, uh, I used to take my kids when they were little all the way down victory. I think victory dead ends. And then there's all those mountains in there. Yeah. Victory. Yeah. You just got to make like a plan. And I will say when people come up to our farm, you know, we run a retreat center. And when people come up there, the first thing they think is, oh my God, the stars. It's like we're divorced from the moon and the stars. Yeah. That's the stars are big, man. I remember the first time I went to Hawaii, I went to the Keck Observatory in the big island. And we went up there and we got out of the car and it was like you're in a spaceship. Like you're in a spaceship and you look out a giant window and there's nothing else just space, a movie. You see the full Milky Way and all the stars. It's spectacular up there. And this is one of the reasons why they had the observatory up there because it's really high. It's like the where we were was not the very top. There's the top and then there's a visitor center. That's right. Yeah, the visitor center. I think is like, I want to say like 10,000 feet or something like that. But then you get even further up like 12, 13 and then you hit the telescope up there on the big island. It's fucking amazing. It's amazing. If you get up there on a clear night when there's no moon, which is what we got really lucky because I've been back since one time was cloudy and the other time we fucked up and got up there and it was a full moon and just wasn't the same. Wasn't the same. But when it was no moon, man, it was spectacular like life changing. Like like you look at in all the sudden you have a fresh perspective like, oh, we're a part of the infinite. There's a spiritual experience you get when you just throw yourself under the stars and you're like, oh, I got it. Yes. I'm tiny. I thought I was big. But that's a real symptom. It's a real issue and a real cause of why we're so disconnected and why we're so egocentric and so we're not humble. Like here's here's an example. Where do when you think about people that are humbled, like cool people, you think of two things. You think of people live by the ocean and you think people live in the mountains because those people are confronted by undeniable evidence of the majesty of nature. Undeniable. Like I'm tiny. Yeah. I'm part of something much bigger. You're surrounded by like I lived in the mountains outside a boulder for a while and when you're driving up there, you're confronted with undeniable spectacular beauty that really is fuck every painting then everyone's ever made. You see, so capped mountains with a lake and just trees and you see a deer bouncing across the road. You see a fox like fuck, this is amazing. I mean, just changes your physical state to look at you like, whoa, like no artwork could ever do. But we don't think of it like that. We just think of, oh, there's the mountains. Well, there's something about beauty. Right. There's physical beauty in terms of like you see a woman that's beautiful and you look in the symmetry and you look in a genetics and there's something that's attractive about that because of your DNA. Right. You're you want to breed with this person because this person has beautiful symmetry in their. But there's another kind of beauty. There's a physical beauty in nature that spectacular that doesn't serve any real purpose for you. Like why do you feel that way? Why are you enamored by this, the vision of this glacial river running down through these mountains and seeing these birds fly around an eagle's sores over? Why is that so spectacular? Why is it so attractive? That's I don't know. But whatever it is, there's a feeling that you get when you encounter those things that's unlike any other feeling. And we are divorced from that feeling. It's one of the best feelings that a human being can get when you could sit down. Like one of the best things about hunting is sometimes like you take a break and you sit down on a ridge and you just drink and water and you just look now like fuck. Right. This place is amazing. It's just amazing. You ever do the Grand Canyon? Yeah, I've been but not since I was a kid. Yeah. Another one of those things is like is this even real? Yeah. I know. I mean, but you know what I used to have a bit about the Grand Canyon. About people telling you oh my god you have to go. You have to go. The Grand Canyon is so amazing. I go yeah. You know what's amazing? That look up. Look up above you is infinity. You're looking at a fucking ditch. You're looking at a tiny deal. Go go go. You can see the bottom. It's pretty good. Look up. Look up. You're in fucking space. There's actually quite unbelievable. Yeah. Space is the ultimate one. But that is the one that we're most divorced from. So think about the beauty of seeing nature of trees and lakes of seeing fish jump and amazing. The beauty that I got from seeing the sky from the keck observatory with no moon just all stars. It was just like humbling just humbling beyond words. Like reset my idea of where I fit in and where earth fits in where people fit in and made me feel in a weird way at least temporary before it wears off because it's just you know normal conditioning. Temporarily more connected to people. I felt more more in tune with people more like we are in this together. We're all we all need to help each other because we're all flying through infinity. And any at any point in time a rock could just come down here and slam into this fucking planet. Take a quarter. Just like you did. Yeah. Like it's like a deal with the dinosaurs. Yeah. And kill us all. It looks like that has done multiple times throughout history and they're constantly recognizing these new areas where impact craters happened 70,000 years ago. 100,000 years ago. Yeah, they're always finding them. They're always finding them and they're like, oh, geez, look at this. No one prepared for it. No, we can't. You know, there's stuff, these reductionists, scientists, these guys, you'll talk to them like we have a solution. We could stop it. We could do this. We could do that. But then you talk to the real hardcore people that actually study the complications involved in deflecting asteroids and they're like, no, we need years. We need years and years and years of planning. If we find something coming our way, we know it's coming at us. We need all the best minds in the world and it still might take a decade to figure out how to do something about this. Well, and then we might see the other one that's coming behind the Sun. We might not see one coming from a direction that we're not observing. But when you can't have that one, you can't perceive. Yeah. Yeah, there's a lot of those too. We don't even know. We don't even know what we can't perceive. Right. Yeah. But the vulnerability that comes from that feeling is also very freeing. It's not a bad vulnerability. It's the vulnerability that I got from looking off in the space didn't make me sad or scared. It made me in awe. Yeah. I felt better. I'm my kids went to a Waldorf school. Yeah. I was with that. Yeah. My oldest kid went to one in Boulder when we were really there. Yeah. So they went there, some graduated from there. And my kids went there. They've been home school for the last two years, but there's a strong now they go to this, this survival homeschool camp. Oh, really? Yeah. It's, it may make fire by friction. They're outdoors like all day long flying deer. I was just giving a plug right now, flying deer dot com dot org. But they're outside all day long, like nine o'clock in the morning, three o'clock in the afternoon. Wow. They're built. It doesn't matter what the weather is. It's like, I'd even drop them off like in the rain. I was like, I'm so sorry, but get out. But you know, they become resilient. They become strong. And you know what they do when they come home, them and all their friends, like 13 kids, it's like 50 degrees out. They're playing outside in the drizzle barefoot. And they're just like strong and happy and connected kids. So they get used to it. And I've become like a domesticated dog. Yeah. Right. Yeah. We're sort of like, you know, they're not wolves. Right. They're domesticated dogs. They like their food from a jar. Yes. From a bag. Like Marshall. You met Marshall. He's domesticated. Oh my God. What do you think? He's as domesticated as you get. Yeah. That dog is the sweetest thing that's ever lived. Oh, like Marshall, your dog. Yeah. Marshall, the dog. I'm actually like, I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I didn't expect. I was like, yes, he did. No, no, I'm sorry. Yes, that dog is tree. Yeah. He's well, he's well, he's the sweetest of sweetie pies. Sure. But that is a domesticated animal. I know. I know. When I ran out of coyotes on, he's like, hmm, I had coyotes coming to my on my property and a sheep. And so I got my dog all rock. Oh, let's get those coyotes. I ran outside the dogs. It's like, goes back inside. Yeah. Yeah. You got to get a dog's used to coyotes just like your kids are used to the outdoors. Yeah. You got to get a dog who knows the coyotes in enemy. I'm living my, I'm living, reliving my childhood. That's interesting. My kids, how far away you from civilization up there, you know, the cool thing is not that far. If I need to go to an apple store or something, it's like an hour to Albany. That's not bad. Yeah. Um, two and a half from Boston. Oh, you only two and a half hours from Boston. And two and a half from New York City. Oh, that's not bad. Yeah. Super soul farm. And, uh, yeah, it's, uh, we do like our yoga workshops and things there. And so the people traveled to you, people travel to us. We have weekends, we have a whole second, you know, 5,000 square foot house for guests. A yoga studio on the property. It's amazing. It is cool. It got a free, got a swim pond. Wow. It's something cool about when it's hot out, like it does get in the east coast. Yeah. You could just jump in a pond. Oh, yeah. Yeah. But you also get parasites. We wrote careful. Don't drink that one. I drink it, man. It comes right from the man. I thought I'd drink spring. Okay. Well, you're pretty high up then. Are you high up? There's nothing above me. Okay. Yeah. Then you're all right. Sort of an avallion. It comes right from the hill. The real issue is beavers. Yeah. If something dies above, I get, well, shit, too. It's beaver fever. You get jardia. Right. I drank out of a lake in Alaska. And I was like, really tentative. I'm gonna drive out of a lake. But you can because this lake is a glacial lake, or excuse me, it's a high elevation lake. And there's no beavers of that altitude. It was on Prince Wales Island. And you can actually dip your your thermos into this lake and drink it. And it's the cleanest, clearest water you've ever seen. It tastes perfect. Exciting. Yeah. It's actually exciting. Yeah. I think when I first moved to the east coast, I was just looking up different springs. Saratoga Springs is a great place. There's just all these natural healing springs. Who should test that water that before you drink it? They're probably going to bring it to someone to shake that bitch up. There are ones that are just coming out of the side of a hill that just go to. Yeah. You bring up the basis. We have an artesian well in our property, which means it's just naturally coming up or, I'm teasing. I gotta get the wicky on that one. But I think it's that pressure of the pressure of the downward push is forcing it up. What is the work? Yeah. Artesian, I always see it used in terms of like handcrafted things. Artesian? Yeah. It's like an artisan. That's artisan. That's artisan. Artesian work. I think that's how artisan. I'm sure I'm fucking this up. It was a bit of a struggle. What is that a cover of your phone? This is our podcast. We do wisdom of the sages. Oh, you have a podcast. I have a podcast. I'm waiting for my mom to start one up. Wisdom of the sages. It's we do it. It was born out of an hour. The podcast. Okay. It was born out of an Asian. Related to or detonating a well-boarded perpendicular into water, bearing, strata, laying. I hate when I read something that makes less sense. At an angle so that natural pressure, I think you're kind of getting it though. Natural pressure produces a constant supply of water with little or no pumping. The water from our artesian well. Okay. So I was fucking in with artisan. I was connecting the two of them. I spoke at that way when I looked at it for that's ART, I S A N S I A N S I A N S. Yeah. The place that I lived on Boulder had a well was amazing. You'd get this beautiful spring water like straight out of the ground. It's just incredible. All your water that you drank was just perfect spring water to come out of these copper pipes. It's great. There goes artisanal versus our tea. Artisan is pronounced artisan. A person skilled out in the plaid art. That's where you go. That's a person. Yes. Describes water with spouts out of the earth under natural pressure. That's it. Yeah. And so sometimes these old houses in upstate New York or Massachusetts have water that's just coming up and they build a tank in the house to hold this water. Yeah. Great way to get water. If you think that's going in your body on your body and your skin in your mouth, it's becoming you as long as no one's fracking nearby. That's a that's that's problem. It's a massive problem. Have you ever seen that movie Gasland? No. It's a great movie to talk about. It's heartbreaking. You angry. It's heartbreaking. Yeah. Because they're doing the right. There's people in Pennsylvania that it was just reading a story about recently where they can't drink their water. They can't shower with their water. They have to get bottled water. They travel someone else's house to shower. It's fucking horrific. It's heartbreaking. Yeah. They poison the water supply with this desire to get oil. But on the other hand, we don't need Middle East oil anymore. So everybody's like, look, the United States produces we're self-sustaining. We no longer need the Middle Eastern oil. But yeah, but what about these fucking people that can't drink their water or it comes out of the spout and they could light it on fire. My teacher, Rod Knott, Swami, who you would love on the show. He wrote a great book. If you ever want to breed a good sort of a modern day autobiography of a yogi. It's about a a Jewish kid in the 60s travels hitchhikes from London to India. Whoa, you can do that. Yeah. But most part, you can. You gotta go through Afghanistan all these tough. Ooh. Cyber pass and he hit our game. He hit our game. He hit our game. Afghanistan? That's gangster. It's super gangster, man. He had a great experience. But it's an all real adventure too. And he ends up in India living in the Himalayas with Saddus. Wow. Incredible. Incredible story. It's called auto bug. I'm on a journey home autobiography of an American yogi. Wow. Yeah. I want to talk to that guy. You good hooking up with him? Yeah. He's great. I spent a month with him every January. Really? We do a we do a teacher training, a yoga training in India every January. I just got back from it. Yeah. I saw it on your Instagram. It's great. It's super fun. We do. We have three academies. We have a music school. where we study Indian music in Kirtan. We have a 300 hour training for people who are already teachers. And we have a sacred literature. She studied the Bhagavad Gita and all these sacred texts. We were talking about that before the podcast. I really wanted to get into that eventually. It's not like the mystical aspects of the Bhagavad Gita and of the Mahabharata, all the ancient Indian texts which are filled with really wild out there. Shit. I mean, it's all real. That was real. In my way. Just like all the things that you say, like, well, that's interesting. That's fast. Fascinating. That's fantastic. The more you get into it, you realize that's freaking real. Like what? Look what's real. Everything from like the Vymanas, Vymanas, things like that. I can't say a real, but I could understand how things can be made of subtle energy. What could be Vymanas? Vymanas like a spaceship. It's a spaceship from and they speak of spaceships and flying crafts. But they're not made of the same elements of this earth. Right. So we have all these things about, you know, and I get it. There's a bunch of people making up shit about about, I saw an alien, etc. There's also very qualified people, you know, air force kernels and things like that. I've had them in here. You've had them in there. No, we're coming. They suffer from the same thing. These people who claim abduction. It's not like a type of neurosis or schizophrenia. They suffer from post traumatic stress and drugs. Yeah. Like something happened. They disappear. They were found two weeks later. Do you remember the story of Betty and Barney Hill? No. It's the most famous abduction story. It was an interracial couple from, I think, it was the 1950s or the 1960s. And just random. My interviews always go here. I had this girl on the podcast, this woman on the podcast yesterday. She's an MMA fighter named as Angela Hill. She's a couple days ago actually. This badass MMA fighter and at the end of the podcast, she goes, I forgot to bring this up. My grandfather is Barney Hill. I was like, that guy. I'm like, no fucking way. That guy, Barney Hill, was the very first, like really public UFO abductee. And there's, record any, it describes as craft that's eerily similar to the crafts that Bob LaZara has described and different people described in the he and his wife lost time while they were driving. And then woke up with these bizarre horrific memories that they both shared of this encounter with these space beings and that they were abducted and they were medical examinations were run on them and they were replaced with missing time. And it's crazy. If you listen to recordings of him being hypnotized and going through it like screaming in fear that they're touching him and where they're taking him, what are they doing to him? It's not like a guy acting. It's not like a scene in a movie where someone's screaming in fear. It sounds real. And the teachings of ancient India is that life exists on all planets. It even exists on the sun. And so the first argument we like, come on, how are we going to exist? They just don't have bodies that are different than yours. They don't have a fire body. And therefore, I'm trying to look at, how does a person with earth and water body live in the sun? They can't. Right. You have to have a body. I mean, I used to think like this when I was 13 years old. Right. I used to think like, okay, why can my dog hear those sounds, but I can't hear them? Right. What am I missing? What sense am I missing that I can't have objective reality? You know, what am I missing? Am I missing a sense? Well, I have this, this principle called the the fart theory. Like if someone farted but you didn't have a nose, you'd have no idea. You'd have no idea. But oh, God, what is that? That fart theory is the beginning of transidental thought. Yeah, because it's there's a sense that you possess that allows you to access recognize something that's invisible. You can't see it. You can't feel it. You can't hold it. There's no way of detecting it other than your olfactory senses. But through your nose, you can detect that something's awful. What sense am I missing? Right. Keeping me from understanding absolute reality. Sure. I mean, that's one of the things that you feel when you take psychedelics. Like is this opening up some new sense that I was, I mean, is this around me all the time? I'm just not tuned into it because I don't have the right chemical composition flowing through my brain. When I start to teach a bigger training, like a yoga training and philosophy, that's one of the things I do mainly. I start with this concept of this is how you understand. Like when I first approached teachers when I went to India, I would say things like, and I'm reading this my heart. I think it's a great book. A lot of great lessons here. But come on, we're adults. Are my supposed to understand that a elephant-headed man scribed this entire book? Can't we just extract a useful lesson? And the answer was very good that I got was, and it was very sweet. It wasn't like cruel. He just said, what do you know? It sort of caught me off guard. Like, what do you actually know? Right. What do you know? And I, and use this example from New York. Okay. Suppose 300 years ago you're living in New York, your family's living in New York, your tribe is living in New York. You have a certain amount of animals and animals that you keep animals that you ride, animals that you hunt, foods you eat. And then one of you goes on a boat to Africa and you come back and you think you're never going to believe what I saw. I saw a striped horse. You think, well, I've seen striped horses. Whitehead, blackneck? No, no, no, no. I saw striped horse. If you've never seen a zebra, it's almost unbelievable if all you know is ponies. Or I saw this horse with a really long neck that ate the leaves on the trees. Come on, man. It's all fantastic because we've never seen it. But that doesn't mean it does. So to really understand the Vedas, the teachings of ancient India, you have to go into it like not that it's all real. I'm not saying to just blind faith, but I'm not saying don't be a blind doubter. Like it's all unreal. That's bullshit. That's crazy. That's nuts. It's got to be could be. I don't know, but I don't know a lot. What do you think that, what do you think like Ganesha was? Ganesha being. By the way, when I speak, I'm speaking, it's not my feelings. Whether I'm right or wrong, saying this is what I'm a yoga teacher. So I teach with the yogis teach. Vanesha's Ganesha's a being. He's a jiva. Jiva means he's a soul. Like in India, they say, you don't have a soul. You are a soul. You have a body. So the body's change, but the soul is eternal. So that's called the jiva tatva. You understand that you're separate than your, we are separate than our bodies. We were like you said earlier, we're separate from our thoughts, we're separate from our subtle body, our mind. So you take on a different Rogan machine, a Raghunath machine. And sometimes the machines are good at warfare, fighting. Sometimes the machines are good at art. Sometimes the machines, they're just like a different vehicle. You would drive the different. So you got a Porsche or you got an 18 wheeler. They're both good for different things. So in the same way, we have some karma. There's a requirement, you have some karma to have this body that has such good fortune or poor fortune or some great success. And it's the karma of the body, but you have to leave that body. So Ganesha's also a post, Brahma is also a post. You could have been a Brahma in a previous life or could be one in a previous life. And you get a body just like you get a body in this life, according to how you act and how you behave and how you think and the people you associate with, they give you a body. For example, if you and I grow up together and all we talk about is martial arts, we got pictures of Arnold Schwarzenegger on our wall. We start to create a body that emulates those heroes. And if we couldn't care less, then we just like watching TV and do nothing. We get a body according to, so in this lifetime, we're making bodies, then we're making our minds, we're making our intelligence. But the yogis say that everything that we do is a practice. Just like, I just found out today that you were a tight-cleanedo champion by reading your bio. I know you read my bio. I got a no more. I just know you from just rolling around with you that type of camaraderie. So you got that way from a practice. It didn't just like spontaneously come you practiced and you bring that practice with you wherever you go. And you can get better at the practice or you can get a little down the practice. But the yogis say that everything that we do is a practice. It's our thoughts, our intelligence, our skills, our spirituality, our addictions. They don't just fall from the sky. We work on them. And that's why there's these things, which is another thing. I don't know if you've ever done this on your show, study the lives of what do they call the savants or like these prodigies? Unbelievable. Four years old, musical prodigies. Where's that coming from? The yogis say it's not random. It's not weird. It's not quirky. It's not unexplainable. It's a practice. Or that was that child chess player from Norway who could play like six people backwards and meet them and not, he was not facing them. He's memorizing where do you get that type of intelligence? The yogis say that's a practice. Or Mozart and Chopin virtuoso is at four. How? And you'll see like the saints of India will be spiritual virtuoso. Like from a very early age, like my teacher's teacher's teacher, like a grandfather teacher, he was like a master of Sanskrit at age four. Whoa. And could give class on it. Imagine that at age four? You know what I was doing? I was doing at age four. I was wrecking shit. I was breaking things. Yeah, lightning things on fire. You know, Shankarachari, another great like teacher of India, age eight, he renounced the world at eight, initiated 10,000 disciples, changed the course of all of India at eight. He wrote commentaries. He could come to a university, re-commentaries on the Gita by this person who at age eight walked away from his mother and said, I'm leaving for the forest. It's unbelievable. This stuff's real. You find this. And I tell you, when you go to one of the fun things I do usually is I do that school in January of the Academy. But in October and autumn time, I do a pilgrimage where we go to holy places. And I take students like 30 or 40 students to holy places. And we just meet interesting, cool people. We go we go to temples. We'll go to sacred places. We sing. We sing. It's fun. It's at the very least, it's like a fun experience. But it's also like very transformational. So we'll go to sacred places. We sing, we sing. It's fun. At the very least, it's like a fun experience, but it's also like very transformational. And you just meet the most fascinating people. It's still there. India's changed dramatically since I went there in 88. But how? How so? Oh, man. It's like the whole, you know, I mean, there was no phones. You want a phone, you go to the village, there's one phone in the village. And also because when the internet came, if you think about India, it's such an interesting place. Like when Greece was in its infancy, India was like a respected hub of learning, metaphysics, spirituality, et cetera. So India, it's been invaded by moguls, by British, by Portuguese. So many different cultures came there. And they can never really quite change it. It was so woven into their DNA, what they were. Nothing changed it until my lifetime. And I watched it. I watched when cable TV hit India. And it was paradigm shifting. Because you got to think, you know, people dress, you know, you got to Germany in the 80s. People dress different. You got to Italy in the 80s. People dress different. I mean, there was no like globalization of, now it doesn't matter. You go to Paris, Beverly Hills, Scranton, Pennsylvania. There's the same Victoria secret. There's the same gap. Oh, you don't want to dress like gap. Well, we got this other store you could dress like. And they're just selling us sort of the same thing. People used to go places for spices, places for silk, places, right? India was sort of like that too. You went there and you feel like, I'm not another freaking planet. And now you got to dig a little deeper to find that. That's why I recommend people go as soon as possible because everything is good. I mean, we're in the valley right now. And there's one point up on one of these streets up here. We went to fall your heart yesterday. Have you ever been that restaurant? Yeah, sure. Love that place. It's a great place. It's a great, great little grocery store too. Great grocery store. But there's one little tiny block where it looks like the valley from 1950. And then there's massive high rises around it. And so we've walked in our lifetime. We watched places just get paved over. And it gets sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse. But truthfully, there is a disconnect with nature often. Even sometimes in the, it's better now. That disconnect with nature, I sort of just like, I feel more connected. I mean, I now I take people until I'm originally stay at hotels and it's definitely not like the old days when I used to slum it in the ashram's. But I miss that slum it too. I miss sort of like just being out there in the elements. When it was freezing and there was no heat or forced to take a cold shower, you know, there was no creature comforts. You took a bus. And you enjoy it now looking back on it. I enjoyed it then. Yeah. There's something pleasurable in renunciation. I bet you identify with that. Yeah. When you have to do something that you don't want to do for a higher purpose, but you're going to do it anyway, there's a pleasure you get. This is a giant roundabout we went to, but I want to get back to Ganesh. Oh yeah. So what do you think Ganesh is? Ganesh, they're higher beings. Now you might say, well, what the hell is that, me a higher being? The idea in the invading thought is that there's Davis or higher beings. And then there's the David T. Davis. Like a G'dayo Christian tradition would say God. How much of what these people were experiencing and talking about in the Bhagavad Gita and all the texts has to do with Soma and has to do with psychedelic rituals that they were participating in while they were doing these things. So that's so funny. I can't believe you've said that. Yeah, it's a commonly known thing, I think. Yeah, Soma is a beverage on the moon. Oh, okay, the moon. It sounds good. But it's a beverage. It's just like it's a commentary beverage, a psychedelic sacrament that we haven't established. By the way, I'm speaking like a matter of fact. I understand. I don't know this. Yeah, I'm saying it could be true. And this is what they teach. Right. That's how we learn the Vedas. Glory and ingredients. It's otherworldly. You can't try to recreate it on earth. There's plants. They say that grow. They don't grow here. And there's beings that grow. Now we just hear these stories. I mean, it's myth. But you know what? The zebra's a myth. I live around a bunch of beautiful turkeys. But if you've ever seen a peacock, turkeys look like bull. You know what I mean? Peacock are unbelievable. Yeah, pretty well. A ketsal is unbelievable. I'm not a ketsal. Ketsal is a South American bright colors. What's his name? Crazema. Crazema world. Oh, there's feathers on his own hat. So if all you know is robin's an occasional cardinal, when you see a ketsal or a peacock, it's like, what the? Yeah. So someone could say, well, you know, you're really going to believe in the wind, God, come on. But we say, hey, look, there's an ant on the table. And I blow on the ant. They ant runs for his life. In the ants brain, he's not thinking, oh, Ragu is blowing on me. He's just thinking, danger, danger, danger. Yeah, I'm actually being. I'm a being with a family, with ideas, with thoughts, with a home. So the yogis say, you don't know. But they say that everything is a personality. Not just you, because in one sense, if I look at you, you're just a big lump of earth and flesh, you know, water, blood, whatever you, whatever you want to, whatever lens you want to look at the periodic table, earth, you know, Chinese elements, and Indian elements, however they're going to look at matter. But you're not. The yogis say you're not that. You just have that. So they say the earth itself is a being. It's a living being. And all the animals are living beings. And outside of the earth, there are living forces. All the planets are beings. That's why there's, here's, get ready for a detour, that's why if you study geoteash or Vedic astrology, there's different mantras to the different planets. Because the planets affect your karma. So some people want to, they realize, man, like I would love to get your chart done. Because when you have people like yourself, or even myself on a lesser level where we have some, some types of extremes in our life, you can read it in their chart. It's, it becomes very obvious. Same with criminals. It's in their chart. Really? If, if you really knew how little control we have of our life, it's shocking. Now this, what kind of astrology is? They call geoteash or Vedic astrology. And it's based on, I'm no astrologer. I just have, have had my charts done a lot. It's an ancient system. It's not based on the sun, it's based on the moon. And what do they need to know? They need to know your, your birth time, your longitude and latitude of where you're born. Like for example, I was born on, I'll tell you a good story. Do you mind? Sure. I went to a great astrologer once. And these guys are really like simple, humble, like humble people. And he lived in an ashram and I said, I want to know my chart. And he just said, I'm not very good. I said, come on, I've heard you're the best. He said, I'm not very good. And I said, but I will tell you what Parashara thinks of you. Now Parashara was the father of the person they say, scribed or spoke all the Vedas, Vyasadeva, who was one of the great sages of India. So Parashara was his father and he's responsible for geoteash or the, what's called the horror chastras. Where they get the word horoscope from. And these are all to do with studying the luminaries, studying celestial bodies, and to pinpoint you in relationship to them. So he said, well, at a certain period, when you were born, there was a rising star. A rising star. And from that star, we can calculate your chart. So he asked, I gave him all my statistics, birth time and date and longitude and latitude. And then he opened up these books that he had on a shelf. It's got to know me from Adam. And he just goes, this is the star of music and spirit. And you will spread music and spirit throughout the world. Whoa. It's pretty right on. I've been through some very powerful astrologers, palm readers, mystics who don't even need your palm. They say they're astrologers or they say they're palm readers. They look right in your face and tell you all about your life. And I kid, and I'm not one. Like I've met many who could blow your mind. I would have to be someone who doesn't know who I am. Yeah, well, it's hard for you. But I'm less known. But in India, no one knows the anyway. Right. But they don't want to have to go to India. You know, it's one of those things. And I'm not one of these new age guys. Like I'm a New York skeptic. OK. But you believe in Ganesha. But I believe Ganesha could be. Could he be? Sure. Sure he could be. I think most likely people were taken so well. And Ganesha appeared to them then. Or that could happen too. I've seen things on psychedelic experiences that are very similar to that. Very similar to a God. I think psychedelia can bring you into this otherworldly realms. And even according to the Vedic concept is there's other realms and everything's divine and everything's a person. And there's 33 million gods. And then of course, and that's within the material universe. Right. And the material universe has higher planets. It has lower planets like the Christians would say hell. But they talk about whole mandalas or discs, and layers of hells. But they would they, differences from Christianity. I don't know where the Christians actually got it from. Or when it was added or subtracted. But the Vedas teach about none of them are eternal, meaning you don't stay there. Just like we don't stay here. We're just sort of doing time on this planet. We do time. We're learning less than you get some karma. You get some good or bad karma. But and if you don't learn your lesson, just like jail, if you don't learn your lesson, sometimes you get added and added sentence. What do they call that? Yeah. You get two life sentences. But sometimes people are out early. They get purl, they get part in. Or they get, or they just say, OK, you're in charge of the library. You're not dangerous. You're not a threat. And we're going to let you out. You're the behavior. So according to how we behave in this world, we're perpetuating ourselves. We're going way low. We're sort of going high. And people go high all the time. It's impressive. And you take that micro and put it on a macro as well. And to the degree that you sort of don't learn your lessons, you just, that's okay. I've noticed in my own life, if I don't learn a lesson, I've got to get that same lesson again. Mm. You know what I mean? Yeah. I've had this conversation with someone about the idea that you will live your life over and over and over again until you get it right and that you'll be reborn. You'll have the exact same existence and you'll do it over again. And this is a concept that some people believe in. Now I said, how do you feel about that? And they're like, that's terrifying. And I'm like, why is it terrifying when living is not? Right. It's the same thing. It's the same thing. Like, right. Like, if I had to live this life over and over and over, look, I'm having a great time. I have a lot of great friends. I have a fantastic family. I have a wonderful thing that I do for living. I, I, I, I, I'm very, very, very blessed. I'm very fortunate. If I had to do this forever, why the fuck would I complain about that when I'm not complaining about it now? Maybe his life's not as good as yours. But am I, am I scared of the eternity of this existence? When I'm not scared of the temporary nature of it? That doesn't make any sense. Like why would I be scared of something that's ultimately very pleasurable? Like I enjoy life. I enjoy my children and my wife. I enjoy my friends. I enjoy my occupation. I enjoy, I enjoy reading. I enjoy watching documentaries. I enjoy encountering new things. I enjoy these things. Why would I be upset if this went on forever? Why would I be upset if I'm going to be reborn again? And then I'm going to be confronted with the exact same problems that maybe I fucked up when I was 10 and 20 and 30 and 40. But this time I'll have a better insight. I'll have a subtly better perception of what is the correct thing to do? What's the best thing to do for everybody? What's the, the moral, the ethical thing to do? And I don't know why that's terrifying to people, but it is. It's terrifying. The idea of doing it over and over and over again. Iliogracy believed that. Iliogracy believed that you must do the exact right thing at all moments in your life. Or you're going to live your life over and over and over again until you get it right. I don't know what's... Those graces were connected with it. Oh, I mean, right? Well, they were connected with everything, man. That's one of the most spectacular families is it's they're going to wash the face of the earth. I mean, you want to talk about a contribution. Like the contribution that the graces have made to martial arts, including our instructor, John Giacmancato, who was frightened, he's a cousin of the graces. Like they're all, they're all trained together. They're all together. That, that family, Iliogracy, you know. I don't believe. Yeah, I mean, every Carlson, all those people, they, they created this most spectacular martial art out of the origins of Japanese Jiu-Jitsu and Giudo, and then introduced it to the whole world and literally changed hundreds of millions of people's perceptions about fighting out of the small family in Brazil. It's unbelievable. It's amazing. They're all champions. They're, the whole families filled with champions. And look, that's what made our, you know, that's what made our friend Eddie. When Eddie tapped out, Huyler Gracie, and Huyler was the most... The most eruption to the family. To the partition. And I was there. I flew them to Brazil. Yeah, we flew together. With, well, it was there. The blonde, Jamie. Jamie. Yeah, Jamie, who will... Jamie Walsh. I don't know what I haven't lost touch with them. I don't know. He owned a moving company. He had a fight organization for a while called Penn Gia. He was putting on MMA fights. Yeah, Jamie was my trainer for a long time. Oh, really? He was a really good trainer. He was good fighter. Yeah. I remember, I didn't know you went. I know he went. Yeah, we all flew together. 2003, flew down to Brazil, and Eddie caught Huyler in a triangle, and I'll never forget it. I was watching it happen. I mean, I was right there. I was on the side of the map. Let's get that up on the screen. I was watching it happen. I was, I watched the triangle get locked up, and I'm like, oh my God, he's got him. Oh my God. I was like, I was thinking, Huyler, probably he's gonna get out of this. Right? He's Huyler Gracie. But I'm like, that doesn't look like he's getting out of that. That was so locked in, and Eddie had that masterful guard still does, but he always had this incredible guard, and it was unique. Yes. If you're not used to somebody's game. Mm-hmm. Yeah. I don't think it says anything bad about Huyler. Oh no. But it does say that there's a create, Eddie is genius, he's creative. Like, like his music was... And he tapped another world champion right before he tapped Huyler. He tapped Gustavo Dante's right before he tapped Huyler. I was there for that too. And I was like, holy shit. And Eddie was a brown belt at the time, which is really crazy. But then when he locked up that triangle, I mean, I'll get emotional if I think about it. I mean, I was there on the side of the mat watching. And I was like, I can't bear it. There it is. So he tries to, what he did is he threatened on one side, and then cinches up the triangle. You know what? Tell me what the crowd was going like. He's doing total silence. Let me tell you what happened. What they had done before this had happened, see, and then he starts pulling the head. And once he pulls the head, this is right where Huyler was fucked. He's tapping, he's tapping. He had a tap, he was going to sleep. And he pointed to Jamie, who's right there in his corner. And then I'm... The whole crowd must have been like, yeah, he'll just happen here. Who is this? And then he walked off, and then he made it look like it was no big deal, because he had a fight Leo Viera right after that. He had fucked up his ribs somewhere in this scramble too. When he fought Leo Viera, he was really messed up. But when you guys came back that day, it was on hand pneumonia. It was unbelievable. It was pan-to-monium. People, it's hard for people outside of the Jiu-Jitsu world to understand the magnitude of that accomplishment. But for me, Eddie's my best friend. So, flying with him to Brazil was like... Epic. It was just this ultimate support thing. It was like, we're going to do this. I'm going to help him. He's going to do this. But when he did it, do they shut off all the matches? What was happening? They killed all the matches outside of this main match. And they put it on television because Hoeiler was the multiple time world champion. He was the most accomplished. I don't know what I mean. He was the most accomplished Nogi grappler. Well, even G. I mean, Hoeiler in competition had accomplished more. He had competed more than any of the other graces in straight Jiu-Jitsu. He had competed in MMA a little bit. But like, Hoeists obviously accomplished the most in Jiu-Jitsu in MMA. Hoeists was the innovator. He was the first guy. UFC won, UFC two. That was those are the most important moments in martial arts, the hoices accomplishments. In my opinion, he's like, that's the most significant impact. But Hoeiler in terms of Jiu-Jitsu and Jiu-Jitsu, just Jiu-Jitsu competitions, he had accomplished more than anyone. He was a multiple time world champion. And when he was competing, everybody watched. Everybody knew Hoeiler was the fucking man. And so when Eddie tapped Hoeiler, it was silent. I mean, silent. We're in Sao Paulo, Brazil. I mean, and we're sitting there. And Eddie is walking around like this, and Jamie is just going, holy shit. And I'm going, holy shit. We were just like, what just happened? And we walked off. And there's a video of us going through the back hallway of the arena, we're going, what just happened? How the fuck did that just happen? It was crazy. It's crazy. People stunned. No one could believe it. No one could believe it. But I think he gave hope, even people like myself. Like, oh, I get it. You can just figure stuff out. And there's hope for me. It's not like, I think that's a great thing about Marcio. Always looking for who's God. And you back the anime movie. Future Bellford, no one could be Future Bellford. Everyone takes turns, and then he gets beat. And it almost like breaks your hope. And I'm like, in God, we're looking for that superhero. But I think the beautiful underlying story is like, you can do that. You can work your way up this ladder and figure out some unique stuff. And with Eddie, it was like, he wasn't even a black belt yet. That was the most crazy thing. And he just got that brown belt. Yeah, well, yeah, it is. It is a year or so. I believe. I believe he was a black belt. Our brown belt for at least a year or so. Because 2003, when I met him, he was a purple belt. And I met him in 1999. That's what I met him at 1999. I used to train with Hanocte. OK, that was squeezing the head there. That's us. That's incredible. We were just, we just couldn't believe it. Frame that, folks. He was just crying. He couldn't believe it. It's crazy. It's crazy. I wish I went. Dude, it's crazy to just watch now. And they interviewed him after he did it. It was crazy. Yeah. It's a beautiful man. It's hard to even watch. I can't believe I won. I can't believe I won. And I'm back in the jut there. I'm back in the jut. I'm like, you're a honey, don't believe jay. That's awful. That's it. You're not going to do that. You're talking about a man. It wasn't just that he won. He tapped him out off his back. I mean, he used the ultimate expression of jujitsu, which is, you know, in a vulnerable position, the man's on top of you. And you still tap him. It was amazing. And it's sort of loud as a big person as Eddie is. He's actually, and if you know him, what you do, he's got no ego about him. I never feel like- He's always making fun of himself. He's super. If you don't know him, he seems like who's this big mouth, boisterous, he's super humble. He's super, he gives all the credit to the graces. He loves the graces. Yeah. And he loves jujitsu. Yeah. Yeah. That was a, you know, there's moments in your life where you just realize like, wow. Like things are possible. That was a possible moment. Yeah. The things are possible. The weird things can happen. You know, I was talking a friend of mine about imposter syndrome. That imposter syndrome? Yeah. You feel like you don't expression? No. You get it when people think that you're really good at something. And you don't have a lot of self-worth. Or you have this perception of yourself that you're not worthy. Right. And he has an artist. That's a big one that you have it as an artist. Like I had it forever as a comedian. And I probably still have it a little bit, but less so than I used to because I'm just more accomplished and more understanding of what it is and more engrossed in the process. And I know what it is now more than I did before. OK. And you, like what I meet famous people, if they know who I am, I'd be like, oh, I got to get out of here. This fucking person knows who I am. I'm tricking them. Right. Trick. They don't know. And they're like, hey, man, I love your stuff. I'm like, no, you don't. You think you do. You don't trust me. Let me get away from you. Right. It's like this imposter thing. And then sometimes things, enough things happen. When you go, you know what? I think I might be legit. I think I might be legit. Like this is so crazy. Like I thought I was an imposter forever, but I think I'm going to relax and just concentrate on the work and not worry about whether or not I'm an imposter anymore. I'm just concentrating on the work. That ego is always there. Yeah, it's always there, man. But the ego, it's interesting. Imposter syndrome is often more prevalent in people who are legitimately talented. And for some strange reason, because when you're legitimately talented, one of the ways you become legitimately talented is to be ruthlessly self critical. Because that's how you get really good at something. And in ruthless self, look, I remember Cat Williams was talking about himself once. And Cat Williams is a crazy person, but a brilliant comedian. And he said something that I have always thought. And he's like, I'm not a fan of me. And he goes, he goes, like, I don't, you know, I don't particularly like me. You know, I was like, that is why he's great. Because that makes you work so hard. Like the worst thing a comedian can be in the beginning is sure of themselves and then incompetent at the same time. It's horrible. It's horrible because you're not good, but you think you're amazing. And then you understand, you don't know why the world doesn't think you're amazing. Because you think you're, because you're delusional. You have this sort of artificial image of the world that you've put up in the world. You are the center. You're the center. And you want everything to evolve around you. And it's the worst thing in terms of for comedy, you people have to enjoy what you're doing. They have to enjoy, and not everyone's gonna, you're always gonna have some people that don't enjoy no matter what. But you're trying to make it an enjoyable experience for the people watching it. Now, if you are delusional and clueless and if you don't understand how people see you, you have a distorted perception of reality, distorted perception of your own presence. It fucks up the vibe for the audience. It fucks up. They recognize it too quickly. Because comedy in a weird way is a spiritual pursuit for the person who's making it. Because you're putting together thoughts and ideas and you're trying to get it into these people's minds in a way that elicits a response that makes them feel good. And the only way that you could really do it is you have to hit those notes. You have to reach that resonance. You have to find that frequency. Whatever it is that works on them. And you can't be thinking about yourself too much and you can't be pleased with yourself. Can't be happy with yourself. You always have to be analyzing. You're the sculptor. You have to be critical. Always have to, and so in doing that, it's really easy to develop and posture syndrome. Because even when you're doing well, you know, like you have to fucking, I've had like, I don't know, nine or 10 comedy specials, it doesn't matter. How many people like them? They suck. I gotta keep going. You gotta keep working out. Like a stick type of perfectionism. Yeah. So when someone would, I don't remember how we even go into this, but that imposter syndrome exists because your ego won't, like your mind understands that your ego will fuck this up. If you let your ego say, oh, I'm the fucking man, you're gonna ruin this whole thing. Like you have to be aware of what this is. Like this ride requires you to stay within a certain frequency. You have to stay inside that frequency. As soon as you start going, yeah, everything's fucking awesome. It all goes away. All of it goes away. You have to stay inside that frequency. And that frequency is not a frequency where you're very pleased with yourself. I think you've gone full circle back to the Bhagavad giga. Because the Bhagavad giga is the warriors have to fight the war. You think the Bhagavad giga is gonna be like, here's Krishna telling Arjuna not to fight. Arjuna doesn't wanna fight. He's got his guru on the other side. He's got his family on the other side. What's Krishna gonna say about this? And Krishna's saying, you gotta actually fight. You're born to fight. You just have to get out of your ego with this. And you have to do it as just a service. And I think when I apply that type of teaching to my life, like sometimes I'm not a great singer. I'm not a great, you know, Indian classical music, but I like to do it. And I'm enthusiastic too. And to me it's not about me. It's about like sort of like an offering. It was like one of the first teachings I got in the ashram was when you're on stage, don't do it. Make sure you're doing it to serve God and not be God. That statement changed my entire life. And I was like, oh shit, everything I do is to be God. Everything, it changed the way it didn't just change the way I sang, it changed the way I parent, changed the way I react to friends, to fans, to my parents. Yeah. It was powerful. So that I have to sometimes, you know, I like to publicly sing and this, have you ever heard Kirtan? No. It's so interesting. What is it? It's chanting, back in call and response chanting, of chanting mantras. And you use like this pump piano and Indian drums. I'll play some for you later. Okay. But it's great. And it's popular in America. It's been sort of a little bit Americanized, but it's good. And it's great. And so what we do on pilgrimage is I have an assistant and incredible drummers from India. And then I played the harmonium, which is a pump piano. And we just sing publicly, call and response. And all the Indian people in India will come around and they'll sing with us. It's like, it's overwhelming. So there's one particular temple I go to in one particular holy place where singers come from around the world. It's like basically, you know, Rolling Stones, Led Zeppelin. It's like the best Kirtan singers from around the world come and they sing. And I remember one time I came with a bunch of students of mine and they called me up to sing. And in my brain, I was like, you guys are like, the real deal I don't want to sing. And they say, no, no, no, you sing. And I was like, no, seriously, I don't want to sing. Please, you sing. And like thousands of pilgrims come. You guys are like the real deal. I don't want to sing. And they say, no, no, no, you sing. And I was like, no, seriously, I don't want to sing. Please, you sing. And like thousands of pilgrims come in at the time. And somehow I have felt like I have to do this. I have to sing because that's what they're ordering me to do. I have to do it in a loving way. I have to do it in a way to make everybody excited, but I can't do it with any ego whatsoever. And it becomes like this incredible tight road walking. Can I do my best with it? Can you get on stage? Yeah. And it's not about me as the great comedian. You know, can I do that sort of as an offering where I feel like people are going to walk away with something and they're going to be changed a little. They're going to be lifted a little. They're going to go home a little bit more connected. It's going to help me and it's going to help them. And can I do it when people, when people, we have this thing where we say, we deflect our praise. People say, hey, great shit. You're a great yoga teacher. This is how I train my students. You're a great yoga. That was a great thing you did. Our quick answer is by the mercy of my teachers. Like we don't want to hold on to praise because praise exacerbates the ego. Yeah. And so we immediately want to say, and it's not even like we're being falsely humble. We actually are made up of the teachers in my life. All the people that love me care for me. Maybe people who's like screwed with me, but they also taught me a lesson. So the yogi's conception is everybody is creating what I am. And therefore, I don't own any of this. You want to praise me? I'm going to give the praise back to my teacher. Now the teacher's mood is by the mercy of my teacher. I look at back at my life and I realize I'm just like a ball of energy. And generally the energy goes to like feed my ego. How can I feed my ego? How can I use that to manipulate girls to people like me? How can I use everything I've got gifted? For my own self-aggredized, of course. And so when you get these teachers in your life, spiritual teachers who sort of like give you a loving slap or a loving, hey, and they turn you on in some way, they take what you already have. And they redirect that north instead of south. Everything I was doing was just snowballing devastation. And now you can you don't read, you don't give up those qualities that you have, but you use them in a way that brings people up instead of bring some down. That's what we were saying about movies too or any entertainment or sounds in our mind. That state of mind that you're trying to achieve when you get on stage, or you're trying to sing with no ego. That's exactly the frequency that you have to hit when you're doing comedy. You do your best, but you don't do your best so that people love you. You do your best because that's what you're trying to do. That's your craft. That's your thing. Your thing that you do, your expression, your art form, you have to manage it. And the way the manager correctly is you can't go out there with ego. You'll turn people off. They won't feel it. You know, there's moments where you can use that, especially with comedy, where you turn, but it's not ego. It's like, but even if you're doing it, though, in comedy, you're doing it for the effect of making people laugh. You're not doing it for the effect of pumping yourself up. And you have to be very careful about that. And if they know that that's what you're doing, they will accept it. That's, that's the art of it. Yes, that's the art of it. It's a dance. There's a strange sort of dance that goes on. I would notice this is humiliating to mention, but I will. If I wasn't doing it in a mood of service as an offering, if I got off stage and that wasn't my motivation, I would depressed. Yeah. Because maybe you can relate to this on stage. I'm the center. I'm the coolest. I'm it. There's singing song lyrics. I wrote on my bed. And now they're all singing them. And then I'm in another country. Now I'm off stage. I'm a nobody. So if you're not medicating with any type of drug or sex, then all you're left with is a bunch of emotions. Interesting. And I thought, I'm not this is true, but I think this is why people who are entertainers can can move towards addiction or ways to mask that loneliness that comes with being the center where the whole world is trying to convince you of the Maya. You've heard that word Maya. The illusion of life is that you are the center. Yeah. By the way, Joe, this interesting thing I want to talk to mentioned to you too. Because you brought this point where like, I like living my life. I love great life. Why wouldn't you want to do that again? No. Because and I don't know. And I didn't sort of challenge it a little because you were saying in retrospect to he'll know. Dealio said doing it. Why would you want to do that? Because the whole Buddhist and Hindu thing is that I don't want to take birth again. Yeah. And since we were talking about these higher planets and higher beings, they say that that planet like earth. And they say there's other ones like this as well. There is some pleasure and some pain. There's people who live in a penthouse. And there's people who sleep in the streets. Or you can be on the 100th, whatever floor it was with the World Trade Center and be a CEO. And then a plane can be wrapped, you know, two floors underneath you. You can go from pleasure and pain, the most excruciating plane and the most incredible highest of pleasure in a moment. So in this sort, I mean, we've got places that are like places in the world, or like the rape capital of the world. And then you've got places that are sort of like, you know, go to Switzerland or Norway where the currency is strong and the people are beautiful. And everything you see is like it's from like a postcard. So we have like great amounts of pain and great amounts of pleasure on this planet. In such a condition, you could start to question like, why am I here? What is life about? It gives you a window to even ask those questions. Now, if there's just so much pleasure in your life, they say that higher beings don't have the impetus to evolve because there's so much pleasure. Higher being. Higher being. So according to the Vedas, it's high in planets. The other type, higher planets. Okay. Now, I don't want to say, ganesh, but there's a higher planets with higher beings who just living a high life. And therefore the impetus to get out of some sorrow, you know, this word, repeated birth in death, there's no impetus to get out. Sometimes people are suffering so much. There's no impetus to even see a spiritual light. People are suffering tremendously. Maybe go to prison or they get caught up in more degrading activity. Sometimes people will have so much something like saying in your life, you have so much good karma, so to speak. But because you're still embodied, there'll always be sort of like a pin prick because that's part of having a body. Right. But my point was this journey is enjoyable. And that I'm for you. You got good karma. Is that all it is? Because I've had bad moments. I mean, is it all just, I mean, if you want to get yourself like a lot of biographies, it is choices. Is it karma's like, is it the direction? Did you choose to push forward in the understanding of the push and pull, the understanding of the discipline and the work and then the kindness and the generosity and that all these things are connected together. And then also the expression, the ability to express yourself through podcasts or through stand up comedy. So these things are enjoyable and that there's a pursuit in that and that the real benefit of it is that other people get entertainment out of it. And that this is your choices, your choices perpetuated. Yeah. Obviously. But there's other people who've done podcasts, done comedy. And they're just not successful at it. Yeah. But it's a puzzle though. It's like, it is. Saying other people sing songs, but people don't play them back. Yeah. There are bands before Green Day, like the buzz cocks from the 70s who, who my opinion was better than Green Day, but they just weren't at the right time, historically to be. The right publicists. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's always going to be that. But my point is like, you don't have to be famous to be happy. It's just life is interesting. Life is enjoyable. Sometimes it's hard and sometimes it's painful. Sometimes it's emotionally devastating for sure. But the idea, if you are alive and enjoying life, the idea of doing it forever is terrifying to people. That was what my point was. Like, why is it terrifying? If it's not terrifying to do it now, why is the eternal existence so disturbing to people, right, unless they have had a traumatic life? Yeah. A lot of people have. Yes. A lot of people have had a traumatic life. A lot of people have. I don't think my life was so traumatic. I think I got so much less. Well, let's leave them out of that equation. And let's just talk about people who have not had a traumatic life. We have a fair look. If you're in America and you're not sick and you have friends, you're doing infinitely better than most people on planet. Sure. You know, that's just we're really fortunate in terms of like the environments that we exist in. If you're not being abused and you have a job and you have a, you know, hobbies and things to do. God damn it. You lucky. You could be born in Afghanistan. You could be living in the Congo suffering from a host of different pathogens and bacteria and viruses and. So, but your thing is according to that person. Was it Helio made up that? Yes. Why don't think he made it up? I think Helio obviously was a great warrior as well as a great jujitsu teacher, but he had this philosophy on existence and that you had to live your life and do the right things always. And if you didn't, you would come back again and do it all over again. Well, the Vedic system is, it is similar, but it's not the exact, you don't get born as Joe Rogan again, living in the parallel life. And like, oh, I didn't take out the garbage that day. I should have taken out the garbage. It'd more be like coordinates your desires and your activities and your thoughts and the people you associate with. You moved up. Psychically, you got a little more degraded. Well, either upgrade or degrade, basically. It was similar. Do you think of yourself like that? Do you think, like when you think of yourself and your fortune and the interesting life you've carved out, do you feel like your past life has had some sort of an impact on who you are right now? For sure. For sure. For sure. Really? Why are you so sure? I'm so well, it's just sort of like my worldview is that there's not a randomness that everything is building upon something. And so I'm building upon tomorrow today. So you're building on next week by why I act this week and you could take a bigger and bigger and bigger. So in that sense, it makes sense. But there's a, there is a little bit more of a leap of faith. Like, and I'm building up to a climax where it will take another body. Or I'm coming from a place where I have some talents. You know, we call them your God given gifts or your my, you know, my daughter is a gifted artist. But the idea is that it's been a practice that we've been practicing and bringing with us for lifetimes and both are both good and bad. And this is a belief system that you just sort of adopt because there's not really any evidence. It's, it's, it's, it's, it's the, that's how the yogis view. Right. Karma and, and you're saying, but you taking this in your self. I take it myself because I see it in this lifetime. Now, like I said, that I don't know it. There's, there's blind faith and then there's reasonable faith. So my reasonable faith lies in this lifetime. I've witnessed my body change. I witnessed my mind change, my intelligence change. I've witnessed myself cultivate desires that heal me, make me stronger, make me lighter, make me more connected. I've witnessed myself choose bad choices, things that are addictive, things that are defiling my consciousness or my body or my health. So in this lifetime, I know I have, I can steer my karma. And at the same time, there's certain things that are out of my hands. Like you and me are on a flight to San Diego. And the plane's going to San Diego. What I, what we do on that plane, the plane journey is our karma. What we do on that plane, that's our free will. So that's the difference between free will and destiny. There is, there is a difference of the two. Just because there is karma doesn't mean you're bound to it. You can move it. But the yoga system is to bring us to this, I'm trying to think, keep it simple. Through this, it's called Sattva or it's a state of self control, a piece, a balance. So all the things of the whole culture is based to keep the mind peaceful. And for when the mind is peaceful, I act less on impetus and more from a higher chakras or higher thoughts or higher intelligence. For example, if I slap a panther, panther's going to bite me, why? Because panthers bite when you slap them. If I slap Joe, you could act from a different place. Hey, man, what's up? Or you could be like immediately. And sometimes I feel that also. I feel like I'm acting from a lower place. I'm angry. I'm going to kick that right. And sometimes I feel like I mean, do this with parenting. Sometimes I get angry at my child. I say, don't you understand? He's just trying to talk to you. He's just trying to share how he experiences. And I have to pull myself back and let go of any way I was parented and try to act from a higher place. So there's always, they say in the human species, there's always this chance to either upgrade your activities or degrade your activities. And they snowball off of each other. Like every good choice helps to make a better choice. You know, we said that we'd die with exercise. Um, how do we get talking about that, Joe? Is this we're talking about? It's just massive detours that we're taking. No, no, we're getting into places. We're talking about your belief that your karma is connected to what you've done in a past life. Sure. So that's a, that's a bigger leap of faith. But I, and you say, I see it in this life. And you see it in other people as well. So when you see people, you look at their life and you think this person, the where they are right now is directly connected to what they've done in a past life. Yeah. Yeah. Um, it's an interesting philosophy. It's an interesting one. And you know, it's an honor. You know, it's nice about it. Even in Western psychiatry, if I go and complain about my husband or my wife, a good psychiatrist will go, what's your responsibility in this? Is it all your life? Where's it you? Right. They take you back. And when you really study this Vedic thought, you realize that there is no more blaming anybody. Yeah. I've just got what I've got for whatever reason. Now what am I going to do with that? Yeah. What am I going to do today? It's also what am I going to do tomorrow? Why the why me shh, shit never happens because I've got what I got. I probably did something to do. And people don't like to hear that. But we don't know our backstory. And to be truthful, I have a blind side, a blind spot when it comes to anything, a church is I've done in this life. I forget all the times I've hurt people, broke people's parts. You know, it was rude or cruel or thought was so I got to get some karma too. In this life, what to speak of a previous life, where I'm oblivious to. Right. And if I just want to blame the circumstance, here's your option. You can either be free from that, be acceptance and accept that there's benevolent forces that are trying to teach us lessons to get out of the birth and death, or you can just be bitter at the world. Why me unfair? So this idea of benevolent forces that are trying to teach us, do you feel that this spiritual quest is almost like a divine puzzle that human beings are proposed and that you're given this infinite series of options. And in choosing the right way of thinking and behaving, you can carve out the righteous path as best you can. You will make mistakes, but that there's a spiritual undertaking that is a part of operating this puzzle correctly. And that this is what all these teachings are about. And that's trying to, we're all trying to relay what we've learned and what we've experienced personally. And we're trying to relay it to other people so that they can relate and so that they can also make choices that will allow them to more refined their approach to life to achieve better spiritual balance. Yeah. So well said, there's, there's, you know, the yogis call meyamas and the amas sort of like zid again, yamas and niyamas. Do you know, amas, yamas and niyamas, niyamas, niyamas, niyamas. And things you don't do, okay. And it's the equivalent of like sort of guardrails on a road. Right. Drive a little bit off too far. You scratch your car. Right. Because of the guardrail, but if it wasn't there, it'd be complete tragedy. So there's sort of like things that we pull in with our sexuality, with our thoughts with our words. It's how to use the vehicle in this lifetime. So the vehicle being the body. Right. What we do, what we don't do, what we don't, what we do, you know, what to eat, what to, what to think, what to speak, how to speak, how to relate to people, how to relate to juniors, how to relate to seniors. So the whole Vedic culture is carved out like this. That in itself is not spiritual. It just assists you in driving a car. I still got to go north. And so once I can take care of how to like take care of this machine and keep it on the road, then I've reached out for connection. Yeah. And that's the spiritual. So there's Dharma. But then there's Dharma that's supposed to get us connected. What is that? What is that? What is that? The definition rather of Dharma again? Dharma means sort of like a right living. It's not some people confuse it with well doing what you're born to do because I don't think it's just doing what you're good at because you could be good at leadership and be a dictator. And you're a great leader. Everyone's going to do what you do. But it will be great leader. Great leader is probably in this chart. But then you also have great, great leaders like a Christ. It was like a great leader. Also. So it's not just leadership. It's leading person towards connection so that your activity has a benevolent effect on everyone in touches. That's Dharma. That's that's Dharma in its true sense. And that's the Dharma of your body. Like your Dharma is you entertain. You could say a warrior. You could also say you have also Dharma as a father. So that's it. There's all type of like your carved out for that. You know, if you weren't doing that, you don't just feel like a little lack in your life. But then there's like a nitya Dharma. What you and the nitya Dharma is actually the Dharma of the soul. And that's why in the Vedic system, it's not like you're trying to convert somebody to be of your religion. It's not like a home run to say, okay, I got a Christian to become a Hindu. That's not what it is. The idea is that everybody's a spirit soul. You can change. It's not about joining the same church or the same ashram. It's like a soul's a soul. It's like truth. Truth is truth. There's no, no, no one's got a monopoly on truth. There's no such thing as it's like math. It's not Jewish math or Hindu math or Christian. It's like math is math. Right. So we want to apply truth to the life, to the vehicle. And that's going to give direction to the vehicle. That's going to be the food for the soul. And that's what the genuine meaning of yoga people say it's a balanced the mind. It's not the balance. It's to connect the Atma or the soul with divinity, with Bhagavan. That's the really yoga. That's when yoga means to come together. But in the original text and the original ancient teachings of Upana Shod's Bhagavad Gita, it's all about is here I am lost in the crazy plan. I'm driving my car everywhere. How do people on the road and where do I go? And that's that's the classical concept of what yoga is. How do we keep it on the road and where do I go? I like that way of looking at it. I mean, we go off the road. Yeah. And we need these discussions. People need these discussions. We need, I mean, I need them right now having it with you. I appreciate it. But we need to hear other people having these discussions. We need to have them personally ourselves. This is every morning on my podcast 5 a.m. You do your podcast every day, every day for an hour. And it's sort of like a check in and we read tunes and all that. It's on iTunes. It's on iTunes. It's on the wisdom of the stages. And me and I co-host with another friend who is a monk for a long time with me. And we are both teenagers from the low reside. And so we do it together. And we have a scene up state as well as he is in New York City and had, okay. So you do it remotely. We do it on Zoom. Okay. But through, it gets taught, the lip sin. Yeah. We call the podcast. Yeah. I've done it. Zoom. I did a Jordan Peterson podcast through Zoom. I saw that. Yeah. Great. It works. You can do it. It's weird though. But we have like 90 people join us live. And so everyone knows each other. And then it's also done public. So it's fun. It's fun. I enjoy it. This is something about doing podcast that. You are working out ideas. It's made me infinitely more aware of my thoughts. Infinitely better at communicating and writing too. Since I'm writing two books right now. And they're both helping me like, yeah, I always thought that. But now this is a better way to say it. I'm sure you do that one. Right material. Yes, for sure. But my friend Eddie Wong, he had a really interesting take on that. He's like, that's what I do first thing in the morning. He goes, I write. And he goes, and I write every day. And he said, and in writing every day, it helps me really understand how I think about things because I'm really, really contemplating, really concentrating on how do I actually think about these things? What is actually important to me? And that that activity of writing for his own education, for his own, you know, betterment is very important to him. And it made me like a big impact on me. I'm saying it that way. I'm like, oh, okay. That makes sense. So many people. By the way, Joe, it's so good that you're doing this. So many people I know listen to the show. Like, it's weird. It's weird. And it's a real wide swath of people. Yeah. I know. It's weird. It's a strange thing. I just kind of sound crazy. But not any crazier than all the other shit we've said so far. I feel like this show made itself. I feel like I'm the person who's been granted the curator position on the show. I feel like the show, all the challenges that I've had through the show have sort of all the fuckups and all the things that I've said that were stupid. Those are almost like we're put in front of me to make me understand the consequences of not respecting it or of not treating it with the proper focus and concentration. And that this thing is, this thing is almost like it's always been here. And I am like an archaeologist who's just brushing the dirt away. And I'm the curator. And I have to show up every day in the lights on artists always described himself. I think it was a Machiavelli or not Machiavelli Michelangelo Michelangelo. Michelangelo described it like that. I can say myself as a puny songwriter. I felt like the song is already written. Yeah. You know, the lyrics are already written. I feel like that with comedy. When I come up with a good bit, like I was, I was new bit that I've only had for like four or five days now and been working on it. I feel like it was a gift. I mean, I know I wrote it. I know I wrote it. I know I typed it. I know I thought about it. But where from where? From what? What is that coming from? What is the gift? And that's one of the things about pot and one of the things about booze and all the different ways that I achieve different states of mine, they help me get out of my own way. So I could find these things better. That's really what it is. It's not as much of an escape from reality. It's an escape from me. For your thoughts. Yes, for me. From my bullshit, so that I can find these thoughts better so that I can go on stage and then my reward is this strange feeling that you get when you know everyone's laughing. This is wild. But the better I get at it, the less I enjoy it in the moment because I'm not thinking this is great. I'm killing. I am just staying on point. You ever say something where you're just laughing at your own joke? Yeah, for sure. Because things come up that I don't know that we're going to say. And then I say it and then it's not laughing. But it has to be organic. I'm not going to fake laugh on stage. But I will laugh on stage. You know, my goal is always to just like hit that frequency. The goal is to like hit that frequency where people are laughing and say with the right economy of words and the right order and find the best way to get it into the people's heads. And that's the crazy thing is the better you get at it, the more affected has on people, but the less affected has on me. Like I could do, I'll do an arena and I'll crush and I'll get a standing ovation in front of an arena. And I don't even, I barely feel it. I barely feel it like me. Like I just did something. Right. I'm like a passenger on a ride. Like a passenger has no one. Yeah. That's what it feels like. I mean, the better I get at it, the more I feel like a pastor. But conversely, if I fuck up, I feel like I fucked up. If I screw something up, if I mess up a bit, if I do the pain is on me, 100%. So the pleasure kind of dissipates, the more, or like a more, an internal pleasure, the pleasure's not from what they are keeping from action. It's confirmation that I'm doing the right thing. That's what it is. It's like like everybody's happy. I'm happy that you're happy. And it's a genuine feeling of appreciation. It's like that concept of the warrior just doing this duty. Yes. I'm just doing it. This is what I do. Now, the Bhagavad Gita, this is the thing that I want to talk to you about when we're talking about the Vedas and we're talking about all the ancient texts, you think that all that stuff is real. Now, could be real. Could be real. But you're saying it's real. You like this? That shit's all real. That's my sort of like hashtag, the solreal. It's because when some, you stumble upon this thing, like man, this is all real. Like, because there's something that's... The irrational thinker. I'm always holding back some reservation for like this can't all be real. But things always just show up. I was like, damn, that's so real. Can I tell you this crazy one? Sure. I can't. I don't want to tell too much about the details because I want to give it private. We're only doing it to two hundred million people. I had a person that nostalgia at my teacher training. And I was training people to be teachers. And one of the ladies was from a very wealthy family. She's older than me. Our kids went to school together. And he did this interesting, this, this, this, astrologer did this interesting class where he did this class on karma, where he shows how karma is actually scientific and predictable. So everyone would have to give there, like I said earlier, longitude, latitude, date and time of birth. I was born on January 11th, 330 AM, 1966. And you'd have to give that all in. So he doesn't know anybody. And he's calling, okay, who was born on 1983, February 6th. They called the person forward and they said, and he wouldn't do their whole chart, but he'd show some big hiccup in their chart. And he'd say, it seems like an October you experience great loss in the person me like, oh my God, my father died in October. And every person he was calling up, he was just read the hiccup. So one particular lady, she said that was so good. Can you do my entire chart? So he had it done. Now this lady, I knew her. She grew up with somebody world famous. I won't mention who it is, but it's something a household name and they were best friends. And she grew up in a very wealthy family. But as she got older, she just became, she became a simple artist. But that famous person was always in her life. And then that person died a tragic death. Um, and so she never had much after that financially. So a particular magazine, like a gossip tabloid found out that she was friends with this person. And on the anniversary of this person, famous person's death, they were going to put out a special issue. And they found that she had all these intimate photos of this person. So as they offered her a massive amount of money for these photos. So I'm stand, I know this story and I'm standing there with the astrologer and the astrologer saying, okay, it seems like in July, you're going to have more money than you've ever had in your life. And she was just like, she looks at me and we look at each other like, oh my god. And In July, you're gonna have more money than you've ever had in your life. And she was just like, she looks at me and we look at each other like, oh my God. And she told them the whole story and she said, yeah. And in July, they're cutting me the check in July. How did you know that? And the astrologer very humbly just goes, it's been known since your birth. So this is like the ultimate version of determinism, right? Yes and no. It's like, use that analogy. It's more cosmic. Well, use that analogy of the plane. There is a determinism, but there's also individual free will, which can sometimes affect. Sometimes you're gonna just get what you get. But how I react to what I get, that's gonna create a whole new set of karma for me. Right? Yeah. How do you react to what you get is definitely, yeah. We're all gonna get some things. Yeah. By me associated with people who are connected, by being associated with people who are a little bit more in tune, then when something happens to me, some great life reversal, some incredible loss, some chronic disease, whatever, I might react to it in a different way. And that's gonna create a whole new pathway for me. Yeah. Well, depending upon your actions, you reacted things differently depending upon your physical state. And that's one of the things that yoga really helps. One of the ways that yoga helps your karma is yoga relaxes you to consequences and to things that happen. Like I remember I was driving on the highway and there was this kid behind me. He was the illegal alien and he was on his phone. And he hit the brakes too late and he slammed into my Porsche. I have a rare Porsche. It's a very nice car and he fucked up my car. And I got out and he didn't have a license. More insurance. Yeah, insurance, actually. I didn't think he did, but it took down his information. I took a photo of his insurance car and I told him, I said, she could out here, man. I'm like, you're gonna get arrested. Like, you're gonna get slammed into me. You don't have a license. You're not even supposed to be driving. You're gonna take your car. His car was fucked up. My car actually drove. I drove it to the comedy store. But I remember the way I reacted to him. Because I had done yoga three days in a row. It was cool and calm. Yeah, I was happy I was okay. Because he slammed into me, man. Bad man! Like that fight story I told. That wasn't angry. Yeah. It changes how you react. First of all, it changes how you react in the moment when you're doing the ass in the class. Yeah. It has a secondary effect. Like you just said. And the third way it affects you is at the time of death. The idea that I've actually had almost near death experience with this too, where you are focused. In the same way you're not angry, you're not freaking out. You become incredibly focused as if I'm about to leave my body. And you can say it once I was attacked. And I had it probably the most spiritual experience in my life. And it was how you attacked. It's such a story. But it's a show. I was at a show. The time of my life when I was monks, we were all monks. And we were traveling and we played in sort of a ghetto part of Buffalo. And a big show. Materially speaking, it was great. We were big. People loved us. We sold merchandise. And which band was this? This was shelter. That's my next band. And after the show, it was about two in the morning. Everybody's getting out of the club. And I'm in the alley getting interviewed for some magazine. And our van is parked. You could drive the car in the club and all the doors and windows are open. And our guys were unloading all the gear. Basically only a few people left in the club breaking down the club. And I was outside getting interviewed. And all of a sudden this car pulls up with these massive dudes who weren't from the punk scene. And they looked like just sort of ghetto dudes. And they were ripped and they were big. And they just grabbed one of the younger kids. I mean our show is like 17, 19, 20. They grabbed one kid and just beat the living crap out of them. And I was like, oh, I'm getting interviewed. So it's sort of awkward. And it's happening about 50 yards away from him. Just randomly traveling to the club. Randomly standing out of the box. Didn't talk to him further. Didn't talk to him. Picked him up, threw him down, beat him, and then went to another kid. And did that. By the time they got to the third kid, everybody just started running for their life. Here's like a get. You know, you don't think of these things in times of great fear and anxiety. Why don't you do this? Why don't you do that? All I did was I ran back in the club to get my band. I said, you guys, we got to get out of here. There's a bunch of crazy guys outside. And all my roadies, we're all monks, by the way. But all the guys who were my roadies said, we can't go anywhere. Like the equipment's half in the car. The t-shirts aren't loaded. And all of a sudden, the bad guys, their car drives into the club. And parks like a tee blocking our van. So we couldn't get out of the club any longer. And they get out of the car. And there's not that many people. There's a couple bands and sound men stuff around the club. And the biggest guy gets out. And he grabs a gun. And he just goes in a really serious and unemotional way. I've got a gun. And I'm going to kill everyone tonight. And I was one of these like eerie, sort of like eerie organ music he could hear. And I was like, it just felt like, oh, this is the day. You know the day you always talk about that death day? Where you don't expect it and you get the day of the ace of spades? That's your day now. And I was like, and I was the older devotee, Krishna devotee. You're Krishna devotee monks or Bach diyoga monks. And so all the other guys in the band came up to me. What are we going to do? What are we going to do? Now they weren't right near us at the time. They were literally going around and beating people up. And all the other monks came up to you, you know, Raghu, what are we going to do? And I had already sort of given up on escaping or anything. I just look, I don't know where I got this from because I'm definitely not an elevated soul. But I said we're going to die tonight. And so we're going to chant. And I went into the... Jesus Christ. I know! Why would you just run? You know what? In retrospect, I don't know. But let me circle back with this. I grabbed the drum out. I played this Indian drum. And we all started chanting these mantras to Nashrin Gadev, who's an avatar of Vishnu. You usually chant for a type of protection, but we all started really focusing and chanting this mantra. It's unbelievable story, but it's all true. And as they were beating up people, they finally came to us. And all my guys ran for their life. Some guys were on end of the van, in the van, above the van. And I'm surrounded by this gang. And the biggest guy just grabs the gun. And he goes to me. Do you want some? I was like, a freaking trick question. What am I supposed to say here? And so I just... You know, by the way, I didn't look like a monk. I had genes on or... It's not like let's beat up monk day. It was just a random act of violence. And so I just put my hands like an Anamaste and said, Harry Krishna, I'm a devotee of the Lord Krishna. And I have no idea why you are angry. And then for the first time in my life, I felt completely helpless. I was just like repeatedly beating. And just punched. And it's just one of those things. It's not like you can even fight back. You are just getting pounded. But what happened was every time I got punched, I chanted a mantra. So it was sort of like, Vishnu, Narayan, Chaitanya, Krishna, Govinda, Gopal. Every time I chanted to the point where I was like, oh, this is amazing. I'm actually chanting. I was actually stepping outside myself saying, I'm actually in meditation on sacred names. And then all of a sudden my head was down, and I looked behind me. And there were these three girls coming to protect me and they had baseball bats. And then I realized, no, they're not. They're the girlfriends of these guys. And then I started getting hit by a baseball bat. Unbelievable. Three times in the head, one on the shoulder and two on the legs. And every time I... And this is a random thing. It's no reason. As far as I know it was random. As far as I know it was random. I didn't know them. They didn't know me. They weren't from that scene. Our show was in a ghetto. There's always a cause of something, but I have no idea what the cause was. And so every time, but miraculously, and you read these stories in the Mahabharat and the Ramayana, all these epics of India, the great sage leaves his body. He calls Lord Krishna's chariot in front of him. Then he chants these mantras, and I'm thinking, oh my God. I'm chanting these mantras at the time of death. I'm chanting at the time of death. This is the perfection of my life. That was what was going through my head. I kid you not. And I was like outside of my body, and I wasn't fearful. And then all of a sudden, to wrap up the story, everything stopped. And I didn't really know what happened, but what was happening was all the guys in the band jumped in our car or van and plowed through their car and took off. And I can't remember how, but I ended up in the street in some ghetto street, carrying this Indian clay drum. I look like every step movie, Carrie, the girl who's covered in blood. I was covered in blood from my head all the way down, all over the drum, and I'm walking in the streets, trying to flag down a car. The cars were slowed down, see me, and then speed away because I looked like a zombie or something. And then I realized, oh man, something. And you're running sort of high on adrenaline. I remember being very lucid and I went over to some light, I saw it look like a garage where they fixed cars or house buses or something when it was open. And there was a man in a booth and I said, sir, you have to call the police. Because I thought my friends now were getting beat up or killed or whatever. And I said, you have to call the police, my friends are in trouble. And the guy literally looked at me and just said, I'm busy. And I said, listen, you got to call the police right now. And if you don't mind, I'm just going to hide in this booth because I think these guys might come back and kill me. And so I'm kneeling down in this dirty garage at two in the morning. And the first thing in my mind is, no one knows where I am. My mother doesn't know where I am. My friends don't know where I am. My band members don't know where I am. They can be getting killed. And everything was so good today. Like, I had a great day. And now it's over, like a dream. And I even have these lyrics that were like, this world's like a dream. It's not what it seems. We think it's solid, but it fades. I was like, I even, I sort of, my self talk became a prayer. And I started saying, I really wasn't expecting to die tonight. But that's what the dream is. It seems real, and now it's over. And I started to think like, oh my God, I was in prayer. I was sort of like in a state of like, somebody when I was getting beat up. I was focused. I was connected. And I was chanting at that time. I said, but now, maybe my, if I got, I'm just trying to think my, you know, boy scout first aid is like, I might have a concussion. My brain's going to swell. I'm going to fall asleep. And then I won't be in meditation. And I started saying, I said, I started praying sincerely. Krishna, I wasn't expecting to die tonight. But you were so kind, considering I'm not evolved to enter my lips so I could just chant. So please don't let me die with a concussion. If you want to take me, please take me right now. And with all sincerity, I started chanting these prayers that I had memorized. These very beautiful prayers from an ancient book. But there are prayers, I focused a picture of Krishna in my mind, and I started chanting these prayers and then unfortunately I lived. Unfortunately, because I was in such a perfect, I was saying, meaning I was at a, that's how I would want to die. So there was no book. There's no teacher. There's no pilgrimage. There was no that taught me more about like my spiritual path and that beat down day. Because I felt like I was close to dying as you can get as so close to dying, but I felt like you had accepted it. And I had been taken care of like in that time of great tragedy. I felt connected more than I'd ever been connected. And I wouldn't wish it again. But I'm so happy it happened. We've still never got to the Bhagavad Gita. Sorry, but we turned hard. I wanted to know why you think that that's real and what you think is going on in those stories. Well, first you've got the dialogue itself, which is cool wisdom for all people. Yeah. And so it's like hyper bizarre. Like what Oppenheimer quoted at the detonation of the atomic bomb. Right. I am become the death color of me. It looks like a creep previto. Is that the time? That's the Sanskrit. How does it say it? Carlos Shmi, looks shy of creep previto. Is that why I am the destroyer of time I am the great destroyer. And I've come to destroy all worlds. So that's one that actual translation. Because his translation, Oppenheimer's was, I am become death. Is that because of an issue with the translation between Hindu and English? Yeah, there's a different people translated. It's slightly different. But it's similar. Meaning in that particular section that you pulled out that was Christian explaining like, God is beautiful. God is charming. God is your best friend. He's also death personified. So he's saying in that particular place, I'm actually also the destroyer of all the worlds. When we think of, the yogis explain it, God is everything. Both the beauty and the destruction as well. And so Christian is sharing his attributes and in that particular chapter, chapter 11, he's the most almost intimidating. Where do you think all these stories come from? Where do you think the origin of the Bhagavad Gita of the Mahabharata of all the ancient texts? What do you think the origin was? What was the motivation to put this stuff down? What was the original concepts that led them to write this and where did it all come from? There has to be an origin of these, these wisdoms, right? Yeah. What do you think that is? You know, to even answer the question, I have to take myself out of Raghu and just answer, like a yoga teacher. Because to answer what do you think? It's one thing you're sort of trained not to do, as far as what is your personal opinion. I can give you my personal opinion, but I have to separate it from what the stories don't say. Okay, well give me your personal opinion. My personal opinion is, I hear what the stories have to offer. I find some value in the stories and I try to apply wisdom to my life. It helps the direction of my life. Life, it helps me. The story is themselves say, these are all real. They're way beyond your perception. They're orally transmitted. As certain time historically, they understood people are getting dumber. See, we have a tendency to think we're at the pinnacle of evolution, but the Vedic teachings is that as we go on in this age, we get more and more disconnected. There was a time where architecture was more evolved, where the sciences were more evolved. We're going to stop. The sciences were more evolved. Like for example, the building of these vymanas, which when we read them now, we just think that's mythological. Even weaponry. Weaponry, they say, we're done with sound. There's one book called The Donner. But do you think this is real? Do I think it's real? I think it could be. I don't think it's definitely... I definitely think it's... So you know... One time, human beings had vymanas, and they flew around the sky, and then they had weapons that used sound. Could. Why not? Was there no evidence? Archaeological evidence that there was a flying craft or was there was ever any technology that allowed people to leave gravity? Yeah. There's sometimes there may not be evidence. Just like this. Let me show you what was the guy's name? Hill? Barnhill? Barnhill. Barnhill. What's your evidence? He could just say, well, it's my own experience. And he's just laid... That's a totally different thing. He's just relaying his personal experience. He could have had some sort of a psychotic break. He could have had... I mean, they could have been mass psychosis with him and with two people. Well, I think psychosis with him and his wife. I can say that there are things that make no sense to me. Yet I sort of tried them anyway, and then after time, they made sense. Like, well, wait a second. That does make sense. Or at different vantage points of my life, it didn't make sense when it was 20, but at 50, that makes a lot of sense. So there are certain things that are hugely specific. I can't say, I definitely know that to be true. Just like chanting on mantras. Man of sense. Man of real sense. But over time, I realize actually that helps in this particular way. But it achieves a state of consciousness. We've known that forever. That achievement... That meditation in general achieves certain states of consciousness. You can actually, with FMRI, you can actually monitor the changes in the way the brain is... See, this is what I like about you. You're one of those guys. You get into these very interesting subtle sciences. And then you find hard evidence for these things. And just hearing that thing with James Wilk and breaking all these things down. I'm more of a simple or a guy. I find people where I trust the way they live and they've applied stuff and walk the... It's more like I can tell time, but I don't know how to take part of clock and put them together. No, I think exactly the same way. I'm fascinated by watches. Yeah. But then you see all the gears behind a watch, like a self winding watch. And you're like, I don't know what the fuck is happening here. I'm sure I like that. I did out eventually. I'm like that with a lot of things. And I'm always impressed when you dig into it with people like this. But truthfully, if you want to know the honest truth, I was like, oh man, I hope Joe doesn't dig into it with me. because I'm not that kind of hard science guy. You don't have people... Even though the stuff I did in the old... I'm concerned with you as a human being. That's why I asked you very specifically, what do you think? Right. Well, I can say the stuff that you liked about me fighting was endurance, flexibility. I give all the credit that to yoga. You did it at the time. To the top of the team. I've told many people that you had crazy cardio and your cardio was you never did cardio. You just did pretty. You never did cardio. You always did great cardio. You always let like really good endurance. And my cardio was even better. I remember being at the bomb squad once. On day 17 of a 21 day fast. Wow. Day 17. And I remember fighting, I can't remember his name as a cool guy. He's like, what? And you know how Jiu Jitsu class ends when we're all tanked? And we're all like, and I just kept on going. And he's like, man, what is up with you? I was like, I don't know. I haven't even solid food in 17 days. So it's not like I'm a genius. It's just that these are sort of like yoga, fasting, deep breathing. I just been doing them. And I'm sure there's people that can give you the modern take on what the benefits are. Yeah, but that's not what I'm asking you. What I'm asking is why you believe the bug of a gait is real. Sure. So my point is there's reasonable amounts of faith in these other things that I've applied that have made me take a next step. So whether I believe it's real, I just believe the truth I can extract from it real, whether the war actually happened. There's a leap of faith. The benefits of those of following those scriptures you apply. And you feel those benefits. So that's enough. That's enough to make me move forward towards the, just for example, the idea of faith. And because especially in America, we don't like the concept of the blind faith. But if I saw you walking in downtown need, let's take it the other way, you saw me, you're driving your Porsche and you saw me walking in Manhattan. And you say, hey, Brago, how do you get to Times Square? And I said, so the first step is I could lie to you. People lie all the time when you ask them for directions. But you have some reasonable faith. I know him. He's a friend. Why would he give me bad direction? So there's a reasonable amount of faith. But even still, people get into their egos and they just want to be even nowhere of directions. But I say you go up the 14th street and you're going to see a McDonald's, you take a right. Then you're going to go down all the way to whatever. Can you remember him and hadn't any more Union Square and take a left and go up third. And then at Union Square, you're going to see a park. At that park, you take a hard left. So again, you have a some type of extended faith towards me. Not blind faith. But you'd go up the 14th street and there's that McDonald's. As you go to McDonald's or that next sign post, you realize, okay, maybe he does know where he's going. Then you go farther. There's Union Square. Okay. I think he actually knows what's going on. And all of a sudden you see the time square in the distance. So faith isn't just like, I believe. And if anyone was to say, I believe this, I believe in these V-monos. I believe in mantras. I'd start to question them. But it happens with small degrees of things being just shown to you that you want to take. All right. What's the next step here? What do they say about this? What do they say about that? And then you apply and see, what does that work with me? And like I said, sometimes things didn't make sense. I remember when I first met monks and they said a question about or not even monks, but people were just like following very strict with their sexuality, even in family. And the guy said, I don't have sex. I was 17. And I was like, you don't have sex with your wife? Are you crazy? So I know. I do other things. And I just couldn't understand that as a 17-year-old boy or 18-year-old boy. I couldn't understand why would you be with a person if not for that. What was the answer? Because they said we were practicing detachment. We're practicing going internal to find our pleasure. And he said, I said, what do you do for fun? And he goes, hmm, go for a drive. He goes for a drive. Are you crazy? But it was where this person was on his path of really controlling the senses and finding this pleasure internally. At different time in my life, it made no sense what. So ever. Maybe he really didn't like having social media. Or something for some sort of excuse. Or maybe there was only internal babies. What's happening? Maybe there is trauma. We don't know the whole story. And you know what you're saying though? But applying this stuff, whether or not you break it down scientifically and objectively and try to analyze each and every word and whatever the translation is, you could actually apply those truths, air quotes to your life and have real benefits. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And other things are just, does it make a difference if the monos exist or not? No, it makes no difference in my practical life. Could they exist? Sure. It could all these, yeah, it could answer a lot. I think a lot of these things we've talked about like life on other planets and aliens, they all are very much explained. Or here's another good one. What are these spiritual paths having common? We train ourselves to find the differences in all of them. And the Vedic teaching say, don't you understand? You should be able to walk into a mosque, into a church, into a synagogue and say, how nice these people are trying to connect. Hmm. Not that we got to win these people over to our team because they're all an illusion and they're all going to hell forever. Right. Everyone's on a type of path and I appreciate them trying to surrender. And the only thing that's going to get in their way, because people say things like this all the time, yeah, it's religion that caused all the problems in this world. And it's not religion. It's the ego that goes with joining a particular church, synagogue, ashram, et cetera that we have in our way. And everybody else, they're a problem and we got to fix it. That's what gets in the way. Because you could say materialism causes lots of problems as well in the world. So I don't think it's that the ego's sneaky, it'll sneak into your diet, it'll sneak into your God, it'll sneak in. And that's why there's an appreciation instead of a condemnation of people that are different than us. Let's wrap it up right there. Those three hours, man. Oh, really? Yeah. Isn't that crazy? That is crazy. It's hard. It's just started, man. I hope that it was important. It was great. It was great. That's it, everybody. Thank you and hard Krishna. Goodbye. Thanks, God. Brother. Yeah, it's a great stuff. So it was fun.