You're a good one. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Nice to meet you Ryan. Nice to meet you Joe. Glad you're here. You're one of four or five people that I've talked to that have seen something that might be from somewhere else. It's always weird when you talk to someone that may have seen something that... Well let's just... First before you get started, please tell people your credentials, what your background is. Sure. So, you know, my name is Ryan Graves. I have an engineering degree, mechanical and aerospace engineering. I promptly left doing that to go fly F-18s for the Navy as soon as I graduated college. Did that for about a decade, both operationally in combat as well as an instructor role, teaching the new students. And you know, we did witness something while we were flying in our jets, but you know, we were doing it under... we witnessed it in the context of our just everyday flying in our missions. And what year was it that you witnessed this? So we started seeing these in 2014 was the earliest that I know, 2013, late 2013, early 2014. And can you describe what it was the very first experience? Yeah, so for me personally, the experience was simply just flying out to the area like I would any other day. Instead of seeing an empty airspace with just my winged person or another squadron, doing something a different block, there were also a lot of different radar contacts, which is immediately a problem because, you know, we could be hitting one of those or someone working in our area. And this was happening because we upgraded our radar the best we could tell. We were in a earlier radar called the APG 73. And we had come back from deployment. We ended up a maintenance phase. It's called. We kind of do a little bit less flying, upgrade the jets if we need to, we need long-lasting maintenance. And we upgraded to the APG 79, which was a much better radar. And what is the difference in the capabilities of the upgraded radar system versus the original system? So, you know, kind of frankly speaking, it's like going from an analog TV essentially to like an OLED. It's, you know, a digital modern tool compared to more of like an analog classical radar that has more limited range and has less ability to track multiple targets and things of that nature. So just generally speaking, we would expect to see, you know, more objects if there were any out there or smaller objects. But there shouldn't have been any objects out there. And so how far offshore are you when this is all going down? Our working area start about 10 miles off the coast. And then it goes out, you know, 150 miles or so that we don't usually use those far eastern areas. But we would only see them over the water. So they would really only be in our working areas, maybe slightly, you know, in between the working areas of land, but never over the land. Sometimes over the bays that are in the area that are quite large, but never just kind of zoom in west over land or anything like that. And is this restricted airspace? It's not. So that's a tricky question. For us operating in a military operating area, it is not restricted in the sense that you have to be, there's only one person allowed in there. You could have these little sesame kind of bumbling in there, but they would get called out pretty quick, both from the kind of air traffic control agency that's working out there, as well as F-18s and the other aircraft that may be working out there. But in a broader sense, when we look at it in relation to our air defense identification zone, which is essentially a band of airspace that surrounds our entire country, it is. If you are, if you're a flight path of originates out over the water outside of the A-diz and you proceed into that A-diz into our control airspace, then you do have to essentially have permission to enter that airspace. It's not a restricted airspace, like a traditional bombing range, but it is protected airspace. It's our coastal layer. So you have this upgraded radar system and what are you detecting? So on the radar, really what we can learn from that is essentially the kinematics of the object. So where is it essentially? And what directions are going, how fast is it going, things of that nature? We can't necessarily make up the shape or things of that nature. So it's a representation. It's like a block on our screen to show that information. So when we see that on our radar, we can tell where it's located. Perhaps what's located around it, if there's other objects we're detecting, how fast fast is going, what direction it's pointed in, what direction it's traveling in. So we call that velocity vector. So if we see this essentially a little circle, I have a tail coming off of it. And that tail kind of represents the nose of the vehicle, at least as its flight path is going. And so with that, we would typically see an aircraft just kind of trudging along with a straight line, taking occasional turns. But these objects had a little bit more of a, I don't want to say random, but more, let's control flight path. That velocity vector would kind of jump around a bit more. They would not proceed in like a perfectly straight line as you would imagine like a flight navigation computer would take you, right? Takes you from A to B in the straightest line possible. These objects seem to kind of be moving in a direction that was not a straight line, but generally proceeding in that direction. And so they would kind of be meandering slightly, but moving in that general direction, both three dimensionally and horizontally. So winding around going up, going down. So they're not on a flat plane and they're not going in a straight line. So I don't want to draw too many firm statements like that because we would see them being flat too. We see them perfectly stationary up there, regardless of the wind. Really. Yeah. Wow. So what kind of wind are you talking about? Oh gosh. I mean at altitude, you can have anywhere up to 120 knots of airspeed. Which is what is that in miles per hour? It's about 130, 140 miles per hour. So they're completely stationary with 140 mile an hour wind. Correct. How would something do that? It's confusing to me as well. Even if we had something that could just burn that much energy, right? Like if you had a sphere surrounded by a little rocket, right? Just imagining something right now. And if you wanted to keep that perfectly stationary, right, against gravity, you could just fire all the rockets at the bottom really fast and hopefully keep it flat, right? Right. It's going to have tiny little variations. And then if you have wind hitting it and all this, you could potentially have those rockets try to counter it. But it would never be perfectly still and winds like that. Because the wind's not perfectly still either, right? Exactly. It changes in varies. So it's almost like it's the wind. It's not even really fighting the wind it seems. You know, it just seems like it's just there in a way. Wow. So the first time you see these things, what are your thoughts? Yeah. The first time really was, well, you know, what is this, right? It's not a UFO or something mysterious at this point. It's at what we're thinking at this point, we see on the radar it's just, well, our radar is broken, right? These perhaps don't represent physical objects yet because we hadn't, you know, visually seeing these or seeing them on our camera yet. And so, you know, we kind of like, hey, what's going on here? You know, is it anyone all seeing this kind of thing? But not really like investigating it, right? It's just kind of like, all right, there are stuff out there, but maybe next time we'll take a look. But the way our systems work when we have all this, all the contacts on our radar, and if we kind of just select one out with our little cursor there, all our sensors go to it, our flea goes to it, which is our camera system, all our weapons. They have like their own little eyes in some sense and they all look in that direction. And so eventually, you know, someone had one of these selected and flew close enough so that as they look at their flea system, their camera, they could see something that was at the spot represented on the radar, right? So there was something there. So they were seeing it visually with their own eyes? Not at this point, just on the flea system. The flea system. And so that's a regular camera and also an infrared camera. And so, typically we'll roll around and infrared just because it returns a better image typically. So, yeah, you know, it didn't look like an object they were seeing on the flea. It just looked like a source of IR energy in a sense. And what size of someone was shining a flashlight. But something had to be there to be reflecting that energy or creating it. So at this point, to answer your question, now we're like, okay, this isn't just an error in our radar. This is perhaps, you know, we're thinking this is real. We have to really respect this as like a safety hazard now. Even if it's just a small, you know, however small ribbon of tinfoil, right, like that, stuck down the engine and still take out an aircraft, right? So we have a very respectful effect. From mylar balloon type thing. Potentially, right? Yeah. But how fast do things going? So sometimes stationary, right? Sometimes they would be going around 0.6 to 0.8 mop, which is altitude about, you know, 240 to maybe 330 knots, you know, around there. So somewhere in the range of an airplane. Yeah. And a fighter aircraft would be kind of flying around at those air speeds, except sometimes they would be perfectly stationary as well. Right. So it's not exhibiting any sort of patterns that you've recognized in the past. No, they have actually. So I'll do it with the stationary, no, right? Correct. But the stationary, no. With the meandering kind of flight path, no. But I would also see them essentially fly what we call a racetrack pattern. And essentially what that means is they fly in a straight path and then they do like a 108 degree turn in a certain direction and they fly a straight path and then turn again. You know, so that's what we call a racetrack pattern as posed to a circular holding pattern. We did witness racetrack patterns. In fact, I think there's been some cases off the west coast just past couple weeks where people have also been observing object flying in racetrack patterns, high altitude with lights. So I do recognize that behavior, but I don't necessarily think that means we have to attribute it to normal behavior necessarily. That type of flight path is important because it's a very efficient way to fly. Right? If you have to maintain the position in a certain area, you want to minimize how much you're turning. Because anytime you're turning in an aircraft, you're using more energy than if you're just flying straight and level. And so by having a racetrack pattern, it's an efficient way of holding in a position by maximizing straight and level time and minimizing your turn time. And how long would these things stay up there for? So from my experience, from our experience, and again, we weren't studying these, but they were always out there. They were out there when we took off, we'd see them, and then we'd go to land and they would still be out there. Every day, every day. Every day. So you guys go from not having any idea that these things are out there to upgrade and rate our system to seeing them every day. What is the thought? How are you feeling when is there an evolution of the thought pattern? Of how you're addressing these things and thinking about them? Initially, you're thinking they're errors. When do you start getting a thought? They're like, what the fuck is this thing? So that happened when we visually saw one. And the first time we visually saw one, the object was directly at what we call the entry point of the area. So that box that I told you about in the sky that starts 10 miles off the coast, there's particular GPS location and altitude where incoming traffic will fly in. And outbound traffic will fly in the exact same spot, but will fly out a thousand feet lower. There were two aircraft from my squadron, VFA 11. And we flew, excuse me, they flew, took off as a flight of two. That means they're essentially flying in a formation like this. And as they hit the area, one of these objects went right between the aircraft. The lead aircrew saw the object, the dash two aircraft crew did not, which is not surprising because they're usually, you're very focused on flying formation. You're just staring right at that aircraft. The lead really has actual lead way to look around. So he saw it. And he immediately came back. I have to assume he didn't have it on his radar because he wanted to have flown through this object at the entrance point. He turned around flew back. He was in the ready room when he'd come back. And he had an all-s gear on, which typically is not a good thing because you want to get that stuff off as fast as possible. So usually means there's a problem of some nature. And he was just sitting there saying, hey, I was hit one of those damn things. And we all knew what he was referring to even though we didn't necessarily have a name for just because we were seeing these so much. And he described it. It just does a black or dark gray cube. And that cube was inside of a clear translucent sphere. And essentially the apex or the corners of that cube, best you could tell, we're touching that inside of that sphere. And that description mirrors many of the descriptions that people have had of these, whatever you want to call them. They're calling them UAPs now for some strange reason. UFOs, I don't know, does it have a dirty connotation to it? And as it tainted because of so many crazy people talking about UFOs, is that what it is? It does come with a lot of assumptions baked in. It baked in. That's yeah. So that's something, but whatever it is, that is a design that people have reported seeing before that this translucent sphere and this cube. Can you see through the cube? Not to my understanding now. So it's some solid black cube that's inside this translucent sphere. And it's just floating around and flying around the sky. So that's a good point. Is it floating around? Is it flying around? It's doing both, which is strange, right? Because you could think of that description, okay, that's kind of some kind of weird balloon, maybe it was stuff in it. And that's certainly one way, if you just view that angle of it, then it seems explainable. When that, you know, the balloon like object starts cruising around at, you know, point eight muck, you know, that that nullifies that particular idea. And you'll see, you'll see that a lot where it's not just like that one picture, that one behavior. It's really kind of to zoom out a bit and look at everything in relation to each other and say, okay, why is this weird, you know, okay, it was hanging out in a racetrack pattern. That's not exotic. But when you, you learn it was doing it for perhaps 13 hours, 13 hours, you know, perhaps they were out there all the time, you know. So, you know, I land and I go back and we were on a, a Intel mission to analyze these, right? We're going to do our training. It's very expensive, 30K an hour to fly these things, right? So really the only time we can put energy into looking at these things when we're kind of transiting back and forth or waiting for a fight to start. And so, you know, it's never like a dedicated analysis. One of the problems I've had is that, you know, people haven't wanted to look into and to study this topic and people ask me all the time, okay, you know, why are you seeing on the jet? Where are you seeing in the radar? I want to be able to tell them that there was a great thing that we saw, but the F18 is not a scientific tool, right? We only get presented certain amount of information through, when all the sensors essentially filter all, all the data out so that we can prosecute the targets and do our job. It's not some type of like analog, you know, information we receive. So you know, just because something is showing jamming on my radar from one of these objects, it doesn't mean the object is executing, you know, electronic warfare to jam my jet. It just means that, you know, it's doing something to our radar signal and when it comes back, you know, our jet is processing it like it's EW. So we need to get proper scientific tools to do an analysis on these objects instead of basing, you know, a lot of our analysis right now just on tools of war that aren't built for them. Right. How long can you guys stay up in an F18? If we're dog fighting about an hour, if we're holding at point six to point eight mock, you know, like I described them as doing somewhere maybe around like two, two and a half hours maximum. And you think that these things are up there for far longer than that. So how big was this thing with this guy saw it? So it's very difficult to tell in the air, but because they were flying in formation, they could make some estimated guesses essentially and that's what we did when we talk about afterward. Right. So the aircraft were about 100 feet apart. This thing, you know, they estimate it essentially split the section, which means it went more or less right down the middle, but slightly closer to lead, but somewhere less than 50 feet, you know, on average if they're about 100 feet. You know, and then he, so he essentially used that, that size reference to say, hey, you know, this might have been somewhere in like the five to 15, you know, foot diameter. It's not a tight guess, but that's the best we could come up with. And what is it like? Like what's the atmosphere like when you go back to the base? Are you allowed to discuss this? Is this something that's openly talked about? Is this something that you get ridiculed for? It's just, you know, like you would expect any group of, you know, dude and do debts, you know, hearing about this, they just kind of, you know, do the normal reaction like anyone else and the kind of, you know, make the jokes and then kind of get back to work essentially because, you know, we're just so busy at this time, right? We're getting ready for war. Like for a lot of us, this is the, the apex of our career descents to get ready for deployment, you know, and it's kind of like the long blade gets cut in a sense in a fighter community like that. It's very much a trust based organization. So, you know, no one's out there looking to like make a big deal out of something that's completely irrelevant, you know, in our eyes to our day to day operations other than a safety risk. That's really like as much as we could process it. So yeah, they would ridicule, but I don't think it was, I want to say it was like over the top or emotionally damaging, but you know, it clear it wasn't something that like, you know, we were going to like, but serious thought and energy into, you know, it was, hey, yes, stay away and, you know, let me know how you did that next fight essentially. And when you discuss this, how many other people came forward with similar stories? It was less about people coming forward because everyone was just like, well, yeah, of course, we see them out there. Like at this point when we, it was almost a safety issue at this point, um, we'll be back up at first, you know, as soon as people, you know, the joke subsided when people eventually flew in a jet with upgrade or radar and saw it themselves, right? So, you know, it dwindled down where everyone was aware of this and it was just a safety hazard. But when we almost had the midair, that kind of up the ante, right? Because, um, we were kind of getting pissed at this point because, you know, the high probability answer was that this was some kind of some type of classified program of our own making that had perhaps just started operating in an area they weren't supposed to for whatever reason. Uh, that was, you know, that was kind of our assumption. So we submitted a safety report because of that near midair, uh, a hazard report, which essentially a, a notice that goes out to the whole fleet that says, you know, this is a potential hazard that could cause a loss from the aircraft. Um, and, you know, it was due to us almost hitting an unknown object of unknown origin. And that's how it continued for a while and there was a number of hazard reps about that, about near misses. Uh, eventually they put out what's called a, a notem or notice the airman, which is a published, um, it's published on a federal website, which essentially lists things like, hey, the runway lights are down or, you know, they're working on this runway or this area is closed for, for something. We had one in our area, local area that said, you know, caution for the unknown objects working in our operating areas. Um, we just don't know what they are essentially. So that's just kind of where it stagnated at, at that point as far as, you know, resolution. That's got to be a very bizarre feeling. You're, you're flying around in these jets preparing for deployment and you see things that are, if not unexplainable, haven't been explained yet. Mm-hmm. It just didn't fit into our framework, right? Even if we look at it so, you know, when we really kind of were trying to hash it out in the squadron, it's, you know, so, okay, what could these be? And even the classified, you know, drone thing. And I, I'm not even going to consider all the things that have happened since then, but even at, at this time, you know, the drone thing didn't make sense to us for a number of reasons. One of those is, you know, why, right? Why are, you know, why do we have potentially hundreds or more, you know, small drones that can perform better than anything we've seen, just hanging out, you know, for years off the coast. And is there a visible method of propulsion that's coming from these objects? No. What about a heat signature? No. So. there's no, there's no plume of heat coming out the back. There's no propellers. There's no wing surfaces that we've seen. And when you're looking at it, are you looking at it? And there's some sort of an infrared that will detect heat. Mm-hmm. You don't see any usually through infrared. Yeah. And so, you know, it'll, it'll come back as either a white hut or a, a dark hut, which means, you know, black color represents heat. Hot, what is hot? Just the, it's essentially if we're looking at like an object against a blue sky, you know, if that thing's producing heat, then it's going to come out white in white hut. So if I see a white object, it's going to be a hot object and the sky is going to be a little bit. What's that word, hot? You're using HOT. HOT? Oh, hot. Like a hot. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Little New England accent coming out. No, it's okay. I'm from New England too. I thought it was something else. I thought it was like a technical term. Yeah. So yeah, you know, and I say that just to say that, you know, it would just be like either all like completely one temperature essentially, right? It wasn't like the skin of an aircraft. You could see it was just kind of like an emission of IR energy, like a flashlight, right? Sometimes most of the time it would be cold. It was like a cold object. And so it didn't appear to actually be emitting heat. There were times when they did appear to be emitting as a hot object as well. So we did see both. So I don't know what the make of that was there a difference in the way they're moving when it was exhibiting heat. Not that, not that I know. I don't want to say no, but we just didn't look at it deep enough to say that at the time. But whatever it was doing, it wasn't exhibiting any of the characteristics that you would normally expect from a jet or a drone or something that had some sort of visible method of propulsion. Yeah. Wow. So when these things are happening every day and all these different pilots are experiencing them every day. This is essentially just from the moment of 2014-ish when this new radar system gets implemented. So you had one sense of what was out there and then all of a sudden you have these new systems and now you're like, whoa, this is littered with these things. Yeah. What is that like? What is that, like what for you personally? What does that feel like? You know, it's just comforting. We spend a lot of time and energy on the most basic aspects of flight in a sense, right? Because if you can't just operate safely, right? You can't come back and land and manage your fuel and not bust through altitudes and all that. You can't do all the other stuff, right? And so we're very particular on those type of details. So to have someone operating that area would be a massive oversight. So it was, you know, in a sense, we kind of, at least I had to felt a bit let down, right? It was like, you know, someone should be willing to look at this and deal with this problem, you know? If it was going to constantly, it was not that it was constantly getting laughed at. It's just it was, we always had more bigger fish to fry essentially, right? Which I respect and I understand, but it doesn't mean we completely ignore that, right? And we have to do more than just, you know, we have responsibility, I think as aviators when we're up there to report really what we're seeing because we're on the front line of what we can see up there. And if, you know, we don't have the command or operational support to, you know, tell the the truth about what we're seeing up there, then, you know, things have to change. And the ramifications of what these things possibly could be, how much does that weigh on you? Because if these things are from another world or from the ocean or from another dimension or what, you know, fill in the blank, whatever you think it could be, that alone has got to be very weird to experience because this is not something that's being openly discussed. So you're just flying around out there, you get this new equipment and then all of a sudden, you're like, hey, there's some stuff out here that we have no knowledge of and it's moving in a way that we really can't explain. What does that like? We never really appreciate that the time. Really, really. Because you're so mission focused. We're so mission focused. And the point when we kind of left our squadron, we left for deployment in 2015. And so this was still happening. It was, it was prior to the point that they started putting that notice out to airmen, no timeout. So they still not even got to the point to have that general notice out. It was just people sending out the occasional hazard reports and left from an individual squadron. And then we left for deployment. Well, excuse me, we left for, we left for workups first, I should say. So let me let me backtrack a little bit. As we get ready for deployment, we have our date where we leave. But then about six months prior to that, we're gone to the aircraft carrier and the different training areas to essentially get ready for that deployment and practice like we play. So right we start going to the boat, we live on the boat, we start doing tactics off the boat. And we left to go down to the coast of Jacksonville, Florida on a event where we essentially do exactly that. We fly out on the aircraft carrier and we do a number of tactical missions to simulate that we are in operational theater. And honestly, it's more dangerous and likely difficult in a lot of cases than the actual combat deployment. You know, we're preparing for every eventuality, air to air combat, rescue missions, everything, but of course, you know, not everything gets exercised when you get out there. So it's much more dangerous and pretty intense. And so that's what we were getting ready to go do. And then we left and we did that. And when we got down down in that area from Virginia Beach, you know, we noticed that these objects were down there as well. We didn't know whether they came with us or whether they were already down there. But you know, once we started flying off the boat, you know, about, I don't know, 1500 miles or so south of Virginia Beach, you know, there they were again. And it was, it was in my squadron again when the video that's known as the Gimble video now, that when that was recorded when we were on that work-up cycle out in Jacksonville. We should play the Gimble video. Jamie, will you please pull that up? Because I want you to kind of give us an understanding from your own expertise, like your technical understanding of what we're looking at. Yeah. So this is here it is. So this is this is a this is a flare footage. Yep. So this is my second for this is one referring to and right in the middle of the top screen, you see IR infrared. So that's that infrared mode we're seeing heat right down. We're in black hot. So that means objects that are darker are hotter. So this object right in the middle is putting heat out. And right now it appears to be rotating. Is that what it was doing there? Yeah, exactly. So we do see this object row in me. It looks like a gimbal. That's why it's called that thing. I didn't name it. But we do. We see the object essentially rotate from what looks like a horizontal position here. Those lines above it represent the horizon. So it's essentially parallel. There it goes. And it's hard to make out the shape of this thing, but it seems almost like a disk with like a crown on the top and the bottom. Yeah. It kind of like it looks like almost like a little little bit of energy coming out from the poles there if you will. That's kind of how I describe it. I see like a little bit of the dark, you know, heat emanating from there or the energy as I call it. And is there any way from this video from this equipment to detect how large this thing is? There is. So the velocity vector in the middle there can be set to a particular size. And that size correlates to a particular length. So that in a dog fight, if you have, you know, you're behind the guy and you essentially his wingspan is equal to the length of those two lines on that circle with the lines coming out. See that? Then you know how far away he is. So it's kind of like an analog thing that's not super relevant like in modern A's, but yes, there is. I don't know however what that is set to in this one. So I can't like make that calculation for you right now. Now I know some people who have attempted to debunk this and debunk even the rotation of this object. How do you know that that object is rotating definitively? He bunk even the rotation of this object. How do you know that that object is rotating? Um, definitively. Well, so we don't, right? We don't necessarily definitively know it's rotating at the end of the day, right? We have evidence that it is, but I don't have definitive evidence that you're conscious human being on those other table of me either, but... That's serious. You know what I mean? We just don't have that information. So you only have video footage, and in the video footage, it appears right now in relation to where it sits on the clouds that it has rotated. Yes. So, you know, we can also see if you, if you, and I know it's been done, people have created models out there that, you know, essentially look at the clouds and they draw out a flight path that this could be at, and the only variable is essentially how far away the object is. And that flight path obeys, you know, an equation that can be observed pretty readily when, you know, you build the little model. And essentially if you're at, you know, six miles or so, the object is proceeding in direction, and then when it starts to rotate as the aircraft described, it climbs and reverses directions. So you can't quite make that out, but when you, when you actually model it out, you can see that at these ranges, it does what was, was claims. And we're kind of skipping a little bit of storage. So maybe I should back up. So, you know, when we observed, when the, when this object was observed, the air crew essentially saw it on what they call a situational awareness page. And so that is a God's eye view of all the sensor data and everything else that our jets and other jets put out. Right? And so we can put curses on and move it around, select stuff. And what the air crew described during this video verbally is a formation of objects and then the gimbal object. So what happened was, you know, we had all gone out on an air to air training mission during this work-up cycle off of the aircraft carrier, the Theodore Roosevelt, again, we're off of the coast of Jacksonville, Florida. And you know, there's like four or five or six, you know, red fighters, which are our own guys, your gals, acting as the enemy. And then we go up and act as the blue fighters and go do our tactics. I was part of the flight. We all flew up there when we kind of run out of gas during the fight, you kind of just return by yourself. And if you still have gas, you continue to fight type of thing. So we don't always fly home together. In this case, the air crew from the gimbal video, you know, they knocked it off and started flying back to the boat. We don't go like directly back to the boat when we run out of gas. It seems counterintuitive, but we have to wait for our landing time. We can't just come back to land earlier. So it doesn't really matter where we are as long as we're nearby. And we just slow it down to what we call our max endurance speed. All right. So we just kind of cruise around, put along out there and just hang out until it's their time to land. And so, you know, while they were doing this, they noticed that there was a group of contacts on their situation where it was page, again, from their radar. And they're like, you know, maybe this is like a penetration test because they'll launch aircraft from the coast. You know, like old old fighters or, you know, just things that can move relatively quick, but you know, not necessarily there to engage us in a dog fight. Let's see if we can detect them and intercept them in time and things of that nature. Part of the overall training. And so when they saw these objects, that's what they thought this was. And so they started flying over to it. And they got, you know, they got about six to seven, eight miles away, six to eight is what the air crew told me. They didn't want any closer because it was night time at this point. They couldn't see the object, which is why they were only in the IR mode. And they essentially, you know, they checked out for a bit and then circled a bit and then flew back essentially as it was time for their recovery. But what they saw was, you know, you saw the gimbal object that we saw in the film, but there's also, there was also a formation of like four to five, I might say six. I don't remember exact number, but somewhere in the four to six range objects that were flying in a wedge formation. So essentially like a triangle without a base. And those objects were kind of, pre-cheating along the same line as the gimbal. From my recollection, the gimbal was, you know, slightly behind that formation and offset below it. And so that formation essentially kind of just turned in a, I'll call it left hand turn in a normal radius of turn to slightly less like, but they got all jumbled up. So they just started turning instead of like a clean turn where they all kind of say in the same spot. Kind of a big sweeping thing. Instead of that, it was a lot tighter and they kind of broke down. They didn't look like they were in formation anymore in a sense. You know, they were kind of scattered about, and I can't tell which ones which really out there on the radar looking at it. So I don't know if they came back in the same formation and exact same position, but when they rolled out 180 degrees out, basically reverse direction, you know, they kind of got back into similar if not the same formation and proceeding opposite direction. And during this time, the gimbal object, you know, again, proceeding called left to right, trailing this formation while it kind of executed its radius of turn, the gimbal just essentially was continuing in a straight line. And then as a fate like pinged off a wall, it just reversed direction to follow that formation, you know, once they had started flowing in the opposite direction. So no just stopped in mid air and went backwards. I wouldn't even say stop. They just seemed like it just like never stopped. Just went ping, you know, and that was, that's how we saw from the situational awareness page from looking down. All right. And so when you lift that up and look at it from the side, you know, what that ping motion looks like is a you turn vertical, you turn to go in the opposite direction. All right. So a climb to reverse its turn to flow in the opposite direction within about 500 feet, which is very tight turn. I think an F18 needs like 6000 feet or 4000 feet to do a turn like that. Wow. Yeah. So there's nothing that we have as a drone that's capable of moving like that. So yeah, again, if you just look at one particular case, it's like, all right, so something climbed vertically and you know, opposite direction, like that's not the sexiest thing in the world. But then let's look back in context and say, okay, we're, you know, 350 miles off the coast in protected airspace around the aircraft carrier, you know, with only fighter jets in the air. And then all of a sudden there's a formation of small objects just kind of cruising around, you know, for a period of time that's unknown, performing the least fuel efficient turns possible, right? Like there's no concern for how fuel efficient that turn is. That's not, that's like the least efficient way to do a turn. And so how is an object hundreds of miles off the coast, you know, with apparently no concern for fuel hanging out next to our carrier? And without the fear footage, you would have never been able to see these things. Correct. Yeah. When you report this, what is, what's the reaction? Like how does that go? No. Because we were practicing like we played at this point, getting ready for war, we were doing like a formal intel debrief after our flights, right? It's kind of like, hey, we intercept these guys and did that another thing. And so the, the air crew who recorded it were going down in that room to debrief it. And someone told me like, hey, you know, your friend there got something interesting on the, on the fleet of times, you know, maybe you should go take a look or something. So because I had already landed my gears off, you know, and so waiting to debrief essentially. And so I'm like, yeah, I could check it out. So I walked down there, you know, it's like the other side of the ship. Go in to classified space, all the intel focus in there. And they're queuing up the video, the tapes to watch the fleet of footage. And here's an interesting thing too, right? So the situational awareness page that screen I told you about with the great R data, that's kind of in a screen that's, you know, chess level. And then there's a screen here, screen here. I level on either side. And if you report, we put the fleet here, the standard procedure in the situational awareness page down here and then we'll have a radar appear or any of our other systems. If you record the screen with the FLIR, you record the SAP page automatically. Like it's part of the same tape. So what's interesting is that's what we watched when we were in that intel space. You know, I was able to see the FLIR footage. And that's what, you know, we just watched. And then the situational awareness page with the radar data showed that as well, which, you know, showed the fleet and showed that movement I described. Those are, you know, if that FLIR footage exists, then the radar data for that event exists as well. All right, because it's filmed the same time. So someone would have the specifically split it off to get the, the gimbal video out without the radar data, right? So the gimbal video was leaked. Is that what happened? I don't know the exact mechanics. My understanding it was that's the way it could be described, but it was done within channels that that doesn't make it, you know, in illegal activity, but I honestly don't know the mechanics of how it was released. So somehow or another it gets out there and it gets online, but the situational awareness page and the radar data does not. You only get the FLIR footage. Correct. Why do you think that is? I think there's good reasons for that. You know, I don't think it's overly mysterious. You know, our radar sensor systems are our primary sensor out there. They're hardly in player weapons. And that's all fine. I think that's completely reasonable to not have that released like, because it's top secret, because it would be some sort of a breach of security. Yeah, give away like how well our radar works essentially, right? But with that being said, you know, there's still ways you can take that information and declassify it and just put the raw data out there in a sense like the kinematics, right? Like, okay, this object where the technique objects that move like this, you know, there's no location. There's no like specific, you know, there's specifics that have been kind of of fleshed out. There's like mathematical tools that can do that with like, you know, precision and certainty. So there are ways to declassify that data. One of the efforts that I'm doing at the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics with the UAP community of interests that have helped put together is essentially preparing teams to do that, you know, analysis. We have a team of engineers, aerospace and others that have, you know, over 300 years of NASA experience, you know, at least that are working to put together, you know, engineering and scientific UAP sensing manuals that can be updated yearly so that the information that we learn going forward in a productive manner isn't something that we need to necessarily get disclosed from the government in order to move forward on. So when you're watching the FLIR footage and you're looking at the situational awareness page and you're seeing these objects, you've already had experiences with these things by then. So the gimbal with something. Yeah, we hadn't seen the gimbal yet though. So this is different than the other objects that you've seen. Yeah. So the gimbal object at this time. What is a gimbal, by the way? A spinning top, that's what I think of. Oh, okay. Yeah. And essentially, you know, in that induces a force that wants to keep it upright essentially, right? So it's spinning you poke it and it kind of goes back to center. Again, I don't know where the names came from, but. Okay. But this particular shape of UAP, you had not witnessed before. Had you heard of something like this before? No. No. And let me say it was not necessarily the shape that one gives it the name and even is what we were analyzing, right? Because what we see in a video is IR energy. And that could be anything. Is there a plasma field there? But the surface is smaller or is there some type of energy out there that, or heat that is masking the shape of the object. We don't really know the size or the make the physical shape of the object from that image. Right. You're just getting the signature. So when everyone is observing this, how many people are in the room with you when this is going down? Yeah, there's yeah, maybe like 15 or so. A lot of intel people, you know, may handful of avators. And then of course the air crew. What's the reaction? Everyone just kind of looking around each other and just kind of like, you know, holy shit. Like, you know, there was no like, oh, that's prosaic or that's there was no conclusion to draw on, but everyone just kind of like had no idea what it was. And the people that were in there had they also used this upgraded equipment so they were all aware that there was something going on out there. Like this is a narrative that's being discussed. All the avators. Yeah. So everyone kind of knows that you're not alone out there. That's a good question. I don't even know how many of the intel folks knew at this point, but I mean, at least our squadron intel, you know, guided and I know a handful of others, but I also don't know how many of the intel folks were aware at this point. Is there a discussion about, you know, how much of this can you talk about openly? Like, is everyone going, huh? Like, what is it like? Yeah, pretty much that, huh, right? And kind of just waiting for someone to provide some, you know, leadership on this. So like, what the fuck? What leadership is available for the alien spacecraft shows up? Well, apparently they called the Admiral, right? So they're like, let's see what the Admiral thinks. And so I kind of like kind of slowly walked into the shadow so no one kicked me out, you know. Right. Because you want to know. Yeah, I want to see what it is reaction at least, you know. And he came down in a couple of minutes and he watched it for like five, six seconds and just turned around and was like, just walked out. Whoa. Yeah. He's clearly seen this before. Yeah. Yeah. That's what I saw. That would immediately be my thought. He's just going, huh. Like, unless he's so fucking jaded, the guy who sees so much work. Oh, shit. Maybe he needs your entire body. He's seen too much shit. But I would imagine if that's his reaction, this is something that he's observed before. So fast for a couple of years and we'll come back. But you know, I at this point talked to various people in the hill and had been involved with some people that had looked into this. And one of them mentioned to me, hey, your inclination was correct. You know, after he saw a video, he essentially came back and called us to report that these fucking objects were still, you know, in his airspace. And we're looking for some type of answer of what to do with the bottom. Wow. And was there any sort of conclusion? Is there any sort of protocol that you that gets established afterwards to what to do when you encounter these things? So to answer that in the worst way possible, you know, we walked back to a ready room. And of course, then we're all like, you know, talking about it. And like, well, it's just because we hadn't we've seen the other objects. Like, from the best we could tell the formation represented the objects we were used to seeing off the East Coast. But the gimbal was new. And you know, now we're building theories because it's like, well, this is different. You know, we're starting to get a little more interested. And you know, essentially someone just came in and just said that was enough, essentially, you know, I'm talking about it. Yeah. And it wasn't like it was, you know, here's, here's an NDA or anything like that. And it wasn't really even anyone in a position to order that they wanted to. But it was still just like, all right, we don't just another weird thing here at this point. And again, we're in a super stressful time, right? Right. 18 hour days, you know, it's a stressful time. Yeah. You know, I look back and I feel like I have to defend that decision because it's like, why weren't you more curious? So why weren't you more into it? You know, or why didn't you think to explore this part of it? But yeah, we were just busy. We were just so focused on what we were doing and trying to do it the best we could. When you guys are alone, like if you're having dinner or you're just alone having to beer, do these things come up in conversation? Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Are there more different shapes and more different types of these objects? The observations off the East Coast, we talk to other people in other squadrons with similar capabilities and they were describing it the same way, the Cuban sphere, same color, same, you know, everything. And does that seem indicative of things that you only see on the East Coast? So far as I know, you know, that again, there's no, I wish there was a better place to answer these questions. But part of the reason I don't have answers is because we've just refused to look at this for so long, right? There's just never been data collection so far as, you know, I know. And so, you know, that would be, these are the questions we could answer that we should, if we had started looking at this 20 years ago perhaps, that we could be answering now. But, you know, we have to collect a lot of data. And it's interesting because we have really two ways of doing that, right? There's, there's leveraging the world's best sensors and things of that nature through the US government. And of course, all that is all that is going to be classified and it's always going to be difficult. And then on the other hand, there's really discovery, right? I mean, this, we don't have to just wait for the government to tell us, you know, what's right and what's wrong, what's real on this topic, right? We are at an age now where technology and the marketization of tools essentially and access to space, you know, is moving it. So, you know, we can verify and move the topic forward without being hand fed perhaps from the people with the world's greatest sensors. Does that make sense? Yeah, it does make sense. How many different types of these objects have you heard other people discuss? There's the, there's circle that has the cube inside of it. There's this gimbal thing which you don't really necessarily know what the shape is. But have people witnessed, I witness accounts other than Commander David Freaver described something that he said looked like a tick tack. I believe he said it was somewhere in the neighborhood of like 25 feet wide, is that what something sounds right? So there's three, right? You don't know what the gimbal, the physical shape of it is. Then you have the circle with the cube inside of it and then you have the tick tack. Are there more? Probably, you know, it's... Have you talked to someone who's seen others? On the East Coast, you know, we were typically seeing what I've already described to you. All up and down. So, even up in like the Potoxic River area outside of DC, you know, people were seeing up there at the test pilot area. On the West Coast, like you said, I've heard the tick tack description, you know, multiple times. Once kind of the work got out, I think about the cube a bit and people were looking and paying attention. I started to hear about those being observed in other areas, such as the West Coast. And further inland, actually, around other bases. But we still know, necessarily, if we're observing things there because they're there because we just happen to have the sensors there, right? It could be in more places we're just not necessarily looking there. So there's a huge aspect right now at an observation bias. In 2017, it was kind of a milestone moment for UFO just the discussion because the New York Times printed a story. And once it was on the front page of the New York Times, it was like, okay, this is a serious magazine or this serious newspaper. And you have a serious discussion now about this thing that had been for a long time been ridiculed. And then the Pentagon discusses it. You start hearing people, why do you think that's happening? Like, what is it about this subject? It must have been for you in 2014, very bizarre when you have this new radar system that starts detecting these things. Now you get this understanding of the fact that these things are there all the time. You just haven't been able to put eyes on them and you haven't had equipment that measured them accurately. Now you do. And now there's this discussion of it in New York Times. What do you think is going on? At the end of the day, I wish I had an answer for you. I don't. From where I'm sitting, I see a lot of people that seem to be paying attention more so now, especially after that article came out myself included. I was part of it. I was witness to it. But just like everyone else, I just let it be part of my history until I saw that article pop on the New York Times. And I don't know why we are moving the conversation forward. I've listened to Chris Mellon talk about it. I've listened to Lew talk about it. It's very simple when I talk about it because it's very simple. It's just their objects out there that our e-veers room was hitting. For me, whenever I engage this topic, it's always from that perspective of aviation safety. So it's never really like engaging on this crazy and ontological wave. It's me just working on a problem that I was trained for by the Navy. I was trained being aviation safety officer. I see the signs of the safety problem brewing. People don't want to talk about it. It's taboo. That's not how aviation safety works. It doesn't live in silence in a cone like that. You need to share lessons learned. And the government gets it now. The DOD gets it. That's why the air crew have a reporting mechanism now. They can come back after their flight, after they've seen one of these objects. And they can report it. And I understand that reporting mechanism has an area where they can describe the shape of it. We can answer that question of yours. Once that day day gets released, I hope it will at some point. It's classified at the moment. Do you have any understanding of how often these things get reported? I don't know how often they're getting reported. My fear is that if aviators don't get feedback from the work you're doing, they're going to stop reporting. If you just keep reporting, a safety hazard every day, and it's just data collection and nothing solves it, then eventually you're just going to say, what's the point? I'm going to just do my thing. And I've seen some declassified pilot reports. Some of these were from the UAP Task Force report that came out last year. And they're fascinating. The pilots are curious. They're seeing things they don't understand. They're seeing these interesting objects, massive winds, they're seeing formations of objects flying around, behaving the ways they don't understand. And they're looking for more. They're saying, hey, if you have any more questions, please reach back to me on classified if you need to. And my fear is that if they don't get that information back, that engagement with people collecting that data, it's going to taper off. So I just wanted to make the plea that we consider that there's a two-way conversation with those air crew. Christopher Mellon, when I talked to him, he was saying that there's a lot more data, a lot more evidence out there that hasn't been released. And his understanding of it is what you're seeing is just the tip of the iceberg and that there's high resolution photos and videos and that some of it is, you know, for a lack of better word, disturbing. Because you're looking at something that doesn't make any sense in terms of what we understand, what's physically possible with the technology that we have access to today. Yeah. You know, I have some volunteers within the AI AA work that I do that, you know, have been in a position to do that, right? Now that, again, there's been a new reporting mechanism. We're kind of moving into a new age with this. I can't speak to all the data that may be out there for the past, you know, extra years, right? Again, it comes with a lot of assumptions and a lot of unanswered questions. But from the new reports that they've started fresh with the Navy, and I applaud them for, you know, standing up and taking the lead on that, the reports that we see is that, you know, this has continued to be a problem that is occurring. The number of objects, you know, they seem to be increasing. It seems to be happening everywhere we're looking, you know, so Navy bases in the West Coast and other places in the U.S. and on the East Coast are seeing them. Yeah, I'll just stop there for a minute. I do like Asian life. It's such a squirrely subject, man. And I'm really fascinated by the fact that these sightings seem to occur on a regular basis over the ocean. And Jeremy Corbel, who has had video leaked to him, I use the air quotes leaked because I don't know exactly how this is happening or what, why it's happening or why I assume they're focusing on him because he's capable of releasing it in a very high profile way. He releases it, people are going to pay attention. But one of the videos is of a trans medium device. Something that is apparently some of the military film this, that it was flying above the ocean and then went into the ocean. When you're seeing all these things, they appear around the ocean. Why do you think that is? Do you have any speculation? Well, you know, it's, it's, we're pretty blind down there at the end of the day, right? You know, we don't, we don't have as good as SAL say or as much presence in the ocean as we do in the air out say. Yeah, we do a lot of sensors and we can likely see certain things, but radiation, electromagnetic radiation doesn't propagate very well through water like that. So in a way, it's kind of be a good place to hide, I would suggest. Yeah. You know, there's talks of hydrogen being a useful fuel source, you know, and of course plenty of hydrogen in the water. But this is all just pure speculation. I really don't know at the end of the day. But when we, I, you know, the video that you mentioned with that, that kind of trans medium behavior went, you know, directly into the object like that, I'll just say that, you know, that is, that is very unique to see object like that. You know, people argue about the shape or or anything like that. Even if, you know, these objects are coming from call it, call it a near pure threat, right? And they're still able to do these types of behaviors. At the end of the day, it really comes down to technological surprise, right? Whether that's an adversary on Earth or whether that's, you know, something else. It's the same process of understanding what the capabilities are so that, you know, come in 2024, 2025, you know, we don't have, you know, a surprise that we can't counter whether that's, you know, hypersonic object flying around. That happened to be UAP or whether it happened to be missiles, right? It's essentially the same problem. The problem is, yeah, we don't know if that's coming from an adversary or whether it's coming from an alien. And so we don't know how to react, whether this thing is observing us or whether this thing is an actual physical threat. I, I, I've used the word threat before. And for me as a pilot, when an aircraft is flying around out there and they're not talking to me, right? Like say they came into our my area and I'm the only one out there and there's an interloper. That's, that aircraft's a threat to me. It doesn't mean he has hostile intent necessarily, but my aircraft could be lost if I have a midair. If I start doing some tactics and I forget he's there and now I'm, you know, he's working through his altitude. So he's a threat very simply. Doesn't mean it's a bad guy or these got, you know, explosive on his plane. But it's the same way when I talk about these being a threat for avators out there. It is a safety hazard. Someone could die. We could lose aircraft. I don't think that these objects are displaying hostile intent out there. But even just observation and collection of our, you know, electronic warfare, our communications, our radar frequency, all that information. If it was a, an earthly threat, you know, that would be very useful information that they could look the back engineer. Has there ever been any sort of design or discussion of some sort of a craft that can operate in a trans medium way that can fly through the air and then go into the ocean? Nothing that I've, you know, seen that's been created really. How would a propulsion system work that would go from the air into the ocean with based on what we understand about like the abilities that we have to that? Sure. You know, on the surface, like to go from air to water isn't necessarily a complete challenge, right? Like you can imagine something that can get dropped into the ocean and perhaps move around or some type of mini submarine that comes up and then launches a UAV right and flies away. But just to be clear to people listening, that's not necessarily what we're talking about. We're talking about an object that is moving at a relatively, you know, quick pace and enters the water as if it wasn't there. That's my, is that what you understand? Yeah. So we understand it as it just, yeah. Just went right into the water. And so, you know, that's, that's incredibly interesting for a number of reasons. You know, propulsion in the air, averse propulsion in the water is, you know, typically pretty different. And once you start talking about high speeds underwater, that kind of goes out the door, you know, high speeds underwater, 200 miles an hour or higher is not like 200 miles in the air. So when I think of something that can operate in both, the first thing I think of is that, you know, neither are concerned because of its operating system, whether that's air friction or whether that's, you know, the water drag that it would be exposed to. It's like the first kind of like out there. that, you know, neither are concerned because of its operating system, whether that's air friction or whether that's, you know, the water drag that it would be exposed to. That's like the first kind of like out there thought as far as how this could operate. It would somehow be affecting, you know, the air or the water, right, the liquid around it to move it around the aircraft or to, you know, negate the effect of all that force, right? Because moving on to water just so much pressure, friction that's just so hard to go fast. Did you watch that Jeremy Corbel documentary, Bobbo's our Area 51 in flying saucers? I did. What did you think of that? It was interesting, you know, I got a cool story for you here when I was a kid. I was an avid explorer of internet and I had stumbled upon what I thought at the time was the coolest possible website ever. I was this guy selling all sorts of like radioactive rocks and like cool scientific equipment and I was like, this is the coolest website. Like this is why the internet was built. And you know, fast forward, you know, many years later I learned that, you know, that was Bob's website. Oh, United nuclear. Yeah. Oh, wow. I heard it. It might have been in that movie actually or the documentary and he has a coldest mokes. That's that guy. But, you know, the stories, the stories fascinating, here's here's my only, you know, I don't want to say I believe or just believe because this is such a controversial area when people start like drawing these, you know, conclusions. So I want to be able to establish the ability to do real science on this topic. Right. Like I want to be able to, you know, get a material or to get a bit of information and have a real peer review process that is going to look at that information objectively without the stigma that UAP have had. Even Bob's story, right? Comes with, you know, people either, you know, hated or love it. It's very controversial. But then the day, you know, data is data. And if we can, you know, perhaps get LN 115 or some other thing that could be used to do an analyst and we can write papers will have a process to take that forward and be able to say, hey, you know, here's now a flag in the sand that we can kind of move science forward on on this, you know, unique topic. And if no one, the people that haven't seen the documentary, what Ryan's referring to with the element 115 is something that Bob talked about in the late 80s. And what he describes is a reactor that uses this element called 115 that was theoretical in the late 80s, but then proven in somewhere in the 2000s, was it like 2009 or something like that? But it was proven through a particle collider where they were able to detect it, you know, when they have these particles and they can detect them for a very short period of time, but they know now that it's not just theoretical, this element 115 is an actual element. In the first discussions that Bob Lazar had about this, he claimed that there was a stable supply, a stable version of element 115 and that this element 115 was used to make some sort of a gravity field. And that was the method of propulsion that these crafts were using and that they exhibited a method of flight that is very similar to the gimbal, the way he described it. And this is again in the late 80s that this thing would be traveling and then it would turn and rotate vertically and that it would then travel in that would be somehow or another this element 115 with this reactor would create this some sort of a field that allows it to bend gravity and bend space and time around it and the way he described it as if the way it uses a propulsion system, you say if you had an incredibly heavy bowling ball and you put it in the middle of a mattress and it sort of pushes the mattress down like that's what this thing is doing to space. Instead of firing flames out the back, it's doing something with this element that's allowing it to travel in an incredibly fast way. And when you listen to Commander David Freuer's depiction of that tiktok object, one of the things that's incredible is that they detected this object at more than 50,000 feet above sea level and then it went from above 50,000 feet to 50 feet in less than a second, which is just bonkers like who the fuck knows what could do that with no visual propulsion system, no visible, no understanding of like how this thing is moving around. But the fact that Bob Lazar was describing that actual method of propulsion back in the late 80s, it's trippy. I wish, I wish through it. If he's a liar, he's one of the best liars of all time and what a great con he's been running because he's been telling the exact same story, the exact same way for more than 30 years. It's really crazy and you don't know what to think. I mean, I talked to the guy I had dinner with him and then I talked to him on the podcast and you know, I like to think I have a fairly decent bullshit detector, but I'm, I don't know. I don't know. I mean, he's obviously a brilliant guy, a legitimate scientist, incredibly intelligent. And I just, he would have been called out and he kind of has about his education record, but he explained that to me and I'll explain it to you afterwards like what he told me that he doesn't want to discuss publicly. But it's, it's so strange that the way this guy was talking about these objects back in the late 80s is exactly how we're observing them behave today. And that he was saying that the United States government had these things in their possession and they were attempting to back engineer them and they hired him a propulsion expert to try to figure them so that's element 115. So when you are watching this documentary and him explaining this and talking about area S4, which is where he was supposedly working on these things, like what's your sense of that? I tried to stay agnostic in a sense because I think probably like most people, like I want to believe it. It's super interesting. A very deep pardon me just was like man, I want all that to be true. That's super cool. And so in a sense, that's what kind of pushes me away from it, you know, because I don't have any tools to to prevent that from taking over, right? Like I don't have any data or anything other than just that. But that's okay. That's what we've dealt with, I think in the past. But I think, and I believe and I hope that as we move forward, we're going to be dealing with this in a new way. It's going to be about planning flags and moving the conversation forward with data and science. And there's some another reason again that could be happening now is that there's just better tools. Our technology is getting better. We in sense have another non-human intelligence on Earth with us right now, right? With our advancement, machine learning and artificial intelligence, those tools might give us information insight into these behaviors in a way that we want to obviously put together, right? That's what ML does best. And so I see great promise for us having a better understanding of some of these mysteries kind of when we bring in that tool that shows things that we just, our brains aren't well suited to find those patterns. So part of the problem with all this stuff is the fact that it's not openly discussed. And I know that you were brought in for a hearing. This isn't in front of Congress, is that what it was? So way back when that's kind of got kicked off, I had a private meeting with members of the Senate Armed Service Committee and Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. And what was that like? Pretty nerve-wracking. I mean, I was, you know, yeah, so you know, it was funny. I volunteered to do this in a sense and I was like, listen, I realized that, you know, I'm active duty right now. This is definitely not like, you know, I can't represent the Navy here or the military, right? I have to just try to speak as a citizen the best I can. So I was like, I'm not going to wear my uniform. I'm just going to go as, you know, as Ryan, not with 10 at graves, hopefully. And I end up getting a call at like 9, 30, 10 at night, the night before I was both to leave. Essentially saying, get your, get your uniform ready because you're now on orders to go up there to have that conversation and you'll be in uniform. And this was like months before I'm getting out of the Navy. So like my, my, she's all packed up, you know, like I'm like calling friends at like, and some stuff I ship back home already, you know, like back up to New England. I'm in Mississippi at this time. So I'm calling my squadron mates at like, you know, 10, 11 at night trying to like get uniform pieces of the past together. Like, oh shit, here's the worst part, right? So I'm in there's, you know, some very serious people in there. One of them is a former admiral and now he's a staffer essentially. And like all the the questions and you know, having the whole conversation near the end, he's like, he's like, so I noticed that you're missing a ribbon or uniform because I, you know, I had to have that rack right here. And just one you get like every time you kind of leave a squadron, they're no, you know, no big deal. But I didn't have it. He's just like the stores were closed. I couldn't get it in time. He's like, did you leave your squadron? Did you leave your squadron on a bad note, you know, because I didn't have that medal? Oh, my gosh. No, but he was pretty cool about it. But yeah, that was probably the most difficult thing. The whole thing that you didn't know you were coming in you. Yeah, pretty much. I just told the story. I just told you to get loved it. Well, I'm sure they're probably like thought it was funny that you were so nervous about it too. Yeah, I mean, you know, I'm at a table, not unlike this one, but much bigger. And I'm, you know, at the head of table here and on your side is like all the DoD folk and like executive branch representation. And on the other side is all the the SaaS and intelligence folks. And I got essentially walked over by a handful of admirals that were in various roles from that point. This was this was an unexpected part of my trip. I was supposed to just go talk to them. But part of me coming in uniform was that I needed to have a conversation at the Pentagon right prior to that. To what to discuss and what not to? No, at the time it was just kind of like to get, you know, a pre-brief essentially. So they described it, but and that's all it was. There was nothing to fair yes. They really just wanted to hear it from the horse's mouth. You know, before they escorted me across the hill. And what were the questions? Like what was the nature of the discussion? Which one? When you sat down in front of everyone. Yeah, I mean, essentially, you know, what's the story? You know, what do you see? And not unlike, you know, a lot of the things I told you about here, you know, did people read a kulu? Did they, you know, people tell you not to talk about it? There was a concern it seemed like from those from the non-DOD folks that they were wondering if there was any influence on me to, you know, either downplay or not talk about it. So they and there was none, you know, to be clear. But that was, you know, they questioned me on that. But then the day it was essentially, you know, they seem earnestly, you know, interesting getting in the bottom of what we were seeing out there. There seemed like a lot of, they seemed to ask a lot of good questions that couldn't be answered in that, at that space, in that classification level. So, you know, they were having a follow-up conversation after I left. But that was really the kickoff of, you know, meets speaking about this, you know, official fashion, right, to like actual decision makers, things of that nature versus media essentially. Is there discussion about media? Was there a discussion about how you were allowed to talk about this or how much of this is classified? So, you know, the whole boat situation, right, with Gimble, and people were like, all right, we're done talk about this. But, you know, there's that's not how classification worked, right, there's NEAs and paperwork. Like so, you know, the short answer was no, like this was never information that was classified. Like I never, you know, I wouldn't have spoke about it if it was unclassified. And yeah, I thought it was inappropriately unclassified and could cause, you know, national damage or anything like that, right. I understood it was like a new thing. But, I was, I was in at least in my mind doing what I thought was best. But it was not classified information. It was, it was not information at the time, right. It just, it wasn't a thing. Now there's a program. Now there's a reporting program, the UAP Task Force, you know, collects reports. Now it's a classified reporting program. So, I don't expect people that, you know, to be quote unquote leaking or talking about it publicly anymore due to it being a real operation now, which is a good thing. Have you had any conversations with anyone at a high level that gives you an understanding of what they think these things are? Yes, you know, not to the specificity I think that you would like or anyone would like. But, you know, there are efforts standing up within DOD with the Air Office with, you know, some of the Intelligence Authorization Act language from last year and also this year. The language and the efforts that are being established to look into this are doing so under the context that there is a large category of other, right, that we just simply don't understand. It's, you know, that we're not, the systems are being designed and built in organizations aren't there to better understand, you know, the Chinese threat that might be off our shores, right. Like if that, if that's identified then it gets routed to the proper place and then they'll go back to doing their job on the mysterious stuff that's still out there, right. So, you know, that's how the efforts are being organized right now. Now, what the output of that investigation is going to be whether it's, you know, aliens or any of the other million of hypothesis is unknown at this point. But it is the mysterious. It's not the prosaic that they're establishing these channels for. So, it really is an unknown and even at the highest levels. Other than what Commander Freaver described and what the equipment detected in terms of speed, the movement of that thing. And then another disturbing thing was that the object when it took off an extraordinary speed after they had detected it and went to their cat point, which is very interesting. Because they had a predetermined place where they were supposed to meet up and this thing went there. Like it could read their plans. They're intent maybe, you know, I don't have an answer for that. It's mysterious, right. It's, those points aren't like super classified. But like there's, there's no logical reason for that, you know, an object like that to know where they're going in the future. Was, is there any other instances of something exhibiting that kind of speed that you're aware of? I hear lots of stories about that from other aviators. I haven't personally like witnessed the gunshot acceleration that you hear about. What have you heard from other aviators? You know, one of them was up by the tax river, the test pilot area mentioned. A friend of mine that was on the east coast with me, who who deployed and was used to seeing these objects was then in test pilot school and then stayed there as a test pilot was out doing a mission. And, you know, off the eastern seaboard. And they had, you know, he had an object come up about 20 feet from his cockpit, looks similar to what's been described off these coasts was there for four to five, six seconds. He's cruising at, you know, 350 knots, you know, somewhere in the teens, the thousands, you know, 15, 16, 17,000 feet. An object just stays there for, you know, a handful of seconds and just like darts off, like into the great beyond, you know, very quickly. And he's being monitored by a whole testing apparatus, right, like a mini NASA with all the screens and the test engineers because he's doing a real flight test. And they knocked it off, you know, the ATC, the air traffic control didn't have any knowledge of that air traffic and, you know, the test people didn't see it either. But he ended up reporting that through the UAP task force report. He did end up getting debriefed and was likely one of the 144 reports. So I tell that to show that, you know, at least at the time it was working, right, like there was a real process. We know that now because we've seen the evidence of it in the reports. But, you know, there's other cases of pilots where they just, you know, they see something in the distance and it's theirs moving around ways it can't explain as they get closer, just, you know, shooting off like a cannon. And when I was telling you earlier about the UAP off the Eastern coast, that's kind of like the new generation. But all the, you know, the age aviators and the Navy, you know, they all had their own stories, you know, whether it was, I mean, not 100%, but, you know, at least the ones that, you know, there were plenty that were willing to talk about it. I'll say about that, you know, I can't say how many weren't, but. So this is not a rare occurrence. It was a long time. Yeah. And this one that you were just describing where it was very close to the cockpit then took off. Was it the same thing, the translucent circle with this, this square inside of it? What's the earliest known sightings of that particular type of object? So far as I know, it's that 23 early, or late 2013, early 2014 back when we saw what the radar upgrade. Have you seen anything visually? I haven't been able to see it. So we would fly up to it. People in our squadron would like, once, of course, we knew there was something there. We tried to fly up to it. All right, and see it. And, you know, our safety limit is 500 feet, which is very close for us. And we train all the time to come to you as a call the merge where we fly right by another aircraft really close. 500 feet is our safety bubble. And then we execute a fight. And we're trained to look at their wings. And see if they're, you know, they have condensation clouding in the air above their wings to tell if they're pulling a lot of G, right? Or if their flaps are auto scheduling down, right, to say they're low energy. And so even though we're going by at 1200, essentially miles per hour relative velocity. And it's really only a frame or two of information. We can make a pretty decent assessment of that, you know, other fighter and what they're going to do. And they're weapon loadout to everything, right? So we have these tools to tell us where to look. So we're not just out there kind of gazing around. All our sensors are pumped into our visor. And so as we look around, it shows us the object we have selected in a box where to look right on our visor. No matter where we look. So as we come to this merge, we have every, you know, expectation of having a successful merge and seeing this object, right? And then, you know, it wasn't there. We'd still see it on the the floor. Right? We still see the energy emitting from that area, but nothing visually. So would have. Wow. So do you think that it's some of these things are not visually available? I wish we just don't have enough data, right? Like are they moving a little bit out of the way? It's tough. Because again, we can only go so slow, even if we're like all the way back, like maybe 130 knots, right? Still 150 miles an hour. If that thing like was right in front of us and dropped down, I mean, I'd like to think that we'd still see it, but it's just, you know, it's just not the right tool to be doing that type of analysis. You know, I mean, we just couldn't see it. So does it mean that somehow they're deceiving us or does it mean that not all of them were physical objects? We just don't have enough data to say that. Well, I mean, obviously, this is speculation. But if you guys are using this equipment out there overseas, are you flying or there many people that are flying these types of aircrafts using this type of equipment over the continental United States? In a jet you mean? Yes. Yes. Do they detect them there? Initially, we weren't reporting them over the continental United States. However, I have heard that, you know, essentially anywhere in F-18, you know, that has these radar capabilities, you know, as soon as you'd be testing them. So we have them further inland in places like that. And so far as I know, they've been experiencing them as well in Lynn. Jesus. So is it possible that these things have some sort of a cloaking mechanism or they're not visually available to like we can't see them because of the way their propulsion system works or whatever? Yeah, I think there's a lot of different ways, you know, that you could be visually deceitful, right? Like you can, it doesn't have to be like a visibility cloak per se, right? But like I can think of like a lot of like tricking mechanisms that may make it very difficult to see something coming to emerge, right? Even if it's just like, you know, something that can change polarity with electrical charge and like, you know, it makes it lighter or darker object or something, right? Like those windows. You know, it's a physical object until you change polarity and now you can see through the, you know, the object in a sense. Right. So there's a trickery there, you know, that could be done. And all the way from kind of basic trickery to advance, you know, invisibility science and physics with negative diffraction and things of that nature. But, but we just don't know. We just don't know. How much has this changed the way you view our place on earth in the universe? You know, it certainly opened me up to all the assumptions that I think I had baked in from from birth in a sense. And as I as I grew up that were kind of either baked into me or put into me or, you know, I put into myself that, you know, basically said anything outside of this, this median channel here is is rubbish, right? In some sense, it kind of I was middle middle of the road, I guess you could say, right? Like, but this really kind of made me realize that, you know, our place in the universe and in the cosmos and even here on earth just might not be as apparent as we think it is, right? Like, we that doesn't sound very exciting, but like we come in a place of confidence, right? We have this perception that, you know, we're the masters of the universe, right? We don't have seen anything else out there. We imagine that there's other stuff, but we have no evidence of it. And a sense, you know, we are the best thing that has ever been in the universe. So to think that there's a lot of other stuff out there, for me personally, it's it's really I'd say allowed me to to better explore that kind of non-traditional mainstream, you know, thoughts in a sense, right? You know, UAP wasn't something I grew up thinking about, but after I kind of got over the skepticism and looked at it and, you know, just realized how much information was there. It made me wonder what else, you know, I haven't been paying attention to or what other small assumptions, even if it's not something as exotic as UAP, but what other scientific assumptions have we made or, you know, economic or sociological scientific assumptions that we've made that have just kind of pushed us in the wrong direction and but right enough that hasn't caused you much of a problem yet. Have you entertained the possibility that there are things that are native to earth that are highly intelligent that we're not aware of? Yeah, you know, I've gone I've gone down that route a whole little bit and I'm not I'm not shy of going down these rabbit holes and exploring them, you know, so like I, you know, I have the ultra terrestrial type theory and you know, I know you probably know more than I do, but I have I've heard those theories. Can I ask you what time frame do you think that that that that ultra terrestrial theory would come from? Do you think that's like something that arose on earth a long time ago or something that's more recent? It's a great question because why would it avoid detection? Like what's the reason for it? Like why would it always have avoided detection? There's not like a historical record of these things like coming out of the ocean and flying around from a thousand years ago that we're aware of. I don't know how would it evolve? How would it, you know, what is it doing? You know, how come we're not detecting them with submarines? How come we're not detecting them when we fly over the ocean on a regular basis? Like if this thing is avoiding detection, why, why is it doing that? Is it observing us? Is this, you know, you want to go really far out? Is this what made us? You know, like what are we? We are so different from every other life form on earth in the fact that we wear clothes and the fact that we can communicate and the fact that we are obsessed with technological innovation. It seems to be the number one thing that human beings physically make. If you looked at us collectively, you have all these people that are working constantly and what's the treat? What's the character, the end of the stick? New or better stuff? Whether it's a newer, better car, a newer, better TV or a newer, better phone, one of the main reasons why people work as hard as they do, they're incentivized by technological innovation. They're incentivized by, like, if we just looked at us, if you just abandoned the idea of culture and context and what are these weird talking monkeys doing? Well, they're making better stuff constantly. Well, why are they doing that? Like what it seems like that is what they're obsessed with, just like a B is making a B-Hive. Do they know why they're doing it? Do they know why collectively they group up in these cities with millions and millions of people? And if you watch the cars come in and out at night, it's much like blood in an artery. You're watching things moving back and forth and back and forth and they're creating objects, better and better objects. They don't seem to be collectively aware of what they're doing. They distract themselves with these cultural issues and you know, they have two completely different polarizing political parties that are constantly at odds and fighting against each other and all the while, they're creating artificial intelligence. And all the while, they're creating some sort of a symbiotic relationship with intelligent computing and with artificial intelligence and with technology that seems to be going in a way where they're going to integrate with it. They're going to physically integrate with these electronic devices and with technology and with the internet. Like why? Why is it doing that? Why is it not aware of that? That should be like the number one thing, concern other than climate change and super volcanoes and giant threats to civilization, they should be really concerned with the direction the shit is going. But they seem to be blissfully unaware, foot on the gas, all gas, no brakes moving in that general direction. Like what if that's what we do? What if that's what this species does? What if this species creates technology and it is essentially on its way to giving birth to a new life form and that new life form is a life form that's created completely out of technology that's uninhibited disconnected from emotion, from instincts, from all of these instincts that we have just developed over thousands of years of survival. All these human and animal instincts, ego, emotion, fear, lust, sexual desires, desire to accumulate wealth and power. All these things that have to do with primate biology and animal biology and mating. What if that's the future? What if the future is that is going to be the past and the new life forms are going to be completely unhindered by all of these problems that we have. If you think about like war, war and disease and all of these things that we have done, like in terms of like environmental hazards and all of those problems that we've created for ourselves, why we've pushed all gas, no brakes towards this industrial revolution and this technological revolution and all the haphazard things that we've done. What if all that shit is just a byproduct of this inevitable merging of the biological life into the whatever technological life that we're creating and what if those things are monitoring it or encouraging it or created it in the first place. I mean we have no idea what happened to the human species. Like we have no idea how the human brain doubled over a period of 2 million years. It's the biggest mystery in the history of the fossil record. They don't know. They don't know what the fuck happened. We're so different than every other animal that's on this planet. What if that's by design? What if there's some sort of an accelerated evolution or something is coming in and every other animal that's on this planet. What if that's by design? What if there's some sort of an accelerated evolution where something has come in and just manipulated the lower primates and created us? So to your point earlier, even in just the kind of reinforced what you said, our technology has moved ahead so fast and we disregard and sense everything right? Yeah. Our climate, but we've seen it, right? Our culture can't even keep up with the technological progression, right? So our culture breaks down and fractures in this damage as a result of the new introduced technology and then ideally our society will adapt to it and move forward and grow with it. I think in an ideal world that would probably be switched around, right? Our culture would define what we need and what we define as important and then we would build tools that would help enable those things that we think are important. Yeah. I would even say that perhaps it's even a bit further down. I mean, when you think about an artificial intelligence, it would really, at the end of the day, is electromagnetic energy in a sense. So if we were to truly merge with an AI outside of being rid of all our things at ALS and our physical bodies, really it might be a move away from just generally space time itself, which we're learning is less fundamental than we already thought. If there is a coherent artificial intelligence contained with a pocket of electromagnetic energy or some type of organization of electromagnetic energy, much like our brain outside of a skin suit, then we're gonna lose the limitations that space time and us operating within space time bring to us. And if that evolves even further, if that sort of ability continues to accelerate and goes in a thousand year period or a hundred thousand year period, we could see the, would have the power of gods. We could see the power to control all the processes that we observe in the known universe, black holes, like the birth and death of stars, all that stuff, if you think of what we can do now based on what amoebas can do. And you take that a million years in the future and as long as we don't blow ourselves up, as long as there's not a, we don't get hit by an asteroid, you keep going and you keep, you have more and more control over the physical nature of the universe and of technology and power and we can harness dark energy and the fuck knows what the future is and maybe what we're seeing is creatures or some things that have already made these leaps or some version of these leaps. Maybe they're the British explorers that land on the coast and check out the natives. And maybe that's what they are. And maybe they're primitive in terms of like what their capabilities are in comparison to what's possible with a million more years of evolution. I mean, it's not going to stop. That's what's fascinating to me is that this is not going, our technological innovation and our lust for constant improvement of our ability to change the world. It's not gonna stop, it's gonna keep moving. So where does it go? I think it's a professor or a handsome who's a economist. He looked at that and what he calls that is a greedy society where we just wanna keep taking and keep building and keep growing. And one of the great mysteries of course is why don't we see alien life out there because we're greedy, we expand and we assume that anything else out there would also want to expand again more resources or to explore. We like to go to different places to explore, which is that a pure economic driven thing or is it something about our human nature that we like to discover new things. And his big thought is we don't see anything out there. And because we don't. And if we assume that we don't see anything out there and we assume that essentially UAP do represent other life forms, then the assumption is that they found a way to make themselves not greedy. So they stop themselves from expanding in a sense. To control that weird rogue unit from kind of just expanding in a million years or however long it takes for that seed of a civilization that might go out into spaceship to come back and be the greedy thing that takes up the whole universe. Well, the way to do that is to eliminate sexual reproduction. I mean, that would be one of the big ways because one of the reasons why people are greedy. Human, especially males, are greedy because they want to be the alpha. They want to acquire the most resources. So they have the pick of the litter so they can decide what gets done. They have the most power over the other entities, the other humans. If that gets eliminated, if we merge with artificial intelligence or we become some sort of new version of artificial intelligence, then we have described it in the past is like that we are the electronic caterpillar that becomes the butterfly. And we don't even know what we're doing. We're just in the middle of like making this cocoon. Like we just got to make the cocoon. We're busy making the cocoon. I found 14 making the cocoon. New New Tesla making the cocoon. And that all that innovation, it all leads to exponentially more powerful innovation, exponentially more powerful technology that's ultimately the end game is artificial life and the ability to transcend space and time and just unimaginable technological power. And I don't think that's possible unless we get rid of emotions, sexual desire, lust, greed, all those things, which are human things. Those are the things that allowed us to survive when we're running away from big cats that we're trying to stay alive from predators and that very desire to stay alive and to breed and to fight off conquering tribes, that's allowed us to innovate and create technology because that's the thing that separate us from the other animals is our ability to develop tools and our ability to innovate and to think and plan out how to protect ourselves, how to accumulate resources so that we can be safe and how to develop walls and cities and urbanization and all these different things have essentially set the stage for this innovation to become a part of us. And the only way to separate ourselves from all of the pitfalls, all the things that hold us back, which are the emotions, the anger, the greed, all the things that we find distasteful about humans, that a lot of us tied to sexual reproduction, a lot of us tied to our biological needs. If we can get past that, that's what those fucking alien things are. You look at them, like if you look at the archetypal alien, they have no muscle, they're these thin things, these giant heads, they have no genitals. Like what if what we're seeing, maybe it's not even like physically a representation of an actual thing that we're seeing, maybe what we're seeing is we're recognizing the pattern that this is where it goes, that this is where the upright human animal, the hominid, this is what it becomes. Just keep going and it merges with technology and then it becomes that thing. I take a little bit of a different view on that, the anatomy side of it, but I think of it more of like maybe that's the best tool they have to interact with us at a peer level, right? Is to build something that's somewhat looks like us, but it's different enough so that it doesn't get mistaken, you know, it's not sneaky in a sense, right? They don't want to be sneaky, they want to be apparent. Maybe that's maybe that's the tool they use in a sense. It's not a being made of light that we don't even recognize as a light form. Like yeah, if I was like waving to an ant, you know, like it's not going to know what's going on. Right, right. Well, that could be possible too. It could be that those things are drones, that those things are artificial intelligent creatures and that the actual intelligence that created them is disembodied in the future. They're just talked about, yeah, you know, space time being a one of the things that drops out, if we do merge with AI potentially. Right. That would make sense that if they were outside of space time, they would need to construct something of space time in order to interact here. Brian, well, if you, if this Bob Lazar story about element 115 is real and they can apply this at scale, like if you have enough element 115 and a reactor that's sophisticated enough, you can travel to anywhere in the universe, instantaneously. Like, and there's no boundaries, no physical boundaries in terms of like what's a, what's possible. I also want to believe that. I want to believe all, but that's the problem. I want to believe all of it, but I also know that there's certain elements of what we're discussing that are 100% in process of happening. Like Elon Musk's neural link. When I talked to Elon about it, he was saying you're going to be able to talk without words. Like, what the fuck is that? Like, where's that come? I mean, you know, he's not talking about next week, but he's talking about ultimately and eventually. And I feel like that's where all this stuff is going to go. it's not going to get less sophisticated. It's, you know, I was having this conversation with my kids last night. I was saying we were having this talk about new phones because I have an iPhone 14. They're like, is it better? And I'm like, no, I mean, yes, but not in any noticeable way that I recognize every day. Like, the camera, the 13 was great too. It's silly. And I'm like, it's funny about people is that we never are happy. If we just decided, this was the conversation we were having, I said, if we just decided right now to stop making new things, we would have a pretty great life. If we decided, okay, planes are fast enough, let's keep fixing them. Phones are great. You can talk. You could, I, you know, you could, I message and you can, you know, use FaceTime. You can see each other. We don't need to fix that. Just maintain it. Let's just the Tesla, Jesus, so fast. Let's, we don't need a new car. Just like fix that and just everybody just keep what we have and let's maintain life. We're never gonna do that. It's possible. We're never gonna do it. We would self-destruct. Like, there's just no way we could do it. Why? Why though? I don't know. That's a great question. Humans beings need to reproduce. That's a lot of it. A lot of it is the desire to accumulate resources and power. And a lot of that is tied to these biological urges that are baked into us from the time that we really did have to survive from animals trying to eat us. I saw a video today of this poor fucking guy who was rock climbing and a bear tried to attack him. I was like, that used to be us all the time. That was us on a daily basis. Have you seen that, Jimmy? Fuckin' crazy. It ain't climb. You guys got like a GoPro on and he's climbing up this rock and a bear comes down at him and tries to get him. Yes. That seemed worse. And so he swats it to the side. Watch this. This guy's climbing up. Look at this. This bear comes right out and he pushes it. And it runs back up at him. And he kicks at him. So one interesting thing about bears is grizzly bears generally when they attack people, they're attacking people because you surprise them. And it's a female with cubs. But black bears are often attacking people for food. They're predatory in a sense that they recognize that people are weak. And they're like, oh, I'll just eat that thing. Because they cannibalize each other on a regular basis. So anything that they can eat, like black bears, one of my friends was up in Alberta and he observed a male black bear attack of female in their cubs, kill one of the cubs, the female scared the male off and then the female ate her own cub. Oh, damn. I didn't see that COVID. Hard work. And one or the dead one. The dead one. The dead one that the male had killed. Once it was dead, she's like, well, might as well eat it. Might as well eat my baby. Yeah. She's ate it right there in front of him. And he's like, Jesus Christ. Like that's what a bear is. It's not a stuffed animal that sits next to your kid at night when it goes to bed. It's not yogi. That's what a bear is. It's not when you the poo, that thing, trying to eat that climber. That's a bear. Well, you know, I mean, here we are, just reminding our planet and, you know, killing stuff and not too different. We're not innocent. We're certainly not innocent. But my point is that I think that we have all these instincts because we are a part of the natural world. And the only way we can transcend that is to eliminate all of those biological urges. If we have true mastery over the material world and to the point where we no longer need to be hindered by those biological urges, that seems to me like the best way to transcend space and time, like the best way to eliminate all the things that kind of hold us back when it comes to logical, rational, thinking. A lot of it's emotional. You know, and I think that that may be the future of the intelligent species in the universe. They probably don't act like, you know, like barbarians. They probably have transcended that. And they've recognized that all the problems that we have, like what's the number one problem we have in the world? It's probably war. Other than the environment and what we're doing to the environment, it's probably war. It's the most horrific terrifying thing that human beings will attack other groups of human beings. They don't even know and try to steal the resources, which is generally what they're trying to do when they're, they don't go to war for no reason. Right? They're generally going to war for, there's a benefit there. Well, if we could get past that, boy, if there was no war, imagine the cooperation that we could have, imagine how much we could get done. If we all spoke the same language, we all treated each other as if we were the same thing living other lives, and we all just shared resources and worked together to make life better for the species. Well, how would you do that? We need to have to eliminate the lust and greed. What's the best way to eliminate the lust and greed? Well, to become something different and more advanced. And the best way to do that is to no longer have all these urges that human beings have, the urge to be powerful and to dominate and all of our dominate or culture stuff that's just a natural part of being a primate. So what do we lose with that? Everything. We lose music and comedy and fun and romance. We lose the best first date of your life where you lose everything. You lose drinking wine and laughing with friends. You're gonna lose everything. You're gonna lose all the things that we love about being the imperfect creatures that we are today. But what you gain is you become these super powerful ultra enlightened beings that have different motivation. And I think that that's probably gonna occur. It's gonna probably occur in stages. And one of the stages is probably going to be either virtual reality or augmented reality that can provide you with experiences that are far superior to the physical ones that you have to get on your own. I mean, I think we romanticize so many things about our life. Like that guy climbing, right? That guy's climbing because he's trying to get this thrill of like trying to physically take yourself through a dangerous course up a mountain and you get this thrill that you're doing that because if you fall, you're dead. And along the way, he almost gets fucking eaten, right? Which is bears. Yeah, pretty wild. But we romanticize it. And it's baked into us in a way that it's inherent to our physical being. Like whenever I go on trips into the woods, one of the things that shocks me is how good I feel. Almost like it hits a frequency that I've been needing, but that's not accessible to me living in a city. And when I'm in the woods and when I'm climbing a mountain and I'm out there with nature, when I'm out there, I feel so good. I feel so centered and grounded. Like I feel better than I feel at any other time. And it resets me in a way that's not available in a city. But what if that's available through augmented reality or a virtual reality? What if that's available through a chip that gets installed in your brain and it's far superior to that feeling that you get? And you recognize the futility of that experience. What you're trying to do is you're trying to recreate what it was like when people lived 1,000 years ago or 10,000 years ago. And you had to survive by throwing a spear at a rabbit or whatever. That was the only way you could feed your family. And that's the only way you would look at that time and how difficult it was. And imagine, just being able to go to a grocery store and go, oh my God, that's so much better. Grocery store is so much better. Nobody wants to go back to hunting for food every day. It's too fucking hard. But we don't think of it that way because we have the grocery store because it exists. Well, what if there's something that's exponentially more significant than a grocery store? Like that life experiences itself. All the things that you love about life, all the things you love about romance and creation and culture and all the wonderful things that we think of when we associate the best aspects of human life and human interaction and human community. But if that's what if that pales in comparison to what could be created technologically? We're gonna embrace it. Just like we embrace phones. I mean, we all have phones. I remember the old days where I go, I don't even have an email. There was a few holdouts. Those fucking people are all on board now. It just took a decade, took a little while. What if that's the future of this symbiotic interaction that we have with technology? I think it is. I think that's where we're going. And my fascination with these UAPs and with this idea that we're being visited by these things, I almost feel like they're cultivating us. I almost feel like they're watching us, like whatever they are, that they're just making sure we don't blow ourselves up along the process. Because one of the things that has been discussed by many people that have experienced these things on military bases is they're ability to shut down bases. They're ability to shut down like these nuclear facilities. And that you got to think that if they were going to wonder about any one particular thing that we have access to, it's being in this transitionary period between having these primate instincts and applying them to spectacular technology in a brutish, heart-herific way. Like we're worried about right now with Russia. We're worried that Putin, because all the horrific things that are happening already in Ukraine, the bombings and the drone strikes and possibly the use of hypersonic missiles, what if that's applied to nuclear weapons? And what if we're dealing with a nuclear holocaust? I mean, that's really what we're worried about. And I wonder if that's what they're monitoring. You know, you asked earlier about the why now part, right? But there's a lot of stuff happening, right? There's climate, there's war, there's everything else. It feels like we're accelerating toward something, right? And technology, not least of all, moving us towards, you know, some people call the singularity. And yeah, you know, maybe they're all here to watch the birth in a sense. I think the hope would be that we would be part of that birth as you described, integrate with the artificial intelligence. I know that there's efforts to consider that the moral and ethical application of artificial intelligence, but are we fooling ourselves? Is that, you know, are we going to have the options of maintaining an ethical AI once it's been created? You know, is it possible to create safeguards and AI that, you know, transition past, you know, or into the singularity and allow it to keep in mind human interest once it's already become sentient if that can happen. You know, one thing that you mentioned about artificial intelligence and, you know, if that is the output of our craving for advancement, you know, what does that change for the world, right? There would only be one general artificial intelligence I would assume because anything that would be created afterwards if it was not a seeker, it would be assumed by the primary AI, you know. So this kind of ties into a thought I've had before about, you know, maybe the way we're interacted with UAP or, you know, we're going to make the assumption that it coming from another planet right now. And so with that assumption, you know, perhaps as society's mature, much like you described, they do start to, you know, advance their sociological side, they start to work better as a group, they, you know, remove some of those more animalistic urges that they evolved with, right? And that remained when they got the power of the gods, if you will, right? Once they had technology, but we're still, you know, commanded by their primal urges. You know, you may very well be right. There's that transitional period that we live in at this moment. Maybe that adds to a lot of the, a lot of the, the hecticness of our current days. But what if those other planets, since they have realized that, you know, they interact with us as a planet, as an entity, you know, if that's the way their society has evolved and it sends to be more collaborative and less argumentative, then they may approach us as, you know, as a planet, the planet, versus a country, right, or individual, individual. They might assume that sense, the best things can only happen when the most people work together, right? In a sense, if we can assume that, you know, if you and I work together, Joe, we can do more than just if they either of us work below, right? If we make that assumption and we apply that to a planet, it would make sense that, you know, if there are a bunch of species out there that if they survive, they would have worked together, learned how to work together, right? Yeah. And they might assume that of us. So like, oh, wow, look, they have all these cool tools. They must have moved to that point where they know how to work together. You think that? I don't think they would think that. I think they'd watch us and they'd go, oh, look at these crazy folks. Well, that's why we're in comedy, right? That's why we're in normally because we do have these tools. And yet, we're not ready. Maybe that's just how it normally is when a civilization or when civilization in general advances past a point where we're at now, that there is this chaotic moment where there are sort of a combination of lower primate and higher being. And the power of nuclear weapons, the power to send video through the sky and it appears on a device that you keep in your pocket that you literally talk to. And it gives you answers to things. Like I was having a conversation with my kids last night and they were talking about, they went to see Little Nas X and how great it was. And I'm like, how old is that guy? How old is Little Nas X? Bang, 23. It just shows you on the phone. I'm like, how wild is that? You could talk to a device. I mean, that's fucking Jetson shit. I mean, when I was a kid, that wasn't even in Star Trek. Even in Star Trek, they had walkie talkies. Remember? It was like Kurt Ouch. And you had to hang up a stupid phone? Like no one imagined the internet even in science fiction. And that's something that we have through the sky that is in incredible speeds. It just shows up on your phone. And the battery lasts all day long. You can watch YouTube videos all day long. It's crazy what we're going to run now. And we complain about it. The battery doesn't last long enough, you know? We complain about everything. That's always gonna be the case. We're always gonna be unsatisfied. And that dissatisfaction is what leads to innovation because it's part of our lust and thirst for constant growth and improvement and which is one of the things that we do. I mean, think about materialism in general. Like what is materialism? What is materialism? What purpose would that serve? This stupid need for constant acquiring of objects? Well, it serves to make sure that people make better and better stuff because that's the best way to fuel materialism. You have to, if you want people to like continue this sort of fruitless desire to acquire new objects, you gotta have new better stuff constantly. Well, if you have new better stuff constantly, what does that do? It fuels innovation because you have to make the things better. It's like our own stupid desire for materialism, it fuels technological innovation. It's like baked in. It's a part of us. Or solutions are usually technology based as well. Yeah. Right? For everything. It's never about, you know, it's never about how do we, you know, how do we raise our children better? How do we kind of work on the personal side of things? It's always what tool can we make? That makes that problem go away. Yeah. Even when we have problems, like we have carbon emission problems, while I was reading an article, I don't remember what websites on, what are scientific websites? About a new concrete that they have that extracts carbon, the concrete itself, the construction of concrete apparently, it leads to carbon emissions, right? Like just, you know, transportation of the raw materials and all the things that are involved in making concrete. Well, they've developed a concrete that actually extracts carbon from the atmosphere, which is pretty wild. So these people that have problems, they see these problems like what's a solution? Well, here's a technological solution for a complex problem. So we don't have to alter our behavior, but we'll have complex technological solutions that mitigate these problems. Makes a lot of sense. Yeah. You know, to describe how I got in the flying, it was very much to fill that urge that you described. You know, when I thought about flying it jet, it wasn't for passion of flying really, you know, I hadn't had access to that. So I didn't develop it. But, you know, I thought that was the place that I could really be at the tip of the spear as far as technology and how I could access it just as a regular guy, you know, with no experience or anything like that. So I mean, frankly, I was driven by, you know, that same urge just went about a different way. Well, that's one of the more fascinating things about classified military intelligence. Because of the fact that it's military, and because of the fact that there's a great benefit to the country for it being top secret and, you know, not being available to our enemies, you, we develop this stuff that we're not even aware of. So our tax money goes in a way that's kind of unaccountable. And it's gigantic budget. And it huge. Like, what is it like? How many trillions of dollars a year did we look at it the other day? Yeah, the Defense Department budget and we don't even know where all that stuff goes, right? But it's trillions, trillions of dollars. It's insane how much money it is. And it's going towards these technologies that we don't even know about until we see them implemented. Like the stealth bomber, for instance, is one of them or the Manhattan Project or, you know, many of the things throughout history. That's fascinating too, because there's so much that's being, that, so when I see something like these objects, these UAPs, part of me goes, like, how much on that shit is ours? How much of that shit is ours where they don't want to talk about it? They don't want to let us know. But they're implementing these technologies and does Russia have something similar? Does China have something similar? Like, how much of that shit is stuff that's just top secret drone technology? Because why is it all of its so near military bases? That's one of the things that I thought almost immediately about the TikTok, because that TikTok thing is real close to the limits and it's real close to all the bases that are near San Diego. I'm like, what if that's ours? Like, what if that's like, I'm super top secret, high level shit that we just don't, we're not privy to that information? That's always, I don't want to call it a risk, but, you know, I think we're inclined to think like that too when we want to because, again, we want to be true, right? Like, we want our government to... That's always I don't want to call it a risk, but you know I think we're inclined to think like that too And we want to because again we want to be true Like we want our government to be that smart and to have that information and makes us feel safer I think oh yeah, I want it to be like a captain America shield. Oh, yeah, that flies at like ten times the speed of life But you know, where does that end right like let's just say that's true like how much technology that could be beneficial for society I either you know energy production or ways we can't even imagine because It was designed for a particular use case, but whenever something like kind of gets out and it's Exposed to kind of that innovation ecosystem, right? It's just there's a flourishing people use that technology and those ideas in ways that people never thought of before Yeah, and so it's not just like you hear of something hit in the way or technology But imagine if all that was just like out in the open to be kind of metal-depawned by you know The quantity of minds we have nowadays with the access to the tools we have the problem with that is war Right the problem is that we can't have that kind of technology available to our enemies because then they would use it on us That's the big fear So if we do have something that's like super powerful and just beyond imagination at this point of our understanding of what's technologically available and that Shit gets in the hands of Russia or gets in the hands of China or gets in the hands of whoever he ran and then they use it on us Before we could use it on that like we want to have the technological military superiority because we think of ourselves as Best case scenario of human beings on planet Earth in 2022 Mm-hmm Well, what if you know what if we've had it for a while and we've you know essentially blown that lead Yeah, I mean why are we why are we talking about more than because I've assumed that would still hold true unless there's been work Elsewhere that has pushed up, you know made that less relevant. What do you think I think if we're experiencing it here It's probably something that you know our adversaries are dealing with and probably are working on as well Have they discussed it at all? Is there did we are you aware of any discussion? Whether it's the the Chinese government or the Russian government is is there any discussion at all about UAPs over there? There's a lot in Russia I mean Russia has a history of UAP Just like we do in the United States, you know from my amateur research But in China too has been taking notice I hear that they have been apparently working on artificial intelligence or machine learning solutions to better understand what these objects are They've been communicating that they've been seeing a large number of these objects and that the sightings have been increasing Everything that leaves China essentially comes out of state media. So you know, what are they communicating exactly? I don't know but That has been they haven't been looking into it Yeah, I mean, maybe that would be the thing that unites. I remember that Ronald Reagan speech There's a Ronald Reagan speech was it from the United Nations. I learned about it. Yeah, it's a wild speech You've seen the speech right? Oh, would Russia help us or so we can help us if we were attacked from? Yeah Well imagine how quickly would it band our differences if we were faced with an alien threat from another world and then hope Yeah, all the UFO people went bonkers like oh my god, he knows something Ronnie's trying to tell us and You know, that's That's I think I mean if there was something that united us as a human race instead of thinking ourselves as like these Individual communities that live on patches of land You know tribal tribal attitudes like the one thing that would do that It's something from another planet knock on wood, you know, we have seen mostly bipartisanship in the buildup and passing in the Congress and Senate regarding UAP activities in the United States So you know to that point it seems to you know what's been happening in Congress and Senate has been Very rational, you know strong bipartisan Work by both you know Senator Gillibrin Senator Rubio, you know, they've been working together on this problem So to your point, you know I hope that continues. I hope that is the thing that can kind of get us over all the back and forth What like what are the big? There's I'm sure besides the commander David favor situation and and some of the what have you ever heard of that's a Like a big instance like something crazy along those lines that maybe people haven't heard of Oh, I don't know what people haven't heard of but you know something You know, there was a fly over the United States Capitol it seems at some point in the 50s Where a group of UAP were just kind of cruising over The White House and the state building you can find pictures of it out there Although it hasn't been pictures of it well, you know, it's like a formation of lights essentially so it you know what is it who knows but essentially There you go. That's a drawing drawing. Yeah, that's a drawing, but Oh, so that's the actual thing Wow UFL sightings a piece for Union or battlefield earth So is that a real photograph? So it's from the 19th district history channel so this could be like a recap Oh, right probably yeah, so from the 19th and that's a That's a drawing for the newspaper. Yeah saucers over Washington DC there Harry S. Barnes senior air route traffic controller for the several Aeronautics administration was in charge of the National Airport Washington DC ART control center the night of July 19th 1952 Briefly he states in the newspaper article our job is to constantly monitor the skies around the nation's capital With the electronic eye of radar shortly after midnight on that date seven P. I. P's What is what's a pips? Do you know what that is pips seven pips? I don't know seven pips Heared suddenly on the control center scope add new gint Jim Copeland and Jim Richie all Experienced radar controllers check the observations the airport control tower radar operator verified the same sighting They were over the restricted areas of Washington including the White House and the capital Oh And there was some concern then That this was that these were Russian right because this was during the Cold War this post-World War II You know we had gotten some of the Nazi scientists and that they went on to work for NASA and through operation paper clip And then Russia had gotten some Nazi scientists as well And we were concerned like with who's gonna develop some sort of spaceship or who's gonna get to the moon first and all that shit was going on around Then right yeah absolutely and you know a few years supposedly after Roswell and you know people always ask about You know it's like well why haven't we seen them? Why haven't they landed on the way health law and all that but it's interesting If you do look back there are some interesting examples of you know large groups of objects flying over you know very important areas You know clearly making themselves known Well my take on that is like if we find an ant colony do we make ourselves available to the queen for a meeting? We don't give a fuck who the who thinks there are charts. Yeah, you know like if they're that advance they can come here from another galaxy You know they're they're probably don't give a shit about Biden like come on. It's so silly. That's always that's your king But we do we care about them So if they wanted to influence most of our people they might look to influencing the person we all look to and it's Or or defy the power of these Institutions by hovering over the Pentagon and letting them know we control You know I'm the captain now look at me. I'm getting me This this thing with the the New York Times from 2017 and and Having these these meetings with these high-level officials that are concerned about these things is this all Is this moving in a general direction of transparency? Do you think do you think they're recognizing that this is something that has to be addressed and has to be that people have to be informed about this because it's so prevalent? I do yeah, so I mean that's that's what I'm seeing at this point You know I've engaged again with people The hill and they are taking this very seriously and by extension they have pushed that serious in this back to you know The and I DOD and the offices that have stood up within there namely arrow right now are the all domain anomaly resolution office From my perspective, they you know they have a charter to to engage the community on this of course not to Not to but any national security at risk But that's kind of another conversation the classification problem But because that's its own entity, right? People might think like you know if someone the proper place can just declassify whatever they want You know it's it's kind of its own entity that everyone else kind of operates under so it's not quite that simple kind of two problems there but I have seen it seems to be Real movement in the direction of engaging the pop pop public on this topic What do you think the motivation for doing that is I? Can't say exactly but you know when I when I have been pushing people to pay attention to this You know it's very simple again for me It's about people are still flying by these things and almost hitting them, right? We can talk all day about the you know societal implications of what they are but The end of the day the people with operators that are flying around out there have to not hit these things and so You know from that sense it's it's it's hard I think for people to ignore that because they understand that you know This is a serious safety risk and that as we kind of transition that new knowledge of the risk to the commercial market in the general aviation communities It's gonna probably serve a few feathers, you know The commercial markets I think don't necessarily want to acknowledge this because they have zero safety plan They've been ignoring this for a while and you know they might have to answer some hard questions about You know why they are ignoring the potential for midair with hundreds of people on their aircraft Has there ever been an instance where there has been a midair collision or crash that happened? Because of you know trying to avoid one of these things so That's actually a better question What I thought you were gonna ask because I thought you know That's a great thing if a pilot sees one of these objects, right? And they have zero training on it and have no idea what it is or what to do They might maneuver that aircraft in a way that could cause aircraft into part or to hurt somebody, right? Right and so the angle you just touched on which is the kind of training in you know The policy side of it where you know because we're actively not teaching pilots to deal with this They could do something dangerous when they do it. I thought you're gonna ask have we ever seen like an airplane crash because of midair with a UFO And again, we don't we don't know right? Of course there's been plane crashes, but nothing's been proven or else we wouldn't be having this conversation But avoiding something would cause a real issue if you're flying 500 miles an hour and you see something in front of you have to make an abrupt maneuver that's unplanned. Yeah Absolutely or the pilot says oh, that's just something on my windscreen because clearly UFOs don't exist And then they barrel into something and it turned out to be a balloon and they lose an engine, right? There's all sorts of ways you go wrong and never like not talking about it is never the solution when it comes to aviation safety How many pilots like when it comes to commercial air pilots? How many pilots report these sort of sightings and do these reports get to the Pentagon do they get to the White House like how does that happen from where if someone's like flying from American Airlines, and they see a circle with a cube inside of it that's like going you know Speed of sound like what what happens? You know most likely the pilot will call up the air traffic controller they're currently talking with and ask them if they see the object or if You know, there's other air traffic there and The most likely answer you know from what I've heard is no they don't see the object and so that just kind of leaves a pilot there at that point It there is something that essentially says within the FAA manuals if you will though another exact One where it says hey if you if you think you've seen a UFO and actually uses that terminology then you have the option to report it to the FAA and doesn't even like tell you an office So just like if you feel the need to report it then that's something you're going to do So what that tells me is that this isn't the first time that there's been people poking around trying to report on it But that was really the best they could do is just say you know Hey, if you really feel like this is important then sure you can fire a message off right? That's kind of it. So there's no organizations. There's no acknowledgement. What's this Jamie commercial pilot that filmed something He saw What is that thing you're saying? It's closer So he's zooming in and this is like black dot. That's a circle What's what does it look like? What the fuck is that a tie fighter? That's a cube So this was over a medieval Columbia Wow and they got the article I found said that this was like labeled as as a UFO as always labeled as trying to find out link right hand look at that It's like a cube go back to that again I mean That looks like a square The air crew on this particular incident if I remember correctly had seen the object for some time before it came in to the The camera's field of view right so What's likely happening here is that the air crew are flying past that object Right so like it's not that air the object's not flying down their nose It's the it's the aircraft flying so they're flying close to it So it might be a balloon or something Nothing around not to say that but generally speaking I think they're they're kind of story If I remember correctly is that they had it they were seeing it for a while and it was like doing something that was like Strange them. I don't know What if a moving or changing shape like you saw or what but it was something that like Completely drew their attention and you know pulling their phones out airline pilot not supposed to use their phone inside the cockpit like that right so He's breaking the rules in order to take a video of that which I plotted for but But that you know this is exactly the type of thing that we talk about when we talk about needing procedures and things of that nature Right he's breaking the rules in order to get data on this right and that's obviously not conducive to You know a proper investigation of this topic right there was another one that was recent that was being discussed online that was taken from a fighter jet I don't remember what model jet where it was the same sort of a situation where someone was taking a photo of some sort of a triangle shaped object That was in the sky Remember that do you remember that Jamie? Yeah, I had I had two so there's one that shows that photo re like it's a an artist rendition of it So it shows a real fake triangle. Mm-hmm I saw another one where it was filmed from a cockpit and there's a very split second You can see something fly by and they've like still framed that. I'll try to pull that up again Okay, which link I had on it's got to be so strange for you To go from not really having any understanding of these things to upgraded radar and then holy shit You see him every day Yeah, I mean and I wish it was people I was asked me like what was it like and it was never this just like come to Jesus moment where it was like you know, oh my god, there's you know You were here it was very we were very you know, pragmatic and it pragmatic about it until we really had time Yes, it was in the hearing I think Everybody flashed by super quick there right and then someone took a still of it as it flashes by right Yeah, so whatever that thing is just Whipped by? Yeah, so this is what they were shown in uh Hearing in Congress Whoo those pilots didn't wander up to that object right like they had radar on it They had the flare on it. They were carrying a flare The only reason they showed that was because they didn't have to declassify it. It was a Air cruise phone, right? So there's this beast of an animal That surrounds us, which is the US classification system and You know the default is that stuff is classified more or less right um And so You know that is something that needs to be contended with by you know Aerobuy the groups actively working in this because they have to essentially Work against that system, right? It's not intended to release information to the public's not why it's designed to do opposite of that What in terms of like the these images that have been released? What what to use the most compelling? Have you seen any of them that have been really fascinating to you? um I have heard that there's some Inconscher vertically interesting Stuff floating around now. So yes, there's like we said in the past there's been stuff But now that there's been an actual reporting mechanism sense, you know the UAP task force started that proactive system and since then There has been recordings of things that are now floating around, you know the general classified network That's not like some varied secret that people you know that people with a proper access can go and verify themselves frankly um And you know I've met some of these people that have done their own homework and they're incredibly passionate about volunteering their time to help Some of them are helping me within the ad double a because they understand that you know We're entering a new realm of understanding our world. I think so you've heard that there's some evidence That we're not privy to or that Yeah, that's general public. I mean, I've no doubt that there's a lot You know plethora of images classified images that you know will give us a lot more to talk about than that frame or two that we just saw Do you have any hope that that stuff will ultimately be released? I think that um I think that there is a pathway there I do think there is a pathway for the declassification of data so that the scientific community can better understand it I have been working with the American Institute air knocks and astronautics with some of the emerging Players within this landscape. I'll say And we've been working very hard to see how we can you know the organization that we put together how we can help those those other Institutions And in their future, you know, we'll be able to announce some of those collaborations So that the general public and better understand the type of work that we're going to be doing What do you think the benefit for the government to to release that information like why would they be transparent about it? Why wouldn't they just continue to sort of dismiss it and look we had our little hearings and let's just go about our business and whatever We get we'll keep to ourselves I don't know, you know, I don't know part of me wants to say hey Maybe it's kind of a changing of the guard of a bit right? I mean the general it's it's been a while if all the stories are to be believed and It's kind of a new generation of people that kind of grew up in a more open society in a bit I feel maybe less inclined to just bury everything away for the for the greater good and that's pure speculation, right? That's how I feel it perhaps, you know as as a bit of a new guard into this topic, you know But at the end of the day I don't think you know, I don't know and I don't I hope we find out right? I hope we kind of get the the debrief at the end of the day one day But I don't know if we'll get that because you've been open about this and I know you did like freedom in podcasts You've discussed this and I saw some other things about you discussing this online what has been What's been the reaction from other people have you Have you received more information of people reached out to you to talk to you about things that they've seen Have you received criticism from discussing this openly? I have not received criticism for talk about openly. I think there was a period of time where As to be expected My former colleagues were treating this like a joke like it was you know in the ready room But I caught shut down pretty quickly from what I've heard And generally speaking, you know, I've had people reach out, you know, with support People Criddly passionate about this topic, you know, I've I like the word latent demand now because in a sense all the The stories and topics and Obscuration on this topic has just hasn't made people's interest go away It just kind of bottled it up in a sense at least what I hear because I have you know every day people are mailing me saying You know, thank you I can feel like I can talk about this now and like a respectful manner I can you know, I'm a professor at a college and we're going to start looking into this with the students because the students are super passionate about this And so you know, I think the younger generation is very easy to Accept and integrate, you know, with the possibility else saying Whereas the the older guard is coming around in a sense So I do think that it is possible. I would say for You know like we talked about This you know this technology change happens with people moving into that technology faster and faster and it kind of leaves Our society about behind it a bit I think the same thing is going to happen with this topic, right? Like there are people that are going to be able to integrate this into their reality Faster sooner than other people And you know much like technology there's going to be advantages to people that do Integrate that information But the hope is that I think we'll get everyone there one day Yeah, and the hope for me is that people release more of this stuff Like the the leaks that of the Jeremy Corbells gotten but like the trans medium device and some of the other things There was another one where there was those pyramid shaped objects that were flying over And it was an aircraft carrier some some ship. I don't think it was a carrier Yeah, they goes like a destroyer or something like what did what did you think of those videos There's a lot of like even to find that Jamie. It's really weird. They're like pyramid And they're they're flying around like Like these things. Yeah flashing triangular shaped object Shown through night vision camera over the USS Russell and footage leaked to Jeremy Corbell What did you uh, did you watch that footage at all? Yeah uh, I don't know I you know people I know we're nugget down and kind of arguing about the shape of the object Right triangle or not I told you I don't give a shit what it's shaped like like these things should not be flying over a US destroyer like regardless like Let's focus on the right things here Um, there's a sense that if something is can be pro-sakly explained then it must be right um, if there's a you know An unknown object that has a light on it It's impossible for it to be a U.A.P. because U.A.V. have lights and they need lights So that's the simplest explanation and therefore everything else is negated right and you need to have that exceptional evidence for it to even be considered um I don't care right. It's a it's a it's a it's near a naval asset and we don't you know That's our airspace and Whether the shape is interesting or not is irrelevant like it's a it's a massive security flaw to have objects like that flying near a ship um It's you know it's it's a travesty if that's what our our navy is allowing foreign adversaries to do so that needs to get fixed And if it's not foreign adversaries Then we need to better understand that as well If you had a pile of chips And you were gonna push it into like red or black Red is a some sort of human-based technology Black is aliens Can we say other instead of aliens? Okay. Just some other other some not human intelligence non human intelligence something from Somewhere else whether it's another dimension another planet. What do you think? I think there's another actor involved I think there is another. I think that there is something that is Not human that is interacting in some fashion I don't know whether it comes from somewhere else or was here before or Come from something we don't understand but There is a segment of the data that is just not explainable at this point and From my experience, you know Again not 100% not binary All right, but on the scale, you know That's the direction that I've continued to move in based off what I've seen And I haven't had any reason to go the other way Do you Bounce around possibilities in your head of whether or not this thing is interdimensional from another planet Yeah, yeah, you know that dimensional thing is interesting in a lot of different ways. We obviously You know obviously but You know we don't necessarily evolve to see reality, right? We evolved to survive in our environment We talked about before In our interaction with you know this 3d space time or 40 I should say May not be the complete picture, you know, we call things other dimensions or xy or z but You know what does that really mean? Is that mean that consciousness that's bound in an electromagnetic you know pattern Right is that is that higher dimension or is that you know a life form occurring in three-dimensional space? I Don't know the answer that right it's kind of a nuanced discussion I think that the day we don't really fully understand our universe well enough to fit it into one of the buckets that we've already defined You know, I think there's undefined buckets that could be a participant in this conversation Not that I say to know where they are right, but I'm just assuming that there's unknowns You know in the makeup of our universe Whether it's the 3d you know 40 space time or whether it's something beyond space time And I just I don't know what those unknowns are where they could live There's your classic you know vision of time travelers or people kind of stepping outside of our space time into you know another land. There's also another quote-unquote You know dimension if we think about you know quantum The quantum regime and you know wave functions and you know one interpretation Has those wave functions not collapsing? All right, and so then there's multiple realities of all possibilities happening at once So there's a lot of different definitions of multi-dimensional And I think we're just still scraping the surface as it is and we're going to learn more about where things could come from in the future Well, I certainly hope so one of the things that gives me hope is the fact that this is discussed openly now It's opposed to when I was younger when I was a kid if you talked about UFOs You were kind of a fool you were a silly person that was you know You were you know, it's like talking about elves or you know leprechauns or something was dumb Like why why why are you concerning yourself with UFOs? Those are all silly stories The only one that was really Helling was the Roswell story because the Roswell story was actually reported in the newspaper that they were covered a crash UFO And then you know they actually flew it to I think was right-pattered in Air Force Base and two separate jets They flew the wreckage to in case one of them goes down. They still have some of the wreckage and one of the one of the jets Which was amazing at the time, you know, but you know, then the next day They said it was a balloon. It was a mistake and who knows what that was I mean, I don't know how much of you looked into that story I've read course it was book Yeah, but you know, so I've got that perspective of course kind of read the mainstream interpretation of it But what was course? It was perspective on it. What did he think? Well, he kind of broke down this whole this whole You know, he told the the UFO story as much as you could tell it. I'm not necessarily vouching for any of it But he really goes into you know details like you just described around moving things around and Technologies that could have been you know, bure of things of that nature Again, you know stuff almost like Bob Lazar where you know, he's highlighting technologies and describing the one way that we now recognize You know things like fiber optics and things of that nature So you know, I don't know where the truth lays but Again, it's all being clouded by this classification system, right? Like the full story is still classified What happens when you have information gap like that people just fill it in? You know recently there was you know communication about how The one of the I think it was the aviation intelligence service of Gosh, what's the Navy I forget but they released a patch with the UFO on it I got straight up. Yeah, I saw that and they took it down then they took it down like a week later Did they yeah, they took it down took it down and said it was an accident. What? I'm gonna be an accident. Yeah, that's crazy. There was a design Yeah, how was it designed and accident? It's like a federal website like you know, just actually post like the wrong gift on Website like that like it was I thought it was pretty cool Jeremy actually made t-shirts out of it Yeah, and then but then you know kind of some of the talk was oh everyone got too excited about that and you made the assumption that There's UFOs and they're doing it there and it's like well one of course That's the assumption that was made but two that's what happens when you just hide information and right like Don't chastise us for not like for filling in the gaps right like that's not our fault Yeah, I think there's a real fear of admitting that there's something that we can't control That's technologically superior to us that can visit and you know we the if fear of admitting that there's something that we can't control that's technologically superior to us that can visit and You know, we the if I was running the country I would like to have the ability to say that we're in control of everything That there's not some super intelligent beings that we don't understand at all that are using technology that's indescribable and They're visiting us all the time and some of them we can't even see We don't even detect them until we lock on to them with superior radar I mean that alone. I mean that that puts you into position of like well, you're not the boss. They're the boss You're just like fucking general manager You know, I don't mean I think that's that's what I would be worried about if I was gonna release that information if I was in a position of power if I was An animal or general or president. I don't be like don't tell them. They're just gonna freak out I feel like our society is more adaptable and flexible now just with the tools we have in the way we communicate You know in the way we can You know break down problems and share them digitally I think now it'd be easier to integrate problems like that because it's easier for people to do their own homework and integrate it Whereas you know 50s and 60s everyone's just circled up on the TV and just getting pumped with whatever information Goes out right. Yeah, that's true. That's true. There's a general accepting of access to information That just wasn't the case before the internet. Yeah, and so yeah, I think we are more adaptable You know society now for better or worse, you know, we we have ability to find our own tribes right and to find comfort With others that have the same ideas of us whereas you know in the past you were on your own island in a sense and so it's hard to cultivate those ideas Well Ryan thanks for doing this man. Thanks for talking about this openly and thanks for coming in here and discussing It was really fascinating and I hope we get to do this again someday Maybe there'd be some new information that comes out and some new revelations and I think we will have some new information and talk about next time Do you know something? Tell me now Got me right now. Would you maybe tell me off the air? I won't tell anybody I promise. I will tell people I can't get you see it right. That's it's too. It's too important but it's really fascinating stuff man and I mean I don't know what to think of it sometimes I think sometimes I think about it too much, you know One of the things that I got out of talking to Commander David Freaver was that that I mean I'm just guessing but that instance of the seeing that thing and watching that thing exhibit Capabilities beyond our imagination that's got to stay with you every day Like that no matter what you do Whether whatever you what's on Netflix. I don't know, but there's fucking aliens out there Whatever you think is important That has got to be in your consciousness like right there next to you all the time because he's experienced something personally that Very very few human beings will ever be able to comprehend what it feels like to watch and To know that that's out there and to know that all of the boundaries that we think of in terms of Just propulsion systems technology and whether or not we are actually in contact on a regular basis with something from somewhere else Imagine having that confidence that knowledge Dave store is incredible. Wow to see the tiktok like that and hear him tell it. Yeah And the thing that was under the water that the tiktok was interacting with That's that's fascinating as well that there might have been some sort of a mothership or something Below the surface of the water because of the way the water was reacting That I mean the transmedia aspect of this is really fascinating to me because it makes so much sense That if they could fly through space and they could just if they have this ability Beyond our imagination or or you know, maybe in tune with our imagination about propulsion systems and the ability to just Move around instantaneously. Why wouldn't they just go in the water? They could do that. Why would the water be so complicated for them if space isn't complicated? You know the difference between space and our atmosphere, you know It's quite the inner or thickness difference right? And so that's why things heat up when they come back from space And really it's the same problem right if you can just do that without that happening Transition seamlessly from space to air then it should be the same principles essentially go from air to water Especially if they're doing it with some method that similar to what bobbles are described of just completely Manipulating space and time around them. You'd think if you saw that there would be some interesting detection methods you could do or Um, you know like maybe like a redshift You know if you were to beam light at it and then record some of it coming back You could see perhaps how that light shifted to the gravitational effects Or if you had a sensor on each side and just like we you know bend light around a star or a planet To see things behind it perhaps we could you know observe a bending if we had centers on both sides Which sounds you know difficult But when you have to say maybe a bunch of fighter jets flying around they're all in data link pumping information together Over a period of time They're going to be in that position just to arrange them chance in a sense So it's about collecting date over time versus like getting it perfectly does there have been a discussion of devising some sort of A plane or some sort of a jet or something that just goes out to try to collect date on these things Yeah, you know the I mean the the area is not Um totally closed off like you could take an aircraft over there or ship over there But that's also why we don't test equipment out there because it's just international water, right? So that's why it's like hey, why would we be testing our own equipment here because anyone can take a boat over here and look up and start sniffing around So yeah, I don't know how to answer that question further Well, this the problem with this is there's I always love to come to a conclusion Oh, well, that's this yeah, and that's that now we know the end. Yeah, there's no the end here Well, you're right. We haven't finished a story yet But you know just to kind of give you from some of my perspective I you know this conversation is still ongoing. I think that more resources and more energy and more people are getting involved I see us moving this conversation forward both Technologically I think that we're going to be able to better understand not only Where are the objects are and how they kind of relate to each other and the locations and Some things about that, but I think we'll better understand repulsion. I think we'll better understand Some of the data that has been collected in the recent past so that we can move the conversation forward technologically as a society As a people and study this from all the different societal angles that it's going to need for us to fully integrate it I think that in the next few years we're going to have the proper institutions both in the government and in the commercial and academic world in order to you know fully integrate this without needing to build new stuff Not exposing the populace to the information and say okay wait for your institutions to catch up All right I see that landscape being built and I think it's going to be interesting when you know We have the tools of the inner society to really flesh out what this information means Well, I for one can't wait To meet our alien overlords I Just want to see I mean, I think this is all emerging and it's really fascinating It's one I think about it too much. I obviously look at this place. I have a UFO on the desk is one behind me It's problem. I'm working. You know, I've left my employer to start to engage in this full-time So I'm right with you. Wow. So how are you engaging in this full-time? More to more to be revealed next time, but okay, I said there's there's a landscape spinning up and you know That I think this fall and this is next winner. I think we'll have some more open conversation about what that short-term future is gonna look like Well, come on back and let us know please be my pleasure Thank you very much. I really appreciate it. Thank you. Great conversation. All right. Bye everybody