Thank you for coming back. I'm really excited about this. So, um, we're going to talk about algae oil and lithium. I can't believe I'm saying I love this. But I we were just having a conversation off camera about dogs and I was telling you my crackpot health theories, which are very sincere and firmly believed. Uh but one of them is that sleeping next to your dog in bed and having dogs in your life physically in your life, kissing dogs is very important to your health. I feel that way strongly, but I never tell anybody cuz it's too crazy. But you just affirmed my belief. You said there might be some science behind >> Yeah, there were was a paper a few years ago in in science where they actually showed that huh that dogs actually captured what we call the oxytocin system. Oxytocin is an hormone. Hor hormone, you know, produced by your hormones. Hormones. Yeah. They are produced and they are for bonding. Actually the main purpose of oxytocin is it's it's a Greek word. It's for um easy birth you know. It actually is activating the uterus and then the birth and and and helps delivering the baby. >> Yeah. Like ptocin that they give to >> Yeah. Exactly. >> Same stuff. And every time we look into the eyes of friends and then be happy you know and have companionship then oxytocin is produced in our body. And the oxytocin has one important function and that is not only to give easy birth to when when they deliver a baby but also a second function which actually important for the bonding between the mother and the child. So the bonding between the mother and child has to is is essential for the for the life of the child. If you can't remember the child, if you can't smell it, if you don't have a connection to the child, the the child is lost. So the mother laughing, the loft of the mother to the child has to keep for the whole life. And this of course is a function of our auto autobiographical memory center which we call the hippocmpus. You know a seahorse shaped structure here in the temporal lobe of our brain on both sides big like a thumb. This is the memory center. Actually we will talk about this in in depth I guess because this memory center is important if we are able to think peace if we are actually act like humans you know reflect about things and of course it's if it doesn't function one disease which we all know about which I call hippocample uh dementia is Alzheimer's Alzheimer starts from the hippoc campus and the main reason I published this in 2016 I called it unified theory of Alzheimer timers is that that this hippocmpus has the ability to grow new nerve cells every day. These are required that we can accumulate a lifelong uh information, knowledge um yeah experiences that are valuable for our ch children but also of our grandchildren. The main reason we get get that old as we get. Okay. So the hippocmpus has to grow new cells and one of the major fertilizers of this growth process is oxytocin. So when a child is born a lot of oxytocin is produced growth and the mother has a better memory than ever in her whole life when the child is born. The same actually does prol prollectin which is important for giving milk to the baby. So giving milk to the baby, the birth of the baby produces hormones and these hormones activate the growth of the hippocmpus. And the same is goes for dogs. When a dog looks into your eyes, the it was proven the oxytocin level increases in your blood, but not only in your blood, also in the dog's blood. Blood by the way. So there is kind of a bonding between the two species based on the oxytocin system. And the paper in science about yeah 1015 years ago said there the oxytocin system was captured by the dogs so that they become our yeah friendliest companions. What could possib First of all that's beautiful and great to hear but what could be the purpose of that? Well, for the dogs it means they get the food every day they need. They uh they is a species which survive that way and evolution you know works in a way that you have to survive and and your children have to survive and your kids have to survive and that is more likely if the wolf becomes a dog you know >> the dog is dependent on you >> it's depend on you the dependence is is uh is guaranteed by the oxytocin system you know >> but why and I understand that of course but what would be the purpose for people. For the people in the past, it was like they were companions in hunting, you know, they protected, you know, your your space, you know, >> so they were for safety reasons. And meanwhile, I recommend them actually as a therapy against Alzheimer's or, you know, because >> Yeah, sure. because they grow the hypocmpus and the bigger the hippocmpus, the less likely you get Alzheimer's. Actually the paper I published unified theory of Alzheimer's goes back that the fundamental physiological or pathophysiological problem in Alzheimer's is the non-production of new nerve cells in the hypocmpus based on our lifestyle >> based on Okay. So the way we live affects the risk of getting Alzheimer's. >> Exactly. So when the last time when we talked here about two years ago, we talked about my first book, the indoctrinated brain. >> And there I showed that the growth of these new nerve cells is important that we are open for new ideas, for new memories, that we learn, that we reflect about things, but also that we are curious. These new nerve cells are the neuronal correlate for curiosity. Human curiosity is dependent on the production of new nerve cells in the hypocmpus. So we are more curious when we have a dog because we produce more oxy oxytocin. But um and what we talked about it two years ago was that the spike protein produced by the mRNA that is injected you know in this uh weird program uh is doing just the opposite. The spike protein activates neuroinflammation in the brain and we have to talk about neuroinflammation today because lithium is the antidote. Actually we talked about this two last two years ago. So if the if neuroinflammation occurs and it's chronic because the spike protein doesn't go away then uh the neuroinflammatory process activates the production of interalucin 1 interlucan 6 tnf alpha all pro-inflammatory cytoines and their main reason uh that they are produced is to signal the immune system there's some damage in the brain but a side effect is and that's physiological is that they shut down the hippocmpus they shut down the production of neur nerve cells in hypocmpus. In the short run, this is good because it creates a behavior that is you are not curious when you are sick. You want to go back. You don't want to don't want to socialize. That protects others if you're really sick. You are not curious when you're sick. That is true. >> Yeah. So that is uh that is the result in the short term. But if it's chronic, if chronically the there's a shutdown of the production of new nerve cells in hypocmpus, then the consequences are depression, anxiety, and in the long run is Alzheimer's. So they actually identified after the MR injections after a few months that the Alzheimer rate went up in a study published in SE in South Korea that was I think published in 2023. And I predicted this already in my book, the indoctrinated brain. and said the mRNA injection will increase Alzheimer's. So Alzheimer's and it has and it has it was published in in a Korean study. So um all the predictions were correct unfortunately. Well it was good for me because I like it when I'm correct my predictions but it's not good for the human world. So the humanity hinges on the ability of the opampmpus to produce new nerve cells. That is the key to humanity. If we reduce it to one function of the brain is that being human is that we are curious that we can reflect that we have um what I call psychological resilience because even if you're curious but you fear going the new path then it doesn't do any good. Curiosity has to be like two sides of a coin. On the one side you have curiosity at the other side you have the psychological resilience. And these two coin this coin with these two sides is based neurolog neurologically on the function of the production of new nerve cells. So you need new nerve cells to be curious to have resilience. Actually all drugs that are in on the market that are against depression have one key feature. They activate the production of new nerve cells in the hypocmpus. I'm not saying you have to take them but this is their function. So they are essentially anti-depressants based on the function that they produce in the nerve cells in hypocmpus and being human in my opinion means that you are able to produce these cells because then you are curious you are interested in the opinion of other people you know you can reflect on the opinion of other people there's another feature these cells represent in my opinion I outlaid it in my book is that they confer something what I call um um psych um um not empathy but um the right word is rational um rational compassion I think it's the right term rational compassion so when we are empathic you know we immediately act on something we see something we act this person is suffering we act but rational compassion is more it's more like if I do something what does it mean for the other person maybe people who are not even outside not inside this room, people outside in other countries. What do my actions do to these people? For this I empathy is not the right right function in our brain. This is what Carnean who got a Nobel Prize about system one system two a psychologist called system one is a reflex. Empathy is kind of a reflex but rational compassion is something that requires thinking. thinking about putting yourself in the shoes of others that you maybe people you don't even seeing the world out of the eyes from other people and all these function are based on the production of new nerve cells in the hippocmpus. So if you shut down the production of new nerve cells in hypocmpus people lose essentially the ability to be human >> they lose themselves. Yeah, they lose themselves and and the ultimate losing of oneself is having Alzheimer's which actually is the ultimate result of having a lifelong shutdown of the production of new nerve cells. Well, the entertainment industry is a weird one. Rather than producing films that inspire confidence and faith and national cohesion, which people want, Hollywood goes out of its way, as if by design, to undermine all of that. Our friends at Angel Studio are a glowing exception to that sad rule. Angel makes movies and shows that are patriotic. They're rooted in courage. They promote faith, family, and freedom. Films like Homestead about the importance of protecting the people you love in their lowest moments. Or Green and Gold, which shows perseverance, legacy, the American spirit. All good things. And last, but not least, Angel tells the biblical tale of David and brings it completely to life. Some subscriptions don't offer a lot, but premium membership on the Angel Guild does get a lot. two free tickets to every theatrical release of an Angel film. That means Young Washington, The Brink of War, Runner of the Sound of Freedom, and more. All free with your membership. So, if you're ready for stories that reveal why America is worth celebrating, visit angel.com/chucker and become a premium Angel Guild member today. Support entertainment that builds something, not just tears things down, something worth passing on to your children. Angel. Great. May I ask, so you're saying that mRNA injections cause this? Yeah, absolutely. So, are I mean, are people still being injected with this? Yeah, still happens. I was in Florida four to five months ago even though there's a ban on this somehow for politically is realized how toxic the stuff is. But when my wife and my wife and I were in Key West, I think it was like in October, November, I think it was November last year. Uh November being 2025 because we don't know when people view this. So um so there were still advertisements here you get the injection you know you know without any insurance problems and whatever you know on the streets I mean I was cur I was astonished you know because >> one of the promises of the last election was we'd shut that down. >> Yeah it's still happening >> but it hasn't been shut down it's still happening. Yeah >> and I wonder why >> I don't know >> what's the point of this >> I I I have no real clue. I mean it almost becomes conspiracy theory at that point conspiracy reality. >> Yeah, it's it's a reality but the reasons behind it I don't know you know why it is not forbidden you know completely. I mean this stuff is toxic. I gave a talk at the Bundesark, you know, about u 5 months ago in Germany. I was invited by the AFD and u and I gave a one and a half hour lecture and 1 hour lecture was it at the end about the origin of the virus, you know, and I said it's a bioweapon by all means. I mean I'm a molecular geneticist. I used my molecular genetic skills, you know, and that that this virus could have evolved by in nature is like essentially impossible. And uh and the evidence I laid down, you know, it was paid for by the Pentagon, you know, by the DARPA, but money in state department who actually put money in equal health alliance, all these kind of things that came together. barriage, you know, that all the labs in North Carolina. I put this all together in a in a in a lecture and uh said this is a bioweapon and and the the the real bioweapon is not the virus itself. Actually, it's this it's the mRNA that people get injected, you know, the modified mRNA that doesn't get get away so easily because of the modifications. And that's what I asked then when I was in the on credit commission I asked the the former former head uh yeah secretary of health you know in in in Germany yenwan asked him why did you yeah asked the yeah the know the that's the that's the um an advisory committee for in for um um yeah vaccination they didn't say they said at the time don't do the children no children no pregnant women nothing you know but the politics politicians wanted it and they pushed it very hard so um though when I asked him why did you allow that because he published a book actually the title of the book is we have to forgive each other that's the title of the book he published a book about this time and in the book I was able to read before I question him publicly I read that he was informed early 2020 that this might be coming from a bioweapon bioweapon lab. So he knew or at least he had to have this suspicion that it was a boweapon and [clears throat] still he insisted that kill children should be injected. >> So when he says we have to forgive each other, what would he be forgiving the rest of us for? >> And he he wanted I think forgiveness for himself >> of course. >> And um and so when I asked him his response was not okay, I didn't know or whatever. No, he said um the parents wanted it. And that was I thought, wow, the parents wanted it. I mean, for Christ's sake, you know, I mean, the parents wanted it because you made them fear that the children might die when they get the the infection, you know, you prod you part of the narrative. And then he said something very special which really made waves in Germany. Unfortunately, not in the in the main media, only in the um yeah, in the alternative media like Euros here maybe. Yes. [laughter] Um yeah, that he said uh it was never the intention to save others. The the injections were never intended to save others even though that was the main thing they told us. >> Of course, if you love your grandparents, you'll take the shot. >> Yeah, that's what he he told us. And uh in this commission publicly he he in my question when he questioned him he asked he said to me or said to the public it was never the intention of the mRNA to help others to to protect others. >> Then what was the what was the purpose? >> He never said the problem is in this in this commission you have only 5 minutes to question somebody. That means 5 minutes for question and answer and that's it. Then it's over. Then he is released and there's no repercussion. There's no there's nothing happened afterwards. >> We just have to forgive him. >> Yeah. We just have to forgive him. [laughter] >> Okay. >> But when when he was asked by my colleague um Tom Laos and he asked him in in the second 5 minute he got uh okay your book says you have to we have to forgive others. So what um so there are so many doctors now who know it didn't you know do the injections actually they want to protect their patients by yeah by all means uh they are now incarc incarcerated you know they're in prison shouldn't we just let them free and he simply said no so no forgiveness for others not forgiveness for those who >> they should be in prison for not injecting their patients with poison >> yeah Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> Yeah. Well, that's I mean that's what we're up against. >> We're living in a strange world. And um and the strange thing is they the reason they made this injection programmed also besides lying to us that it would help others was that it would help ourselves you know that we might not get this severe COVID which but where we end up with tubes you know and getting uh artificial u um respiration and and die essentially 50% was the death rates when you got you know the and I published a book on because it's not here but it's here in the conspiracy against lithium. I show the case that lithium is uh protecting uh our body against severe what we call cytoine storms. So the over production of cytoines cytoine storm and actually people died from COVID or any other respiratory disease that goes back since the first cases of influenza you know uh the common flu people can die and when they die they usually die based on the fact that the immune system is overreacting one of the reason it overreacts and why the all these diseases happen in winter is that we have a vitamin D deficiency it's quite easily explained but uh The cycine storm you can end immediately if you give people lithium. Lithium is a natural antidote against an overreacting immune system. And it was already published case reports in 2020 in August that if you patients have severe COVID that they have to go to the hospital if you give them lithium essentially the cyto cytoine storm ends immediately and the people are saved. >> So that would have saved thousands of lives in the United States. It would have saved everybody because nobody would have gotten the injection. The whole mRNA program would have been for nothing. There was wouldn't have been any reason to do that. >> When was this known? >> That was published six case reports in I think it was August 2020. And then the same group did a peer-reviewed uh random control trial standard pharmaceutical you know way to test drugs. In this case they used lithium. I think they gave the people two times 20 40 milligrams a day. And um the control troop got the standard treatment and the inter interference troop, the one who brought the lithium got standard treat treatment plus lithium and the outcome was dramatic. They were out of the hospital in half the time. Nobody had to go to intensive care. Nobody died compared to the control group and it was all known. But the same goes for vitamin D. If you had severe COVID, it was already published in September 2020 that if you had severe COVID, you have to raise the vitamin D level in your blood. But not but the vitamin D in our blood that we measure is the vitamin D pro hormone. It's uh it's 25 hydroxy vitamin D. So this is the what we measure in the blood is not vitamin D. We measure what is converted to a pro hormone. So the vitamin D we produce in our skin is converted in the liver into pro hormone and that's a storage form of vitamin D and also the the form we measure in the blood and this is immediately you know functioning as a hormone as vitamin D hormone in the cells and shutting down the cytoine storm. It's also important that we uh fight uh uh that we fight viruses. So a study was done in Cordoba in um I think it was published in September 2020 where they randomized a group of [clears throat] patients that were in a hospital based on COVID severe respiratory disease uh cytoine storm. They put them in two different groups. And one group got the vitamin D pro hormone. Yeah. The 25 hydroxy vitamin D, not vitamin D, the pro hormone form. And the other group just got standard uh treatment. And the effect was the likelihood of having to go to um to uh intensive care to that disease essentially worsens was 25fold reduced. 25 fold. >> That's incredible. And it was all known in in in uh at the end of uh 2020 before the injection program with the MRA rolled out. Now we care about supporting companies whose values aligned with ours. We [music] do not want to shill for sleazy companies. It is better to give business to like-minded Americans than people who hate us. That's our rule. And that's one of the reasons we like Charity Mobile. When you make the switch to Charity Mobile, the company sends 5% of your monthly price plan to pro-life, pro-f family charities of your choice. That's millions of dollars in counting [music] sent to pro-f family philanthropies. Okay, you're probably thinking that sounds great, but Charity Mobile must be super [music] expensive to pay for that. But no, they've literally never raised their mobile plan and no plan exceeds [music] $50 per month. Charity Mobile is a good company with good service and good prices. So, it's all good. Switch day and try it. Keep your number with a compatible phone, no compromise on quality, and support a truly great company and a good cause at the same time. promo code Tucker to get a free phone with free activation, free shipping, and a free gift with every new line of service. Visit charitymobile.com/tucker. >> How many people have gone to prison since February of 2020 for killing all these people? Do you know? >> I think it's close to zero, isn't it? >> Right around zero in that range. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. I don't think any of these governments have legitimacy at this point. >> No, it's not. And lithium is very important in this case because lithium the the mechanism how lithium works is a mechanism that is as old as life on this planet. C can you just stop right there? Lithium. Okay. So that's the main topic here. I'm interested in learning about lithium. I associate it with batteries. Is are you talking about the same lithium? >> Yeah. Actually the lithium you find in your mobile phone is pretty much the amount of lithium we we need for one year as a human. So my recommended daily allowance, you know, it's recommended by me. It's provisional because usually you need a state or a department to acknowledge what the amount is. But the amount of lithium that humans need is approximately 1 millig per day. So 1,000th of a gram. 1 milligram. It's not it's almost you can't hardly see it on a spoon, you know, it's so little. So just to start at the very beginning, lithium is an element. >> It's an element. It's uh actually one of the first elements that the univers produced if we believe in an in a big bang or whatever but it it co-developed in the universum with helium and uh and um >> um but not oxygen um what's called hydrogen. Yeah, hydrogen and lithium and helium. That was the three first elements that ever were produced in the universe. And that's why you find lithium everywhere. Lithium is everywhere. Uh that's is the reason why it's called actually lithium. Lithium is comes from lithium. That's the that's a Greek word for stone because every stone people analyze there's lithium in there. >> Not not much maybe but a little. So it's the one element you find everywhere. >> Is it um in is it in fruits, vegetables, meats? >> It's everywhere in our diet. >> It's everywhere. It's in our diet. It's everywhere. But people realized uh at the end of the 19th century when in the mid of 19 19th century lithium was discovered as an element. Um so the chemistry was so far advanced. We knew that lithium exists. This is what what how it looks like what's the way it is and everything. And people realized at the time that when there were um springs somewhere you know springs where people went to because they felt better when they drink the water of this particular spring. holy springs you know in everywhere scattered in the world that the the denominator the the common yeah factor of all these springs was lithium the content of lithium was higher than in other water. So when the lithium content is higher a little bit higher then you feel immediately that it helps your brain because apparently you have a deficiency. So once the deficiency is resolved, your brain works better again. And um and uh there were studies out in the from the 1970s. They concluded already that if you have the luck in from for example in Texas, you live in an area where a little bit more lithium is in the tap water than in other areas of Texas. And those studies have been done all over the world. Meanwhile, then the likelihood that you develop Alzheimer's is reduced. That you commit suicide is reduced. That you are admitted to a mental hospital is reduced. That you get killed is reduced. The murder rate depends directly on the level of lithium in the t in the tap water. >> Really? >> Yeah. Because the me what I call the mental immune system which resides in the hypocmpus is dependent on lithium. >> Do you think people are receiving less lithium than they once did? Yeah, absolutely. In my book, I describe the original not only the origin of the man of of our human of humanity. So, humanity relies on our ability to think to put ourselves in the shoes of others to be social animals in a way, you know, that we are we can socialize that we want peace, you know, we don't want to we don't want war, we want peace. We want the best for our kids and war is not good for our kids. Yeah. So, >> I've noticed. >> Yeah. Absolutely. So, so we all have have an immune system but we know the immune system I call it the physical immune system which fights pathogenic microorganisms. That's what we call the our immune system. But to this I added another immune system a term I call it mental immune system. This one doesn't fight microorganisms at least not directly indirectly because maybe we think about measures of you know keeping them away but uh it fights microorganism pathogenic microorganisms micro meaning big >> microorganisms like Bill Gates maybe you know I mean talking yeah but people who want who don't who do us harm you know we have to protect our family from these pathogenic macroorganisms >> yes I know some Yeah, exactly. [laughter] And that's what the mental immune system is for. That's why we have a mental immune system. And the mental immune system, as I was able to show, resides in the hypocmpus in the production of new nerve cells in hypocmpus because these are the neuron coralate as I already laid out in the beginning of our talk. They are for curiosity for um the ability to think in you know to change perspective. you know that we find you know the ability to to to to solutions which is not just uh sending weapons you know but but actually yeah diplomatic ways to solve problems not only on the political level but also in families you know with friends so what makes us human is the mental immune system so what's in your toothpaste if you're using the brand you grew up with you probably don't want to know the ingredients likely include fluoride something called SLS glycerin foaming agents it's a chemical cocktail tail. Van man's toothpaste is different. Their miracle toothpowder is changing everything and people are ditching traditional toothpaste filled with chemicals by the thousands. Van man's toothpowder uses ingredients with the same mineral structure as your teeth that remmineralizes them and strengthens your enamel naturally. No fluoride at all and totally edible. You could put it on toast. Not that you'd want to, but you could. People who use it report whiteter teeth, less plaque. They wake up without that gross film on their gums. And here's the amazing part. Vivid dreams are back. You dream clearly when you stop coating your mouth in fluoride every night. Did you know that? Pretty amazing. Tells you a lot. So, make the switch. Visit vanman.shop/tucker. Use the code Tucker for 15% off your first order. vanman.shop/tucker. Use the code Tucker. 15% off. VanMan. Real ingredients. Zero exceptions. I wonder if the uptake rate for the mRNA shot is higher in Congress in the United States than the overall population. >> It's possible. I don't know. Maybe >> I would bet about 100% of US senators took the co the mRNA shot >> or or they pretended to do it. I'm not sure. >> I hope so. I hope they did. >> Yeah. Well, I hope so, too. But that would be actually worse because they might have pretended because they knew it's it's toxic. Yeah. >> Otherwise, you wouldn't have to pretend. You would actually take it, >> right? Well, they're not serving in the war. >> I don't know. I don't know what these people did did, but I have my suspicion that people who propagated the stuff knew it's toxic. >> Of course they did. >> And if part of the propagation is to tell the public I got the shot, I'm sure they didn't get it. You know, >> anyway, >> it's also evil. Sorry, I'm >> But but the mental immune system, I asked a question. I'm asked myself the question when when in in the history of humans evolved the mental immune system. Now from the evolutionary perspective and from the evolutionary perspective it evolved when there was a drought in uh in the in Africa a drought of a span of about 70,000 years and it started about 200 19 15 95,000 years ago roughly 200,000 years ago there was an ice age a very severe ice age lasting very long and essentially the ice mountains of ice were accumulating in the and on on in on the north pole and the south pole and Africa went dry and people and life in Africa on the mainland was essentially not possible. So only a few people was survived. We believe actually that maybe only a few hundred people of human survived at the coast in South Africa. Actually the spot which I described very intensively in my book the algae oil revolution became a world inheritage site in 2024 for that for that reason [clears throat] and here they found fruits uh fruits of the of the ocean you know I call them the fruits of wisdom you know and that's our muscles the muscles were at the toast they were like in abundance and if you check out what muscles contain they contained pretty much everything the human brain needs. They are just the perfect muscles. The shellfish. >> The shellfish. Yeah. They are just the perfect and they were there in in quantities. So these few hundred people couldn't even you know think about eating everything. They were just growing faster than they could eat it. So that completely changed the lifestyle and it had an impact on the brain. So they got all the omega-3 fatty acids in quantities uh but also in what they get got and what they didn't get probably in the inland Africa was lithium. Lithium is part of the muscle. So to put it this way like iodine iodine is very important for the brain. >> Yes. >> We know what happens when you have an iodine iodine deficiency >> and iodine is really not so easy to find in >> causes mental retardation lower. >> Exactly. Actually it it's not actually retardation. You don't develop a brain. You have problem to develop one. So you are in a way. But means you means you have lost something but you don't even develop a brain when you have a a lack of uh of iodine in your childhood. It's was the most severe um yeah mental issue that we know of you know. So anyway, in geologically old, you know, areas, you know, like in the in the Alps, for example, or in in the mountains somewhere, that if they're not volcanic, then there is a lack of iodine because it was washed out over the millions of years into the ocean, you know, it's washed out and the the soil doesn't contain much iodine. And the same happens with lithium. Lithium is also washed out. So in salt water in in ocean water you find 100 times higher level of lithium than in sweet water. Yeah. Really? Yeah. It's 100 times higher. And muscles or Yeah. shellfish accumulates the lithium by 3 to fivefold. So if you eat the meat of muscles or shellfish then you have uh an in intake of about 1 to two milligram. I calculated this in the book of 1 to 2 milligram a day. That was when that was essentially our natural food for tens of thousands of years. >> And that was a time when the human brain >> shellfish, not fish. Shellfish. >> Fish also has lithium, of course. But >> I say now I'm bragging. I know nothing about health. I've always loved shellfish and dogs. >> Mhm. >> And you have just affirmed both of my choices. >> Yeah. I'm very very thankful that I did this. You know, you [laughter] know, I'm I'm happy to make you happy. I love having my eccentric choices uh ratified by science. >> Yeah. The only problem with shellfish, of course, if you eat it too much, is that it not only accumulates lithium, it accumulates everything what is in the ocean. >> Well, it's the dirtiest thing you can eat. >> Exactly. And that's why I came up with an alternative because there's not enough shellfish on this planet to feed everybody so that he can has his quantity of lithium that he needs. Because the problem is when nature gives you something for tens of thousands of years, then the body usually starts to use what he gets and at a certain time he starts to to uh put his genetics around it. And so what was somehow a free offer becomes a necessity after a certain time. Yeah. So we have got used to have lithium in our diet and now it's gone because we moved away from the coast. We are inland. We are in areas where there's less lithium. We don't recognize that there's a deficiency because all other people behave the same. You know, everybody is a little bit less friendly as it could be. Everybody is a little bit more irritable as it could be. Everybody has more the risk of being having you express anger. you know, we are less um able maybe to to find a peaceful way. Actually, my strongest belief is that the written history that of of our culture, you of the human culture for the last 6 7 8 10,000 years is the history of a lack of lithium because people moved inside had these cities and they didn't eat shellfish anymore. And if they were not lucky enough that the that lithium was in their groundwater where they had their city, then they lived in a with a reduced amount of lithium that were able to ingest. And if you have a reduced amount of lithium, that has severe consequences on your brain function, particularly on your mental immune system. It's interesting that you say that because I mean coastal cultures are famously and provably more evolved, flexible, cosmopolitan, prosperous >> um you know than inland culture. I mean >> right re there was no real city at Riad 200 years ago. There was Jedha on the coast and that's true in like every there are a lot of reasons for that but do you think that's one of them? Yeah, actually I rechecked uh one of my first books. It has not been translated in English yet, but one of my first books I worked on Okinawa, you know, why people get older there, why they have reduced levels of Alzheimer's, uh all these kind of things. And uh when I wrote on this book, the term blue zone, you know, was not known. But meanwhile, the term blue zone means areas in the in our planet where people get old but also stay healthy when they age. And these were called blue zones. And so I checked for my book the conspiracy against lithium all the blue zones and they are lithiumrich areas and it makes a lot of sense. Uh I so I gave a talk about uh two years ago I actually sent you an email which with a link and you said I remember you giving me an email back saying or it was signal or whatever saying uh it's great that you were able to give this talk. I was invited by the foreign minister of Switzerland on the international cooperation forum. It's a conference where about 100 nations took took part all over the world. Of course, it's very closely linked to the uh to the World Economy Forum. So, so for me, it was like walking into the into an area where I didn't feel very happy. uh my book the exhaustive brain was the reason I was invited because there I explained what the brain needs to think and of course what to think peace. So they invited me to give the keynote at this uh event in 15 minutes I have had to answer the question what the brain needs to think peace. Okay. And uh well it was just a few weeks after I was here and then our interview you published it and they realized that I have different ideas what the brain needs that I was not a friend of the mRNA injections and so forth. So they couldn't uninvite me again, you know, that was not would have been a better, right? >> But they tried, of course, to to reduce the amount of uh of slides I'm using, you know, they actually came to me 5 minutes before my speech because in the evening I shut down the computer. I sent them the speech, you know, the the the slides, but I shut down the computer. I shut down my my mobile phone. I came very late to my talk in the morning was the first talk the keynote and they came to me rushing to me Michael you have to cut out 50% of the slides you know 50% because the slides contained a couple of informations like for example the function of the brain does not the mental immune system which we required for thinking and thinking is a prerequisite for thinking peace of course you can't think peace if you can't think obviously so if you want to be able to think real thinking type two thinking system two thinking we need the mental immune system and the mental immune system doesn't work if you inject mRNA with a spike protein so this slide they didn't like I also showed that uh with vitamin D the problem would have been over and that would be healthy for your brain but my one of my last slides I showed was that I want to make it my my goal to prove that lithium is essential for the mental immune system and at that moment I was a little bit fearful because uh the meeting took place in Basel, you know, and that is essentially the center of the pharmaceutical industry in in Switzerland. >> It is. Yeah. >> Yeah. And I was there and said, I want to show that lithium is essential. And the proof is now in my book, The Conspiracy against lithium. It's the first proof ever that lithium is an essential trace element. Meaning that if you have a complete lack, you wouldn't be able to live. If you reduce it in animals for example, it reduces their fertility. The newborns, the ones which are born are smaller. The ones many surv don't survive the first few months if they have a lack of lithium. Not a complete lag, just a reduction. A complete lack is very difficult to achieve because lithium is everywhere. But you can of course create artificially a deficiency in animals and has detrimental effects. How how would you create a deficiency in people? In people we have already a deficiency. We live already a deficiency. So if you assume you need 1 milligram of lithium a day which is the dose where you have the lowest suicide rates the the highest longevity. So if your tap water has let's say 500 mg of 500 micro of lithium it's half a milligram per liter. This is yeah it's like a quarter gallon at water you know. Then if you live in an area where this is the case, then you have a longer life with less diseases. You also have a much reduced uh risk of Alzheimer's. We already discussed that. Yeah. So, so longevity, Alzheimer's risk all depend on the amount of lithium you have in your tap water. And this is of course only in certain areas of the world, but not everywhere. I assume 90 90 to 95% of the human population suffers from lithium deficiency. And this is severe because it it uh the mental deficiency syndrome which I which I essentially termed it I termed the lithium deficiency disease u mental immune deficiency syndrome and it's is the end result is Alzheimer's but it starts with autism autism um attention deficit disorders schizophrenia actually the first one who mentioned in the history of of our culture that lithium might be essential was John Kate. And John Kate published in 1949 a paper where he treated people with high doses of lithium, really high doses for bipolar disorder. And he found out that bipolar disorder is a mix of a change of depression and and andia mania. But he said that mania was primarily affected by giving lithium. It was reduced. And he assumed that the effect was astronomer mania and on bipolar disorder as general that a lack of lithium in your childhood is might be the cause of bipolar disorder. So if you have a lack in your diet in lithium in your childhood that might be a cause meaning and that was his conclusion in the paper in 1949. Meaning that lithium must be an essential trace element because if it has effects on your brain it must be essential. if it's lacking. >> And in the same year, 1949, the FDA made a prohibition on lithium as a as a supplement. You are not allowed a supplement anymore. That was happening in 1949. >> Why? >> On purpose. Actually, that's the conspiracy I'm talking about in the title. Three centers in the United States, medical centers, doctors gave their patients, patients which suffer from heart disease, congestive heart failure, you know, very severely sick. They said to their patients, "Hey, you are not allowed to eat salt anymore. Salt is not good for your heart." So they removed the sodium chloride, which is salt, from their diet. But of course, then the food doesn't taste very good. So they gave them instead of sodium chloride they gave them lithium chloride. Now they didn't take one migram of lithium of course it has to taste salty they took grams of it. At the time it was already published in the journal of the American Medical Association from in 1913 by a self test from a doctor that this these amounts of lithium are highly toxic. Highly toxic. They can kill you. And that's what they did. They gave these patients high doses of lithium in not milligram but gram. Can you imagine something that is essential in one dose you give it a thousandfold higher. What will happen? Think about water. water like half a gallon of water might be healthy. You know, you should drink water every day. Yeah. >> But now make it a thousandfold. How much water you have to drink? You you die from drinking water. >> Oh yes, you can. You drown. Yeah. >> So everything you increase dramatically, everything that's good for you, you increase it becomes toxic. >> I've noticed. >> Yeah. >> And same goes for >> And the same goes for lithium. And the lithium killed people at that time. And they published in spring 19 1949 three papers in the journal of the American medical association yama uh well jamma yeah yeah jamma they published three papers backto back apparently independent of they called it in the time magazine accidental food poisoning but in the paper when you read them and I found them and they are in the book I found out that these were done that was done purposely these people were given kind of a clinical trial we wanted to find out how much lithium people can can accept. And they monitored how these people died. And then they told the the FDA said to Time magazine, "Oh, we wanted to actually shut down the supplementation of lithium as a trace element anyway because we want to develop a drug with it." And um and that was happened in 1949. You might know 7UP of course you know 7UP has its name from lithium. It was lithiated soda. I think the formula went came out in 1929. And one glass of of seven up had exactly 1 mg of lithium. And seven stands for the atomic weight of lithium. It's seven and up means upregulation of the mood. So you drank your lithiated soda which was called seven up and you had essentially an upregulation of the mood. And because you remedied your deficiency but and that was of course a big thing selling the stuff and many followed even Coca-Cola started putting lithium in their in their drink but in 1949 that was prohibited and they had to change the formulation. So from 1949 on the whole world essentially banned lithium. In Europe there's still a ban in lithium. Here in America, meanwhile in the United States, you can buy lithium because there was a reform of the FDA in 1949, I guess, where the F and the D separated somehow. So there is more relation on drugs than on food and and supplementation supplements with lithium is food. And here the the responsibility is for those who produce it. If you put it on the market, if nobody dies, you are responsible. But nobody died so far. So for the last 3540 years, it is possible to buy lithium as a supplement in in America. But the ban from the FDA from 1949 still persists in Europe. So in whole Europe, it's not allowed to receive lithium to get lithium as a supplement. You are not allowed to put it in in a supplement to actually get this 1 milligram. So I gave a speech about half a year ago. It was in June 2025. I gave a speech at the European Parliament to end this stupidity to end this because I was able to prove in my book that about 90% of all diseases which we call chronic diseases 90% of chronic disease the major market of the of the pharmaceut pharmaceutical industry is based on chronic inflammation and the natural antidote of chronic inflammation is lithium in your food. So if you give people lithium these chronic inflammations would you know reside and the drug market of course would shut down. But um but this is not what the European Commission wants. So I'm essentially running against walls when I try to talk to Osula Fontline. >> Well, you're not the only one. >> Yeah, I assume I assume [laughter] I assume. But that was the main reason I came here to the United States. That's one of the main reason I talk to you here because the maha movement will only be really successful if everything that the brain needs is given to the people. So people need enough omega-3 fatty acids. They need enough of lithium. They need enough all vitamins, all essential trace elements, everything is needed. I call the the requirement is based on an on law of nature. And this law is quite simple. is called the law of the minimum. So the law of the minimum was discovered in 1828 by a by a German um agricultural science scientist and he discovered that um when you want to grow some some vegetables whatever on a field the vegetables have some requirements and for example is as phosphate is missing you can give the plant as much potassium as you want it will not Oh, you have to give the plant what it needs. And this is the law of the minimum. It's very important law because it tells people in agriculture that they don't waste you know material on their fields that the plant doesn't need and only give the plant that exactly that what is missing in the soil and this it goes about growing something. Now what is growing in our brain is the new cells in the hippocmpus. So we can apply the same law there. The law of the minimum applies to every living being in particular to our mental immune system. So if you apply the mental the law of the minimum to our mental immune system then if something is missing it will not work. You can eat as much meat or protein as long as there is no lithium in the brain you brain will suffer. Uh as long as there not enough omega-3 fatty acids the brain will suffer. And the ideal volume of the hypercmpus which gives you essentially the best mental immune system with the best growth rate is um and here maybe I have to give you some facts the hypocmpus can grow by a few% each year by volume by a few% each year because he has the ability to grow new nerve cells and they are required that our mental immune system functions so they grow and the hypocmpus will grow but in modern societies there is not growth of the hippocmpus as a shrinkage. The shrinkage is an average 1.4% per year by volume. So after 30 40 years, your hippocmpus is only half the size it was when you were 25. >> And what are the effects of that? How would you notice that in another person? >> You notice it because he's mentally not as not flexible anymore. >> Not flexible anymore. >> Yeah. He reiterates, you know, common phrases. You can talk to can say hello to him. He will respond friendly maybe if he's a friendly person but you realize very quickly that that you cannot go into a discussion with him about anything because he will shut down. He his mental immune system is not functioning. He's caught in the past. He's caught in the past and even this past will diminish because the long-term consequence of a shrinking hippocmpus is Alzheimer's. Actually, it's a biioarker for for Alzheimer's. The smaller your hypocmpus, the closer you are to develop the disease. So we have a society already that's not on the people that have Alzheimer's. If Alzheimer starts in the age of 20 yeah if your hypocmpus is shrinking actually even in kids they don't develop the hypocmposus the size they should. So the deficiencies start already in the womb of the woman you know I mean they start when you are essentially uh concepted you know at conception you you grow into an environment where things are missing. Just to give you an example, if omega-3 fatty acids are missing, you cannot build synapses in between your nerve cells, 50% of the fatty acids in your synapses, which are important for connecting your brain cells for important for our mental functioning consist of omega-3 fatty acids. Now, what happens if you don't eat them? Our body can't produce them. So, and the the biggest hypocmpalle volume you have when you have an omega-3 index, it's a measurement of how much omega-3 fatty acids your body has, is 11%. 11% is the ideal. This is what the placenta for example tries to give the child that is growing up. 11%. 2% is not you cannot live with 2%. Below 2% was never measured anywhere in the world because 2% is the minimum that is required for life. But of course it's not a happy life. So 2% is the minimum. 11% is ideal. What do Americans have? 4%. Children, we have children maybe with only 2 and a half to 3%. So what are the characteristics of a society in which most people have lithium deficiencies and >> stunted hypocampuses? Like what how do people behave? Like what are the signs that your whole society is suffering from this? Well, they they just behave. There's trained behavior. Of course, if you are trained to be a friendly person, you know, say hello to everybody, you will do that. But, uh, practically speaking, your mental immune system is dysfunctional. And if it's dysfunctional, you are not as curious as you should be. >> You have not the resilience that you should have. You are not as compassion with others because you cannot put yourself into their shoes or see the world through their eyes, which makes it difficult to negotiate. So, you're not as peaceful as you can. [laughter] You know, you're not as peaceful as >> I'm recognizing some of these signs, doctor. >> Okay. I hope not by somebody close by. >> No, just But if all of a sudden you look around and people are not interested in what just happened, like how can you not want to know how that happened? >> Yeah. And if people do seem like they have less love for each other and less compassion for each other and are not capable of seeing other people's perspectives. >> Yeah. >> I mean I've noticed that. >> Yeah. And this is a world I don't want to live in. And this is why I have made it my agenda to make lithium to show the world that lithium is an essential trace element. And the biggest opponent I have is the pharmaceutical industry. >> Why? Why would they be opposed? >> Well, all these diseases that follow this deficiency of lithium are their biggest markets. >> So, what's their argument? So, if if I were to have Albert Bula, who I'd love to interview >> on uh right now and I asked him about you and your proiththium agenda, what would he say? How would he criticize you? >> Well, they have no real arguments. I mean, the arguments are not are strictly are simply not there. uh every argument I can counter quickly but they are not even open to discuss it. So maybe they have a lithium deficiency. I don't know. So I don't know. But they're not even open to discuss it. The the even if I asked Jet GPT for example, I gave it my example, you know, my all the the the the results of my research and that this is now what I have. The answer was okay. Lithium fulfills all the criteria that were necessary for all the other trace elements when they were named or or yeah uh defined as essential. So if you have a a lag you have essentially dead animals you know they are not fertile anymore they don't are not fertile anymore we have a disease actually 6 weeks after my speech at the uh the European parliament the nature published you know nature very prestigious paper journal they published a study from Harvard University and they looked at the brains of um of Alzheimer patients who died. They checked what is the what what trace elements do they have in their brain and what how does it link the amount of trace element they find to the disease stage and they found that from 27 or 28 different trace elements they checked not all of them of course are essential but also aluminum is is a trace element in our body because it is there in in traces but from 28 trace elements I looked at only one was significantly correlated to this disease and that was the lack of lithium And that correlates completely to what we find in in in in in studies epidemiological studies that if you have a lack of lithium in your table in your water then which is the main source of lithium then you have a high risk of Alzheimer's and also a risk of dying of Alzheimer's and then they took mice and removed lithium and they immediately developed Alzheimer's. The mice, of course, they were genetically engineered to develop Alzheimer's. But they usually don't develop Alzheimer's if you treat them well because if you give them room to to to run around, if they are happy animals, they don't care if they have a gene in their brain that actually causes Alzheimer's, a human gene that causes Alzheimer's. This is actually what I published many years ago. There there are genes that mutations in genes that cause Alzheimer's, but they don't cause Alzheimer's. They accelerate Alzheimer. But what they accelerate is a state of deficiencies that we have in our body that if we remove them actually the the the mutations in these genes don't make any difference. So essentially behavior trumps you know uh genetics you know behavior in the sense of giving the body what it needs. If we do that, our brain or our yeah body actually doesn't care what kind of genes actually might cause Alzheimer's. You can overcome the genetic disp disposition. So anyway, these animals were genetically engineered to have these predisposition to Alzheimer. They don't get Alzheimer's, but once you remove lithium from their diet, they actually develop the disease. And if you give the lithium back, the disease disappears. Do you think that if everyone in the United States got a milligram of lithium every day, what would be the effects? >> It would be dramatic. And not only of course lithium by itself is just curing one deficiency as I outlined in my book, there are many deficiencies that people suffer from. Omega3 would be one, vitamin D might be another depending on how their diet is. It might be vitamin B12 or whatever, you know. So there are many deficiencies and you have to of course based on the law of the minimum you have to get rid of all of them. But [clears throat] lithium is a really good start actually a friend of mine he is um a pediatrician he actually gives lithium to all the children meanwhile and he says and he did before that over 20 years he gave them vitamin D he gave them omega-3 fatty acids he gave them everything they needed but he didn't know about lithium until he met me. So now he started to give them lithium. He does it now for two years. And since he did this, he said this is the most yeah lifechanging trace element he has ever experienced in 20 years. After a few days, children who are irritable are not irritable anymore. Children who refuse to go to school because they are have a lot of anger driven. They don't socialize. It's gone. We reverse autism this way. you know, in the early stages. I have a a friend of mine, she her son is 17 years old. We Yeah, we met several times. He didn't want to look in my eyes. He couldn't speak. He actually put it on YouTube after a few months of lithium and of course everything else. After a few months, he actually sent me a message through YouTube, thanked me officially, and he looked into the camera and said, "My life has changed since I got got lily. It will change everything." In chapter four of the book, I put together something that um I would say would be a revolution in medicine. If at the very moment you you'd have the law of the minimum which actually is a law of nature for everything that has to grow it needs best basically based on its evolutionary history which defines it the the the yeah the necessities you know I mean a cactus has a different necessity to grow than um a fern tree you know you know a plant who lives in the in the in the brushes you know in the dark uh in in the in the woods, you know, I mean, uh, every plant has a different requirement to grow. And the same goes, of course, for us. We have different requirements than a fish or, um, I don't know, a dog. Everybody, every Yeah. species on this planet has specific requirements, but they are all defined by the law of the minimum. It might be different for different species, but the law of the minimum always is responsible that we live to our genetic genetically optimum to our genetic optimum. And so if something is missing then of course it will be detrimental. This is basic science. It's is understandable. You don't have to be a doctor to know that you know I mean it's it's so simple to understand this basic law of life. The law of the minimum actually is that's also the law of the maximum. You shouldn't give anybody something that is too much of something. It's the law of the maximum. And between you have the ability for what we call homeostasis, self-regulation. Yes, self-regulation is impeded if something is missing. Law of the minimum or if something is too much. And these two laws are not taught in med school, at least not in Europe, at least not in Germany, I would say, or in Switzerland or in Austria because I talked to many doctors and I had studied in med school. This basic law is not taught. And why is it not taught? Because all chronic diseases are essentially a result of not obeying the law of the minimum and the maximum. If these laws are not obeyed, chronic disease will ensue. So once you know that and you know that if you have a deficiency in A you cannot cure it by giving B then every drug that is prescribed by doctors lo lose their sense because if you have a deficiency let's say in lithium and your brain develops Alzheimer's what drug could help you it must be lithium nothing else helps so every drug that the pharmaceutical industry tries to develop is essentially a lithium mimatic, a pure alternative to lithium. But at the same time, they have to make sure that nobody takes lithium because their drugs would be worthless. And I gave a when I gave the talk at the European Parliament, I actually showed it for Alzheimer's. And there are many reviews out now, meta analysis, where they looked at studies where people with Alzheimer's got lithium. So lithium at a very low dose 300 microgram that's not even a milligram 300 microgram that's 0.3 migram actually stabilized Alzheimer's patients for 15 months while the control group no went downhill it was just a single a single molecule if you do everything that's in here in the book you can actually reverse Alzheimer's so and this is what I think should be the future of medicine a preventive medicine that gives people everything they need based on the law of the minimum >> when you say reverse Alzheimer's give us a scenario where that would work >> well you you realize >> at what stage in the progression >> it's in the early stage it's in the early stage it's like like you can reverse for example diabetes you know and uh type two diabetes >> I should say that's I've taken for granted now people know that 15 20 years ago if you said you can reverse type 2 diabetes you would have been laughed at. >> Yeah I know I was laughed at. >> Oh you said that then? Yeah. Sure, sure. Sure. 15 years ago, I already proclaimed that all these diseases can be reversed. But I took the the diff most difficult path. I tried to convince people that it also works for Alzheimer's. And that's why I published my first book. >> Yeah. That is not a conventional view right now. >> No, it's not. But it it you can reverse it because Alzheimer's in the early stage, that's why I call it hippocample uh dementia starts in the hypocmpus. And when the hippocmpus is affected, the first thing that you lack is a lack of of a lack of um sense in where you are, what you just experienced. And this is all driven by a lack of these nerve cells that I call index neurons. The index neurons are the nerve cells in the hypocmpus that index essentially all the information that you that you have learned during the day. So we are sitting here and uh if I want to remember in in a few weeks in a few years the our conversation uh the index neurons essentially get this information the content of our discussion here from our brain uh and they have to reconstruct it so it becomes conscious again and in order to do that they require the two informations when did the conversation take place and where when and where actually for the wear these are called space neurons the Nobel Prize was given I think it was 2016 or so or 2014 uh the I think it was 16 the Nobel Prize was given for the discovery that the hippocmpus has cells that memorize where something happened in the same year the time neurons were discovered the hippocmpus also traces down when something happened and the when and where we can connect this my term to an index. These are index neurons. They have an index like if you're going to the library, every book contains some information and this is like the information that we the information that we are exchanging here. This information is in a book but you have to find this book in your brain again and there you need an index for this book and the index is the time when the conversation happened and the where where the conversation happened and the index neurons are happen to be the ones that are produced every day. Index neurons are produced by the adult hypocal neurogenesis every day. So in order for our brain to store new books every day lifelong we have to produce new cells. That what the index neurons are for. That's what the neurogenesis is for. The production of new nerve cells. Now if you start if you stop this production because you don't obey the law of the maximum, you give the brain too much toxins, alcohol, whatever, too much, then it stops. If you have a lack of something, law of the minimum, it cannot go it. If you have a lack of lithium, production is not as good. For example, lithium produ is is known that it activates the production of brain derived neurotropic factor and brain derived neurotropic factor is growth factor for the production of neuros cells in hypocmpus. Lithium shuts down uh severe inflammation. Inflammation shuts down neurogenesis. So lithium is helping you that if you come under stress that you don't immediately have a complete shutdown by neuroinflammation of the production of new nerve cells in your brain. And lithium that's the maybe the oldest effect of lithium and I was able in the book to show that the first cell that ever existed on this planet however it was created maybe God however doesn't matter the first cell on this planet is called the last universal common ancestor of all life on this planet of plants bacteria humans the first cell that was in the evolutionary Yeah, three. The first one on the bottom had already a defense system which I was able to show relied on lithium and the defense system is called autoi. The ability very known self >> self eat. Autoi is activated by inhibition of an enzyme called inocetylone monophosphotase. Complicated word I call it impace. So impace is an enzyme that is essentially activated by magnesium and inhibit inhibited by lithium. So it's like a gas pedal and a brake pedal, you know. >> Yes. >> And if or in order to drive a car safely, you have to break and and and and accelerate, you know, you have to you have to be able to do both. So homeostasis requires that you have both magnesium and lithium. But if you only have magnesium and no lithium, then actually auto is shut down. auto is required to activate um uh is required for the impace to shut to activate the uh autophagy process. So if you think about that our brain has the ability to become 100 years old. It can only become 100 years old if first neurogenesis is taking place all the time in the hypocmpus otherwise you develop Alzheimer's and die. And the second thing is that all the other nerve cells, every nerve cell in your brain has to become 100 years old. Because a nerve cell you cannot replace, you cannot remove it and put another one in if it doesn't work anymore properly. It has to stay healthy from the day you are born up to your to the oldest age. And the only way to stay healthy for 100 years maybe is that this nerve cell has the ability for a very yeah active autoy self-eing eating of mitochondria that they don't work anymore of uh proteins that don't work anymore that they don't become just debris know lying around and dysfun make the cell dysfunctional. We have to make sure that the cell is always active and functional and it's the only way to do that is autoe. So autoe has become the is the oldest process probably in in all living in the whole living kingdom of in in life. >> Fasting can spur autoagi. Is that correct? >> Fasting is a very good way to do that and lithium is a key that it actually works. So we all have a little bit lithium in us. So we still have a little bit of OFH, but it could be much better if we had the essential dose. >> To be totally clear, you're calling for about a milligram a day per person. >> Yeah. And I'm not the first one. There was actually um a key scientist actually also a German, but he had his own department at the University of San Diego and he published a paper in 2002 about the essentiality of lithium at the time. Everything he knew at the time he he put together in a review article. He had his own own department. He was one of the leading experts in the world on trace elements and vitamins. And he published that lithium is essential and you need 1 milligram. He he at the time was not Yeah. He published it but nobody really took uh took um notice of that. And uh and the problem was also he didn't really explain how he came to 1 mig. And also of course he didn't had all the he didn't have all the information at the time that now 20 years later I got no access to. So I could be I could in my book I was more thorough. Uh the the the ev the the chain of evidence is complete now. And uh when I did some reasoning how much we need I also came to 1 milligram. So I suppose >> is there any down so if so that was 24 years ago if I took a milligram of lithium every day for 24 years would there be any downside any negative effects? >> Not that I know of. The deficiency is the problem. >> Yes. >> Um lithium is probably the safest trace element from all essential trace elements which are out there. So for example iodine if the recommended daily allowance if you go three four five times above that it could become problematic. The same goes for selenium for zinc for many of these magnesium um four five 10 times more and becomes dangerous. uh lithium, the European Chemical Association uh agency which essentially is advising the European Commission they published a paper recently or a few years ago that um you can go up to 85 mgs of lithium a day without harm on the long run. 85 milligram. I wouldn't recommend 85 milligram but this is 85fold. So so you are far away from any toxicity. >> So um okay so to the practical part of the conversation what should the average person do every day to reap the benefits you describe? Yeah, I would take lithium actually uh unless you are living already in an area where there's a lot of lithium in the tap water and you have to drink the tap water of course and maybe 2 liters or so if it's just let's say half a milligram per liter per watt but uh I would recommend lithium oritate and actually that's what also the nature paper said uh that I just quoted you know which was published on 6th of August 25 um that lithium has physiological role in our brain that is important for for um keeping the brain uh healthy. It's it's essentially the natural antidote against Alzheimer's. Uh still the European Union still doesn't like it to be uh you know uh inaugurated as an essential trace element. Uh but I need only one country to do that. But this is a different story. So what should you do? The paper in nature actually recommended the same salt of lithium that I recommend. Of course, lithium I talked about lithium chloride, you know, in this when they when they >> replace table salt with Yeah. when they poison a thousand times. >> Yeah. When they poison the people, uh lithium chloride is not good because it's the lithium is ionized very quickly. The same actually is with lithium carbonate. Githium carbonate is what people get with bipolar disorder. But the carbonate becomes essentially CO2 in your stomach and you have the pure lithium. It's an iron. uh much better and more effective is what I recommend is lithium oritate. Ourate is the salt of orot of the orotic acid and uh this is was formerly known as vitamin B13. It was 20 years ago it was recognized as a vitamin un until one found we found out that the researchers found out that uh the orurotic acid is produced uh by the female uh breast when they produce milk. So the breasted milk contains um um the orotic acid actually it's it's it's it's it's the Greek word or orotic acid stands for milk and it was only first discovered only in milk from cows and from other animals and and and it was it took a while that they realized also humans can produce it and then it became it became it was said it's not a vitamin anymore because we can produce and it's a key component of nucleic acids. So if you need this orotic acid to produce new cells to double for example your DNA and when you produce cells so it's very important for your body and because it's so important there are transport systems in your stomach in your gut and there are transport system over the bloodb brain barrier that try to deliver the oric acid to the the cells that are important for us and particularly nerve cells. So they produce the the ordic acid has a transport system and uh it and the lithium can hijack essentially this this transport system because it forms a very stable complex. So lithium oritate is ideal and the scientists from n from Harvard University actually tested different lithium salts and I was very happy because the boot was already out that they concluded lithium oritate is the way to go. So bank back to your question what would I recommend? I would recommend 1 mg of lithium every day in form of lithium orotate. >> And what form is that? I mean for the average person don't have access a science lab. You can just go on Amazon and buy that. >> Yeah, you can go to drugstore in in Europe. It's no problem. In America it's no problem in the United States. In Europe it is a problem. Of course, you can also get it at Amazon. Uh because um the import for example from the United States is allowed, you know. Uh I actually talked to um to a lawyer and he said she said to me that you can actually buy it in the United States. You can essentially request it to ship to you, but you're not allowed by, for example, European law to uh get it shipped for your whole family because then you become a drug dealer because that's too much lithium for you. >> It's too much lithium. you are not allowed because you're only for personal consumption. Uh there's so we have this very stupid strange situation that first lithium is not acknowledged as a essential trace element even though it even though it is and then we have and on top of that we have a prohibition it's forbidden to put lithium for European companies in in supplements making it completely idiotic. So >> well well idiotic or actually kind of brilliantly diabolical. >> Absolutely. >> If you were trying to subdue and destroy a population, it seems like this would be a good way to do it >> if you want to make pe sure that people are willing to follow narratives. If you know going to shut down the mental immune system, taking away lithium or making it difficult to supplement it, even creating fear of lithium lithium because you know people are treated by lithium with lithium and they have bipolar disorder but then they get hundreds of milligrams very close to the toxic yeah lethal dose really close you have to monitor them pretty much every other week that they don't overdose you know it's very toxic Many people who with bipolar disorder actually discontin you based on the side effects they experience and all these side effects are in you can google them you know you go to Google and then it says okay it makes it it harms your kidneys it harms your thyroids it harms many things you know because of course you you overdose it essentially as a treatment and people fear now lithium is toxic. The problem in Germany is and in all over Europe, since it is not allowed as a supplement, you have to have a prescription by a doctor for an essential amount. And this is totally ridiculous because now you have to convince first the doctors that they prescribe it to people. So people who read my book say, "Okay, I want to have lithium for myself, for my family, for my kids, but I can't go to a drugstore. I have to essentially go to a doctor writing me a prescription." But a doctor if he was well good enough indoctrinated by the med by med school. Yeah. By the idea of the pharmaceutical industry. The dogma you know the dogma of the pharmace industry that we are taught in med school. It's quite simple. First of all humans are failure of nature misconstruction. They tend to to all kind of diseases. And third only the pharmaceutical industry can save us. Okay. [laughter] But and this >> sounds like a religion to me. >> It's a religion. It's a dogma that we are taught and we are not taught the law of the minimum which would essentially make this sound stupid because the law of the minimum says well you get a chronic disease if you have a lack of something that is essential for you. Um so once I realized that then I as a doctor I would give every patient what he needs that he doesn't you know get a disease. Yeah. that it would be preventive medicine but preventive medicine requires the understanding of the law of the minimum but this is not taught. What is taught is people get all kind of diseases. I when I left meds school I essentially knew nature is I believed nature is playing a game with me. So either I end up with Alzheimer's, a stroke, heart attack or cancer. This is my choices. This is these are my choices. And I actually went into basic research, genetic research to help the pharmaceutical industry to solve these problems until I realized by my own experience that maybe my lifestyle is a cause of a heart attack that I'm was prone to get when I was 40. >> Yes. >> So, so when I realized I just have to change my life a little bit to omit all these diseases, then I really became interested because I'm a researcher. So, what happened? And then I discovered the law of the minimum you know this law this law which was is for agriculture for humans. When I when I realized that everything changed I realized now we need a complete new medical system and Maha is exactly that you know it's exactly my paper uni unified theory of Alzheimer's is essentially a blueprint of Maha but it contains lithium and it contains algae oil. If these two components are added, Maha will be a great success. >> I'm going to uh do everything I can to pass the word. Dr. Thank you for this. >> Yeah, I thank you. Thank you very much for your time. Yeah, it was a pleasure. It really was.