Well, why don't you surprise that Jim Gaffigan going after the Democrats at the Elsmeth dinner? Because he's got Trump derangement syndrome and I couldn't believe this shit he was saying. Really? Do you remember the jokes he did? He goes to the media and the Democrats say that democracies on the ballot and they have to protect it and they had to protect it so much they did a coup. I was like, it's fucking Jim Gaffigan. And he's not for Trump. I have no issues. Trump derangement syndrome. In fact, I just kind of sub... So I know him and he never would talk about politics because he wants to have the biggest audience. But Trump, he can't hold bite my tongue. I've got to say something. And I was like, the time to say something was when Barack Obama was ruling as a neo-con, a tool of Wall Street. And that's what made workers desperate enough to vote for Donald Trump. That's when you should have said something when the Democratic Party stopped being Democrats. And but now you're going to say something, you're upset at the symptom instead of the disease. At the result of what you allowed. Yes. So that was actually something I thought a lot about last night at the fascist rally. I think that's the fact that it was so huge. And I know Trump is always talking about his crowd size and there's debate about it. But last night there was no debate. I mean, it was crazy. It just midtown was just like a massive people. Yeah. It was like Times Square and New York City. Yeah, it was there. I was in Manhattan yesterday. I saw it. Yeah, I was on my way to a some kind of peace rally or something in the valley. It was the by Scott Ritter. Oh, judge of the Palatano was there. Oh, I love judge of the Palatano. So the crowd was just so overwhelming yesterday that I did ask myself, like I think Trump's going to win just objectively. I want him to win, but I think he's going to win. But then I thought if I were the Democrats, I would I would pause and ask like, what is this? It's not just that you know, half the country's evil. Maybe there's more to it. Does anyone ever stop? I mean, I try and understand why do people love Obama? Why do they love Biden? I mean, I do try to wonder. I mean, I think you should. They're Americans, right? I understand why people like Obama or Trump or loved him. He made me feel good when he spoke. Of course, even though I was aware of the things he was doing when he gave a speech home, like I feel a little bit better. He was really good at saying it. Every Americans like, you know, slavery really was bad. And you know, there are the disparities between black and white and here, like all these white people voted for a black president. Maybe we're going to move beyond that. I mean, we could stop talking about race and start talking about economics. That's what I thought just personally. I thought I'm a race-skilled guy. I am not, but I would like to have a conversation about something real like economics and war. That's exactly where I'm at. And that's, so I had this guy on Michael Prenty's son Christian Prenty wrote this paper recently. And it was about the birth of wokeness. Like, some people think, you know, it started five minutes ago. Some people think it started 20 years ago. He said it started after World War II and was the coming together of the NGOs like the Rockefeller Foundation, Ford Foundation with the intelligence community. And what they did, like they didn't have a problem when Martin Luther King wanted to integrate lunch counters because they didn't cost them anything, you know. But when he shifted against the Vietnam War and then he did a poor people's march on Washington. He didn't do a black people's march. He did a poor people's march. And that's, of course, you know, they killed him when he was supporting a sanitation strike, right? It was the economics. And so they, they, they, they spend the, the goal of the, the NGOs and the, the intelligence community to decouple social movements from the class analysis and the class and the economics and just push it all into culture. And that's been forever. And I'm like, you know, I mean, they, they, they, they, they, they, they, they, they, just like anti war in the 60s, they used to be regular people, button down. And then all of a sudden it was all hippies and the smelly people and, but where's those Manson? That's right. Yeah. And so that's, I mean, that's not, so, and now it's led up to this. And I, I sniffed this out about the trans issue, right? Cause everybody was on board with gay, gay rights. Everybody, you know, they went in the 90s. They used to be second class citizens and now they're not, right? And, but so then they had to, and I saw that, that, that, that think the headed black rock. Right. Thank you. I saw him doing this. And I'm like, oh, that's what this is. He was Larry Fink as a trans rights activist now. Oh, they, all those, I'm like this son of a bitch is so he's out there raping the planet and screwing over workers and the middle class. 100% and so he gets to wrap himself in this patina of virtue by saying I'm for trans rights and we have to force it down people's throw. I mean, based on paraphrasing, but that's basically what he said. And that's what I knew what was happening because this is not a grassroots. This is an income from the grassroots up and this is something that even turns the edge, the gay community against each other. So this is all about divide and conquer and it's been about. So that's what's, that's what wokeness is about. It's about divide and conquer and it's not, it didn't just start. It's been going on since World War two and they last thing they want you to do is have a class analysis. And that's what, so why is it that people who voted for Bernie Sanders and voted for Donald Trump, right? There's a class analysis that will go along with that. Michael Moore of all people in 2016, I don't know if you ever saw there's a video of him giving that speech about why do you think that these people are not racist? These people, these are people who voted for Barack Obama twice. These are people who voted for Bernie Sanders. Why are they attracted to Donald Trump because he stood there and said if you shipped their jobs to Mexico, I'm going to put a terra fondue and you're not going to be able to sell a car and that no other politician would say something like this is Michael Moore giving that analysis, right? And so you haven't heard him say that stuff since because he got spanked. Okay. So there's so many threads here and I want to get to that because I'm fascinated by AOC same thing and a couple, and a couple of others who should be, I don't know, Trump supporters necessarily, but they should be making common cause with Trump on, on the promise of a fair economic system and they're not and why. But let me just get back to your great point that this, that wokeness was used as a tool by the people making the most money going back 80 years. Yes. So this is why Malcolm X had a short lifespan. That's right. Exactly. If you actually listen to Malcolm X speeches, well, they're not about race. So he went and had an awakening. Exactly. And awaken is like, oh, there's, there's white Muslims. Exactly. So he was surprised that that wasn't the game and as soon as that happened, he has short life. And so same thing wouldn't Martin Luther King decided it was about class and not about right. And no, they wanted to be about race. And so you've seen the studies. I'm sure that, you know, after Occupy Wall Street, so you had the, the, the, the, the Tea Party, right. They were upset about what happened during the economic crash in Wall Street and the government bailing them out and kicking, kicking people out of their houses and making sure the bold, you know, the way I said it was. Barack Obama made sure the bankers got his, their, their bonuses while he kicked 5.1 million families out of their homes, not people, five more, one million families. And then you find out that he got more money from Wall Street than John McCain did. And you find out that I really, yes. And that every, there was an email from Wall Street from city group to the Barack Obama campaign with a list of people they wanted in his case and his cabinet, every person on that list ended up at his cabinet. And the reason I know that because that got released by WikiLeaks and that's why they've been trying to kill Julian Assange ever since. And so they all are working, he, you know, he wasn't a departure from George W. Bush, Barack Obama just a skin color. He took us from two wars to seven. He was, he gave us a right wing healthcare plan, which was came out of the Heritage Foundation, which is the same pleapla gave you project 2025. And you know, he gave us Mitt Romney's healthcare plan. And so, and he deported all those, it's, he dropped more bombs than George Bush and nobody noticed. And that's why they wanted to have Kamala Harris. That was their first choice. The donor class was Kamala Harris was their, they thought we'd have a female Barack Obama. And that's a good face for imperialism, right? Because we have a black woman bombing and stealing resources and doing deal liberal and neolcon policies. That's perfect. And that she couldn't get a vote. So then they had to go to their second most reliable person, which was Joe Biden. That's exactly how it worked. I don't know if you remember, but they coordinated her on Martha's Vineyard. She's going to be our candidate and they thought they had the black Barack Obama, but she couldn't get a vote. She has no political talent, right? And so then they forced her on Joe Biden as the vice president. And then of course they did a coup just like Jim Gaffigan said at the El Smith dinner. They had the, they had the, the debates way earlier than they normally would. So they would give them enough time to install Kamala Harris. And that's exactly what happened. So I don't know how I got off on this tangent, but yes, that's, and that's the, oh, we know that after Wall Street, after Occupy Wall Street and the Tea Party, then the major newspapers, the mentions of racism and white supremacy. People have studied this. I'm not making this up. I'm just quoting studies. And went through the roof. And why is that? That's because as Chomsky taught us, the newspapers aren't there to inform you there to manufacture consent. And one of the great ways to manufacture consent for the establishment is to divide and conquer. It's been their ever since World War two. It's been divide and conquer. And that's exactly what they did. So they got everybody hyper, I, it's, that's what identity politics is. And it's got everybody who you identify with your skin color. You identify, it's the opposite of Martin Luther King. It's the opposite of judge someone by the content of their character. Exactly. And so now everybody's identified with their gender or their sexual preference or their skin color or their ethnicity. And they got us all siloed off and split up. But what we need to do is what Christian Smalls did on Staten Island when he started the first labor union to, for Amazon, right? So here's a black guy on Staten Island. And what is he doing? He's organizing a bunch of Trump voters to go against Jeff Bezos and the machine. And he won, right? And he didn't do that by saying, Hey, who here's a gun nut? All right, you are out who here supports the trans. You don't, you're out. Okay, who here? No, that's not how you organize, right? Who's left? Okay, now I'm going to organize with the rest of you. That's not how it works. You go, we have an economic interest. We share a common economic interest and we share a common enemy. And that enemy is Jeff Bezos and the establishment who's with me and they were with them. And you know, if the funny thing is when you win a, when you win a union like that or you win economic gains for everybody, the people who disproportionately are benefited are the, are the people of color. Are the, you know, if you give black people have more medical debt per capita than white people, if you give everybody health care, that's how going to help them more, right? So you give everybody health care. It helps the trans community. You get, so that's the, you give everybody a living wage, a strong union that helps everybody more. And the people who are more disproportionately helps are the people who you can sit, normally consider the most vulnerable in your society. So that's the irony, but they want us fighting over things that just help your little, you fight over trans rights, fight over reparations, fight over this instead of fight over something that helps everybody. And that's what, so that's what divide and conversation. So that's why we are where we are, Tucker. Well, it's such a smart analysis. And I just want to say for the record, I agree with every single word that you said. First, it's just incredibly easy to divide people from outside. It really is especially along the lines of the media will characteristics because they don't change. And so the conflicts tend to be resolvable. I mean, you can go from a Bernie voter to a Trump voter to whatever's next voter. You can change it, but you cannot change your skin color. And so once you create those divisions like their permanent and you wreck your society, I just detect in your worldview something that you don't see very often, which is universalism. Your instinct or your sense of the world seems to be based on the idea that there are principles that apply to everyone regardless of what they look like. And I thought that's, I mean, that's what Western civilization was based on. That's Christianity, by the way. But I don't see people approaching questions with that assumption as much anymore. No, because they're propaganda, I used to do the other. And you know, the American people, I've said this, my friend, Nick Cruz says this, Americans are the most propagandaized people in the entire world and they don't have any idea that they are. You know, at least people in China know they're being property. And that's right. People in the old Soviet Union knew it was propaganda. People in America turn on Anderson Cooper, turn on Rachel Maddow, Sean Hannity. They think they're getting the truth. They really do. They think, you know, hey, don't you think it's a little weird when Sean Hannity and Rachel Maddow are saying the exact same thing about Ukraine? Don't you think that's weird? Well, yes. In fact, I did is funny you mentioned that. And so, you know, I try to remind people that, you know, that you got fired, not because you were going along with the wars and telling the lies of the wars. When you were going along with the Iraq war, they couldn't give you enough TV shows, right? You were on CNN, you MSNBC, your number one guess was Rachel Maddow, then you had the number one show on Fox. It was when you started to tell the truth. They don't fire you for lying about wars. They don't, they fire you for telling the truth about the wars. And that's just same reason why Julian Assange was in prison. He wasn't in prison because he lied about the war machine. He was in prison because he told the truth. And that's where people need to realize that I try to, I ask people when I have these conversations with my old liberal friends from Hollywood, the ones who still talk to me. And I'll say, is there anything you hear on cable news that you don't believe? Is there anything? And you know what? They never say anything back. They never say, well, I don't believe that. They never say anything. It has changed the subject or move on to something else. You really think they're just accepting the whole sandwich. Yes. Just swallowing without chewing. Just yes. And that was the beginning of the end for me was when I wouldn't go along with Hillary Clinton because I was a big, I've always been a liberal progressive. And I supported Bernie Sanders. I thought we were really close to doing something at that convention in 2016 and Philadelphia. I was there and you walked into the convention hall and half the people in there wanted to overthrow the democratic establishment. Half the people there wanted to get corporate money out of politics. And there was lots of friction. They were turning the lights out. They were using sound kind of. It was and it really felt like we were about to do something, right? And then I went to the last convention just this year in Chicago and it was like a step for the wife's convention. It was brainwashed, brain dead, go alongs. Nobody had a thought in their head. No, there was there is cheering on billionaires and cheering on the war machine and it was growing. See, I director Billy billionaires on stage from from, you know, Oprah talking about how she's a victim of sexism racism. That was one of the funniest things. That's like Oprah since I've been in college. She's been a highly touted celebrity with her own television show. There might have been a time in her life when she was discriminated against. But boy, she certainly made up for it. And for her to be the voice of that was really disgusting. And then you had, you know, Pritzker come on stage. I'm a real billionaire and people are term like this. This is the democratic party, the democratic party. And so that's what happened with Bill Clinton. They treat you by the way at the convention. I couldn't stay there. I had a pass to be on the floor. It honestly depressed me to the point of almost tears. And I would go up to people. I would go up to delegates. And I would say does it bother you that the party who's putting democracy on the ballot throughout 14 million ballots and installed Kamala Harris. And through a person, they would all say there was a process. She followed the process. They didn't care. Nobody cared. They don't care anything. That she didn't get a vote. They don't care that they threw out the guy who did get a vote. They don't care that they relied to about his mental, his dementia for years. They didn't mind nothing. Nothing. And they were all about it was the only it was and they talk about abortion at the convention like it's a day. It's like it's Christmas. And you know, like hey, I would I always, you know, like Bill, the old liberals. I always was like, you know, let's let's make abortion safe, legal and rare, right? And they're like, no, let's let's cheer it on like it's Christmas. I'm like, that's weird. It's like cheering on amputation. Like, yeah, you get to get your amputation. I'm like, no, that's something that's if you have to have it. That's, it's glad I'm glad it's available, but that's always a sad day. Anyways, so that's what it's about. I really noticed that because I've been covering this stuff since 92 and Clinton, I mean, I've always been against abortion. I was going to say that. I'm a career disagree with me, but I, you know, I feel that way. But I remember Clinton really kind of going out of his way to be like this is a sad thing. And, but we think in these circumstances, it should be legal. And I'm so struck by the change. What, what is that? Well, I had a conversation at the convention with someone who's, she's in this woman's rights organization. She was the head of it. And I don't want to mention her name, but she, I was saying, well, I've always been in pro choice. I don't want a G man in between doctor and a patient. Yeah. I trust women. I trust doctors to make that decision without a government stepping. And she's like, well, that's not good enough. You have to be pro abortion. And I'm like, that just seems, I'm like, well, what's your message to someone like me who's pro choice, but not pro abortion? And she's like, well, that's a longer conversation. I'm like, you don't have a, you know, the message for me? Are you sitting, she said you have to be pro abortion. I mean, it blew me away. And this is someone I like and respect and it's very funny and all that stuff. But I didn't see it coming because I've been saying because during COVID, they went from being pro choice to pro abortion, which I noticed, right? I know it because it sounds so weird coming off your lips. I'm pro abortion. You're pro, no, you supposed to be pro choice. You supposed to be bodily autonomy, but they don't say anymore because they were all for the mandated emergency medical treatment, which was COVID vaccines with no long-term studies. They were for making people take that. And so that's the exact opposite of bodily autonomy, something that I've but said my entire life, everybody who will call themselves a liberal is said, well, they stop saying that because they're not for bodily autonomy. Therefore the government being able to mandate and experimental medical treatment while they're lying to you about it. But they're pro abortion. I would say on my show that nobody's pro abortion and then I bet someone at the convention who was and I was just like, whoa, it still kind of blows me away. Natural disasters, wars, political conflicts, the recent threatened dock workers, strikes, it ports around the country. All of these are reminders that things that we take for granted in this country like medicine are all dependent on a long and fragile supply chain. If something happens to that supply chain, you and your family will not be able to get things that you need to live. So right now seems like a pretty good time to stock up on essentials for when the next unexpected disaster hits because it's coming. We know that. That's why we're partnering with Jase Medical, which can supply you and your family directly to your home with things you need. Quick, easy, affordable solutions for problems that require life-saving medication for ones in your family in the case of an emergency. So the Jase case is a personalized emergency medication kit that contains essential antibiotics and medications to treat the most common and potentially deadly bacterial infections. For example, and then a whole host of Adon medicines from Iver Macden to Epipens depending what you and your family may need, how hard is it to get this not hard? The process is quick and easy. You fill out an online form. You consult with their physician and you receive your medications through a licensed pharmacy at a fraction of the regular price. It is all totally above board, completely legit. And in the case of a disruption to our supply chain, which again could very easily happen, it could mean the difference between surviving and not. So we recommend it. Go to jase.com, use code TUCKER at checkout for a discount on your order. That's jase.jas.com promo code TUCKER. Do you have any idea what that it blows me away to? Again, and I'm coming in from exactly the opposite perspective. I've always disagreed with a pro-choice position. But I also thought when I would listen to Clinton, I'd be like, I get it. I get why people feel, you know, 13 year old girl raped. She's got a disabled, you know, the baby's disabled. I mean, I understand why people are like, yeah, she should have an award. I have the right to. This is such a different message. And I just don't know where that came from or why that it's just really striking to me. It's dark, super dark. I think it's super dark. Yeah. But those are the same people who can turn their head at the genocide happening in Palestine and say things. I mean, I would turn to people who I liberal their whole life from like, so you stand with the people of Palestine, right? They're like, convalese, not the president of the Middle East. They'll say things like that. And I'm like, what? But she is funding it. And it's like, well, Trump is going to be worse. What is he going to do? Dig up the dead babies and kill them again. You know, if Trump is worse, then we deal with Trump when that happens. But right now, you cannot reward what the democratic administration is doing with Kamala Harris and Joe Biden. You cannot reward them with your vote. You have to make them pay a price. You have to influence them. And that's why now all the every Muslim mayor in Michigan came on. I'm pretty sure just endorsed Donald Trump. And so you're going to you're going to wag your finger at those people. I've seen people prior to they go, well, Trump's going to go house to house. I'm I work with immigrants and Trump's going to go house to house and kick them out. And I'm like, so you're prioritizing the immigration status of migrants over the literal slaughter of Palestinian children. That's morally repugnant. And as, you know, Thomas Frank said and listen to liberal, you know, that when you listen to these people more lies, it's stomach churning. And that is just like you're just bending yourself into pressures. No, so there's no red line. I have a red line. My red line is genocide. And you know, Kamala Harris could come get my vote. You know, if she said, Hey, you know what, I'm not going to do. I'm not going to fund Israel anymore. That's their problem or has something she won't do it. And so if you're if you're willing to go along with that, there's no doubt you're not voting for a lesser evil. You're just voting for straight up evil and you're doing mental gymnastics to make yourself feel better about it. People have to lie to themselves about Donald Trump, the same establishment that venerated him my entire life. He was on every magazine cover and fight it on every late night talk show. He hosted Saturday Night Live. They, Hollywood gave him his own national television show for 10 years. They gave him Emmy nominations. And Oprah loved him. The view, cast him on the lips. They loved everybody loves Donald Trump. Stephen Colbert loved him. He would say, look, everybody loves Donald Trump. Thanks for running Stephen Colbert said to him and then all of a sudden once he became president, he's like, he's Hitler. He's the worst thing in the world. And if you look at what he was saying about what what caused that pivot, this establishment. So the establishment does, they couldn't control him. He's, you know, like I've heard you say they're afraid he's going to do one less war than they want. And so they can control him. And he's also as Aaron Mate is pointed out that he puts an ugly face on imperialism, right? Because now they've painted this guy as a white supremacist. And he, you know, he speaks in a crude way often. And he puts an ugly face on imperialism. So it makes it harder for them to invade small brown countries and steal their natural resources. A lot of user if is Barack Obama doing it. Look, I what he did to Libya, like what they did to Syria, like what they did to Afghanistan for 20 years, Yemen, the whole deal. So it makes it, so but Trump makes it harder for them, right? And plus he's a wild card. He won't, he wouldn't go along. That's why the, that's why they lied about him. That's why the CIA lied in, in aid of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris about Hunter's laptop. That's why they did Russia, which was concocted by the Hillary Clinton campaign. And that's why the FBI lied to the vice, vice accord 17 times. So they could get a phone tap on Donald Trump's phone and his entire organization. And they still couldn't find a crime that they wanted to impeach him over because they had to find a crime that they weren't also complicit in. And that's why it's so long. So, so, so that's why they're boys and for me saying, you know, and I, when I had Cornell West on my show, I tried to impress upon him that don't you see like you don't have to like Donald Trump, right? I didn't vote for Donald Trump. But what you see, they're doing to Donald Trump, they would do to anybody. And when I say they, I mean the establishment and the handful of billionaires that actually run the Western world and our media, they would and own the Congress. They would do to anybody who stood up, look what they did to Bernie Sanders, right? So when there was a chance that Bernie Sanders was going to become the nominee, they immediately rusted gated him. They immediately called him a sexist and we really called his followers racist and sexist and violent. They did the exact same thing. And that's what I tried to impress upon. I mean, they would do this to you. They would do this to Bernie Sanders. They would do it to me. They would do it to Jill, they do it to Jill Stein, they'll do it to anybody who they can't control. And Cornell West response to me was to call me a Trump. That was one of the saddest things I know Cornell and I, you know, it's a very complicated person. But in some ways a goodhearted person in many ways. Yeah, yes. And he's smart. He's legit smart. But he has lived in, you know, he told me that we live in two different worlds and I was like, we sure do. You live in an ivory tower your entire life. And I've come from blue collar background and my whole life. And I'm out there with the people all the time. I tour the country constantly. And I do meet and greets and meet hundreds of people every night. And they look at me in the eye with some of them with tears in their eye and they thank me for what I'm doing and for what I'm saying. And even though they don't agree with me politically, like I would say half my audience is to traditional liberals. They'll have their half our libertarians or conservatives and ex military. You know, I have remember Bruce recently had a guy said, you know, I've served in three different countries and three different wars. And I watched your show and I woke up and now I realize what's going on. And those are the kind of things that, you know, kind of never leave me. I've had, I've had military guys try to give me their medals. And you know, it's just, it's overwhelming emotionally for me to meet these people. And so that's what I, that's the world I come from. And that's not the world the media comes from. That's not the world that Cornell West comes from. And because Cornell West is black, he kind of has a trump card where he can say you've never suffered like I have. You don't know what it's like. I don't know what it's like to blive and work in Harvard and Yale and Princeton. That's got to be miserable. No, you're so, you're so right. So let me just get back to what you're what I wanted to ask you a couple of minutes ago, which is the people who should know better and Cornell West is certainly in that category. Well, look what happens during come. That was my big beef when I had a man because he wouldn't say a peep during COVID. I'm like, you know, really? I didn't know that. No, well, now he's now he is saying something. I just picked up Bobby Kennedy's, but you know, I was like, you know, where were you? And you know, he's always I stand in solidarity with workers. And I'm like, well, they fired 70,000 healthcare workers in one state alone because they wouldn't take an experimental medical treatment. Where were you then? Right? 41% of black owned businesses closed permanently during COVID. Where were you then? Where were you screaming about that? Where were your solidarity then? And so I don't want to pick on Cornell West. He's got a lot of like him. Oh, yeah, no, I agree. And I like it. But it was a very big letdown for me. You're right. So my question is not even to get personal about it. Or AOC is someone who, you know, has called me a white supremacist a thousand times. But I still look at her and I say this is woman with talent. She died. I think she does have talent. I'm sure she'll disavow me for saying that. But she's also said a few things over the years. We're like, you could be closer to the right track than you are, but she seems to have sold out immediately. And I would also say not to be mean, but Bernie Sanders same thing. Like what? What? And Michael Moore of a. You are, but she seems to have sold out immediately. And I would also say not to be mean, but Bernie Sanders same thing. Like what? And Michael Moore of all not only was he, you know, on a popular streak and he's actually from industrial Michigan, he's also fat, which I think is significant. No, no, I'm not being mean. I'm being serious. No one in the ruling class is fat. A lot of America is fat. Michael Moore, like he seemed a little bit more real than or potentially more real than a lot of the spokesmen for the left. Why is he going along with that? What is this? Why there no independent voices? That's funny because he was like I pointed out earlier in this conversation. He was the one who gave that big speech about why regular people are attracted to Donald Trump. And it's because they want to give an F you to the establishment that has left them behind. And the Democratic Party has certainly left workers behind that. They crushed their railroad union strike. All of them, Democrats, they all did that and pretend they did and pretended they didn't pretend that they're somehow the, they're the party of the workers. There is that it all ended with Bill Clinton. Bill Clinton was no friend of the working man. He got, you know, after Ronald Reagan, he called up Wall Street. They fact that Democratic leadership council, you remember that the DOC. Do you remember who was on it? They had people from the Koch brothers sitting on their board, him and so there was, and I mean, he got in welfare. He increased the police state. He deregulated Wall Street, which came the crash to the economy and hurt black and brown people more than anybody. Within 10 years, he did that. He exploded the prison population and he had a private plan with Newt King with the privatized Social Security, but Monica Lewinsky screwed that plan up if you read Listen liberal. And so he, he, and he did NAFTA, which cut the legs out from an in the working unions for a generation. These, those are things that Republicans couldn't do, which is why people like Glenn Ford and the black of gender report has said that the Democrats are the greater evil. They're the more effective evil because they can get stuff done that Republicans good and you know, they've reached the Malcolm X position. Yeah. Uh huh. So George, when George Bush, the first one of the do NAFTA, he couldn't get it passed because there is a, a, a certain Democrats in the South who wouldn't go along with the bill. Clinton came in and gave them cover and then they did it. They did NAFTA, right? Which screwed over. So Barack Obama, he's dropped more bombs than George W. Bush and nobody made a peep. But how do you control critics who know better? That's what I don't get in Michael Moore specifically. Michael Moore had his own franchise. He's not dependent. He doesn't have a cable contract. He doesn't, you know, he was sort of outside and here I'm not, I'm not complimenting Michael Moore. I'm just, but I'm just noting like the guy had talent, he had his own income stream. He had some insight into what was actually going along, along, along lines what you just said. So how do you get Michael Moore to obey you and join forces with Larry Fink? I think it's the same way they got John Stewart, right? So John Stewart went on, uh, Stephen Colbert and he told the truth about where the COVID virus came remember. Do you remember that? Yeah. And he stopped him at every turn to the point where John Stewart had to get up off the chair and walked directly towards the camera and finished what he was saying. So Stephen Colbert couldn't interrupt him. Do you remember that? It was very well. It was, and then he got completely dismantled or completely ostracized by polite liberal establishment. And he spent the next year trying to get back into their good grace. That's what I think it is. It's that, you know, we have that built into us through evolution. He wanted to be part of a group and he was no longer part. He even talked about it like I didn't realize that there was a right wing position on COVID and there was a left wing. There was a conservative. I didn't realize that. Well, he, he frick out his mind, right? And to make up for it, he then had to pin a metal on a Nazi at Disney World, a legit, legit Nazi, which he's never been asked about or ever had to answer for. He then gave a cranium Nazi. Yeah. A tongue bath, the two of the biggest blood salt war criminals in my lifetime. Condoleezza Rice and Hillary Clinton. He did that. And in fact, that was just disgusting. And then he did a vaccine panel during COVID where he brought on four vaccine lawyers. Not one skeptic. He didn't bring on anybody with a counter narrative to just lie about vaccines and COVID and not so he was doing all these things to try to get back in good great. That's my theory. That's why you asking what happened to Michael Moore. I think you get ostracized and he doesn't want to get ostracized. And then who knows the money dries up for your next movie? Who knows what that, but definitely, that doesn't make any sense. That's actually that makes sense that I'd love to ask him, but he'll never come on my show. I feel like I think it's a great explanation, probably right. I mean, I think it's probably as simple as that. You know, the desire not to be. I mean, I don't want feels like to be shunned. I know. Right? I mean, people I've known all my life speak of me in the most despicable ways. And it's because I actually kept true to my values. I actually, you know, I look forward to a day when the left actually criticizes and is skeptical of big pharma and is adversarial towards the government and the captured regulatory agencies and the liars inside government like Fauci and Collins and all those people. I look forward to those days when we stand up against the CIA again and don't believe the FBI and the intelligence communities, which is infiltrated every lefty organization and dismantled up. I look forward to those days when they come back. I've never left them. They did. They became Neocon right wingers. I don't know if that's even the right term anymore to call me, but that's what the people who think they're liberal now are now they're now state their pro war, their anti free speech, their pro censorship, their anti bodily autonomy. And now they're excusing a genocide. They're the exact opposite of what they think they are. That's just I could not improve on that. Can I just take you back to some of you said a moment ago about the 2016 election in Bernie Sanders and Sanders was clearly and it was also true in 2020. The Democratic candidate in the primaries with grassroots support. I mean, he was with actual people behind him, right? And he had a message that was distinct from all other messages in the Democratic coalition. And Russia gated him. Okay. So I think looking back when historians untangle this, you know, this mess that we've been living in for nine years and trying to figure out what actually happened, like how did we wind up at war with Russia, a hot war with Russia, which we're in now. Yeah. I think they're going to trace it back to the leak of the DNC emails. I just have always felt that. What was that? So well, we know that. So we used to be that my member when George Boyce said he met Putin and he looked into his soul. Yes. And that's because there was, you know, we wanted to export our crony capitalism to Russia, which we did in a big way. And there was economic interests in Russia. Well, then the war machine had economic interests and we needed a we need a boogeyman again, right? And I remember when Biden was pulling out of Afghanistan and there was a lot of people who consider themselves liberal that work of giving him congratulations. Look, he's getting out. He's getting out. And I was like, well, wait a minute, what is he going to do with the money that we've been spending in Afghanistan? Has he said, well, I'm going to wait till I hear because I pretty sure they have another war in the chamber if they're going to let him end this one and exactly they did. They had the Ukraine war in the chamber, which they had been preparing for for at least a decade if not longer. And and again, that's the Rachel Maddow Anderson Cooper, even shot, they're never going to tell you that, oh, that's right. The CIA got in bed with right wing Nazis and Ukraine to overthrow their democratically elected government. Why for economic reasons? That's why why because oh, because the Ukraine wanted to also they got a better economic deal from Putin and Russia than they were getting from the European Union. And that cannot stand. And so we, we overthrew their democratically elected president. Then we, Zelensky's a puppet, right? And he ran on peace. That's the irony. So he ran on peace and ending war and now he's banning newspapers and opposition parties and going into Christian churches and you've seen it all and killing American journalists, right? And he's not elected. He's addicted. And he's a definition exactly. So they'll never tell you about the Minsk accords and that they had peace agreements and that as Angela Merkel revealed that they never, the Ukraine and the NATO never intended to abide by the peace. So what happened after we overthrew the government in Ukraine in 2014 was the people, the Russian speaking, ethnics and the East part of Ukraine didn't want to go along with that good government. And so the Ukrainian government Nazi started bombing them, right? They started showing them, which is why we had to have peace agreements, Minsk one and two accords and Angela Merkel revealed that they never meant to go along with those. They just use that as a time to build up the Ukrainian military to get ready for a war with Russia that they were going to provoke, which everyone knows that they did provoke. They certainly did provoke it. And I don't think everyone knows that, but I'll just say it again. They provoked it using Kamala Harris at the Minsk Security card. When she said that, you were going to put them in you, we're going to put Ukraine in NATO. That was the final straw. And there was, you know, I'll Putin one and was, hey, just don't do that. I can't have you putting nuclear weapons and I can't have a NATO right on my border. And you could everybody can it anyway. So they, but the way it's told in the United States is that Putin is an evil dictator. And he just woke up one day and decided to invade Ukraine for kicks because he's just evil. And they don't have any. And then of course, he blew up his own pipeline, the Nord Stream pipeline, the biggest, and which actually screws over Europe and Germany, right? Now their economies are all hurting because of that. And Putin's economy is outgrowing growing faster than the United States. Exactly. And I believe I was called a trader for pointing that out. It doesn't make it any less true. It's a fact. But this is all, and this is so frustrating, this kind of propaganda. And because I have the time to look into this and I'm aware of it, and I can't keep my mulch at about it. Now, you know, everybody calls me a right winger. People say I'm turning Democrats into Republicans and stuff like, no, I'm trying to wake up Democrats and Republicans to the uni party that's been running things. And that's exactly what we're living in. And it's funny, I'm noting some kind of a pattern. Every war there seems to be some kind of, and every coup we do, there seems to be some kind of natural resource that we actually are after in an economic gain. Just like, well, Lindsey Graham just said it that there's $11 trillion in rare earth minerals under Ukraine. He just blurts it out like his boyfriend's name on Valentine's Day. And there it is. I'm like, oh, nobody ever talked about this for the first three, four years of this war. All of a sudden he's like, oh, it's all about $11 trillion in rare earth. Like you son of a bitch and they just say it. They just say it out loud and there's no media there to hold him accountable. Because the media is now owned by billionaires like Jeff Bezos. And they, they don't hire journalists from blue collar backgrounds. They hire journalists from Ivy League schools who are going to be class loyal. They, I didn't have to tell them what to say. Exactly. Who are going to be class loyal boy? I've told you before about how low it is a great app that I am proud to say I use my whole family uses. It's for daily prayer and Christian meditation and it's transformative. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's fair ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road, headed to kids sports, there is always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family, but it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity obviously is attacked under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Do you see the opening of the Paris Olympics? There's a reason because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle. Obviously. So try Hallo get three months completely free at Hallo. That's Hallo.com slash Tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually intruding ground yourself in prayer, it's now. Hallo will help. Personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended. Hallo.com slash Tucker. So I'm fixated on this question of the DNC emails winding up with Wikipedia's and Julina Assange. We were told that Russia did that. The FBI was never allowed in to the US government never actually. Crowdstrike. Crowdstrike, right. Told us that and we were just beaten a face with that line for the next three years and it was on the basis of that supposed crime that Russia became our biggest enemy and we went up in a hot war with Russia. And my question to you is do you think those emails were stolen by Russia and given to Julina Assange? She's denied that. Or do you think they were leaked to WikiLeaks by a disgruntled DNC employee who saw the DNC cheating in the primary on behalf of Hillary Clinton and against Bernie Sanders to shut down democracy within the party? That DNC email leak being blamed on Russia serve two purposes, right? You get to tie Donald Trump to Russia. Right. And then you get to demonize Russia, exactly, which they had a war in the chamber for, right? They wanted, they knew this was coming. So it served both purposes. And do I think that so we know Russia I had on Bill Binney who at the time was the number one code breaker for the NSA for decades. And of course he told the truth. So the FBI tried to prison him, but he's smarter than the FBI, which isn't that hard. And so he outwitted the FBI tried to imprison Bill Binney. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They tried to get him, but he outsmarted them, right? He told the story on my show. I don't, I can't remember the details because it was in 2016. But basically he was just in one sentence. He changed very familiar with how information moves digitally said made the case mathematically that it would be impossible to leak it from outside the building. And I have someone downloading it from said it had to be downloaded. And he said because there would be, there would be a trail of, you know, electronic trail that you would see if that information got downloaded and went. So he said that had to be locally downloaded, right? And so then it comes up set thrych, right? So you always can tell when the establishment's up to some fuckery, when they don't allow you to ask questions about something like you were allowed to ask questions about COVID. So you know something's up, right? So that's true in our personal lives too. If I refuse to talk about something, there's probably something there. So I first experienced this when it came to set thrych, right? So I remember that there was a private investigator that was hired, I don't know by the the family or someone connected to the set thrych family. And he gave a press conference. And I all I did was cover his press conference and I asked logical questions like, hey, if this was a botched robbery, how come they didn't steal his watchers if a wallet or anything, how come there's, where's the videotape of this? There's cameras everywhere. Hey, how where was he when the time he left the bar to the time he got to his house, there's hours in between there. Nobody. I just want to know. And I remember I was on a panel, a news panel and I said, can anybody remember the last time there was an unsolved murder and watching in DC and reporters weren't allowed to ask questions about it. And that was just like, no, no, they don't want to talk about it. They don't want, of course, that's never happened before and it's never happened since. And so I got the hit piece put on me in the Washington Post because then called me conspiracy theorists because I was asking logical questions about an unsolved murder. How dare you in Washington DC? I was put in a hit piece in the in the what Washington Post and some of a bitch a couple of years go by and now the they've been or first of all, the FBI said they didn't have his computer. Seth Rich is laptop. Oh, then they said, okay, yeah, we have it, but we can't access it. And they're like, okay, yeah, we access it, but we have a component, but we can't share it. And then a judge ordered them to release their findings of the, it what's inside that computer and they refuse the judge ordered them again. You have to do this. And they said, I know they invoke some national security thing and they and they said, we're not going to release it for 65 years. That's what they said. And I was like, he's a low level stat. We're like, DNC. I knew it. There was something up and when the FBI isn't good, I'm like, what did to Seth Rich kill Kennedy? Why won't they? So and and of course now I was right to ask all those questions. And so it certainly seems all the evidence points towards Seth Rich, it doesn't point towards Russia because now we know that Russia didn't. I knew that immediately. And then 2016 that that wasn't possible. And they knew that the crowd strike was lying. And that and that it was the Hillary Clinton campaign and the intelligence community that concocted the Russia gate conspiracy theory, which is one of the dumbest, most easily debunked conspiracy theories of my life that was repeated ubiquitously in the press, right? Manufacturing consent. And so the steel dossier, Hillary Clinton funded it, right? And we all know it was all made up. And she lied about that. By the way, she had to pay him a fine for lying about that. Nobody ever that again, none if it doesn't get reported in the press, it doesn't happen. They decide what's news and what isn't. And if it doesn't get reported, I mean, he got reported on page 17, but nobody made a big deal out of it. So that's what if you're asking me about the DNC leaked of the emails. I think certainly the evidence doesn't point towards Russia whatsoever. There never was any evidence. And they lied about everything. And there was, I mean, I remember if this was a look, I'm not a Democrat have never been. So a lot of this stuff was confusing to me. And it was just hard to, it's hard to assess things as they happen. And I feel like an idiot for not, I might instincts aligned with yours exactly. I thought there's something there's lying here. I know lying, but I'm not exactly sure what they're lying about. And I don't know what the truth is. But I remember that the nation magazine, the oldest leftist magazine in the United States, fiction of asskies, old magazine ran a piece by Bill Benny saying this is not Russia. Russia did not do this. And you look back eight years and the idea that the nation magazine would write a piece like that would, that's impossible to imagine now. They would never do that. It's like every institution on the left got captured by this weird neoliberal dishonesty. And how did that happen? Well, is that the, so Aaron Matei did a meticulous debunking of the Russia Gate conspiracy theory and he was allowed to be printed. I think it was in the nation. Oh good. Okay, good. Boyd the editor, I think it's, I think Vanden Hovl, Katrina. And she caught a lot of guff for just, it was the only time they printed anything counter to that narrative. And Aaron Matei ended up winning the, I have stone independent journalism award for that work. And they said he meticulously debunked Russia gate. It didn't, it's Russia gates of dumb conspiracy theory. If you want to find the debunking of it, there it is. It's, it's, it's, it was given an award. The, the, the is the award, right? But again, that doesn't make the front page of the Washington Post in New York Times. The Rachel Maddox ever going to tell you that she's just going to keep going on in Russia getting a Russia gate because it tells the truth about Russia gate gets you ostracized. And to lie about it, get you a $30 million contract, which is what Rachel Maddox got, which is $100,000 a day. That's how much Rachel Maddox gets paid to lie to you about Ukraine, about COVID, about anything. That's what she's there to lie about. Russia gate, how long can that continue? I mean, the audience for news organizations that lie, all news organizations lie, but, you know, you'd hope it's inadvertent to mistake. No, I've made a lot of those, but the ones who lie on purpose like NBC News or CBS or ABC Washington Post in New York Times, like they're losing audience shares as a result of their lying. Can they continue? Um, yeah, I don't see any end to it. Right now they're keeping inventing fake, fake check organizations. Uh, so I had like this, you know, CIA employee from NBC News, uh, contact me about me spreading misinformation. Now always directly about you. They said, uh, when, uh, you spread misinformation about me. Yeah. That I said that, uh, I repeated the Russian propaganda, uh, that you were targeted for assassination by Ukrainian and I went back and I looked at my coverage and I said, uh, the only thing we can say for sure is that this guy is being detained for questioning. That's the only thing I didn't, you know, I received did that. Yeah. If you look at this, and then I realized that story's true just by the way, I've never talked about it. I'm not going to talk about it now, but it's just, it's so interesting. They never called me. I would be that I was the target of that assassination attempt. So you'd think that someone would ask me. They never did. Who was this employee? Uh, you know what? I say woman and I can't think of her name, but I know she's been, uh, I, as I looked into it, I'm like, oh, other people have called her out for being the mouthpiece of this, uh, intelligence community. And that's what her job. She's a fact checker. She used to be a librarian and now she's a fact checker for NBC. Wendy's a don't see or something like that. She's like a Ukrainian sounding game. Uh huh. And then I just got contacted then the next week, uh, a place called Logically Logically fallacy or Logically false or some kind of international fact checking organization. And I, and they were saying, Hey, you're spreading misinformation about this and it was a satirical piece. I had done one of them. And it was so funny. Yeah, but you guys know what's that's higher as anyways. So, um, I looked into who funds them, right? Cause that's the first thing you want to do is look into who funds them and they were started off by a grant from MIT, which we all know is CIA infested. And then they got, uh, the Jeff Bezos who's in bed with the CIA, uh, and wants to keep his to billions and billions of dollars of contracts with the CIA. He also funded them. And then there are two big clients, the UK government and the United States government. You fact checking on behalf of the war machine. That's what that is. If you're, by the way, if you're a government fact checker, then you are by definition like a liar, Lord, Haw, you're like a stooge. Yeah, you're Tokyo rose. You're a lie. I mean, you're not a liar. You're a collaborator. Baghdad, Bob. Yeah, Baghdad, Bob. Thank you. That's what you are. That's what those people are. So what, the, the, what I realized what was happening and it kind of scared me was that, oh, they're trying to get me, they're going to try and wrestle brand me. They're going to try and get me the platform. So they can have all these articles about Jimmy Doris spreading misinformation and they can point and then so then YouTube will go, oh, well, look at all this. We got to get rid of this guy. Look at all, all these fact checking organizations, which they did the same thing. So Facebook demonetized me because, you know, the big farm of funded fact checking organizations, which is funded by the Johnson and Johnson. Okay. They said I was spreading misinformation about COVID, which not, not nothing. None of it was ever misinformation was all information. Again, you don't get in trouble for telling, for lying, you're in trouble for telling the truth, which is what they did. They would, they would write these, I mean, 20,000 word essays about how I lied about something and it just came down to they didn't like my headline. They quibbled with my headline. That's, that's called a quibble. That's not a fact check. Not one fact I got wrong, but then Facebook used that as, hey, you know, they put a label on my story. This is misinformation. You better not share it. You better not even read it. You're going to get in trouble. And you know, and then now Zuckerberg has come out and apologized. Yeah, I was pressured to do all this censoring and they're still doing it. They're not stopping like that. I don't know why he's even did that, but they're still doing it. They're still have those fake fact check organizations. And if you look into them, they're being funded by a billionaire or they're with a political agenda or by a big pharma or a corporation somewhere that has a political agenda. They're not, anybody calls them self a fact checker is a liar. They're paid liars. Of course, the irony is it's always exactly the opposite of what they're telling you. Yes. And if you get your money from the government to fact check that the biggest liars are always the government. Of course, the second biggest liars is the corporate media and third in a distant third are randos on social media. That's so true. I think anyone who uses the term misinformation, not ironically, is part of the problem. Because that's not a real category. They're only two categories, true or false. Inconvenient for the people in power is not a meaningful category to me. I don't give a shit with her to be in community. Isn't that what? What are the, what are the, one of them disinformation, I think is it might be true, but it's inconvenient for the establishment or missing all of them. It's true or false. Is it a lie or is it true? It's that simple. And it's, you know, when you start expanding the categories, it's like the genders. I'm sorry. I just, you get into fantasy, but its fantasy concocted to protect the people in charge. So do you feel, it feels to me just being in New York last night, like things are changing and Trump is at the, you know, the apex of the pyramid, but not sure how much it's about Trump. Maybe it is maybe it's not. I'm not really sure, but I've noticed a lot of people who seem to have decided, I'm just going to say what I think and I don't care anymore. Do you feel that? What I will say is that when Bobby Kennedy joined Donald Trump and he did that, and I think it was Glendale, Arizona, he got introduced and he was up there talking about ending the billionaire billion dollar funded wars and investing that money back at home. He was talking about cleaning up our water supply and cleaning up our food supply and getting the corruption out of our captured agencies. The CDC, the FDA. He was talking about taking on big agra. He was talking about confronting our obesity epidemic and the chronic illness that's been exploding. And whether you think Donald Trump is serious about letting Bobby take over that agenda or not, what was really interesting to me was that was a stadium full of Republican voters who were cheering that stuff on. That's right. And that's a traditionally that's supposed to be a Democrat. When I was the last time you heard a Democratic politician talking about the captured regulatory agencies, right? These are things that the Democrat, these are what I would consider lefty issues. So what this message there, that's what really scares the establishment Tucker is for a guy like me to see that and people who agree with that message, to see a room full of Republican voters also agree with that message. And we're like, hey, well, maybe we're not that different. Maybe we do have more in common and we share a common enemy and that enemy is the oligarchy in the establishment that has been crushing us and poisoning us at the behest of big pharma and corporations and big agra for the last 50 years. May they don't want us to realize that when Kamala Harris, when Dick Cheney then doors says, she says, oh, we have more in common than divides us. She doesn't mean she has more in common with workers. She doesn't mean she has more in common with regular people or students or she means she has more in common with neocon Republicans. She doesn't mean that we share, they share a common enemy. They are the common enemy. And so that's what I'll say about that. And I see, I have a red line. I wish Donald Trump, I was talking with Chris Hedges. I was interviewed on his show and we were talking about how if it's Kamala Harris, it's Donald Trump, the same thing's happening in Palestine and Gaza. And I said, weird thing is that someone's trying to kill Donald Trump and it looks like it's the deep state. So he must be a problem somehow, right? So that's so that's gives me hope in a weird way. They're trying to kill him. So that's got to mean something, right? I definitely agree with that. And they're not trying to kill her and they're not trying to kill Joe Biden. And so that's got to be something. The establishment has a very, I think they're unimpressive and they've done nothing to help our society. And I mean that. But the one thing that really good at is sniffing out who means it, who's a threat. Their threat assessment is unerring. They know, like they look at AOC who's like power the people. but the one thing they're really good at is sniffing out who means it who's a threat. Their threat assessment is unerring. They know like they look at AOC who's like, power the people, power the workers, they're like, oh yeah, she's one of us. Like they know that's a lie. They know she doesn't mean it. And they look at someone like Tulsi who's like, you know, liberal, check from Hawaii. And they look at her and they're like, no, actually, you can't be in our party. Like they could just feel, you know what I mean? And the fact they want, it doesn't matter what you say. They're like animals. And I mean, this is a compliment. They detect the aroma. Like they know who's a threat. And I agree with you, trying to kill Trump is like, it's established as Bonifidees of my mind. You know, that you bring up Tulsi and people forget what happens. She was a darling of the Democrat Party. Vice-chair of DNC when she got to Washington. And then she decided to support, she didn't like the corporate money inside the party. And she decided to support Bernie Sanders. Yeah. Right. Which made her hated by half the party that supported. So those half the party supported Bernie, half the Democratic primary voter supported Bernie, half supported Hillary Clinton. So that half the party hated her. Right. And then she went on to tell truth about the Syrian war. Yes. And to tell the truth about the rest of our four choice wars of economic interest. And she lost the red. Then she ran against Joe Biden and she ran against Bernie. So now the Bernie supporters turn on her too. And that's why some people need to remember what happened with Trump. I just try to remind people. And now I disagree with Tulsi's view on a lot of things. Israel is the big one. But I don't forget why people, again, just like with you, they, she got in trouble because she told the truth about Syria, because she told the truth about Ukraine, because she told the truth about the Democratic Party cheating Bernie Sanders and the corporate control of their party. That was again, you don't get in trouble for lying. She got in trouble for telling truth. That is absolutely right. And they knew they could smell it on right away. She got back from that trip to see Assad. And I was so out of it. I was like, what's wrong with that? She's on the foreign relations committee. Exactly. And she wasn't, I mean, I never understood why we were against Assad in the first place. I never had strong feelings about Assad. He protected the Christians in Syria. I don't know. That seemed like a good reason to at least be neutral. Whatever. I just didn't, I wasn't that interested in the topic. I'm American, right? So it's not my world. I'm not living in the Levant in my head. But when she did that, I remember, I mean, they were just like, no, we that they hated her more than they hated any Republican. I was really struck by that. So that it was, you know, there's a theory that the reason why the the Syrian war happened was because they wanted to put a pipeline from was it kakatar or Saudi Arabia right through Syria. And of course Syria was aligned with Russia and they wanted to get rid of Assad so they could do that. And, you know, the CIA was backing, you know, ISIS and al-Qaeda actually literally funding them, right? And a dirty war in Syria, right? One of the most expensive dirty wars they've ever done. And it was all of course without question the most immoral is that funding ISIS and al-Qaeda. Yes, you're not on our side. No. And yet our government did that with our money. And Tulsi is like, if I'm recalling this correctly, sponsored a piece of legislation that basically they said we're not allowed to use US tax dollars to fund ISIS. And they were like, shut up extremist. Right, winger. Since saying so what happens? It was so bad, Tucker in Syria that the Pentagon would be funding one terrorist organization and the CIA would be funding another terrorist organization and then they would fight each other inside Syria. And how do I know that? Because I got pretty in the LA times. That's how obvious it was. But again, that doesn't that it's not it's on page 37. It's not on page one. It's not the lead story of the news. In fact, it never makes the TV news. And all they do is show you pictures of them cutting the guys head off with the butchist kitchen knife. Remember when that was the big thing? Very well. On cable. I remember I'm watching Chris Matthews and they would show up as an ISIS guy cutting someone's head off with a kitchen knife and Chris man's like the president's got to do something. He's got to do so. That's exactly how propaganda works. And they're like, look, they're barbarians. And that might my response was, yeah, why don't they blow their heads off with a nice Christian bomb made by Christians in a Christian bomb factory because that's what Jesus would do. We did an interview with a woman called Casey Means. She's a Stanford educated surgeon and really one of the most remarkable people I have ever met. In the interview, she explained how the food that we eat produced by huge food companies, big food in conjunction with pharma is destroying our health, making this a week and sick country. The levels of chronic disease are beyond belief. Well, Casey means we've not stopped thinking about ever since is the co founder of a health care technology company called levels. And we are proud to announce today that we are partnering with levels. And by proud, I mean, sincerely proud. Levels is a really interesting company and a great product. It gives you insight into what's going on inside your body, your metabolic health. It helps you understand how the food you're eating, the things that you're doing every single day or affecting your body in real time. You put stuff in your mouth. Speaking of myself anyway, and you don't think about it. You have no idea what you're putting in your mouth and you have no idea what it's doing to your body. But over time, you feel weak, and tired, and spicy, and over, even longer period of time, you can get really sick. So it's worth knowing what the food you eat is doing to you. The levels app works with something called a continuous glucose monitor, a CGM. You can get one as part of the planner. You can bring your own. It doesn't matter. But the bottom line is big tech, big pharma and big food combine together to form an incredibly malevolent force pumping youthful garbage on healthy food with artificial sugars and hurting you and hurting the entire country. So with levels, you'll be able to see immediately what all this is doing to you. You get access to real time personalized data, and that's a critical step to changing your behavior. Those of us who like Oreos can tell you firsthand. This isn't talking to your doctor and annual physical, looking backwards about things you did in the past. This is up to the second information on how your body is responding to different foods and activities, the things that give you stress, your sleep, etc., etc. It's easy to use. It gives you powerful personalized health data and you can make much better choices about how you feel. And over time, it'll have a huge effect. Right now, you can get an additional two free months when you go to levels.link.tucker. That's levels.link.tucker. This is the beginning of what we hope will be a long and happy partnership with levels and doctor Casey means. Because I don't want to get too far of a feel, but since you've been watching this stuff for a long, whatever happened to Chris Matthews, he was like a do-to-ful soldier for the next year. He got me too. But why? I mean, I worked in television my whole life. So I know for a fact that a lot of people could have been me too, but it was Chris Matthews and they just crushed him in one day. Why? I saw I found a video. It's a good question. I found a video of him on, I think election night, some election night. And Rachel Maddow sitting there saying, you know, the Trump's victory, the Republican victories all about racism and hatred and racism. And he was like, no, if you go through Wisconsin and you see that the diner's closed and there's this thing and a people and he made an economic case for what was happening. And I was like, that's what happened. That's what happened. Amazing. Because he actually slipped up and told the truth once, right? Just like John Stewart, when he slipped up and told he's a truth about the COVID virus, then I guess Chris Matthews didn't get his mind right or they had to make an example out of him because that's what that was. Fascinating. Oh, I'm so glad I asked that question. Yeah. So there's his zero tolerance policy for certain truths. I mean, so zero tolerance, like you can spend 40 years if you're Chris Matthews carrying water for a bunch of dumb politicians, pretty reliably. And then you say one thing about economics, that's true and you're done. Yeah. And or look at, you know, look at Medi Hassan. He thought he was insulated because he lied about the Syrian war. He lied about the Ukraine war. He lied about COVID. He lied about Russia. He did all that for the establishment. So he thought that had bought him some little insulation to tell a little truth about Palestine. And then no, you're fired. And that was that. You know, I'm talking about. Oh, if I do, yeah. And that was he's like, no, dummy. You don't get to, you don't get to tell even a little bit of truth, especially when that's consequential. So do you think, I mean, it just looks like if you look at the rogue numbers, for example, are your numbers, for example, it does feel like the era of those news organizations, which I will never stop being angry at because I worked at them. But it does feel like they're Arizona over. Well, it's funny is that my numbers that keep going up on, on rumble, YouTube has, I've considered borderline content. Really? Yeah. Oh, yeah. And so they have ratcheted down the algorithm on me, even though I still managed to get between 15 and 20 million views a month, I used to was I was getting 24 or 25. Now they've gotten me ratcheted down to 15. And you know, I remember I had a discussion with some people at YouTube. And I'm like, Hey, this is a little what's going on? Okay. Is there is there anything I said, I'm, I'm unbended me. Is there anything I can do to get this to get off this algorithm that I've been put on? And it just got way worse during the election season. And the response was, well, it's the election season. And so, you know, everybody's numbers in this space are down. I'm like, that's like saying, I should be selling, that's like saying I should be selling less less less toys during Christmas season. Exactly. I mean, this is my numbers should be going through less ice cream in August. So I mean, I understand it's it's it's um, YouTube got the hell scared out of them in 2017 because we we are a threat like now you're independent. I'm independent. We are a threat to the New York Times to MSNBC. We do get more higher ratings and still necessarily Joe Rogan. That's why they come at them so hard is because we're a threat to their business model. So they have to discredit us. And the way they do it is they scare the advertisers away from shows like ours, right? That's I mean, there's a story that just came out. That's how they wanted to the Labor Party and the UK had a plan to kill Elon Musk's Twitter by scaring advertisers away, right? And so that's exactly what they did. It was called the ad pop ellipse. It happened on YouTube in 2017. And it's been, you know, a tough slog ever since. But we still break through people still are hungry for, they're just hungry for honesty, right? They even like I say, I would say half my audience doesn't share a lot of my politics, but they appreciate that I'm not lying to them and that I don't call them racists or I don't hate them. I respect them and that I tell them we share. We all want the same things, but we just have different ways of getting there. Right. No, I feel that way about you. I mean, I actually do agree with a lot of what you say, not all, of course, but I think you're sincere and serious and brave. And those are the three qualities that I look for in my friends. And in people I trust in media, why wouldn't I? Since here, not lying to me, maybe wrong, but not lying serious. Like trying to honestly like what are the big issues? What actually matters? I think that's important. And brave, not getting it pushed around. Like, I don't know. I don't think it's that hard. Oh, right. Right. I mean, they've certainly tried to push me around. You know, they I got when I spoke at the UN Security Council, I was invited to speak on the anniversary of the Nord Stream pipeline bombing. And so I that's the funniest act of industrial terrorism in history, because Putin did it. Putin is so evil that he blew up his own pipeline. He's not an evil genius. He's an evil moron, I guess he blew up his number one economic stream. But so what I did, and I, you know, I spoke in blunt language to the Security Council about it. If you think Russia did this, you're either a paid liar or a duke. And well, in my way. So I did that via Zoom because I was in Europe at the time. And on my way home on the plane, my computer and my iCloud account got hacked. And it was from Pegasus. Right. Now Pegasus was invented by the Mossad. And it's very expensive if you want to get it cost millions of dollars. And they can, anyway, I remember when I got off the plane, I called my IT guy who used to be a security specialist for the military. And I told him what happened. And he was like, Oh my God, Jimmy goes, even I couldn't do that. He said, this wasn't a person. This was a state actor. Oh, sure. And I said, well, maybe I shouldn't have given that speech at the Security Council. And he laughed and I go, no, I just did that. He goes, Oh my God, that's what this is. Yeah. And so that was, and then you have to also put my name in that list of that, that kill list Ukraine right has that kill list, which been there. Yeah. You're on. And so these are the, and so now they have everything. So if they, they want to turn it on me, they've got everything that was ever on my hard drive, everything that's on my computer, my phone on my iCloud account. So they, if they want to compromise me, they got a lot of stuff. They've got a lot of stuff. And stuff. And if they're, and of course, they'll plant it on there. Right. If it's, if it's not, you know, they'll, they'll make it, they'll make me look however they want to make me look. Yeah. I mean, I, I don't have a computer and I try and stay off the internet for that exact reason. And I just want to say, I had to use it loud many times that I, I think Kitty porn is wrong. And I think I'm not a pornography general. And I just want to say, I mean, I, you see these people without even naming names, but one of whom I know personally, it's like all of a sudden, you know, you're in a kitty porn. Okay. Right. Yeah. Yeah. No. I mean, for sure. I mean, I've seen it. I know. Having been the target of that stuff. And you don't want to whine about it. I never want to seem like I'm whining. I have a great life. And I feel really privileged to have the job that I do. But no, there's heavy, very heavy stuff going on. There's no. I just want to be a comedian. I, I, as the God tucker, I just wanted to be a comedian. And be able to sell tickets and tour and have people like me because I was funny. Yeah. That's all I ever wanted. And somehow, well, I did, when I did my special in 2008 was called Sis and Jimmy on Comedy Central. And that got some attention. And so I just got, it was the Iraq war that made me get interested. Like I couldn't believe how bad the cable news was reporting this stuff. So I just started talking about it in my act. And, and a lot of people reacted positively to it. And when I started, I got offered my own public radio show in Los Angeles on KP of K. And I started just, you know, doing what what I do now, because, and I realized that the, the, it, I could do it way better than anybody in the corporate news because I don't, I don't have that mind control that they first of all, they pre-select those people. That's like I said, they come from Ivy League. You know, there's two types of people who go to journalism school, dupes and bad journalists. And couldn't agree more. And they all come from the same class never hired one. And good in 30 years of, you know, being in more than 30 years being this was I've never hired a single journalism school. It's a trade, not a profession. It's, it's by the way, the most straightforward trade there is. Yes. And they want you about, you know, making like, you know, you're not a profession. I've had people, you know, say that to you, you're not a journalist. I'm like, all a journalist is, is, as it was described to me is you stick your head and you look, take a look down the street and you report back what you saw. Exactly right. That's all journalism is. And you do it, you know, with some, with a high level of honesty and a dollop of courage and that's, but it's just not hard. If you're really smart, you can fix air conditioners. If you're less smart, you can do journalism. I mean, no, that's, that's real. That's such a great way to put it. That's really funny. Well, it's true. It's, so, but what? Okay, so I'm interested, and I think you might know the answer if Trump wins in a week, move over a week. And I think he will. Um, what? I don't see how they're going to let him win. I don't, if they would overthrow governments in every other part of the world and rig elections and do coups, yeah, Juan Guido, yeah, in the whole and Zelensky and, I mean, they're willing to start a nuclear war. Why wouldn't they be willing to rig an election? Well, I think they have and they're trying. Yeah. But I think maybe, you know, there's a, there's a level of popular support. This is hard to hide. And I think we're reaching that point. But okay, let's, let's start at the, my assumption first then, and then we'll return to your. So let's say Trump does win on November 5th. And, you know, he wins all seven backgrounds. Maybe he gets the majority of the popular vote. Maybe he gets the majority of hispanic vote. I mean, markers like that that are kind of hard to lie away, right? Even if you're Joe Scarborough, like, what do you do with a number like that? Um, how does the democratic party respond with the establishment respond? Uh, but they just double down on everything that they really, yeah. Are you kidding? Yeah, they lost him the first time. And I'm like, well, this, this is going to force them to change. It didn't. They got what they invented, rush a gate. They ramped up the racism. They want to help. If you fail, I've been fired a lot, but a drinking problem like I, they ever went, but that's when he stopped and he said like, how did this happen? How was I part of this disaster? What bad choices did I make? Do what extent was it my fault? You have to do that? That's what it is to be an adult, right? Uh, you can't always blame other people for your problems. They're, that you, it's amazing how many people aren't adults. That's what that's what COVID taught taught me. That's what Russia gave taught me. That's what every January 6 Syria, Ukraine, I mean, it's amazing. People are propagandized it. They don't think they are. That's the problem. They think and I had something to tell you about it, but I can't remember, but when he won the first time in 16, I thought that was going to make them change that they just got way worse. They got in chaos. I mean, why do you think there's an open border? There's many reasons. One is we can't meet our recruiting goals for the military. Exactly. And thank you for saying that. That's what this is. That's, that's a big part of what this is. And I'm not making that up. Dick Durban said it on this Senate floor into a camera that that's what this, that we got to have these immigrants so we can meet our recruiting skills. Give them guns. Yeah, they're not going to be a tool of, of the state against the population. And then the Pentagon makes it legal for the military to murder American citizens. Are you joking? Yep. And, and another part is of course, you know, it says anything about it. It's a, as soon as unions start to get some power, right? They open the border and flood the country with, with immigrants to, and so now we have workers, desperate poor workers. Now they're, our, their iris turn towards even more desperate people, right? So we put sanctions on Venezuela and to try to overthrow their government because turns out there's more oil underneath on its way, then there is Saudi Arabia. And so all the sudden we got to bring their people some democracy. And, you know, what, why don't we let Venezuela work it out? Because we don't want to let them out. We want to install a puppet so we could get their natural resources. So we put sanctions on, and the whole point of sanctions is to make the people who live their miserable. So they're get so miserable. And the idea is they'll rise up and overthrow their leader. And then we can install a puppet. It's never worked. Not one time. At one time, as it worked, to try to do it to Iran, not going to work. Russia and Russia is not working. And so those people then do become miserable. And then they flood our own country as immigrants and say, fly them some of them in on jets. And same thing with Haiti. We've been wrecking their economy. And, you know, I mean, Hillary Clinton made sure they didn't get a minimum wage, right? And she, it's unbelievable what we've done. We've stolen their natural resources. We stole their go. We've occupied their country right now. Joe Biden is bribing the corrupt government of Kenya to send their peacekeepers over to Haiti because the people are coming together in Haiti to realize that they have more in common and to oppose these puppet regime. And so Joe Biden doesn't want to send the Marines. He's literally gave $400 million to Kenya. You send your people, go break up this up. So what my point is, do people come to America? And the mistake is to turn your ire towards the immigrant, which is what the establishment wants, right? I would do exactly if I was in Venezuela. I'd get the hell out of there and come here and try to get a job. If I was in Haiti, I'd get the hell out of there and try to come here and get a job, especially if I'm being encouraged to, which they, they are paid to do it. Yeah. So the, the, the key is make sure don't lose your focus, come together and keep your eye on the establishment that's creating those desperate people and opening the border and creating chaos. And let's remember chaos always favors the establishment. And so it makes you big. This isn't different, right? They, you know, Mao did a very similar thing that the country, he split. He did divide and conquer. Can I say he was chaos always favors the establishment? Yes. Chaos always, if you feel like you're living in a chaotic country, it's because it's intentional. And it's just true. You know, I interrupt you. I just, but I just want, I just want that to hang in the air for a second because I think that's really wise. And it's worth remembering, you know, 10 days out from a presidential. Yes. We did a live tour last month. One of the funnest things we've ever done coast to coast 16 different cities speaking. Well, next week are Grand finale Halloween October 31st, 2024 in Glendale, Arizona, our special guest that night days before the presidential election, Donald Trump all proceeds donated to her came early. We're proud to do it. Hope to see you there. So what it, I'm sorry. I interrupt telling what mountain was. And what he's going to do. Well, he, he split the people up into the, the good people and the bad people. And the good people were the people who did what they were supposed to, right? And if everybody just did what they were supposed to, we'd have this utopia. And, but we can't have it because the bad people won't do it. Right? Well, just like with COVID, right? Now, uh, Rob Schneider makes this point, right? In his book, which is fantastic that, um, like during COVID was like, we could get out of this pandemic. If those bad people would just take a vaccine, which was always a lie, you could never vaccinate your way out of this pandemic. You could never get rid of the Corona virus and they, they couldn't. But that was a lie, but that kept them. And then, uh, so that's how the kept people divided and conquer. And that's what it, so that's what's going on, right? It's, it's why I can give a new some all of a sudden clean up homelessness in San Francisco when he's having, uh, the president of China visit, but he can't do it before and he clearly can't do it after. What it, that's all. I mean, of course, so chaos favors the estate. They want it that way. They want people living under bridges. They want you being accosted by methheads when you're, uh, going to the 7-Eleven. They want you begging for authority and authority. They want you to be willing to give up freedoms just like people were during COVID. You know, Arnold Schwarzenegger screw you a freedom. Remember that? Famously, he said get out of our country. You screw your freedom. Yeah, I agree. What that? Why would I want to screw my freedom of that? Cause that's exactly when mild did you split everybody up? The Austrian rose to the surface in towards the. Yeah. And so that's what that's what this is. And, uh, they want us not coming on. I'm, I'm, I'm true. Like me and you, uh, coming together on Syria, on Ukraine, on COVID. This, this is a threat to the establishment. They have to divide in conquer. They can't let that happen. I just one time, uh, I remember, uh, I, it was, I think it was during the Black Lives Matter riots. I interviewed, there was a guy I saw at the Michigan Capitol and, uh, he was a boogaloo boy. Now, the boogaloo boy was, they were a response to the Proud Boys, right? So they were, they didn't want to be associated with them. They knew they were anti war. They were anti police brutality. They were actually, they provided security for us on Black Lives Matter protesters. And they, he went to the Capitol, gave a speech. We have more in common than separates us. We are, we are brothers. We have common interest and he was there with someone from a, you know, an LGBTQ organization. He was there with a Black Lives Matter person and a, and a boogaloo boy. So I interviewed that boogaloo boy. That was the worst thing I could have ever done. They came at me like I had never been come after. I had written articles about me. Jimmy Dorsa, uh, the leader of the dirt bag left and he's in bed with alt right and these right wingers and Nazis and yeah, and I was like, no, no, no, I, I just interviewed a guy who by the way, uh, the dirty secret is those guys like those boogaloo boys used to be Democratic voters 25 years ago. And they're not anymore and they don't want you to ever talk about why they're not anymore because they've been, they're backs and been, uh, they, the Democratic parties turned back on them, right? And so, uh, I brought that guy on and I got murdered on social media, corporate news, pieces hit, hit jobs, people. It was, uh, videos made about me to the end of the day. And, uh, all I did was I, I remember I tweeted out and going, hey, I just interviewed a boogaloo boy. We agree on, uh, war. We agree on LGBTQ. We agree on Black Lives Matter. We got all that going. Isn't that weird? And boy, I got ratioed. I got, uh, you know, I, I, trended for probably a week. Uh, they could not, the establishment cannot have that. They cannot have you coming together. And that's the message. That's my message is, no, you're not my enemy. You're my neighbor. And you are hurting just like I am. We're under the same, uh, you know, just like during COVID's what I've held people during my show, the, uh, uh, uh, uh, the, the establishment did a controlled demolition of our economy, which flattened everybody except a handful of millionaires and billionaires and they want me to be angry and hate my neighbor for the pain I'm feeling because of that, because they wouldn't take a vaccine that didn't work the way they said it did in the first place. Well, I'm not going to hate my neighbor. I'm going to join with my neighbor because we share a common enemy. And that's the only way to get this out of this hellhole and this death spiral that our country's on right now. We're in the end stage of Republic and people don't realize that they think trumps the problem. Then Trump is a problem. Trump is a, people willing to vote for Trump is a system of a uniparty problem that has been squashing workers for the last 50 years. I've had people say to me, you know, Jimmy, January six, under mine, our democracy. And I'm like, you know, you're adorable because we don't live in a democracy. We live in a flat out oligarchy, which was proven by a Princeton study over 10 years ago. Your democracy was stolen by corporations 50 years ago. When are you going to get pissed off about that? Is it that people don't want to see how deep the rod is, how big the problem is? It's just too much for them to metabolize why it's hard for them to believe that Barack Obama was a problem. Like, oh, wait a minute, he's, you know, I've had people, he's the best president of my lifetime. No, he was the best speaker. He was, he made you feel good. He was, again, there's a reason why he got more money from Wall Street than John McCain. It was a reason why he instituted a right wing healthcare plan. As a reason why he let them pro, he let him play it out at Dappell. It's a reason why he dropped more bombs than George Bush. It was a reason why he destroyed Libya. He destroyed Libya. And he's like, oh, that was a mistake, you know, and they're going to, they're going to prosecute people who, a lot of them peacefully protested on January 6, but Dick Cheney, they go, oh, it's about the rule of law. Why does Dick Cheney and George Bush still walk the Europe? You know, Barack Obama was supposed to prosecute them because they ordered a worldwide torture program, right? Which is a war. And Barack Obama's constitution required to prosecute them. And he didn't. And the public reason he gave was because he said all those, those torture crimes happened in the past. And Barack Obama was looking towards the future. And what would I heard that I felt a lot better because all the crimes I've committed during the past two of them. I'm glad, I'm glad we're not prosecuting past crimes. I bet those people in prison are pissed off. They committed their crimes in the future. But even that we're having this conversation, and I'm not just saying this to inject note of optimism, but because I think I believe it. The fact that we're having this conversation suggests that the level of consciousness is very different from what it was. I think it will people up exactly. So how can you happen to monkeypox? What happened to bird flu? Did they was those test balloons? Do you think people go along with it? And then people did. And they're like, all right, get rid of it. But that's the thing. I just, I don't think people are going to go along. I mean, if they come back, you know, in eight days or whenever it is on November 6th and say, you know, Kamala Harris is a historic first. She's just incredibly popular, got more votes than Barack Obama. I'm just going to say, no, that didn't happen. Like you're lying. And I'm sick of having to go along being bullied into repeating your lies. And I think a a lot of people are in that frame of mind also, do you? Well, you see, the media is getting more panicked and they're getting more than should be panicked. Yeah. repeating your lies. And I think a lot of people are in that frame of mind also, do you? Well, you see, the media is getting more panicked and they're getting more that should be panicked. Yeah. You see what's going on. They saw their quiz links, their collaborators with the totalitarian regime and they should be panicked. 100%. Right. And you see the things they want to focus on, instead of what they, what people want them to focus on. You see, when MSNBC will go and do, they'll interview some regular voters and like what's gone, Senator Michigan, and they keep bringing up, they'll bring up January 6 and people are like, what are you talking about? Like that doesn't affect my life. Who cares about that? Do you know who does care about that? You, the liberals, the media and then the people who watch that media are taught that they're supposed to care because we almost lost our democracy, which again, I already pointed out, you know, living in democracy. You're a chump. It was unarmed. You can't have an unarmed insurrection. These were old ladies deep in debt with diabetes who believed in the Constitution. You could say they were wrong to think the election was stolen. Okay, that's a real debate. Happy to have that debate, but they believe that they were not sinister. That was an FBI. Yes, that was just a regular riot that was allowed to happen and encouraged to happen by the FBI plants in the crowd. And how do I know that? Well, because Christopher Ray, the head of the FBI was under congressional testimony and he was asked, did you have FBI assets dressed up as manga supporters inside the Capitol before the the riot started? And he said, I can't answer that question, which means yes, the answer should be no, which is what the congressman said. The answer should be no. Well, the answer should be we're not going to continue to fund your agency. If you don't answer the question and we're sure not going to build you a brand new building, which they did. Yes, Speaker, that has Mike Johnson signed off on to his eternal shame, one of many things for what you should be ashamed. Anyway, but yeah, no, it's, but again, we're kind of proving the point that underlies my question, which is everybody kind of knows what's up now. So how can you continue? I hope so. I just hope so because we travel in different circles. Right. And you know, I'm in liberal Hollywood and your other places, really showing people are still there hypnotized, they're in a trance. Even now, yeah, look at the media. I mean, they think the media is real. They think it's the news. Yes, in Hollywood, yes, yes, in Los Angeles, what happens when you're in a dinner party and you start dropping stuff like this? Oh, it's true. You're eating sushi alone and vegetable. Correct. That's correct. Yes. No, I mean, I hang out with other hair attacks, you know, really? Yeah, you do like how could you still be hypnotized after all of like I get? Okay, this virus shows up from China. You think it's got a 50% death rate or whatever. People are afraid I understand. But you know, four years later, really, you still think that's real. You know what the real death rate was 0.27% goes like less than half a percent. And you know, that's the thing about Bill Gates, right? He wants to make it, by the way, illegal to misinform, right? He's like, well, we always had, we've always had restrictions on free and he's tech talks with his hands, which is first sign of a liar. And he's saying he's talking like that's true. I don't know. I'm making it up. But he does have like old grandiose hand gestures, which is it that's that it is a bad sign. He and he says, he said, we've always had restrictions on speech. You know, you can't threaten someone's life. And you know, you shouldn't be allowed to misinform someone on vaccines to make them hesitant. What did you just conflate? He just conflated death threats against someone and talking about the vaccine. You see that and he's a number one investor. And so people don't know this. But as soon as Bill Gates, he invested $50 million in Pfizer. And then it went up during COVID, and he cast out at $550 million. And as soon as he cast out, he started shooting on the vaccine. I don't know if he saw the video, but he was, I play this on my show all the time. He said, well, we didn't know at the beginning that it had a low fatality rate. And then it affected mostly just the elderly kind of like the flu, but a bit different. Now, they don't play that on MSNBC and then, they don't play that anywhere. Right. I played on my show, right? Which is why I'm borderline content. And, but there it is. And, and I'm like, well, why would any's like, yeah, there was a lot of problems with the vaccine. They weren't infection blocking. They didn't have long term. And I'm like, whoa, whoa, all they had to do was cash in his stock and he immediately starts telling the truth. But I'm like, I bet there's something else up. And soon enough, or immediately after that, he started selling this new vaccine that you inhaled through your nose. And he said, these are better. These are infection blocking. And these are long last thing. And I'm like, and I'm like, well, let's see. He's invested in the company that's making that out of the India. But why? I mean, this is the point where I get religious because I don't understand why someone like Bill Gates were Larry Fink or really any of these people who have multiple billion dollars would care about making more money. I think that's a really disease. Like, that is money worship. But that I'm not against being rich. I like making money, I guess. But not that much. But some I like not being in debt. Okay, I get that. You know, I want people to have more money. But if you've got billions of dollars, like why would you spend any time making more? I think that's really sick. Well, that I think that, you know, it becomes a, it's a game to these, that's what gives their life meaning. What there's there, they don't have any other meaning, right? I mean, except for, you know, covering up his trips to Jeffrey Epstein's Island, you don't have any other meaning. What, what, what, there's nothing at what else is there? And it's control. He's a, he's a maniac, right? That people because he wears a crew neck sweater and glasses, they think he's a nerd. And he's a good person, you know, just like, just like Rachel Manna wouldn't lie to you. She's, she's a gay gay people don't lie. Chris, Chris, Chris Hayes is a nerd. He wouldn't lie to you. That's why they got those. He's trans. Yeah, that's why they got those people because they exactly though, you wouldn't think they would lie to you. And that's why they hired them. And then they go along. So same thing with, with, with, uh, Bill Gates. I mean, he, he's never, he wasn't inventor. He wasn't, he, but he was a, he was a good monopolist. And he knew how to crush other businesses. He didn't, he didn't write the code. He bought the code. And, uh, and he, he knew how to become monopolist, right? But there were times when people were throwing pies in his face, do you remember that? Very well. And the media had turned against him. And so he had like, well, I can't let this happen. So then he started by the hundreds and hundreds of millions of dollars. He started buying off media companies and he started starting journalism schools and people. Yeah, stuff like it. So like, uh, for instance, PBS NewsHour didn't have like a science segment. He funded it, right? And so that, then they, he would Bill Gates funded PBS science coverage. Yeah. So that he, so he's there funding, the creation of the, the, the research for a vaccine. He then funds the coverage of that. And then he funds the NGO that's going to distribute the vaccine. I mean, he's got a coming and going. You know that he's, uh, co-opted the media. That's why he's seen as a media darling. Now, people think he's a great guy. You know, I've had, again, people said, Jimmy, he's just trying to end malaria in Africa. He's trying to, he's like, well, if you listen to exactly what has happened, and why there's certain country countries that don't want to do business. In fact, I think there's lawsuits against him in other countries. Uh, and if what he actually did and what he actually did in Africa, listen to Bobby Kennedy. He'll tell you what I am. I'm not an expert on it. But I 've listened to Bobby Kennedy talking. It's nefarious. It's gross. And, uh, it's egregious. Uh, so I think he's just a megalomaniac. And, um, yeah, I think that that doesn't go away, right? That that, that's, that's, that's where he gets his life meaning from. But these, I guess what I'm saying is he's not Jeff Bezos. He hasn't made enough money. He's not stopping Bill Gates, Jeff. Bailman, come on. What do you make of speaking in Bezos, um, and all these guys who care about global warming? Like Jeff Zalkabur or Mark Zalkabur, do you see his new yacht? It's, uh, it's got four diesel engines on it. But I bet it's he's got an electric stove on it. I mean, well, I mean, I think the purpose of those yachts is well, to go to the South of France the summertime, which is fun. But also it's to escape the mess that they're making now. Yeah. Obviously. Let's talk about this five feet shorter than Bezos, because you know, he's a man of the people. So what do you make? So Bezos is paper, the Washington Post, which is the official organ of the intelligence. He's in has been for many, many decades, um, refuse to endorse Kamala Harris. And Bezos has taken, you know, Bob Kagan, one of the dumbest people in Washington, Tori Newellins husband, former co-worker of mine, truly a mouth breather, like an idiot. But he resigns in protest because democracy is dying in darkness because they didn't endorse Carmella Harris or something. What, what do you make of all this? Well, it's funny to watch the liberal class wake up to the fact that, uh, he may be, it's not a good idea to have a handful of billionaires around our media is egg. Oh, what? You mean he's doing this for business interest. Yes. That's why he's doing this because he wants to have to continue his billions and billions of dollars of contracts with the CIA and the government. And he's afraid that Trump will step in the way of that. Plus he's got, uh, he's now wanted to do the space. That's why Elon Musk is a threat to him, right? And, uh, doing contracts with the government for space exploration and that kind of that's what this is about. That's exactly what this is about. And so it's same thing happened with the LA Times, you know, they're like, Oh, there's another billionaire that owns, uh, maybe we shouldn't have billionaires. And so it's, they were okay with it as long as he was going along. You think Jeff Bezos bought the Washington Post because he's committed to the truth. Are you kidding me? He's got there because he needs to manufacture consent. He's got that because he wants to control the narrative. That's what that's about. And Peter, as long as it went along with their hates, they were okay with it, right? And how does this coalition, the Democratic coalition, hold together? It's got a bunch of different component parts, rich white ladies, obviously being the pivotal component. But lots of others, poor black people, immigrants, gays, but it is falling apart. It's, well, those here's just my meta view of it as a complete outsider. These groups don't have common interests. So I'm not really sure other than like hating straight white man, which is not really a reason to have a party over time. It's not that interesting or meaningful really. What like, how could you hold that coalition together? Um, they're just doing the with propaganda and hatred and the fear right? Fair works. And, um, but is it falling apart? Well, I'm pretty sure I saw a headline the other day that said that Trump is winning the Hispanic vote. That's like unbo, I mean, yeah, that's incredible. Like just he's not, he's not making the most gains. I'm pretty sure it could fact check me on that. But, um, you know, more black people are voting for him, uh, than any other Republican. And, uh, it's, it's hopefully people are waking up that the Democratic rule isn't materially improving their lives. And I think a lot of people, I think Hispanics, I mean, um, are against, uh, illegal immigration. Oh, big time. And big time, they are. That's that that's for real. Oh, yeah. For lots of different reasons, moral and practical they're against it and how patronizing to assume that you'd be for crime just because you share the same sounding last name as the people committing. And it's like insane. That's so talk about racist. Well, what is it? You know, the whole thing of that, uh, which I'm surprised Trump doesn't make a bigger deal out of is that, you know, Trump did the step back, which, uh, released a lot of nonviolent black people from prison, which is the opposite of what Joe Biden and Kamala Harris did. Joe Biden wrote the crime bill. He still brags about it. We want to apologize for it, which is why black and brown people are locked up at way higher rates than their population. And Kamala Harris kept black and brown people in prison, uh, after a federal judge ordered her to release them in California three times. And her office argued in court that we have to keep them in prison because it would upset the prison labor force. So what she's literally doing is I would keep them as slaves. I mean, that's what she did. She, she kept, uh, black and brown people in prison for slavery because that's what it is. And, uh, Trump never brings that up. It's weird. I don't know, maybe because he feels like it will make her seem more, you know, a fighter of crime, but she's actually, I mean, she targeted black single mothers, uh, when she was gonna, uh, she went after and prosecuted the parents of truants and who did she target? She targeted black single parents. And I've covered it on my show. She did that. And then she called out the press to go and cover it when they were being per blocked single mothers, black mothers. And the one woman who I covered her daughter had sickle cell anemia. She was in hospital. And everybody knew this. Kamala Harris didn't care. She said the, uh, the cops to go rest her and she lost her house. She lost her job. Her kid had a stroke. Um, that, that's who Kamala Harris is, right? That's who she always has been. And that's who Joe Biden is. And I don't, it's funny that how they can flip that script on Trump. I tried to re, re-bind people that, hey, you know, the reason why black and brown people are locked up is because of Donald Trump. It's because of Joe Biden and Kamala Harris. And they did say they just can't compute it. It just goes against, you know, whenever I've, I'll have a conversation with someone from my old life. And I'll, I'll do an information, uh, dump like this on them. And I don't know if we got just had a conversation with the comedian friend of mine. And there was just like a long silent pause. And he goes, that's a lot to, it's a lot to think about. That's that. Who is that? That's a lot to think about. Like, I'm not going to think about it. Yeah. And it means I'm not going to think about it. It's too much. And there's no way you could be telling me the truth. And but I'm not going to look into it. Because that would be doing my own research, Tucker. And you're not supposed to do your own research. No, we've got mom to do that for us. Can I get, let me insert another, I'm trying to, to break the, the, the wall of, of pessimism here. So Bobby Kennedy, if you would check in with any American who Bobby Kennedy was for the last 20 years and says, who's Bobby Kennedy? He's the guy who falsely connects vaccines with autism. And that's why he was not allowed in the New York Times. That's why he's called the Nazi. It's kind of speaking of drummed out of polite society. He was after that Rolling Stone piece about 20 years ago, connecting autism with vaccines, even the, even the autism organizations denounced him. So in the tank, they are. But you never hear anybody criticize him for that anymore. It does feel like there has been a change, even in the media on that question. There has been, I saw Guy and CNBC the other day, like some, some CEO talk about 72 shots. He's like, that's exactly. You see that? Except no, I didn't. But I see people who, well, even I was never against vaccine. I mean, I've never spent four minutes thinking about vaccines. Right. So, but I see, because of my job I had to, but I see people who, it was very normal people who don't think it's outrageous to ask. Is there a connection between the vaccine schedule and the rise in autism? That wall seems to have been breached. People's minds seem more open. Am I imagining this? Well, it used to be people like Jim Carey. Well, exactly. It used to be people like Robert De Narrow. Really? Oh, Robert De Narrow. I have a clip of him on the today's show. There was that movie. I think it was the first un-vaxxed or something like that that was supposed to play at his, uh, a so-called film festival. And there was a big, they didn't want it to air. They didn't want him to show it. And he was on the today's show. And he's like, there's something there. You have to look at it. There's something there. There's a direct quote. No way. Yeah. If you, that video's out there, I've showed it on my show. And then all of a sudden, he got the phone call and that was that. Uh, he never talked about it again. And that filmed in get, uh, in fact, I had the guy who did the film on my show that filmed in air. And, uh, that was that. Yeah. So it used to be people like that. And, uh, yeah, there were like, and I remember just in the interest of full disclosure and honesty and repentance, I remember making fun of them. Me too. So, um, that's, that's where I was at the time, which was unthinking and stupid and reactionary. And I apologize for that. Uh, but I just again, I feel like there's been a massive change just on the ground, as we say, with normal people and their willingness to entertain new ideas. Well, when, you know, autism goes from one in 10,000 to right now, I, the last I saw was in California. It's like one in 22, some crazy low number like that. Uh, I think enough people have been affected and touched by it that they are questioning. And so, you know, I used to always say, uh, you know, uh, conservatives can't understand a problem to let effects them, right directly, but it turns out it's everybody. Yeah, that's right. It turns out that's everybody was so one in effect, you direct me to me. You know, I didn't look into COVID policy until I got vaccine injured. And then as soon as I got vaccine injured, I was like, uh, I was put into a study. And some of the drug, one of the drugs was I ever met in that they were giving me and I was like, hey, and then they explained to me, Jimmy, this is on the WHL list of essential medicines, one the Nobel Prize. It's been prescribed billions of times. That's how they told me at MSM BZ. And before COVID, it was looked at as a miracle drug. They were saying it could cure cancer. And I looked at the doctor and I said, well, why would they be saying this? And he explained because they can't get their emergency use authorization. If this actually treats it, even though in their own literature, it says it does treat coronavirus. And, uh, and I was like, well, what else are they lying about? And it turned out, Tucker, there wasn't a thing they weren't lying about. they were lying about the origin of the virus. We all know they were lying about funding it. They were lying about herd immunity. They were lying about natural immunity. They were lying about transmission. They were lying about contraction. They were lying about mass. They were lying about lockdowns. There wasn't anything that they would lie. They were lying about the danger of the vaccine. That's what I made decide. Yeah. And you unfortunately lived that. Yeah. I still do. Yeah. So I had nerve damage from it. I didn't a simple neurologer. Among other things, my blood pressure went through the right. I had a one, my blood was 180 over 140. I mean, I was in bad shape. And, um, that's like stroke level. Yeah. I could have had a stroke. Yeah. And I'll talk. I mean, who knows? I might have had many strokes. Uh, but anyway, um, so I don't know what the question was, but the COVID thing is what was. Yeah. I just, yeah, it's like four years ago, if we'd had this conversation, even just exactly what you said over the past two minutes, that would have been considered like, whoa. First of all, don't talk about your vaccine injury. Whoa. Selfish prick. Like how dare you? I had people come at me. Again, people I know. Why are you talking about it? Don't it? You're going to make people vaccine hesitant. And I was like, well, I said that to your face. They said it to me online. Right. Oh, yeah. This is, I don't go on Facebook, Facebook is miserable. I go on Twitter, right? Cause you can actually get news and stuff from there. And people would come at me and attack me on Twitter like that. I'm just like, you don't, you don't know. I mean, I get that you don't know anything about COVID, but why are you so loud about it? Right? No, that's boy isn't that the truth. Yeah. And none of that. I mean, some of my favorite comedians, you know, I've talked about this in my special. I talk about it on stage and talk about it on my show, but my some of my favorite comedians that I looked up to, the in their special, they would shame people for trying to get informed about COVID and experimental medical treatment. They would shame them. And I'm like, if you're, you're shaming people, you're not supposed to shame people for questioning authority. You're supposed to shame people for following rules without questioning authority. And if you're shaming people for question authority, you're not doing comedy, you're selling cars. I don't know what the hell you're doing. But it broke my heart. Did that. I don't want to name names, but they're, but legit, legit, the top, the top comics. I know the late night guys did all of them. All of them. That was shame this shameful, disgusting is and they'll never apologize. They'll never do. They will also never recover. They will never recover from that. Well, it's funny that Greg Goldfeld's now cranes them all into that. That's exactly right. Case in point. Who watches that shit? Anyway, it's a it's a hey, you want to have some superficial com for that cook. It's all like they're all sitting there. You say the talking point from them from the studio. I'll say the talking point from the studio. We'll pretend we're having a real conversation late night. Talk shows are the most boring, stupid, vapid. They're just unbelievably stupid. I know. I can't believe who watches. Is there anybody over 16 years old that watches that stuff? No, I can't imagine. What can you imagine? How would you brain must be much to be able to? There's actual shows out there now. There's shows like this. There's shows like Joe, there's shows where people have real conversations about really interesting things. And they're not trying to sell you anything. I don't get how those shows are again, but there must be important for the propaganda. That's why that, you know, that's what keeps them going. I guess they must make money somehow. I just think there were at a point where the people in charge have really only two options. One is the one that I hope they'll choose, which is to look inside and ask as every adult should. How did I play a role in what went wrong? You know, what did I, you know, seriously, like just take a look inside I mean, that's the basis of AA. It's why it's the basis of joy actually. So they do that or they have to use real force to get people to comply. They can no longer do it through propaganda exclusively or through any kind of consent manufacturer or real. They have to just go right to force because people just don't believe it anymore. They have no authority. Well, they did force during COVID. They forced you, you couldn't travel. You couldn't go to work. They fired people. Like I said, you know, 70,000 healthcare workers. Yes, they used force, but they had the capos like in the population enforcing a PMC's 100%. And I just feel like that, you know, some of whom all of whom I have my contempt, I will say, and all of whom should apologize, but many of whom are totally sincere in believing that the lady at the grocery store that the mask was the threat to everyone's life. Like they really believe that. I believe that I want to be able to get a lot of fight with my brother over it because I thought he was being reckless and selfish, right? So yeah, yeah, and being dumb and I was, oh, I was so I was that person. So I have compassion for those people who are propaganda. Yes, yes. I do too. But because I was one of them. But I just think that that population is really small now. So if you want to continue with your fake democracy, if you want to continue looting the country, you just kind of have to pull out the gun and say, Oh, Bay, at this point, they really have to go to force. And I think that's why they've now allowed the Pentagon to murder American citizens who won't comply. I mean, I don't, what's the other explanation? Yeah, that, that it's almost seems too crazy to believe, right? What I did, I mean, that just happened. That's all. Yeah, I saw it. I'm like, boy, if I didn't, that's they're not not doing it for a reason. I mean, they're doing it for a reason that's what you think. And I'm like, oh, boy, they're getting ready, right? They're getting ready to do. So I thought my first thought was they're getting ready to throw the election. And then when people protest, they're going to go in and sculpt it and say, look, these people were just like we said, they're always violent. They're doing January 6 for doing on a grander scale. That's what that's what I think. That's what that was. I could be wrong. That's just a guess. But they're doing it not for a good reason. Not for a good. Well, I just don't think they have their sort of out of options. And we may look back wistfully at a time when they can control the population with CNN, you know, when Wolf Blitzer was enough to get people to obey. And now that, you know, it's a joke. They're all a joke. And then we up, but we know they're a joke. The kidnapper has taken off his mask like he doesn't have any choice. He has to kill us. Well, that's why they're good. The digital currency is such a big deal, I think, because they can control you through digital currency. And let me look what they did to the truckers in Canada. They cut off their funds. And now you can't do anything. You can't go anywhere and even even people who donated to them got in trouble and got their funds frozen. So if they can including their Bitcoin, they froze people's Bitcoin. How did they do that through the exchanges? Oh, I thought that was the whole no beauty of Bitcoin. What I thought too. That's what I thought too. Oh, I think it could be the beauty of it. I'm not attacking Bitcoin just to be clear, but a lot of the crypto people, if you asked them directly, and I was at the Crispo conference in August in Nashville, because I care about it. I said, well, wait a second. I thought the promise of Bitcoin was autonomy. And they're like, well, yeah, you can have autonomy. And I said, well, how do you how about you make it easy for me to conduct business and Bitcoin simple transactions? You don't mean buy a Bitcoin that's not a Tesla, you know? And and keep it private. Because it's my money. I made the money. There's no reason in government. So have any role in it at all. I should be able to do it secretly. And that's what you told me I was going to be able to do. It's not just a pump and dump scheme. You sleaze ball. It's not just about you getting rich and moving to Puerto Rico to pay no taxes. It's about returning freedom to the population of the free country in the world. That's what you told me it was. And they're like, well, you could do that, but you have to have a wallet. I mean, it's just somebody and I think a lot of the Bitcoin people are totally sincere and great people. And I'm not, you know, but somebody needs to make it easy for the average person to use Bitcoin as intended, which is as a vehicle financial freedom as we would have made control. Yeah, they control. To do that soon. I think I think well, what's happening in El Salvador? Isn't a lot's happening. That's great. I mean, I again, I'm not attacking Bitcoin. And the the promise of Bitcoin is the promise of freedom. And I support it vehemently. We need that because digital currency, they're already doing implementing it voluntarily. Like you can, they're going to track your carbon purchases on your credit card. Have you seen this? No. Yeah, they're starting to implement it voluntarily. And they'll get to let you know your carbon purchases. And so they've already got a place. They've already have mechanisms to do this. And so they can say is, you know, I foresee a day not too far away where they say, hey, you know, you're, we don't like how you're spending your money. Of course, it's too much carbon. So we're going to freeze and you can't spend it on the things you want to spend it on. And you got to do this and you got to get a electric stove and electric stoves and the, uh, we got to get an electric car. And where does the power for the electric car come from a coal plant? And it's a soak? No, no, no, actually a coal plant. Yeah, I know it's crazy. What's going on? It's a, they, they've been fed a bit of good. And by the way, the, the, I, I've read an article that said that if, if when you get like a Tesla or an electric car, that's the equivalent of having 20 refrigerators in your house, right? So they already have an energy cry. And whenever it gets hits 90 degrees in California, they were like, hey, everybody be careful. They can't handle the electric. They elect your kid can't handle. So if everybody got an electric car anyway, it wouldn't, you couldn't do it. So I don't so this is all good. And this is just propaganda. And the people who are telling you, uh, that you have to, uh, be tracked on your digit, your carbon footprint and drive electric cars and use electric stoves. And you can't use a gas powered leaf blower anymore are the same people who don't ban private jet travel, which is going through the roof through the roof and they're like, uh, and then they'll say, well, I buy carbon offsets. But if you really thought global warming was real, you wouldn't apply the private jet because you know that's contributing. You would buy the carbon offset anyway. You would be trying to do so. They won't, the people who keep telling me about this like John Kerry and Bill Gates, they don't, they don't really believe it. That's just not for one. So there's a, you can, even if you believe in carbon based climate change, the any of their solutions are bullshit. They're false profits. They're fake clergy. Yes. And I don't, so I, uh, after Russia gate, after Ukraine, after Syria, after COVID, I don't believe anything that they say, including what it comes to climate change. I don't believe, of course not. And it's just, it's about, it's incumbent on them to prove it to me. So my last question is to get a snapshot of where we think, where you think we're going, um, election is, you know, imminent. How many people do you know, liberals form up, you know, progressive types, um, are voting for Trump? Well, the ones that come once, uh, ones that I meet doing comedy, um, again, in not, not many in Hollywood, not when still really, oh, come on. No, no, no, no, I mean, I've had people, I'll have people secretly admit to me they got vaccine injured. The secretly they won't say it out loud. Like I'll come off stage and they'll be a famous comedian. I won't say, and they'll say, yeah, I got shingles in my eye when I got the vaccine and stuff like that. And I'm like, you don't talk about it? No. Oh. It's a comedian, I won't say. And they'll say, yeah, I got shingles in my eye when I got the vaccine and stuff like that. And I'm like, you don't talk about it? No. Oh, I've had people email me and say, hey, keep talking about it. I got myocarditis. No way! Yes. So they've so internalized the guilt and shame. They see an end that they can't even admit that they were a victim of a crime. They don't want to be ostracized from polite society. I mean, you can't do that. I was a different from one saying I was gang raped, but I can't tell anybody because I'll be blamed for it. That's sick. That's sick. It is sick. I agree with you. So my audience is different. So when I go out and I travel, I meet all types of people. People come to my audience, come to my shows, and I meet them. And they range from hippies to ex-military, to police, to firemen, to labor organizers, to nurses, to teachers. And so they're all done. So they're done, definitely, with the liberal intelligentsia. And they see through it. But I don't know if they necessarily mean they're going to vote for Donald Trump, but they're certainly done with Trump. When Trump invites Sean O'Brien ahead of the team's turns to the Republican convention, it doesn't even make him endorse Trump. Sean O'Brien does not come as a Republican or a Trump voter. And he says that from the stage. I'm not a Trump voter. I'm not a Republican. I'm not here to endorse Trump. But he invited me and I'm coming. How is that not the most powerful sign ever? Can you imagine letting someone at your convention won't even endorse you? And you let him come anyway. That is a sign that this party would ever, it's many flaws, many flaws. But is the open party? Is the actual coalition of different people, different interests, but with a common humanity and Americanness? Like, doesn't that just tell you everything? I've made a big deal out of it. Oh, did you? Yeah. And it was kind of ignored, I thought. Yeah, certainly. Of course, that's not good for the establishment. Yeah. And you saw that the port workers, right? They went on strike and they shut that strike down immediately because they had to settle it because that's not good. And they don't want other unions to catch on, right? So as soon as the workers start to get power, they got to stop it, right? And that's why they're having open borders. There's no doubt about it. There's a little bit of a tightening of the labor market. The workers are starting to get a little bit of power. They completely flood it. And the liberals who I see who aren't voting for Kamala Harris. So they're going to vote for Trump or they're going to vote for Jill Stein. Yeah, right. That's better. They're not voting for Kamala. They're not vote. They want to punish the Democrats. They think they need to be punished. And I agree. I think they do need to be punished. They will not come to get your vote. They don't care. You know, you, I'm sure you saw Chuck Schumer in 2016 when they said, hey, what about your losing blue collar workers, right? Hillary Clinton, you're losing. He said, it doesn't matter. For every blue collar worker we lose, we're going to pick up two white collar suburban voters. And you can repeat that in Ohio and Wisconsin and Michigan. Well, I guess they couldn't do that. That was a lot. But that's your show. So that was at the time, the leader of the Democratic Party, out there telling people we are not trying to appeal to workers. We're literally trying to appeal to white collar Republicans. That's what the Democratic Party is now. They will bend over backwards to get white. That's why Liz Cheney is touring with Kamala Harris. Is there anybody anyone that is disgusting as Liz Cheney? No, in world history. I can't think of any point. I can't. But that's what that's what is that telling you? They're not going after workers. They're not going after their natural constituency Democrats. They're going after white collar suburban Republicans. That's what they're trying to do. And they'll bend over backwards for them. They won't do anything to get the Muslim vote, which you think would be a natural constituency. They won't do a damn thing for them. And that's why they all just came out in Michigan and endorsed Donald Trump. At least Donald Trump, they won't do anything. So I'm always, you got to make them come get your vote. And you've got to punish them for turning their back on workers, for funding a genocide and for forcing medical experiments on people and for censoring and shutting down and shaming people for questioning, you got to punish them. And I'm all for that. And so I don't people are punished in them by voting for Jill Stein. Some of them are voting for Donald Trump to punish them. I say whatever you can do to punish the Democratic Party, we got to break them. The great you made, or thank you. OK, thank you. So it turns out that you two.