The Joe Rogan experience Train my day Joe Rogan podcast my night all day This is the power of music I told my wife that you were coming on and she said I don't want to get a mom She said if I die on my funeral I want her song. I'm coming home really? Yeah, I was like whoo Was like that's a heavy thought and then I listened to it in the gym I was like god damn. I listened to the version where you were on the piano. It was like a solo concert And I was like god That's such a it's such a great song, but it's such a such a crazy thought. Yeah That someone would want Wow a very specific song Yeah Have you waited for a podcast? I know but but that's you know, that's the emotion of real music Yeah, like you said, I mean a text message about a AI you know because you sent me one of your songs and you're like a is never Gonna recreate this I said something like I don't think it's capable of writing stuff with this much emotion Yeah, what's not real? Yeah, it sounds cool That's what AI does they there's cool songs that come from AI But there's always gonna be and I completely agree with you. There's always gonna be a thing We know a person wrote it that they sat down and they wrote it and there's this connection With their their spirit and their creativity that comes out and that's what people love about music Other than stuff that sounds I like I like AI music because it sounds cool But I know what it is. I know it's just a robot. I mean, I think it's you know Sometimes it's good for certain things, but the type of music that I make personally It's like very therapeutic for me to write. I always I'm writing from like a true emotion. So Yeah, each It's just like another tool. I feel like that um, you know when auto tune first came out People were bitching about that and Even like my first albums I recorded with my mom when I was a little kid. We did it on two-inch tape You know, so there's no computer involved So then computers got an introduced and people were bitching about that like this isn't real music. Yeah You know, it's just like all these technological advances To me I see them as just tools that creatives can use to get their vision across What was uh, what was Peter Frampton using back in the day? It was like a tube or something, right? I have no idea that you do remember like You you know what that stuff is Jamie, right? It's like a tube you put in your mouth or something. Yes, it's like a straw and like the microphone picks up the sound so the sound would go through the tube into your mouth and the mic from picks that up And you're using mouth because I remember people hating that like way back in the day people were hating that like that's on This real voice like what is he doing? Well, let's put it through that thing You know But there's always I mean look there's always gonna be tools that people use to enhance creativity But right the thing that's weird now is that they're making entire song if they can make Total Skyler great category and they sound pretty good. They sound really good. You know, that's what's cracking Yeah, it's your voice. It's you know, it's only gonna get better. You know, it's so new. Yeah So those entire podcast with me that I never did really yeah, there's a whole conversation with me and Steve Jobs I never met Steve Jobs Just me and Steve Jobs talking about stuff is it the visual too? No, it's not the visual This one's just an audio one, but eventually I'm sure there'll be a bit of visual one of them There's definitely ones of me talking to people I've never talked to because like people pretend they've been on the show No, they're fun Representation with me. It's very very strange. You know very strange Yeah, we're living in a weird blurry time Like the lines between real and not real or getting very blurry Like it's an introduction to the matrix like we're getting like the first Whispers of the fog of the matrices as it envelops us. Yeah getting just these little clouds like this is weird Then eventually just give me a wall We're gonna just be in the full Cloud of the matrix, but I see people questioning everything now. They're like is this real Everybody's dusty about everything now. You should. Yeah. I mean there's people like prominent news people who've reposted Stories with videos in it that we're like straight out of a video game. Yeah Very very weird time we're in very But I think it's also exciting. Oh, it's definitely exciting. You know, it's fun. Yeah. Well, it's weird Anytime things are weird anything things like yeah, but that I think it makes you really appreciate actual things like real Physical things. Yeah, I agree with that real connection with people real art You know, I think that's what's gonna happen a lot with AI like people's actual artwork like getting something like Like this chimps called this is made with Thimbals symbols with zilge. Oh, yeah This guy shaying against the machine He makes still yeah, he's an artist makes cool stuff But like I know I got made that yeah, like when I'm fucking around with this like this guy made it Yeah, I think it'll make us value real human made art more and Value like nuance and mistakes and things not being perfect. You know, yeah I mean that's part of what's relatable exactly art is it in it's part of What makes us appreciate that it did come from a person You know like when you look at a really cool painting like that painting like that doesn't that's not perfect. Yeah, that's supposed to be perfect Just supposed to be an expression. Mm-hmm. It's like a person's work. It's like they're Whatever they are their thing their essence is in that campus. Mm-hmm. You know Yep, how'd you start doing music? Oh, yeah, you said you recorded with your mom when you were little. Yeah, I hold yeah I was six when I did my first show Wow, yeah, so she was in like folk bands and stuff and she also plays Celtic carp and my dad was in a barber shop quartet My great grandma's an opera singer so I just like born into an extremely musical family and when I was like two Uh We were singing happy birthday to one of my aunts and I started singing a harmony And my mom was like what is going on. I was a two-year-old singing harmony I wasn't even able to like sail the words but the notes I was singing were like the harmony part and Then with all her bands that she was playing with all the time I would be at the rehearsals and chiming in and then they would like bring me up on stage to do little guest appearances and It was just very clear that that's what I wanted to do. Wow, and so when I was six We put together our first like hour long set and I played at a library Me and mom together And it was a Mother's Day show Madison, Wisconsin I'm from Meso Manie. It's like a 1500 person really small village basically in Wisconsin And so then I just loved it and so we started touring around the Midwest and played a lot of really random venues like elementary schools libraries Women's health conventions I think the one of the biggest shows I ever did was actually a Boy Scouts thing And it was like 1500 Boy Scouts So I did this from the time it was six till I went solo. I think when I was 12 That's crazy That's an interesting life though to have your path carved out or at least the direction Yeah at a very young age. Yeah, and it wasn't like I was like a Disney star or something So it wasn't like a big scale. It was it was organic. It was small and but I made it decent money and I'm in for a kid And I saved it up and then when I was 12 I bought my first grand piano with the money I'd saved up Oh wow. Yeah And so then I started writing songs at the piano like pop songs and stuff solo And it wasn't cool at that time to be singing with my mom anymore Like you know kids get really mean in middle school And they would like make fun of me because we were singing the silliest like Like we are the colors of the rainbow and never spoke tobacco and my grandma slid down the mountain These are some of the song titles So it was very silly and I got made fun of and so I wanted to sing pop songs And uh I went solo and my mom was not stoked about that because like it had become her career Singing with me like we I would miss like I would miss so much school Um sometimes I had six shows a week So it was like a lot Hey, if I don't but you're helping in perfect Oh look at that No, I don't So when you say your mom wasn't stoked about that, but was that like real friction between you guys? No, I mean she was really supportive but like like I said I had become her career singing with me so I was like She had to adjust to her whole lifestyle and everything for that Wow, you know that would be a hard decision for you then knowing that that's gonna bomb your mom out Yes, and no I just like I was so driven At 12 oh yeah Yeah, well what was the feeling like when you say you're so driven like what was it inside you that made you want to I Just loved making music and performing and writing And I knew I just there was no like option of Anything else I would do with my life and I knew I wasn't gonna sing with my mom my whole life You know, so Well, yeah, so crazy God, that's a hated school so much and I begged to be home schooled and We couldn't figure that out so I ended up dropping out I was 16 Bajay, it's so much Um because I was so focused on music. I felt like I was wasting my time in school. Wow um Yeah There was this teacher that My algebra teacher Um She said something to me that kind of lit a fire under my ass in a good way Um She told me music isn't a career And I was like I'll show you bitch And so I dropped out and I never went back after she said that there's so many teachers that have Influenced over children that say things like that and it's such a crazy irresponsible thing to say Yeah, because I had I hadn't missed um or I hadn't done my homework Because I had a show The night before this and then we had a test and I aced the test. I was a good student. I had like a 3.9 Um But I aced the test and but she was like, but you get out of do your homework Just like everybody else in this class and I was like I had a show I couldn't I didn't have time And she was like well music's not a career That's such a crazy thing to say because it's clearly a career Why do you listen to music who's making it? I know when you go to a concert People are paying is there someone is there someone on stage? Is that a career? You know, fuck does that mean Small town midwest. It's like I mean, I guess all everywhere. It's everywhere. People push the go to school You know get a good job Um, and I just wasn't on that path ever It's very wild to be that focused at such an early age but it is It's something fun about those kind of like I'll show you bitch stories. Yeah Like I could have taken that and been like I could have gone the other direction with that comment You know, right? You could have said oh my god. I don't want to be a loser. Yeah Be homeless. Yeah, okay. She's right and she's an adult so she must know But yeah, I didn't get older and you get older and you realize like there's a lot of people that are teaching They're like they're just teaching because they need a teacher It's not because like we found this magical person is really good at educating children really good at like shaping their minds Their futures. Yeah, no There's some good teachers. I have a lot of them. I had some really good teachers But she was not one of them. It's hard to find someone that's really good at a job that doesn't pay very well It is that's part of the problem. That is part of the problem. It's almost like You would think that if the future of Humanity is very important One of the most important things would be education So one of the most important things would be finding the best teachers and how would you do that? You would pay them Yeah, really well. Yeah, like if we really cared about the future of birth We would spend a ton of money Making sure that these teachers are really well-educated and that they really understand psychology. They really understand how to motivate children You would think that would make a lot of sense right? We're it's so odd how Intelligent and capable and innovative. We are and yet so fucking foolish at the same time That we just allow that generation after generation shitty teachers not getting paid good teachers not getting rewarded You know, and then they they retire and they're like who's at all for yeah, nobody cared nobody nobody Appreciated what I was doing. You have to fight for your pension like This stuff messed up but the education system so crazy because I mean essentially I mean I when you go down the 10-foil hat road It was essentially designed to make factory workers and you know, there wasn't really formal schooling like we have now where children go at an early age and show up and You know and leave their parents all day. That's like the fairly recent thing in human history And the reason why they got people really early is because that's how you can brain wash them Right you get kids when they're 14 15 years old that kind of already have their own view of the world It's hard to shape them be get those little five-year-olds six-year-olds And then if you get preschool, you know because a lot of people have to work You know parents both parents work so then you can get the kids real early and Then you can make little workers out of them Like walking a single-file line and yeah, they control everything Sitting class it's straight ahead Pledge allegiance. Yeah, and if you can't pay attention you must have a disease. So we're gonna give you some medication exactly Yeah, and then you're like I probably should have had some of that medication to be honest probably not No, no I definitely think I'm an undiagnosed ADHD Okay, but I feel like almost everybody else. Well anybody that's any good at anything We had this conversation yesterday with my friend Eric. It was like I think it's a fucking superpower Yeah, I really do I don't think it's negative at all The other's a lot of shit. I can't pay attention to if it's boring. Right if it's boring I check in But then do you like super hyper focus on things Oh, yeah, oh, yeah, like I don't need to sleep. Yeah, I could stay up for days if something is really interesting If I get focused, which is why I have to stay away from video games and stuff like that. Oh, yeah, you just just lock in For hours. Yeah, it's problem. Yeah, but but it's not just video games like anything that I really love But things that I'm not interested in it's like I can't absorb it It just goes in and that's what high school was like for me. It was like I'd be in class I'm like this is torture But then I'd find something I really loved and I'd be like fully locked in But it took a while for me to because I just thought I was gonna be a loser. I'm like clearly I can never hold a job I'm not I can't take direction. I'm not I can't pay attention Like something wrong with me like I'm not I'm just gonna be one of those people That's just kind of a fringe person. It's never you know never fits in anywhere. I'm like, okay This is where I am. I'll just get some weird odd jobs to feed myself with like this literally how I was thinking about my future I'm like, did you know well? I got lucky Things that are unconventional But there's so many children out there that are told like hey Music is in a career, you know, hey, you know, whatever acting writing books whatever it is comedy Somebody there telling you because they didn't do it that you can't do it. Yeah It's a bummer like I was an artist when I was young I wanted to be a comic book illustrator when I was really young and I had one shitty high school art teacher Who was just such a twat? He was so bad and I just a quit art my senior year I was like I don't want to go to this guy's fucking class like cuz it wasn't a big high school And he was the only art teacher so I quit. Well, what did he do? He was just negative He was like you can't cuz I just wanted to draw what I wanted to draw You know, and I was in to comic book stuff like Conan the Barbarian and superheroes and stuff like that and He was like you're not gonna make a living doing that you're most likely you're gonna have to do like advertisements for like diapers like diaper ads and all like fucking diaper at like that's explanation that he used diaper ads And I would look at him and he just looks like he looked depressed He was like this skinny guy with a pop belly and he was probably an artist that didn't make it as an artist And he had to become an art teacher instead Exactly. So he's like bitter and Yeah, well, we realized that too. We looked at his actual art where like huh That's I'm very good. That's so inspired. There's not a lot of fire in that belly You know, he's just a boring dude who's just like depressed and sad. He probably drank a lot We see a skinny person with a big belly. Usually. It's like booze. Yeah This episode is brought to you by armor every week. There's some new wellness hack that people swear by and after a while you start thinking Why do we think we can just outsmart our bodies? That's why armor colostrum caught my attention. It's something the body already recognizes and it has hundreds of these specialized nutrients for gut stuff immunity metabolism etc I first noticed it working around training especially workout recovery Most stuff falls off, but I am still taking this if you want to try armor is offering my listeners 30% off plus Two free gifts go to armor.com slash Rogan I mean there's there's a lot of people like that even in like the music industry I feel like a lot of the experts In the game are just like people who were artists and didn't make it another bitter and then they try to Tell you how everything should go or how you should do everything and oh yeah That got me for a while Well, when I was really young and I feel like those people are like weights that you have to carry You know build up resistance He build up strength from dealing with those bullshit people because they're stupid ideas They get they actually get in your head and you have to wrestle with that for sure Especially when you're super young like I was when I first moved LA. I was 17. Wow by yourself. Yeah, wow Yeah, that's crazy. I was like very green Small town Midwest girl. Wow dropped an LA and like and really pretty. That's a terrible combination Really pretty 17 it was weird as Midwest. Oh God. Yeah, look at you now shaved head tattoo on it Yep, yeah, you came out on the other end good though But isn't it true though though like like those kind of experiences like experience and like Audity and uncertainty and just like the weirdness of like moving to a place like LA when you're 17 Like when you get through it on the other end you're a different person. You're a stronger person for sure I mean every experience makes you stronger right so yeah, I just threw myself into this crazy mix in LA and it was culture shock like So what year was this when you moved to LA? So I was 17 so And I was in the graduate where should have been in the graduating class of 2004 so So somewhere that three 2003 yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, and I lived with the guitar player from Culture Club Really Roy Hay Wow, yeah, he had a house in Venice and I crashed in on his couch and It was wild Wow, boy George Do you hang out with boy George? No never no he wasn't there you ever meet him in the car player on the phone. Oh, oh Yeah while there was a Murder next door the first month I moved in Yeah, there's like a bloody mattress in the little alleyway between the houses and they taped they caution taped off all the houses and they had to question us about like did we hear screaming and So I was just like sitting there on the steps Not allowed to leave while they were taking the body out and Then the coroner after he put the body in the truck he came and sat next to me on the steps and started like hitting on me He's like it was like You're a very beautiful girl. I'm like you were just touching a dead body. This is so weird. Where am I? Oh God Yeah, welcome to LA Yeah, we got over that dead body real quick. Yeah, hey where are you from? Yeah, fucking bloodness bigger name. Yeah Gross Wow, that's a movie mmm-hmm. Well LA in 2003 was still okay Yeah, it was like not bad, you know It was still traffic and everything but it hadn't gone completely sideways sideways like this now it's so weird when I go back like this is unrecognizable It doesn't seem like the same place every sign has a for every building as a for lease sign on it It's like this is nuts like it's hard to believe that this is that you're like When you see things like Detroit You ever see that movie Roger and me. It's a great movie. It's a Michael Moore and it's all about the collapse of the Detroit Automotive industry and how they moved all the plants to Mexico and when they did that the entire economy of Detroit and Flint, Michigan and all these areas just collapse like tens of that hundreds of thousands of people out of work Instantly with no prospects the industry was gone and it's a horrific Dis depiction of what can happen when greedy people decide that they'll they'll completely Sabotage an entire city so they can make you know X amount more dollars and move all the Factors to places where you can pay people a dollar a day or whatever the fuck they pay them and Um, you know, I had seen that but I was like oh that was you know 1980s or 1960s whenever when the when the The place was booming like Detroit was at one point in time. I think the third richest city in the world. Well. Yeah, it's even that's true I'm pretty sure that's true, but Um, it was all just because the automobile manufacturing. I mean everything was made there for Chevy Chrysler all of our big cars and it just Go on like a ghost town like a ghost town and you know and when I visited Detroit to work I'd be like wow this is crazy You see trees growing through the middle of houses the houses are collapsed and like literally Nobody took care of the house. It was abandoned so trees Grow through the roofs and they're reclaiming these homes. You see You go by these gigantic like Buildings like industrial buildings all the windows are broken. Yeah, everything No reliable historical source shows Detroit as the third richest city in the world the common claim is actually the Detroit Was the richest city in the world or at least the US was one of the highest living standards around 1950s not third. Oh, so it's the richest It's that that's the common claim. Oh, what it actually was Very high medium household income around 20% above us average and it's all because of the automotive industry One of the highest home ownership rates in the country Because of this many commentators and locals Histories describe Detroit as the wealthiest city in the US and by some accounts having the highest standard of living in the world in that era articles and tours about Detroit repeatedly referred to it as the wealthiest city in the world in the 1950s not as the third wealthiest So is that true then that it was the wealthiest city in the world? Tours about Detroit's history The third richest city in the world line seems to come from its memes social posts. Okay These posts are often mixed or exaggeration of real facts Detroit truly was exceptionally rich by US standards But rankings like third in the world are not backed by clear clearly documented global per capita income comparisons from that period Well, so it was rich. It was very wealthy very wealthy either way and when you think about the rest of the world You know like you know people have to use that term the 1% like the top 1% do you know what that is like for the world? No, no, what is it? $34,000 no, can we yeah? $34,000 is the top 1% of earth. That's crazy crazy That's crazy. What is it for the US? 1% if I had a guess Let's guess A bet it's like $500,000 a year Do you think what do you think it is? $250 $250 What do you think it is Jamie? That's my guess I don't know the $150 Top 1% Wow All right, let's throw that in perplexity Guess that I didn't want to look What do I say half a million? Top 1% of the US 700,000 Yeah, we're gonna closest Hmm 700 to 800,000 or more depending on the data source in a year That's pretty crazy. So for the United States 700 to $790,000 per year most analysis And then for the rest of the world 34,000 Wow Crazy That's wild That's wild Yeah That's capitalism Yeah But I bet there's probably some truth to In order for the United States to have such a high income these other countries have to get bucked over Globally you only need an annual income on the order of 60,000 to 70,000 to be the top 1% Oh, it used to be 34,000 I'm sure it fluctuates One widely cited analysis found in the 2012 annual income of 50,000 Was enough to be in the global 1% so where's that 34,000 come from? It was a mean that was going around too Oh, fucking memes It might have been kind of true but again, yeah memes I saw it repeated by someone very intelligent I've looked it up before but I think it was a meme Okay Either way I get I get those memes get me all the time Look at this And then you go to the Okay. Either way. I get those memes get me all the time. Oh, oh, it's okay. And then you go to the comments and it's like, oh, I'll fake. Yeah, there's a lot of that. But you know, that's the dirty thing about what they did with Detroit. Like, they decided that they'll take advantage of these people that are ultra poor, that are willing to work with. And it's not just that they get paid a dollar a day, or whatever they get paid. There's no healthcare. There's no benefits. There's no retirement. There's no dental. There's no nothing. You just get that money and then figure it out on your own. And then, you know, you buy a Ford car and you think it's made in America. Commonly repeated claim, the annual income, about $34,000, US puts you to the top 1% of the world. But this comes from rough, older viral estimates. It's not based on current rigorous global data. More careful tools and datasets now suggest that $34,000, places you well above the global median, but likely closer to roughly the top 5 to 10% worldwide, rather than top 1%. Okay. So it appears the socials. But it's 60% still. Yeah. 60% still. Like, right. You're barely getting by. Yeah. If you make $50,000 in America, like you're fucking struggling. Yeah. Unless you're super young, you don't have any good features. And one of those. That's a good question. Like, what's the average public school teacher salary in America? Let's guess. I think it's like 60 grand. I think it's about that. I think it's about that. I think it's about that. I think it's about that. I think it's about that. That's actually. What is it? Don't, don't, don't. 74,000. Public school teachers now average $74,000 to $75,000 per year. So that's like, you know, you're okay. The country live. Yeah. Well, if you live in New York, you're fucked. Yeah. If you live in New York, you live in a box. Yeah. That's pretty good for Wisconsin. Okay. Um, state averages. Lowest paying states to above $90,000 in the highest paying once like California and New York. So California and New York, $90,000. Oh, starting teacher-pacetic, definitely lower than the overall average. Oh. National estimate of the average starting teacher salary about $48,000. Wow. Meaning it takes years of experience and often advanced degrees to reach or exceed that $74,000 average. So if you get like really intelligent people, even if they love children, they're like, I can't do this. I can't live like this. Yeah. You start off at $48,000 a year. That's fucking bonkers. That's not even a thousand dollars a week. And then you have taxes. And then you have an apartment and then you have food and then you have a car. Yeah. Oh. Yeah. How do people do that? Which is weird that we put our pre-op priorities in strange places. Like the amount of money that goes through, you know, various corporations and NGOs and the amount of loans that all this different fucking shit that where our tax dollars go. And you look at that and you're like, that seems so short-sighted. Very. Yeah. No politician runs on that. No politicians like we need to really find the best teachers and pay them the most amount of money that we can afford to make sure that we get the best and the brightest. Everybody's like, fuck you. It's weird. Yeah. It is. People are strange. Yeah. I wish you could like check boxes of where you want your tax dollars to go. Oh, 100%. Yeah. I wanted to go to education or whatever. Yeah. Imagine if that was an option. If when you voted, you could actually vote on where your taxes went. Yeah. Yeah. Like not even voted. It should be actually individually. He might have to pee. He's acting. You know, I know. Yeah. Let him out. Because generally he would be chilling by now. And when he huffs like that, he's usually trying to let you know something. Tell you something. Yeah. He huffs. Yeah. He comes around. He's like, I can't get it. I'm going to chill out, bro. My dog does that when she senses something outside like a coyote or something. She starts huffing. Well, you guys are saying you have a one of them giant Caucasian shepherds. Yeah. It's a central Asian shepherd. We have an alibi. I guess there's a lot of different like breeds under the central Asian Shepherd. They're all hurting dogs, right? They're like protect. It's a protection. Yeah. It's like wolves. Yeah. Pull up the image of an alibi dog. Just Google wolf crusher. Is that what they call them? Yeah. How much does it weigh? She's actually on the smaller side. She's like 105 pounds or something. Oh, that is smaller. But her head is so massive. They get really big. That one can't be real. But they are massive. That's what she looks like. Yeah, pretty much. She's all white. But those dogs are great for just like keeping track of the property. Yeah. Look at that image. This is wolf crusher in the bottom. The bottom right there. All right. Go to the left. Right. Left of the wolf grinder thing? Yeah, that one right there. So that I think is like a Turkish kingle. Which is I think the next dog we're going to get. Because we need another one. Our alibi, Nala, she, I'm just like such an animal lover. So she really should be outside living on the ranch. But she sleeps in bed. So I need an outside dog that's actually watching the livestock. Because this past couple of weeks, we lost 12 chickens and four sheep. To what? Coyotes. Wow. Where do you live? Napa. Napa Valley. Wow. You have that many coyotes out there? Well, they are invading our property right now. It's been the last few weeks. It's been really rough. Well, once they know that there's food there. Yeah. Once they taste the blood, they come back every night. Yeah. I lost all my chickens in California. Yeah. We lost a couple of them every now and then. I had a dog. His name is Johnny Cash. And he was a mastiff. And he was a sweetheart of a dog. But he was huge. He was like 140 pounds solid muscle. And these coyotes made friends with them. And so they would come by the fence and hang out with them. And then eventually he got accustomed to them. And then one day the pool guy accidentally left the gate open. And so he went into the area where the chicken coop is. And the chicken coop is completely protected. But we had one of our chickens was brooding. Do you know it, brooding? Yeah. Yeah. Of course you do. So when you take chickens, when they're brooding, you have to take them away from the other chickens. And you put them in a smaller coop, and they have to perch. So if they perch, then they don't think that they're sitting on an egg, and then they get over it after a while. Yeah. And the coyote trick Johnny into smashing that little chicken coop so that he can get the chicken. What do you mean? I don't know how this motherfucker did it. But it couldn't break down the chicken coop, because it was only like 30 pounds. And so it was over there with Johnny. And me and my wife and my kids were playing some sort of a monopoly or something in the living room. And someone yells coyote. And one of my kids yelled coyote. And we see the coyote running across the backyard with the chicken and its mouth. And then leaps onto the top of the fence. I thought we had this fence. It was probably like six feet tall or something like that. Like Ron iron fence. I don't keep the coyote's out. No. It leapt like a ballerina. Like a gymnast. Toes to the top of the fence. And then off with the chicken and its mouth. And part of me was so impressed that I wasn't even mad. But a part, I was like, what the fuck? I was like, how did he get that? So we go outside and there's Johnny standing there in front of this destroyed chicken coop, which clearly he did. Yeah. And so then he realized that chickens are to be killed. Oh no. And so someone left the gate open again. And he decided to just go right through the big chicken coop. And he killed nine of them before one of my daughters of screaming, Johnny's in the chicken coop. No. Yeah. He made a mess out of it. That's awful. Well, he didn't know. I know. But my chickens are like my pets. I like snuggle with them and stuff. We lost one to a bobcat last week. Yeah, we had some bobcats take some of our two. Yeah. And we lost one to a fox. We will lost one to a fox like a couple weeks ago. Do you free range your chickens? Yeah. Let them out of the coop every day. Yeah. They get out of the coop and then we bring them in at night. But you know, fucking animals, they figure it out. Yeah. So like last week, because we let the chickens out every morning, it was 6 30 in the morning. Miss Coyote came and killed 12, like back to back. Just rich and muddy. Well, on the cameras, that's, we only saw one. Wow. Yeah. So it was like surplus killing. Yeah, thrill killing. Well, they don't. They kill and then they leave them there. And then they go back and get them later. You know, they do that with cats, you know. I mean, mountain lions do that for sure. But yeah, it was weird. He just killed them all and then took like a few of them with them, left some of them. Mm. Motherfuckers. It was awful. I was broken because it took my favorite chicken. And her name was Big Cheeks. She was sweetest. She would like come like a dog. You could like call her name and she would come to you. And do you eat chicken? Yeah. And then my chickens. I don't eat my chickens either, but it's always weird. Because my wife treats the chickens like they're little babies like, hey girls, hey girls. She takes care of them and all that stuff. And then we'll be eating chicken. Yeah. This. It's odd. Yeah. It's odd. I mean, we have cows too. And I eat beef. Do you eat your cows? Well, they're not technically our cows. So we have like an arrangement with a like cattle guy. And he just uses our property to graze them. OK. Because we need the cows because we have a biodynamic vineyard. And so we use the cows in the vineyard. Like for a few months out of the year, just because it creates like a great ecosystem. And also like their footprints make little puddles and the water gathers because we're also dry-farmed. And so we don't water our grapes. Really? Yeah. So why is that? I'm not the wine expert. I think it's because you get like a better flavor profile. If you like, it's more concentrated. if you don't like overload them with water. And also it makes the vine struggle in a good way. So it makes them reach deeper. Like the roots reach deeper into the ground. And so you get more like flavor, I guess. And so this is your own wine? So we don't make the wine. We sell the grapes to I think we have five different winemakers now. They're all doing single estate wines from our property. So they're not blending it with anything. So you can drink the wine from our property, but it's not our label because I don't want to go out there and sell wine and make people taste my wine. And I don't want to go down that whole marketing. It's like I have a whole other job. I don't need that one. That's interesting. We just handle the farming. That's cool, though. If somebody wanted to buy wine from your property, like what are the wines? Well, our property is called glass rock. And so Pilcro, glass rock, Tansy glass rock. Oh, so they all say glass rock. Yeah. I'm sorry. They have like their brand name or whatever. And then underneath it, it'll say like the vineyard site. So if you get it from a glass rock. I'm going to buy some wine from your farm. Oh, I'll send you some. Do you like wine? I do. Oh, I do. I like wine. OK, I'm going to just mill you a package of all of the wines from our property. OK. Cool. It's all Cabernet, but we're taking like an old world approach to it because Napa Cabs are like super powerful. Tansy alcohol. And that's not really my style. I like like French and Italian wines usually. And so all the winemakers we're working with are taking that approach. And so we're picking a little bit earlier, lower sugars, lower alcohol. It's really delicious, delicate, beautiful wine. How did you get involved in this? Well, I got really into wine like in my 20s. And then I took a trip to Napa for a birthday. And it's so beautiful there. Have you been to Napa? Oh, yeah, it's gorgeous. So I just like fell in love with the area. And then I met the love of my life at the grocery store there as buying watermelon. And he asked if he could carry my melon for me. And that was his pickup line. I actually turned. I turned him down though. I said no. Yeah. But we, Carlo Mondavi is his best friend. Gina Mondavi. Mondavi wines. Yeah. So he's grandson of Robert Mondavi. And so they're like best friends. And Carlo, I was living in Park City, Utah at the time. And Carlo had a house in my neighborhood. So that was like our mutual connection friend. And so I would just come to Napa to visit Carlo and teach me about all the wine stuff. And that's how I met Elliot when we're at the grocery store. And then a year later, we got together officially. We just kind of like kept in touch. I was married at the time. He was in a relationship. So it was very dramatic. But I'm sorry, sorry. It was very dramatic. It turned into a crazy divorce five year lawsuit all this crazy. But anyway, yeah, it was fantastic. So then I moved to Napa and moved in with Elliot a year after we met. And so then we, but we lived in St. Helena, which is like a town up to the valley from Napa proper. And it was like a 400 acre ranch out in the middle of nowhere. And we had like a 400 square foot house, like a little tiny cabin basically that we lived in. And after a while, like getting cats and stuff, I was like, this is really small. And I have to make music after recorded and like having a studio in the 400 square foot house. It was just, you know, so then we ended up buying this house down in Napa. And we bought it for the house. But there was a vineyard there. And so we were like, we got to figure out what to do at the vineyard. And it was conventionally farmed up to that point. But we're like irrigated. Like irrigated days, pesticides. Like, you know, like pretty much most of the vineyards. You know. And but we're very all about organic and everything. That's great too. Because one of the things that we were reading the other day was about glyphosate in California wines. And they tested a bunch of California wines and all of them had glyphosate in it. Yeah. So we don't use any of that. That's awesome. Yeah. We're very anti. So we transformed the vineyard into this biodynamic organically farmed. Did you know how to do that before that? Did you read books? How'd you find out how to do it? No, we hired a farmer for a while from France that that was his like forte, basically. So we transformed the vineyard and then now, Eliot's out there doing a lot of the farming. Obviously, we have help. It's because we have like something like nine acres planted a vineyard. And so we have help. But he's out there running the tractors and stuff. Wow. Yeah. He's always done. He's always done like a lot of like tractor work. But not ever in a vineyard. So it's it's all new to us. But it's fun. That that life of like being on a piece of land and growing something there and like living with animals that is like the romantic life. It really is. It really is. It thinks about it. It really is. Is it that cool? It's yeah. It's awesome. You got to come. I think you'll love it. It sounds amazing. I want to do that. I've thought about doing that many times like by in a ranch, living on a ranch. It's just like I get terrified of like adding one more thing to my life that will probably push out some things or eat up time. I just don't know where I'm getting that time from. That's the only hesitation that I have. I just hire help. Yeah, but then you have to talk to them and you have to do that. Yeah, you have to manage it all. You have to do like interpersonal drama between the help, like my experience of shit. What do you like? I don't know. Fuck. You know what I mean? Yeah. Like it's worth it though. Honestly, it really is. It's so peaceful. Like especially being in the industry. I'm going out and like touring and just being in big cities and then coming home to this like peaceful serene ranch. Real balance. Yeah. It's the perfect balance. Yeah. Well, that is probably the key to staying sane as a performer. Like having a balance. I think so. Because so many of them just stay on the road. You kind of like lose your roots. You lose your grounding. Uh huh. You're always performing. Well, and for me, like living in LA really ruined my creativity. How so? I think a lot of it was like I'm I have a tendency to like give everybody too much power. So like all these so-called experts like listening to their opinions about what I was doing. Just got in my head. And so removing myself, being able to remove myself from those characters and personalities telling me what they thought I should be doing. Like writing about thinking about dressing, whatever. I just I need to like have open spaces to really hear my own inner voice and like my gut, you know. So I left LA when I was 23 and I moved up to Oregon for a while. lived in a cabin by yourself. Yeah. Really? How'd you find it? Well I had I had been on tour and I was playing keyboards and singing backups for somebody else. So I can back up a little bit. So I got my first record deal when I was 18 or something and put out an album that was with Warner Brothers Lincoln Park signed me and I was going by the name Holly broke at the time. That's my first and middle name. And so I put out an album through that and it completely like flopped and I went broke and you know LA is so expensive and I had spent all my college savings to move out to LA and make demos and everything. So I had nothing left. So then I had taken for the first time in my life I had to get some jobs like not just performing. So I worked in Barnes and Noble. I taught gymnastics and I edited porn and then I edited porn. Wow. That was a great experience. That's got to be weird. It was weird. How did you take that job? How did you even find out about that job? Well it was a Craigslist ad and it was just like we need video editors and I was like oh I can figure that out because I edit in Pro Tools and stuff music so it can't be that hard. And they said they would train. So I showed up to the interview and a suit and they were like so you know this is adult content because it didn't say that in the ad. That's how they brought it up. You know this is adult content. Yeah. How the fuck would you know? And they were like are you cool with that? And I was like I guess so because I need the job. And so I just took it and it was a nine to five literally just looking at like the most disgusting shit you can imagine. Like two girls, one cup has got nothing to my son. So it was like hard. core porn and it wasn't editing feature films. It was taking like a feature film and then cutting out all the highlights so that I could make like basically reels or like you know it wasn't Instagram but basically like these little clips that people would search and find like a comm shot or like a cream pie or whatever search term they would use to find this specific little clip. And so I would put together these little clips and then tag it with all the search term somebody would use to find it. That was the job. And so it was all just like watch the whole film and pick out all the most disgusting moments you can find and turn that into a clip. And then I started getting this thing called the Tetris effect. Have you heard of that? No. So like if you play Tetris for too long you start seeing like the shapes following you the hallucinate basically. So you'll just like be making dinner or whatever and you're just like hallucinating like the Tetris shapes but I was hallucinating like gaping buttholes and so how long did you do that job? I only lasted two weeks but it was the best paying job out of all of them that I had because I got paid by how many clips I got done in a certain amount of time and so I was making like 30 bucks an hour which is great for a high school dropout you know. And so it was good money but I with the Tetris effect thing happening to me there was like a light socket over my bed that I had taken the light bulb out of because it was too bright and every night when I fall asleep I would like stare at that and see a gaping bottle. This is not healthy. This can't be good for me to continue doing you know. And then I also simultaneously got offered to be a keyboardist for this other singer Duncan Sheik. He's like a 90s he had a song called Barely Breathing in the 90s and I was a fan and so I was like well that sounds like a better job you know and that's music at least. So I went on tour with him for a while. I don't know if it was like a year or two but the whole time I was just like I wish I was making my own music and singing my own music you know it started really eating at me being like the backup musician. And so I was like journaling a lot on tour and I wrote I just want to cabin in the woods where I can set up my studio and be away from all these people and basically I manifested the cabin because like six months after I wrote that at my journal my mom called me and she was like my friend has this property in Oregon and she has a cabin and she's willing to let you live there for free. You just have to work in her art gallery selling art like twice a week and I was like that sounds perfect. Wow. So that's what I did. That's how you want to have an Oregon. So that's how I want to have an Oregon. A part of Oregon. It's the southern coast. It was in the middle of nowhere but it's basically near bandon. Being or bandon dunes golf courses have you heard of that? No. It's a really famous golf course but it was kind of near there and I lived there for like six months set up my studio kind of like had to rediscover my love for music and fall back and love with it because I had like writer's block and I was really depressed. I had also just before that broke up with my boyfriend at the time and my heart was broken and I was just like I was I was a mess. But my cabin was this really small one room cabin with one light bulb and there was no bathroom in it. There was a bathroom outside and so I had to like walk in the middle of the night if I had to walk to the bathroom and I was like, where's the bathroom? Was it an outhouse? No. It had a flushing toilet in a shower but it was like a standalone one. separate from the cabin and like down a path. By itself? Yeah. Just a bathroom? Yeah. Well because the cabin was like an old fire look out that they turned into a cabin so it didn't have like plumbing or something so they like add I don't know. But it was really beautiful and it was also at the top of the sand dunes so I couldn't drive up to it so I'd park to down the hill and hike to it. How far was the hike? Like a quarter mile? Every day? Yeah. Yeah. And so and I didn't have like internet or anything up there. Wow. But it was great but I was terrified of mountain lions the whole time. And so I would like you know walking up that hill at night if I came home from whatever I had had my flashlight and was like looking all directions like and I actually made a a mask to wear on the back of my head because apparently like I contact with a mountain lion like they want to tack and so because they attack you from behind so like we're a mask on the back of my head. Wow. That's who told you how to do that. I don't know Google. There's I don't know if it's real but I did it. It's real for tigers. There's a group of people that work for the government in the Sundar bands. So the Sundar bands is this area in India that's notorious for tigers eating people and apparently over the, well this is Google this number because I'll fuck this up too. I think over the last 200 years something insane like 300,000 people have been killed by tigers in this area. Yeah. That's insane. Yeah. Well there's a lot of villages there and then there's also typhoons. Apparently when these storms happen sometimes people die and they wind up in the river and you know they get washed away and the tigers apparently developed taste for human. And then there's also this thought about the water. The water is not fresh. It's brackish. So the water is a high salt content in it but they still drink it because it's the only salt water. So they're probably constantly irritated. The Sundar bands usually prone to attacking sometimes eating humans causing dozens of deaths every year but not every tiger there is a man-eater. Aww. Sweet. This is a world war. It suggests Sundar band tigers regularly killed 50 to 60 people per year with some estimates over 100 especially including unreported cases. Most recent expert estimates put the average about 22 to 23 human deaths per year in the Sundar bands far lower than the popular perception. Well there's like clusters of attack. Oh yeah, here it is. Local news is reported clusters of attacks. Multiple fishermen and crabcatchers killed within a month showing that risk and spike in certain areas or seasons. I had a bit in my 2009 comedy special about this attack that happened in the Sundar bands where there was four guys in a boat and this tiger swam out to the boat. Little the guy dragged him to shore, dropped his body off, jumped back in the water, swam to the boat, killed another guy, jumped back in the water. The guy dragged him to shore, dropped his body off, jumped back in the water, swam to the boat, killed another guy, jumped back in the water, did it with three guys for he got tired, and the last guy just fucking shit, this pants on the boat by himself, one guy lives. So these are the people that would walk around with these masks on the back of their heads. Oh, wow. Yeah. So I did the right thing. Yeah, you did the right thing. Well, at least for tigers. But there's, I mean, I'll take that. And that crazy, like, these people all living around there. These are honey collectors and the Sundar bands to prevent tiger attacks. Like, you got to know there's a lot of tiger attacks when you were in a fucking mask around your head when you're going to work. Whoo. Yeah. That's creepy. Yeah. Pucking scary. It's a crazy way to die, too. Yeah. Especially a tiger. It's probably pretty quick, though. I guess once they get a hold of you, it's just mush to get the back of your neck. Yeah. I mean, it probably happens best. All right. Yeah. Mountain lion probably take a little longer. I don't know. Yeah. Probably 20 minutes. 15, depending on what you scream. You pick. Yeah. Yeah. We've had to deal with those, too. Did you have a gun or anything when you were up there? No. No. You just think about getting one? No, I didn't actually. I had an axe. It's better than nothing. It was, I was just chopping wood because I had a little bit of a- If you were really afraid of mountain lions, talking me didn't get a gun. I don't know. I didn't even think about it. I don't know why. Wow. That'd be the first thing I thought of. It was not fucking chance in hell. I'm walking around there without a gun. Yeah. I don't think at that point I was in the guns yet. Are you into them now? Yeah. Yeah. We've a gun range at our house. Oh, that's cool. Yeah. Elliot's very into them. I have a carry permit. Good for you. Yeah. Good. Have you ever seen a big cat in the wild? Oh, yeah. I'm out of mine. Yeah. It was the biggest one you saw. Like a real big one? I don't think the ones I saw were huge. They were like 100, maybe 150. The first one I ever saw was just in Colorado. It actually wound up getting one of my dogs. And this was- They got your dog? No. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I lived in a place called Gold Hill. It's like North of Boulder. So it's like 3,000 feet above Boulder. It was fucking beautiful. Gorgeous. I would have stayed there. But it's very high altitude. It's like 8,500 feet above sea level. And my wife got pregnant. And when you are pregnant at very high altitude and you're not a custom to that, it's like you have the flu every day. It's horrible. And we wound up going back to LA. But so that was the first one that I saw. And then I saw one in Santa Barbara. I saw one in actually in Monocido. We were driving and I saw this thing running across the road. I was like, oh, is that a coyote? And then I saw the tail. Yeah, the tail's together. Oh, it's a fucking mountain line. Like that's wild. But that one wasn't even that big. That was like 70 pounds. And then a couple of years ago I was in New York. With my friend Colton and we were driving around this corner. And he goes, do. Look under that tree. Look at that cat. And we see the glowing eyes of this cat because it was like just starting to get dark out. And I was probably 30 yards from this thing in the truck with the binoculars. Just looking at its head. It's fucking head was massive. Like a pumpkin. Like the muscles. The mandible. The mandible muscles were like these things around its head. Just a crushing machine. And these huge forearms. That's what I remember about it the most. His forearms were massive. And it was just sitting there under that tree staring at us. And I was in the truck. Like I wasn't, you know, we were armed. And we were in a truck. And I was still shitting my pants. Like that thing is so big. How much do you think I weighed? At least how much I was in. How much do you think I weighed? At least 180 pounds. Maybe 200. It was a big tom cat. Like that one that we have out front. Like that. Like that size. Wow. Yeah. It was like that one was one of my friend Adam Greentree killed. And he killed that in Colorado. And that one, they had a depredation permit because it was targeting this ranchers' cows. And they had tracked it. And that day, as they were tracking it, it had killed one of these cows. And it was still alive. They just gutted it. It basically took it down and just started eating its organs while it was still alive. Yeah, that's what they do. Yeah. It was pretty rough. Yeah. The monsters. We had an issue with mountain lions up at our other property in Napa. We had sheep. And I was actually on tour with Eminem. And got a text from my neighbor that our sheep had had babies on Valentine's Day. And so I was like, so excited to get home and take care of these lambs. And I guess one of the lambs was rejected by the mother. And so we had to bottle feed it. So, which is the best thing ever. I love that. You know, some people think it's like a unnecessary chore to take care of bottle babies, but I love it. So like three times a day feeding this thing. And she became like a dog. Like she would follow me everywhere. She just left on my front porch. Her name was Valentine. I got a tattoo over actually here. And so like a few months later, we had had like maybe 10 lambs at that point. Little babies are so cute. And like one morning, oh, well, so our property was like 400 acres. And so in our house is so small. We had like other little buildings on the property. So I'd set my studio up in one of the other buildings. And so I would drive up there. It's like a half mile up the driveway. And I was driving one day up to the studio. And I saw this mountain lion like crossing our field. And I really rushed to get my phone out to take a video of it. Of course, they didn't get a very good shot by the time I got the video. And I turned around and went back to the house. I was like, babe, there's a mountain lion on the property. And I showed him the video. And it was like kind of blurry. You couldn't really tell. And we called our neighbor. And I think the sheriff. And showed them the video. And everybody was just like, well, nine times out of 10, when people say they see a mountain lion. It's just a bobcat or like whatever. And I was like, no, I know this is a mountain lion. Like, I know what I'm looking at. You know, I saw the long tail, the whole thing. And they know, like nobody believed me. Like it's bigfoot or something. Yeah. Like I'm like, no, I swear it's a mountain lion. And Ellie believed me. So we went up and took a little hike up the ravine where I'd seen it walk off to. And I swear that like, the lion must have been tracking us. back to the house. Because it that night we were. Because we didn't see it. We went up the ravine and we didn't see the lion anywhere. But we went back home. And then that night we were like, watching TV and scrolling through Instagram or whatever. And he showed me this, you know, the Russians. They like become friends with all these crazy animals, like bears and whatever. So there's like this video of this like Russian guy, like in bed with his mountain lion. Like cuddling with it. It's always Russians. I know, right? There's psycho. They are not regular white people. No. And so he was like, he showed me this video. And he's like, I could never kill one of these unless they fucked with my family. Yeah. That next morning, I take my coffee out onto the front porch like I always did. Look down at the sheep pen. And I see this mom sheep laying with her baby. That's not moving. And I was like, this is something that's not right. And I go down there and sure enough, there's like the thing marks, you know, the deep thing marks in its throat. And it's like stomach eating out. And the mom would not leave its side. And so I go back to the house and I'm like, babe, we lost it. A lamb to the mountain lion. Nobody believed that I saw. And so we called fish. And we called Fish and Wildlife. And they came out and confirmed that it was a mountain lion kill. And so they set up, they were, they put traps in our sheet pen. And you know, to see if we could like trap it and relocate it. And so they stayed on property that night. And I can't even remember all the details. Basically in the middle of the night, we heard this big bang. And we thought, oh, the trap closed. And we opened the door and it wasn't that. It was like one of our sheep had busted through the fence, trying to escape the lion. It was standing in our driveway like right in front of the house. And I was like, oh, fuck. So then Elliot goes down to the sheet pen and he sees the lion. And it's like just like those glowing eyes, you know. And then it darts off into the woods. And it had killed another lamb. And didn't the trap didn't go off. And so then the guys, the trackers, they came down and they were like, okay, let's just like hunt this thing. Like take the dogs. So they had like six dogs. And basically for the next like week, tried to get this lion. And couldn't like the dogs were getting all mixed up. They were like wandering off one direction and then going another direction. And they're like, and like the trackers were like, this has never happened. Like they usually get it. Like what the hell is going on? The dogs are just getting all confused. And we basically, oh, and then another night Elliot was out there thinking that he heard the guy's whistling. But I guess it was the cat's whistling. So Mountain Lion's whistle. Do you know about that? Yeah. It's a crazy sound. You can probably look it up. Mountain Lion whistle. I need to hear that. Yeah. But he heard whistling and he thought it was the trackers like saying like we're here. And he like was just standing out there and then 20 minutes go by and the guys aren't there. And so then they finally pull up and they're like, or he was like, were you guys whistling at me? And they were like, no, like did it sound like this? And he was like, yes. And they said that's the lion's. They whistled to communicate with each other. Put the headphones on so you can hear this. Oh. Oh, that's in, that's to hone ranch. That, I go to that place. That's in California. That's outside of Bakersfield. I'm elk hunted there before. That place to hone ranch, they had one pond where they set up a camera trap. They set up trail cameras. They found 18 different cats on one pond. That's crazy. That's not normal. Oh, they have a lot of cats on there. Yeah. I don't know if they're going to do anything. I know. They're kind of nuts. Texas has the complete opposite approach. Yeah. You just shoot them. Yeah. Yeah. You don't have to have a permit. Well, we got permits. We got permits because they came back and killed every night. And then they took my Valentine. Yeah. And I was like, so hard broken. There was nothing you could do to lock them up. Well, I tried to bring Valentine into the house and put her in a kennel in the kitchen, but try sleeping with a screaming lamb. It was like not a thing. We put her back out and she was fine that night. But the trappers just kept saying, no, we got to just leave everything as is and we'll get them. But then like after a week of hunting them and nothing, it was like, what are we doing? Like we should move these sheep. Like I was fighting for that. But they were just like, no, we got to keep everything as is because if you move them and change the what's going on, it'll like the cattle just like maybe not come back for a while, but then it'll come back. You know? Wow. And so they were like, if we're going to get this thing, we got to leave everything as is. But anyway, so they finally got the cat one night. I actually had to leave town and do a show. And Elliot called me and he actually was the one that shot it. But they got the cat and I felt like this huge sense of relief. And I came home and I thought everything was fine. And we weren't going to lose anymore lambs. And then like a few days later, I woke up and took my coffee outside and there was a mom sheep dead now and she was dragged under the fence. And I was like, what the absolute fuck. So turns out there were two cats hunting together. And that's why the dogs were getting confused and couldn't follow the trail. And I guess like in the spring, a lot of times the moms will like teach their children how to hunt. And so they weren't even like eating the lambs. They were just killing them. And so it was like basically them learning how to hunt, I guess. I don't know. I don't know. But we got another permit and we got the second line. And then everything was peaceful. But we went down from like 20 to three sheep. Oh, God. Yeah, it was awful. Killed 17 sheep. Holy shit. That must be terrifying. Yeah. And I mean, I'm like out there. I'm scared for myself even. Yeah, that's really good. Living out there and like going into my studio and stuff. Like it was really scary and really heartbreaking. Yeah. I could imagine 17 is crazy. Yeah. It was really bad. When you shoot the cat, do you have to bring it somewhere and then they have to like register? Well, they took them the the fish in wildlife to the bodies that yeah, the dogs, you know, treat them. Because people eat them. Like they taste good. Really? Yeah. Yeah. I had some. Oh, my foot. Eat the loin. Like the lint. Like people eat the roasts. It's like pork. Yeah. My friend Steve described it as a superior pork. Yeah. A lot of people eat mountain lion. Interesting. I know. It sounds crazy. I tried it. Have you ever had bear? Bear. Bear. Bear is good. Really? Yeah, believe it or not. People like go. It depends on what the bear is eating. Like if you eat a bear that's eating a lot of fish, it's going to be kind of funky. If you catch a bear that's been like eating a dead deer for like a couple of weeks, that's not good. You know, a moose. Yeah. Like a dead moose. That's the taste kind of rock or something. Yeah, it'll smell rotten. But if you catch one that's been eating blueberries, it's like some of the most delicious meat. Yeah. My friend Steve Ronella, he has a show called meat eater and he was hunting black bears in Alaska over this blueberry patch. He shot this black bear and he's cooking it and as he's butchering it, he did it all in camera as he's butchering it like the fat from the bear is purple. Wow. He's like blueberry. Wow. And so like the flavor of blueberries was in the meat itself. That's interesting. He's like it's the most insane meat. It's delicious. I try that. Yeah, it's good. I like elk, because my favorite. Um, where do you guys live in Napa when you guys goin' back? Tomorrow. No, tonight. I got something. I'll give you something. Really? Yeah, I got a freezer bag. I have a commercial freezer out here. Oh sick. Smell. Oh, good. Yeah. Let's go. That's by far my favorite. Yeah. Oh, it's delicious. It's the best for you too. Like you feel different when you eat it. You're like, oh, it's like, it's got so much nutrients in it. You've done the access to your hunting and why we want to do that so bad. Oh, it's, first of all, if you use a rifle, it's 100% guaranteed. Really? Yeah. I'm not getting a deer. There's so many of them. You have to kill them. There's un-lun-nigh in particular. There's 30,000 deer and 3,000 people. Holy shit. Yeah. And so in un-lun-nigh, you can actually stay at the four seasons. So you stay at this like amazing resort and then you go hunt. That's awesome. Yeah. So I went with, uh, well, we've got a few years, but I went with a whole group of friends one time. It was like seven of us. We went there. And we had the best time. We hunted and then we ate access deer and it's like your, your, overlook in the oceans is gorgeous paradise. Yeah. That sounds like a great thing to do. Yeah. That sounds like a great thing to do. But there, that's a deer that evolved around tigers and they are so fast, like unbelievably fast. Like if you shoot at one, that's 30 yards away and it hears that the bow go off, it'll be out of the way before the arrow gets to it. They, what's called jumping the string, they just duck down and take off. It's not like they know an arrow is coming at them. They just know to run and the way they run is they load up their muscles by getting low and then springing forward. But they do it so fast that they're, okay, 30, 40 yards. Let's say 40 yards. So 40 yards, you've got an arrow that's going 290 feet a second. From the sound of the bow going off, the top of the bow, bow going off, they're gone. Yeah. Which is insane. But can you, can you hunt with rifle out there? Oh yeah. Oh yeah. Oh yeah. That's how they do most of the hunting out there. Okay. That we went and I went with a bunch of like very experienced bow hunters, like top of the food chain bow hunters and we all got access deer. But it was a struggle. It's like a lot of them jump the string. A lot, you got it. We wound up realizing that the best time to go was at night, not at night, but in the afternoon, because in the afternoon, it's much windier. And so it hides your sound. Because they're just on edge because they get hunted 365 days a year. There's no off season and they have to hunt them because there's so many of them. Like you'll like driving at night, you'll stop and turn the headlights to a field and you see thousands of us. Like they're, they're infested, infested with delicious animals. And there's no predators. There's zero predators other than people. So they bring in snipers and people with night vision and they shoot them at night and they use headshots. And when you go to like the restaurants in the four seasons, they serve access deer. Oh, that's cool. Oh, it's delicious. It's so good. What does that place malleable farms? I think it is. They have insane venison sliders from access deer. They're so good. I mean, it's it's one of the most delicious game animals. When we went, we did a podcast from there and, you know, we call it podcasts from Paradise. We're all having a good time. And because after that, 150 different people went the next year and only one of them was successful with a bow. Every other one was like, fuck this, I'm getting a rifle. This is ridiculous. These things are so fast. But it's an animal that evolved, like I said, around tigers. Yeah. King Kamehameha in Hawaii was given access deer as a gift from the leader of India in like the 1800s. That's how they got there. And then they just took over. Oh, yeah, they took over there everywhere. Yeah. Maui has a lot of them too. But they also have this is a company called Maui Newy. So like if you love gaming, you can actually buy game meat. So wild game meat in America, you can't sell. So if you buy, like say if you buy elk, like you go to a restaurant, you buy elk. You're getting it from New Zealand. Oh, wow. Most likely. Yeah. Most I think most of the elk that they serve in restaurants in America is coming from New Zealand because New Zealand is a similar situation, no predators. And they brought in all these animals and then they're just infested. And most of it's probably not even really elk. It's probably stag, which is super similar anyway. When you get like farm raised elk, that's you're probably getting it from somewhere else. I mean, they probably have some places that are allowed to sell farm raised elk in America. I don't know which one that would be. But wild game like that you hunt, you cannot sell. Because that's how they almost went extinct in this country. And the turn of the century, in the beginning of the, I guess like the 1800s, at the beginning of the 1900s, they brought elk to the point of extinction almost. And the same with white-tailed deer, because they were market hunting. So because don't had refrigerators, you'd have to get meat all the time. And so they were just shooting all of them. Wow. Yeah. I didn't know that. Yeah. But in Maui, you have so many of them. And then they set up a company called Maui Newey. And Maui Newey, you can buy bone broth, venison bone broth. They have meat sticks. And you could buy actual venison and they'll freeze it and then ship it to you. So if you want wild game, it's like one of the best places. And one of the most delicious wild game too. Yeah. Yeah. Access to your delicious. Yeah. We want to do that. Oh, it's a great hunt. Yeah. Because you can't, first of all, you're in paradise and you're going to see them. It's not like if you go on an elk hunt, like you could be in the mountains for days before you find an elk. Because you got to find out where they are. You got to listen for bugles. You got to, you know, you got to glass a lot. You look around. You might not be successful. If you, if you bring a rifle to one eye, you 100% are going to be successful. And you can kill a bunch of them. You know, you could like package it for you and send it home to you. Yeah. There's a guy named Bob the butcher, shout out to Bob. He'll butcher him for you and package it for you and all that jazz. And you know, if you give enough time, they'll freeze it. And we actually brought it back to the four seasons and they put it in their commercial freezer. They froze it for us. And then we, you know, put it in these big, yetty coolers and brought it back on the plane. Nice. Yeah. And you could like literally get a year supply of your meat in like a few days. If you wanted to do that and just eat medicine for the rest of the year. Yeah. It's pretty cool. Yeah. And I'm like, do you ever year up and up up to two guys go deer hunting? Well, I don't. Elliot does. Elliot does. I help him clean it though. I've been doing that since I was a little girl. Oh, really? My dad taught me when I was a kid and I would like he hunted a lot and I would just, he would send me on these like routes to kick the deer out to him, you know? Oh, okay. So I would like do the hiking kick him out and push. Yeah. And then we would, uh, we would all gather. This is usually around Thanksgiving. We'd all gather in the basement and like cut the meat up and skin and all that. Wow. So I like doing that part. Well, that's cool. It's a great way to be connected to what you're eating. Yeah. Exactly. It's a completely different experience. You have a different appreciation for it. Oh, yeah. You know, then something you just like buy at the store or an restaurant, like it's totally different appreciation. Oh, 100%. And also it's like, you know, it's organic. So it's an actual wild animal. And it's the best life that this animal is ever going to live and including the best death. Because especially if you, if you're good with a rifle, if you're, you're accurate, you practice like it's, it's dead like that. And it's not like getting, it's gut's eaten out by a mountain lion, you know, or anything else. It's going to eat it. Or old age or winter. All the horrible ways that animals die. Yeah. And they're teeth grind down to nothing and they essentially starve to death or. Oh. Yeah. Okay. That's rough. It's a hard life. Yeah. So how'd you wind up leaving Oregon? Um, walking in a quarter mile every day by ourselves. Flashlight trying to avoid being eaten. Yep. I had to get out of there. Well, I, I figured out that I needed, I needed to find a way to make a living in music. And so I reached out to the only person I had left in my corner, musically, because like at that point, I had lost my record deal. My lawyer dropped me, my manager dropped me. Um, but I was still technically signed to UMPG publishing. And, um, so I reached out to my like point person there who hadn't spoken to in years. And I said, help me figure out how to make a living in music. I gotta figure this out. Cause that's the only thing I really know how to do and I'm a dropout. So I can't really get a good job. Oh, the editing porn. Yeah. And I don't want to do that. And so, um, I met with her in New York. I flew to New York and we just sat down and had like this long conversation. And I had like ever since I was like 13 when I first heard Stan by Eminem, I had always been like, I love that combination of like a pretty, you know, female vocal with hip-hop. And so I'd always wanted to do something like that. Um, and so I said, I think I could write hooks for hip-hop songs. Like that was kind of like my, the what I told her I wanted to do. And she was like, well, we just signed this producer named Alex Kidd and, uh, that's kind of like his wheelhouse. So you guys should meet. And, um, so I flew back to Oregon and she connected us on email and I would go down to the little cafe to get internet. And so, um, I would just, I emailed him and he emailed me back some beats that he had just made. And, um, I would just sit there with my headphones in the cafe and like, hum little melodies into my computer. And then, and sent him back. But the first one I did was called Love the Way You Lie. And a month after I sent Alex that hook, uh, it was a number one song. Wow. What was that like? Almost crazy. Going from like, broke and living in the woods in this cabin and then writing a song that literally took over the world. Yeah. So that's kind of what took me out of Oregon. Because after that I started getting phone calls, you know, from everybody wanting songs from me. Um, um, had me and Alex come out to work on detox for Dr. Dre. Um, and Puff Daddy wanted a song that's where coming home came in to play. Um, yeah, it was just crazy. Suddenly I was, I went from nobody caring to everybody trying to get a song. That's got to be such an insane experience to be like, what am I doing? I'm out in a cabin. I got to go outside to pee. I got to walk quarter mile to the house. You're like completely isolated. Do you have any friends out there at all? Yeah. I had a couple friends. I made a couple friends when I was out there. And then also another. I know. I was on those. Yeah. Off to the races. Mm-hmm. It's crazy. I had to be very strange. It was and I also felt so much pressure because like. That's crazy. How did you adjust to that? I had to be very strange. It was and I also felt so much pressure because like I definitely had a little imposter syndrome when I wrote that song because I was just like that was too easy. Like it took me 15 minutes right the hook and I sent it off and suddenly everybody wanted to get a song for me and I was like that must have been a fluke. Like this is never gonna happen again. I'm never gonna write another one like this or whatever and so so many people were just wanting songs and I felt so much pressure to deliver a hit song every time you know and I was always so hard on myself that it that became even worse. Just I would just wait too much pressure on myself. I got invited to do so many songwriting sessions but at that point like I had pretty much only ever written by myself and so being like thrown in rooms with songwriters and producers and stuff. I was so shy. I just felt it was always so hard for me to open up creatively in front of strangers. So I would just like walk out of the sessions crying and just be like I suck. I can't do this. You know it was hard. That was the hardest part for me. Just performing in front of the bunch of people. Just like yeah just trying to like create hit songs every time I go into a writing session. I just felt like there were some such high expectations on what I would deliver and I can't force creativity. It's like it just happens or it doesn't you know but I felt like I had to deliver a hit song every time and because I put that pressure on myself it kind of shut down my creativity and it made it really hard for me to do that. So then I ended up like just leaving a lot of sessions and feeling like I didn't deserve to be where I was and not good enough. How'd you get over that? I didn't really. I don't think I ever got over that. I did a lot of these sessions for a while because I felt like I had to and then I just kind of stopped taking them. I stopped agreeing to do them because it was just too hard on me. So explain these kind of sessions. So you go to a studio with producers and like and they essentially say okay let's try to create something ready go. And then you're in there and your creative process is you by yourself like trying to connect with emotions and thoughts and ideas and also near around people and also you're a little weirded out because you've been living in a fucking cabin by yourself. That and you're editing porn for two weeks and it's like that and I just had this like hit song that was huge, was massive and I just felt like there were such high expectations on me. Right. So it was very hard. Everybody that I've ever met who's really good has imposter syndrome. Yeah. I think it's a part of being genuinely creative because I think like genuinely creative people don't have that kind of weird ego. We're like yeah, finally I'm getting mine because some people do have that where they feel like they deserve this. But I feel like at least most genuinely creative people that I've talked to when something big happens to them they're like this is fucking crazy. Like all of my comedian friends when they start to hit like when something happens when they get like a viral clip and then they do a Netflix special or something like that in the beginning they're like bro I'm kind of freaking out. I'm like we all are. It's okay. Like this is the thing. Like you're gonna feel fucking weird. Yeah. That thing, whatever it is that imposter syndrome I think is a good thing. I think it's a sign that you have a healthy mind or at least maybe not healthy. Maybe that's the right word. You have a creative mind. You know and that you're in also everything completely changes. You have a hit song all of a sudden out of nowhere. Number one like what the fuck like that kind of shift in paradigm like that is not normal to get adjusted to. You have to be a complete psycho to go to be like all right, this is perfect. This is what I've been waiting for. You know? Yeah. Because everybody sees people either on television or you know in you see them in the media and you think that's a different kind of thing than me. I'm not a famous person. I'm not popular. I'm not successful. I'm just me. I'm like and then all of a sudden people know who you are and love you and you're like oh my god I'm a fraud. Yeah. They don't know about their shitty songs I've read. Exactly. They don't know that like 99% of the songs that I write suck. Oh the one you know. I think that's the case with everything though. You know when I talk to all my friends that are comics also the same thing like out of the jokes that they write like 10 of them suck and then one one pops through. But the thing is like you just gotta keep cranking. Keep keep trying to find whatever it is. That was the hard part for me was to keep going and keep trying. How would you do it? How did you like what is your creative process? My creative process well now a big part of it is not living in LA. I have to be out in the middle of nowhere and I like to be alone in the room. Even if I'm writing to somebody else's beat or something like that I just like to sit with myself and do it. And I just try to focus on how it makes me feel. You know I spent some time trying to write what I thought other people wanted to hear and I feel like those songs always sucked. And so just like letting it flow almost like I'm not writing it like I'm channeling it or something. That's better. The songs that like take less effort tend to be the better songs. And the songs that I slave over to try to get them perfect and overthink they end up doing nothing. John Melanchab told me he wrote, I need a lover that won't drive me crazy in the shower. Like that done. He was just saying it. No it makes total sense. I write stuff in the shower. I write stuff when I'm cooking dinner. It's not like going to a studio from this hour to this hour and write a song. It never works for me to do that. So it'll just be random. Like this new album I'm putting out there's a song called Motivation. And I remember it came to me when I was standing outside the vet's office when my dog was getting surgery on her ACL or whatever they call it in dog world. I was just like pacing outside during her surgery and this like song started coming to me. Did she have to do that thing where they cut the bone? Yeah. Yeah. I had a dog. She had to have both of her back legs on that way. She blew out both of them. It was brutal. The recovery was brutal. It's horrible. She even cooks. She was also a puppy. So she had like puppy energy and we had to sedate her and it was awful. Yeah. And so do you take specific time to just like sit and try to write or do you just like let ideas come to you? I usually just let ideas come to me. I like take a lot of voice notes in my phone or I'll write down lyric ideas that come to me. And then I need to be better about making time for it because when I do make time to like go in and be creative, it usually does. There's a balance. It's like I can't force it but I also can't be lazy and like just avoid it completely. You know? So I try to balance that. Have you ever read the War of Art? I started it. I have copies out there. I'll give you a copy if you don't have one. I think I started the book on tape. I have a copy of the book. It's a very small book. It's very easy but it's all about that. And Pressfield was kind of like an underachiever until he was like 40 and then somewhere along the line he realized that what he really has to do is be a professional. So he developed this methodology of like channeling the muse. And instead of thinking of the muse as being, you know, instead of thinking of creativity as being the sort of abstract thing, he thought of it as a thing that you summon. Like legitimately show up every day at the same time in front of your computer or your notebook or whatever. However you do it and literally say I am here to summon the muse. Like I'm here respectfully to call upon you for your gifts. And if you just show up every day and treat it like that, it will work. Which is a really crazy thought. It makes sense. Yeah. Yeah. Do you do it? I do it. Yeah. I don't do it every day. But when I do it, yeah. I just sit there and I don't say I'm summoning the muse. I think he does. Yeah. What I do is I go, here we go. I just say here we go. I say here we go. And then I start typing. And a lot of times it's like almost like working out. Like in the beginning, you're like, you know, you got to warm up, you got to get things going. You know, you get on the bike a little bit, crack a sweat, start stretching. You know, I'm typing in the beginning. It's just like, well, I fucking suck. These thoughts are useless. This is not yeah. I got something. Yeah. And I figured out a way to do it with it is more organic for me. Because I used to just try to write things that were funny. And now what I do is just write a right on a subject like a thing. And then I'll let it like if I'm writing about whatever fucking global change, global warming fucking earthquakes, whatever I'm writing about, I'll let it shift to what I don't try to stay on subject. Yeah, you let it just. Yeah. It might completely change to something totally different, a completely different subject. And I just let it. And then I just try to get out of my own way and write as much as possible. And then I go over it and try to extract things from that. And I take those and I copy and paste them into something else. And then I'll expand on that idea. Like I'll start fresh with this idea. And it's it's just a numbers game. It's just a numbers and time game. The amount of numbers, the amount of time that you spend thinking about stuff, you get these little gifts. Yeah. And that's where the concept of the muse comes from is because it's almost like it's like some sort of a divine entity. Yeah. It feels like that. It does feel like that. Yeah. Everybody says that whether it's authors or musicians or comedians or anybody creative, they say it feels like it's not even my idea. Like it just came to me out of nowhere, right, which is the weirdest thing about the creative process. It's not like like a structure you're putting together like a house. You know, like I know how to do this, I lay down the foundation. I put up the girders. I do the it's like this thing, like this spiritual weird entity that you're in contact with. Yeah, for sure. And it's not you because you're like empty when the ideas come. They just like make their way into your head. You're like, whoa, where the fuck did that come? But then you're responding to your emotional like how it makes you feel like reading what you're channeling or listening to it. And for me, like I focus mostly on that, like how is it making me feel? Is it causing some type of like emotional response? You know, yeah. And then those are the magic moments that I would have to be so weird to do it in a studio with a bunch of people you don't know with under pressure. Yeah, for me, it doesn't work. I don't know how some people are like thrive in that environment. I don't know how. Yeah, get it. A lot of rappers. I just love doing that. But I think they feed off of each other, you know? And like a lot of rappers they tell me that like, like they're doing it for their boys. So like as they're like hitting like new lines and coming up with new new rhymes and new wraps, it's like they're they're fucking around with their friends and like having a good time. Like impressing them with like strong lines and great bars. And I mean, I've definitely had some moments like that, especially like you can find people you have really good chemistry with, then it can work. Right. But generally speaking, just going into a room with strangers that doesn't, doesn't work for me. But yeah, there are some people that like I feel super connected to creatively and I can do that with them. Well, I'd imagine everybody's got their own different little process, but it's just a matter of like doing something, like making the time for it. And I would imagine also it's like as you get really busy and successful and there's a lot of obligations, it's harder and harder to find that still time. Well, yeah. And there's like cycles like right now, I'm not writing at all because I'm just in, you know, album promotion mode. And so it's all about like content and all this other stuff. So I haven't written a song in a long time. So and it's also kind of like a muscle like songwriting for me. Once I get into a songwriting zone, it's like coming like way easier all the time. But I have to like warm up to get into it and get back in that headspace and you know, warm up that muscle again. That makes sense. Like marathon running. Yeah. Yeah, something. Yeah. I think everything's like that. Yeah. You got into like grooves. Yeah. So when you're in the middle of promotion, like what is the difference in like do you have ideas that still come to you and he just sort of jot them down and go one day I'll go back to that. Yeah. Yeah. I just store them. Does this feel like when you're in promotion time, does it feel weird? Like you got to go out and sell it and you got to I don't know about it. I enjoy all the different aspects of it. You know, I love that it's all creative for the most part. Like even just like making content and filming stuff. It's a it's a art form too. So I feel like I'm still like getting my creativity out. It's just not in the songwriting. So is it like one of those things where in the back of your mind, you're like eventually this will come to an end and I'm going to get back to it. And then it starts to like it chat. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I get the itch. Yeah. Time to get back. Yeah. I'm already feeling it. I'm ready to ready. Got you. Well, I would imagine that being in a place like Napa where you're like around like peaceful, you know, beautiful background and you know, nature and it's probably like way easier to get in touch with your mind to be trapped in Manhattan. For sure. Be be fuck you. You know, that's exactly why I've stayed away from cities. Yeah. I guess everybody has to find their own thing because I have friends who thrive off that shit. I have friends who live in New York City. They can't live anywhere else. I didn't love it. Yeah. I maybe it's because I grew up in a rural environment. I think my friends are all broken. So I think it's a comfort thing because like I grew up in the woods. So it feels like home to be out in the middle of nowhere. But if I grew up in the city, that might feel more comfortable for me. And I might be able to hear myself think better there. You know, everybody's different. I think everybody who goes to the woods realizes they need it. I think it's a vitamin. It really do. I think it's just like how sunlight gives you vitamin D. I think there's something about being in wilderness where you're in tune with all those life forms. Because it's not as simple as oh, there's a bird. There's a squirrel. No, the fucking grounds alive. The trees are alive. There's energy that all these things have that is being distributed somehow or another in this strange array of information and of just life that's all around you that you feel. Yeah. Yeah. Feel when you're out there. Yeah. Like forest bathing. Yeah. That's real. Yeah, for sure. And it's also there's no fucking cell phone service. So I think there's something to that too because the the earth feels cleaner. If that makes any sense. Like when I'm in a place that has no cell phone service, I swear there's a subtle difference in the way the world feels. It's like a vortex. Yeah. Yeah, because I think like in this room, we have Wi-Fi with both of phones. Like I think there's signals that are just out there that we can't you know, you can't tune it in and go, oh, that's a video. My friend sending me you don't do that. But there's something about whatever the fuck that stuff is that I think your body recognizes as a fog. They say it fucks with bees. Like cell phone signals in particular really fucks with bees. And like, okay, well, fucks with bees. I bet it fucks with us too. Oh, I'm sure. Yeah. Yeah. Because it feels like if you're in a place with no cell phone service, the world feels different. And it's not just because you can't check your phone. It's the world. The actual the actual air around you feels different. Yeah, I definitely feel that too. Yeah. No, I think that's how people are supposed to live. I think we're doing some weird shit to ourselves. You know, producer. But the weird shit is cool in a lot of ways, you know, because it's how we meet each other how we talk to each other. You know, how we find out about good balance of it all, you know, exactly. Yeah. Do you have goals? Yeah. What are your goals? Like, because some people don't, some people just enjoy just doing. They don't think about like goals. Yeah. I mean, I have like things I want to do before I die. We don't want to. Well, I want to be better about putting out more music because because I do put so much pressure on myself, it's taken me like five years between each album to make one and put it out. Second, I second gas myself all the time. And and I think like I've put so much pressure on it. Like this has to be the, you know, the sound that the mark I leave on the world. And this is what I want to be known for. I'm like, fuck all that. Just capture a moment in time. Like what am I feeling right now? What vibe am I into? And capture that zeitgeist musically. And then move on to the next one. Like it doesn't all have to be cohesive. I used to just be like put so much pressure on it being cohesive and having like a certain sound or whatever. But now I'm just like, okay, right, like right now this album, I'm calling the genre bubble grunge because it's like inspired by the 90s pop and grunge kind of like combined together. But then the next album, I might totally flip it and do something totally different. And that's okay. Like it doesn't all have to be like it can be different. I can, I can change it up. And so my goal in regards to that is to put out an album every year instead of every five years. That's a big shift. It's a big shift. But I don't want to look back and just wish I would have released more because I have so much music sitting on hard drives and on Dropbox folder that's never come out because I would like make a bunch of music and then second guess it and start over and start over again. It's not good enough. It's not good enough. I'm like, I should have just put everything out. I should have just been okay with like, you know, putting out a bad album or a bad song. It's okay. But you think that's making it and putting it out. Perhaps a part of the creative process is boiling it down to something that you do. I think so. But I think I take that way too far. Do you think that that is in part because of the pressure that you experience for your first thing that hits is number one, which is crazy experience. Yeah. And you were really young. Yeah. You know, also I'd boom. Yeah. Maybe that was part of it. It just made me like extra hard on myself. But I want to have more fun and not take it so seriously. So how do you plan on doing that? How do you plan on having more fun and not taking it so seriously? I am already doing it. Yeah. Yeah. I think I just turned 40 and I think that also has something to do with it because I'm just like seeing the end. Like what am I doing here? I just like torturing myself with all this pressure and not just like having fun and being creative and throwing it out there, you know. So I'm already doing that. I'm already having more fun. That's great. But that is one of the beautiful things that comes with age. Yeah. You give me less luck. Giving less fucks and just accumulating experiences to the point where you recognize like the flaws in your past thinking and why did this? And I'm not happy I did that. And you gather enough of those experiences where you get a better map of the territory. Like, I think I get it now. Yeah. And then you're really established now too. So it's like you don't have to be as worried about whether or not, you know. Yeah. It's a beautiful thing that comes with age, they're not giving a fuck or not, you know, like one of the funniest things to see an old person doesn't give a fuck. Oh, yeah. Old people who don't give a fuck and just say anything. Yeah. They're fun. It comes to their mind. It's hilarious. They're fun. Well, thank you for being here. So have fun. Yeah. I enjoyed it. I enjoyed talking to you and I really enjoy your music. Oh, thank you. Can I talk a little bit about the album that I'm putting out? Absolutely. Okay. It's called wasted potential. It's about me wasting my potential. But it's an album where I'm telling the story of my like upbringing in small town, Wisconsin, discovering my sexuality and just like it's like a coming of age story. And it's a part of my story. I don't think a lot of people know. They mostly know me from working with Eminem and all the things I did after that. But I just felt like it was time. I think because I turned 40 recently, I was like, thinking about my childhood a lot and like realizing I didn't appreciate it enough. I had a great childhood. And so I just wanted to tell that part of my story. Kind of for the first time ever. So I'm excited to get that out. And it's important for me to get it off my chest and out so that I could like finally, I was depressed about turning 40. Oh, yeah. So depressed about it. But I think it's because I didn't feel like I was like present during my childhood and I mean, I was working a lot. And so it was important for me to get it off my chest and be at a point now where I feel like I can accept that I'm 40 and actually enjoy it. And so that was the cold gist of the album. What do you really think that you have wasted potential? Oh, yeah. Really? How's how? Well, when I made music for my mom growing up, it was a completely different lifestyle to now making music in, you know, LA and the big world of music. I didn't realize how much work it would be. I didn't realize the grind. And I think when I first got into it, I was kind of lazy about it because I was like, I honestly, I probably should have been a Gen Z because I was just like, like does I don't want to do this? You know? And so a lot of decisions I made in my career. I feel like, you know, it was all my fault basically all the failures that I've had. I realized were my fault for being, you know, lazy or not putting in the effort and the grind. And yeah, so I wasted a lot of potential. I had all so many huge opportunities when I was younger in the music industry. And then I kind of just like, it was like, it was too much work. But is that a part of like a work-life balance? Yeah. I mean, that's what Gen Z would say. Right? They're all about the work-life balance. But in, I feel like in my generation, the millennials, it was all about like work, work, work, work, work, work, you know? And I wasn't doing that as much. So yeah, I didn't, I didn't feel like, like turning 40. I was like, I'm not in the place where I thought I'd be. I didn't do all the things I wanted to do by the stage. And I was feeling kind of like a failure. And so... Do you think that that self-critical mindset though is just one of those things? It's just like, it's actually inherent to anybody that's creative and ambitious. Like you're always going to be self-critical. And that's probably one of the reasons why your music is so good. Like this idea, it's not good enough. It's not good enough. It's like obsessing over things where you only release something every five years. But then look at the quality of the songs that you do release that you do love. It's like there's a balance in there. Like a little bit of self-critical, a little bit of like, I'm not doing enough. It's let it in there, but don't believe it, you know? Life is life. It's life. All, you know, it's not all like leave a legacy. Because in the end, it really doesn't matter. I know. It's true. That's why I'm just so I'm trying to have more fun now. It's great. Yeah. Both things. Both things. Listen, your music's awesome. Thank you. And it was awesome seeing you with Eminem. It was great. Oh yeah, you can do the show. Yeah. And also that's how Marshall was named. He was named after he told you that. Yeah. So thank you. And best of luck with your album with everything else in the future. This is really cool. Enjoy it. Thank you. All right. Bye everybody.