And step on the mall and use the crypto. That's your name, right? That is pretty good. I mean, you do not believe the deviations. I think some people just cough it up as they're cling on airball. I don't know what they're doing with my name. What's the ban? Mallono. Oh, it's French, correct? Yeah, but it's like French French, not like Quebec French. Oh, OK. What is the difference between Quebec French and French French? Well, you know, like the Queen and Cockney. That's the difference, right? So Quebec French is like the gutter, at least by the French they consider to be the gutter French. How rude. I know. It's funny when it be very nice people. How rude? Yeah, they're very nice people in there. And for the French to look down and put a lot to the second mall board, it takes a lot. Anyway, for folks listening to this, we're in Toronto right now. This is the first time I've met stuff and I've met him just a few moments ago down in the lobby. But I've seen a lot of your internet videos. And I was particularly impressed with several, but really the Trayvon Martin one. I think you covered that better than anyone I saw online on TV in the media. You gave a real, you know, the quote, the Fox Fair and balanced. You gave a real fair and balanced approach to that subject. And to me personally, as a human being, that was one of the most frustrating events of our day. Not just because a young man lost his life, not just because of the race baiting that went on with it. But the cloudy, muddy thinking that I felt was perpetrated by media and by politicians. And by all these people that were looking to capitalize on that event, the thinking was so disingenuous. And they were showing these photos of him when he was like, a fucking baby. Yeah. And it was really confusing stuff to me. And actually, if you looked at George Zimmerman over time, the pictures got wider and wider. Like they actually applied photo retouching to make him look wider. Oh, yeah. I mean, it was like Gestapo style propaganda. It was just wretched. Wow. I didn't know that they did that. You know, they edited his 911 call, right? Really? So, so Zimmerman called, and he said there's some suspicious guy rolling around the neighborhood. And then the dispatcher said, what is his race? And he said, well, I think he's black. And NBC added it out the question. So it sounded like there's a suspicious guy rolling around the neighborhood. I think he's black. Like he just saw, wow. But he was actually responding to a question. They edited that out. The woman lost her job. And then he's now suing NBC for defamation because they edited it to make him sound like a racist. Well, I don't know if it's really bright for him to be involved any further in the legal system. But I think what they did was it was horrendous. It was very strange. It was very strange to watch. You know what my approach? And you know, it was certainly one I live in a color blind society. And I think that would be great. So for me, I always try to try and look at it like, well, what if he wasn't black? What if he was just some other white guy? What if they were both black? Or what if they were both rainbow colored with dolphin heads? I don't know, right? But what if it had nothing to do with the sort of black energy around race, the negative energy around race? And so for me, I really just wanted to look at it like, you know, that Joe Friday thing, you know, what are the facts? What are the facts? What are the facts? Because I really have strong strength and it's hard to do with this culture to just treat people like color doesn't matter. And that means you don't get to play the race card. Yeah. And I think Rudy would be great if we could achieve that. Yeah. It seems so hard for people to get to. Well, it's too common. It's like it's almost it's just a natural part of our culture. We've got that pattern that's been so firmly established. That path has been so deeply carved that people just slide right into it. Well, I wonder too, you know, this horrible shooting that just happened in the Navy. Yeah. In Washington, Alexis, I wonder. I didn't approve of this. Yeah. Bullshit, hypothetical. But I wonder if this guy was a black guy. And apparently he had a real chip on his shoulder about, you know, I'm not going to get ahead because they hate me. He's like, he hates me. And all that. He had a real chip on his shoulder about being black and trying to get ahead in a white world or whatever. I wonder if the degree to which they did not intervene in his obviously escalating mental health problems was because they were afraid that he was going to launch some complaint about racism or something like that. I wonder if that actually scares people off from dealing with people just like their human beings because they're afraid of that kind of getting pulled and then getting dragged into something got off. Yeah. Well, it's almost like we're still responding to the echoes of the imbalance of the past, the slavery era echoes and the civil rights era echoes of the 50s and 60s. It's almost like we're still not even the ship hasn't. We haven't made it level yet. It's almost like that's why this stuff is still tolerated. It's very confusing to me though when it's so obvious and so blatant like it was in this case. It's also very frustrating to me because as a person who deals with a lot of martial artists and a lot of people with anger issues have become really incredible members of society and really admirable human beings. People who've learned to harness this frustrated energy that a lot of young men have if they grow up and confused households or with their absentee parents or bad neighborhoods or whatever the factors are that lead them to be these angry people, that can be channeled and it can be channeled into a way that develops character and it doesn't happen. So when I see a guy like Trayvon Martin do what he does and get shot and die and all this, I see a massive loss of potential just as a human being, a young human being. You know, a young human being that commits crimes with his bad things, but 18 is not even necessarily a bad person. What they are more than anything is just misuse potential and misguided. A human being is so incredibly complex or so many facets and aspects to being a person and developing as a productive member of society that it needs guidance and most people don't get that guidance and it's up to them to kind of find it. I mean, you see an unbelievable tragedy like that. I always think of like all the terms and the steps and the other possibilities that might have happened, the intervention, some teachers somewhere, some relatives or someone who would have just seen something going off the rails and really stepped in and made a difference. I think that tidal wave can be stopped early. I think once it gains real momentum, it's tough later on. It's very tough. But you know, early intervention, really seeing people who are going off the rails and then really working in the arena, if we could get that down as a society, and I think we live in a different world. We would, I absolutely agree with you. We would work living a different world, but it is very, very, very difficult to do. It's incredibly difficult to pull someone out of that momentum, the momentum of being a bad person and almost reveling in it, which is a big aspect of gangster rap or art. Well, they've done some really interesting studies work because just over the last 10 or 15 years, we see inside the brain, but for the first time, everything in these fMRI's are getting really seen inside the brain. And they've found people who've been identified as status and they show them pictures of people being heard intentionally. And they're like happy joy centers light up. They're little like brain gamsoms. Light up. That's so messed up. You know, because it's like opposite planet. You know, because we all think we've got this thing from religion, like everyone has a soul and we're all kind of equal, all made in the image of God of this and that and the other. But according to this people, I've talked to a research that I've done. I mean, there's some real predators among us who really are not kind of like us at all. And it's somebody who sees some cat being driven over and he giggles and finds that really quite thrilling. I mean, that I didn't even know what species that is, but I think there are not people out there that they make life kind of difficult for the rest of us. Yeah, it's a real issue. It's very scary and how are these people becoming that? Is it because of nature or nurture? Is it because of abuse that they've personally suffered that sort of stimulating? It seems to be very young. Yeah, well, so I mean, this is the fascinating thing about epigenetics, right? So I mean, when I was a kid growing up, there was this nature versus nurture, like you got your genes that's what you're born with, right? And then maybe you can influence it a bit with nature. But what they're finding out now is that genes turn on and off depending on experience. So they found like if you have a particular gene and you're a boy and you are physically abused as a child, almost reserved. You're gonna end up on the bad side of things. Like you're gonna end up buying a aggressive criminal jail or whatever, right? Now if you don't have that gene you're abused, you've liked you, but it's less. And so certain genes for aggression get turned on and strengthened based upon your experiences. You're gonna end up with a deck twins who grew up in different households, gonna end up with different genetics based on their environment. So that's what's so important about it. Something I focus a lot on is a parenting parent, it seems to be so many people are out there and they're just so messed up. Like you just, you can't rewind and you can't send them down a bit from path. But if you kind of look at the next generation, the next generation, what if we could get the percentage of people spanking their children down from 90%. I mean, it seems so weird in the 21st century that that's how parents are really focused on that. It's still 90%. Depending on where you counted 80% to 90%. It's less so in Europe like in Sweden, I think it's been banned since like 1973. And you'll know what a hell of a hole sweetness quite than me, they're even fine. But yeah, it's still 80% to 90% in, well, it's legal here. It's legal in America. From two to 12, you can hit a child and can't, and legally just not at the face and not with an implement. So it's just, and of course these are the most vulnerable, tender, helpless, dependent, lack of freedom members of society. And but it's hard to see how are we in society that we have. You had this great bit last night, of course you have the show of anyone who's listened to this much. But you did this great bit like what a space and the Indians come down and try and understand you had Kim Kardashian, which of course is tough enough. But what if they tried to understand that culture, wouldn't it make my sense? But you realize that the hierarchy's in everything that we have, the wars, the prisons, the you for prisons, you need prison guns, for wars, you need soldiers. You can't get healthy, happy, well-adjusted people to go out and do that kind of stuff. So I think our whole society relies upon the maltreatment of children and if we didn't have that, a lot of people who got a lot of money in power right now to kind of find themselves out in the cult. Yeah, I don't necessarily think that it's engineered that way, but I certainly think it takes advantage of the situation at hand. Yeah, I don't think there's a secret cabal. Yeah, it's a secret handshake, but you know, lions get together to hunt gazelles. They don't have to flot it out in some smoky room and it's just their instincts to go get the gazelles. That does get sort of hypothesized though, right? That that is what's happening, that they're trying to keep people down with a lack of education. That's why there's such little funding for schools and they're trying to keep people poor because poor people don't raise their kids correctly and so on and so forth and they're continues. I think we have an instinct for domination as human beings and I think animals do too and they don't have secret cabal as a Rockefeller's in smoky room and organizing everything. I think we just have an instinct for domination and it plays itself out, but I don't think it's something written down and handed out in secret brails or something like that. I agree with you. I think we also have an instinct for escalation. And no matter what, we always want more. We make $500 a week, we want seven. If we control Middle East, we want to control Africa. It's just a natural thing that if we do a certain thing, we will continue to do it and try to push the envelope further and further until we hit some sort of a wall or resistance. I think in America, we are starting to see that wall built up and gain momentum. The wall of resistance against the Syria invasion was bigger than anything that I'd ever seen in my entire life. I'd never seen a university across the board, the entire country go fuck this. Yeah, yeah. This is crazy. This might be the first war. It's actually stopped. Yeah. Like in history, it's a bit of first war that popular resentment and resistance has actually stopped against all the financial, military, industrial complex momentum that is in the States, which is huge. I don't know if you know the fact that the people who vote voted yes for the war in Syria, that 86% more funding for the military industrial complex than the people who voted now. That's just voting to send money in blood to the donors, right? I mean, it's horrible. But the fact that it might actually be pushed back and the fact that the Russian guy, Putin is telling the recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize to not have a war. Yes. I mean, what is the upside down universe that we live in? Not only to have a Putin set a really interesting thing about claiming that citizens of the United States are exceptional and how dangerous that is and about how we are all just human beings and to have anybody established as being the exceptional people. It is a very dangerous idea. And for the United States to sort of promote this idea that we as Americans are different, like that's, he's absolutely right. If an individual displays that characteristics that are called entitled or narcissistic, which means that just good things should come to me no matter what. If they're not brought to me, I'm just gonna go take them. And that's a really dangerous personality trait, but somehow it's elevated through the magic of patriotism into like wonderful stuff, right? I find it fascinating. I mean, and as I get older, I find it even more fascinating because the guy like Obama, I'm 46. The guy like Obama is just a couple of years older than me. So it's not like this thing where when I was a boy and I would look at the president, yeah. They were way up there. They were different. You know, it was, there were always a part of this system already, political system, educational system, skull and bones, all that. But this Obama guy was the first guy that doesn't fit that mold to me. And it's close to my age. And you know, the concept of me being a president is just the most ridiculous thing of all time to me. But this guy is essentially my, obviously more educated than me, but essentially my age. And I find it amazing how he has gone from being this political outsider, this rebel, this guy who's gonna change this and close Guantanamo Bay. And then all suddenly gets in. And he's exactly the same thing that we've seen time and time again over the last eight years. It's the same person as Bush. I mean, it's more and more drones, more detainees. And the only reason he ended the war in Iraq was like fast, they had to get tragic. You know, if you have hope for the guy, right? The reason that they had to pull the troops out of Iraq was that Iraq was gonna stop holding the troops criminally responsible for what they were doing because they were facing such resistance from the population for the occupation. They finally said, okay, you guys don't get to get out of jail for equal, anymore. We're gonna start applying international military or military law to your troops. And Obama's like, okay, fire up there. The airplanes we're gonna pull those buggas out because they're gonna subject to the rule of law. And they had to get them out that way. Well, how about what he wrote on his own website, thechange.org website about whistleblowers. And then removed it. You know, after it was called out on and after the Edward Snowden case, like he said, like what did you say about whistleblowers? Or are you exposing illegal activities? When you were running for president, and now here you are, the most, as far as at presidents go, there's never been a president that has been harder on whistleblowers than Obama. Never. Nor have there been more revelations and more important revelations as far as the direction of society and privacy in the United States. But that was exposed by these whistleblowers that has a massive impact on our culture. Massive impact on who has the right, do I have a right to send a naked photo to a friend as a joke, or is that gonna be held against me? You know, if I don't pay my taxes, or if I have a dispute with the government over a certain issue, are you gonna pull things out of emails because they have someone writes bomb in an email? You know, as a joke, does that get flagged? And it's convenient, that's a good, if you may well use. Are you kidding me? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I defrag that. I don't know what you're gonna call it now. I'm gonna use that word anymore. Yeah, I mean, but there's a lot of hot words. And to me, that's a dangerous thing. I think what we're in right now as far as the whole privacy thing is this strange, transitionary period to a point where I think ultimately there will be no privacy. And I think I don't think that's bad because look, we were all really cool and everyone was really nice to each other. Well, the privacy wouldn't be as important. It becomes important when people violate privacy and there's stalkers and there's people that fuck with people and people that have agendas to mess with people's lives. But ultimately privacy, we're dealing with information and the trend in society and technology seems to be the dissolving of boundaries between people and information. And I think it's been amazing as far as education. When you look at your phone, you can Google something, you get of answers to any question. I mean, this is, we live in an amazing time when it comes to that. But that trend, you know, we talked about escalation. It's just what we do. We're getting that trend, we'll escalate further and further. And I think ultimately it'll escalate to the point where there'll be no more secrets. Yeah, I mean, I mean, the technology that we're having this conversation, we can broadcast it to like millions of people. Yeah, I got like 50 million downloads of my shell, which for our philosophy, shall we? It's incredibly crazy, right? But this is huge, right? It's like these two bullet trains go on across the landscape, right? And the technology of control versus the technology of illumination, I think a really, really battling. And we got to keep pushing the gas to stay ahead because we've got this incredible thing you mentioned in the show recently, like the gatekeepers are down, right? We can have this conversation broadcast it directly to people. Nobody has to tell us what we can talk about. Nobody tells us what words we can use or what concepts we can explore or anything like that, which is unprecedented except maybe for the couldn't vote press in like the 15th century when they printed the Bible and started handing it out to peasants in a language that they could actually understand, because before that you had to know Latin and all that and that crap. Right, right. So they got to read the Bible for the first time and like, oh, shit, are you kidding me? This is in here, this is in here. They started to develop their own thoughts about it. And that broke down the monopoly of the Catholic Christendomite, which had been around since the Dark Ages. So when you get information to people, you fragment the central narrative of a society, which is great. You know, that's what you want. Central narratives are incredibly dangerous. You know, we had a great central narratives, the Nazis. Yeah. Wonderful central narratives about the role of the white race to dominate all the other races and Germany's manifest destiny in Europe. Communist had a great story about that we were rising the policy area destruction of the middle classes and the end of the bourgeoisie. Narratives that are really well-inflicted and universal and incredibly dangerous. All the lemons run the same way. So we've got this massive air strike on a central narrative which comes directly out of this technology, which is where you can get exposed at viewpoints that you never would have been exposed to before. Do you think before the internet, American media would be playing anything that Vladimir Putin said about Syria? You never even know the guy said anything, totally right. Now you can get it all. And you can connect with people. How am I talking about it? But the comedy stuff where I think the connection stuff is really a good theme in the show, doesn't it? But there's a race because the degree to which we can shatter the central narrative and individualize what we're doing in the world is, you know, they're racing with us to try and control and make us afraid to communicate with each other and afraid to get to the truth. And I really view that as a pretty important race of like the next 10 years. Yeah, I agree. I think there's the real issue in this world is information and then of course, the big one is the monopolization of resources. And the monopolization of resources, which are I believe, I think resources should be a global asset for human beings. I don't think anybody should be able to control the amount of oil. It's just like I don't think people should be able to control water. I think it's ridiculous. The idea that a group of human beings decide to control water, I feel like that's an almost of terrorism, the idea of keeping water from people that need water, the idea of keeping oil from people. I mean, if we all agree that we're going to use oil, the idea that one person can decide who owns this ship that has been in the ground for millions and millions of years, just because you planted a flag on a patch of dirt. It's fucked in craziness. But that's where all the influence comes from. The influence comes from this massive amount of money that you can gain by controlling monopolizing natural resources. And it's just like when they used to be able to monopolize the information that was received, just like when William Randolph Hurst basically controlled most of what information got out to people, when you know, ran newspapers. That's a dangerous aspect of our world that is eventually, I think, going to crumble into the way of its own bullshit. I just don't see how it can continue. I don't see how people can continue to live the way we're living right now in the face of the information that we're being presented with. What you know, the great thing is once you go outside and narrative, don't you find me, for me, I feel pretty retarded most of the time. Like I'm not a dumb guy, but I see so much information out there. So many stories, like I do all this research for my shows and stuff like that, I feel like I barely scratched the surface. There's so much information about there. And with the central narrative, you feel like, well, we're Catholic, so we're Jews, so we're Jesuit, so we got it down. We got the whole thing down, right? But the great thing is once you shatter that central narrative, you realize there's such a vast amount of conflicting information and opinions and perspectives. And I don't know what the hell is true half the time. And I'm lucky to get 10% of it. So I think that it reads a kind of humility in that it's the opposite of the desire to dominate. The desire to dominate is, well, I know what the hell people should do. And by God, I'm going to make them do it. I know they shouldn't smoke marijuana. And if they can smoke marijuana, I'm going to round them up with cats and blue uniforms and throw them in that prison cell, where 200,000 times a year they get raped. And America more men get raped than women. You know, they get around. It's all prison stuff, right? So when you feel like you just know how the hell everyone else should live. The way we should help the poor is take money from these guys by force, give it to a giant bureaucracy and have little drops of it drip down to the poor that keep them in a dependent state. So they keep voting for more and more government. If you really feel like you know exactly how people should live and what they should do, then you have no problem bringing out the airstrikes at the military and the police and the prison system. But if you humble and you realize that we're pretty much retarded about everything, there's a few things that I'm good at, but most of it, you know, I'm not going to draw my own teeth. I'm going to do my own appendix, I barely even clean my own house, right? But once you get exposed to a vast amount of contradictory information, you realize just, like we're all kind of stupid. And that's why we should be humble and not order each other around at the point of a gun, which was so addictive to doing these days. So I just got a great quote about that, about the bonfire of enlightenment, and the bonfire of enlightenment grows brighter, the surface area of ignorance becomes more illuminated. And you realize the more you learn, the more there is to learn, and then it becomes impossible. We're giving all these doubles every 18 months these days. Like there's just no possibility that anyone can be anywhere close to mastering any significant voice. It's great, though. I think that's great because I think that there's a real danger in claiming, you know, that the kind of arrogance that comes from especially very highly educated people in specific areas, if you're very highly educated in a specific area. They oftentimes are arrogant about things that they're ignorant about. And it's interesting to watch that become an impossibility. You're faced with such a massive amount of data that's just online on my Twitter every day. I'm exposed to dozens and dozens of fascinating stories. But we've got to go to any one. We got to go, because we've got to go make it back away. But just love to dig into all this stuff. I'd love to learn every language there is. And I'd love to know every song that was here. But you can't. I would like to get at least a small grasp of what the fuck they're talking about. When they're talking about quantum physics. I would really just, that's never going to happen. I think once you understand quantum physics, it changes on you. It's one of those things. Yeah, it's like that fog. Findments, quote, if you think you understand quantum physics and you don't understand quantum physics. I've read so many articles on it. I don't know what I will explain it to someone will say this is amazing thing that just came out today. But I don't know what it means. I think some geometric object that explains the interactions of particles. As long as my shoes don't turn into shocks that eat my feet because of some quantum flux, I'm OK with it. I know it does some creepy shit deep down. I know that also by the time it comes to the level of your sense, like it all cancels out. This is still going to be a table tomorrow. But deep down in the roots of matter, some really crazy shit is going on. Yeah, subatomic part is blinking in and out of existence, existing simultaneously in two different places. In motion and still at the same time. Basically what they're saying is that the heart of matter itself, the smallest measurable portion of reality, is magic. That's really what they're saying. You're going to get emails from physicists saying, oh, don't call it magic. They're not magic. It's just a little confusing. Thank you for correcting me. I had magic to us. But then these microphones are kind of magic to me. These little magic penises that record everything we say. It's amazing. I had Dr. Amik Goswami on my podcast. He was one of the great quantum physicists of our age who was just impossible to understand. I mean, he would just go on so far into the bushes. The magic is gone. It's talking magic. I mean, it's so strange. But that is the accepted, smallest, measurable part of the universe. And it's amazing when you really start to think about what we know about nature and nature being fractal. In so many different ways, the universe itself being fractal. And then when you get down to the smallest, measurable components of reality itself, being this strange fiction almost world. It's so bizarre. It's impossible to know everything. So I think this age of enlightenment that we're in right now is really unprecedented. I don't think there's ever been a time like this. Yeah. And once you break down the narrative, right? So my boring education was all in history of philosophy and science. And in the Renaissance and the Enlightenment is when people said, well, God doesn't answer anything. God is a barrier to an answer. Because the moment you say God did it, it's like, we've got an answer. God did it. And then it becomes something that's blasphemous to the question. And so when people began to dance, the God thing, then they began to be able to explore. They began to say, OK, well, if God didn't do it, what the hell did we get here? What is the world? And what is the sun? How does it work and all that? I think we're kind of getting there. And in a really painful, difficult way. I think we're kind of getting there. Because we've got this narrative. And in the future, I guarantee you, it's going to be completely insane to look back and say, people ever believe the shit. I mean, the guys who cut their own balls off to go join that comment. You look back and you say, well, this wasn't there, someone who said, when you're bringing out the pink in shears and taking off your, your tidy whities, there's got to be someone who's saying, we're kind of going in the wrong direction here. But I think in the future, I can look back at us like that and say, what were they thinking? Like we have these geographical areas called countries. And in those countries, we have a tiny group of people with all the guns in the world. And they tell everyone else what to do. And somehow we think, this is going to work out fine. I can't believe I was recording. I wasn't recording up until just now. Oh, I have a lot of the way. Yeah, I have to get the first, remember, 27 minutes. We got it there. We got it there. So folks who are listening to us, we'll normalize this. Here's the video. We've seen this voice quality goes, I'm considered. Yeah, I'm so stuck at technology. I'm sorry. I can't believe that this wasn't recording. But what we just saw it again. We're one guy. I can't, I'm not quite on my room. I'm not quite on physics. I'm like, oh, you know, that's where we solve everything. We solved the 27 minutes. That is it. The whole fucking thing, yeah. Well, I'll make sure it gets normalized. But the, you know, the, I think the enormity of the times we live in, really it's, it's really easy for us to not notice it or not. It's so normal to just be able to call someone and your cell phone. So normal to be able to get on the internet and just get information. I think the enormity of this as far as what is that, what that's like in comparison to having to go to a library and to getting your education from a school, which you're getting, you know, with your taking science, you're getting it from this professor. And this professor's going to recommend these books. And there may be a completely opposing point of view that you're never going to be exposed to. Whereas if you Google something, you know, and then Google that phrase and then debunked, you know, man, I can't tell you how many fucking times I've had someone send me something. And then I'll say Google, well, you just set me and then debunked and then was talked. And if you haven't read that stuff, then I've talked to me because if you only get one slide, it's not any side of it. Yeah, you're not. You're getting this weird sort of confirmation bi-SC thing that exists. I've heard that argument as to why the internet is bad, that one of the bad things about the internet is you seek out like-minded people and you sort of confirm each other's biases and get together and pat each other on the back. Sort of, yes. But I feel like those are just little camps, you know, outside of the wilderness of information, which is New York City, you know. You might have a tent where all you assholes get together and say, you're at the 6,000 years old. But you know, you're an hours walk from Manhattan. Right. You're not going to survive. Well, I don't remember all those people talking about it unity of narrative and seeking out like-minded people really complaining about, say, the church that I grew up in. Or the public school that I grew up in, where I was taught that, you know, governments are necessary beneficial, wonderful. And, you know, we fought the Second World War to defend against national socialism and we won. And like, we had, we already had that narrative. Now, people are fragmenting into their own narratives, but that's still way better than one monolithic nonsense pile that we're all supposed to be. socialism and we won. We already had that narrative. Now people are fragmenting into their own narratives, but that's still way better than one monolithic nonsense pile that we're all supposed to be buying. Yes, yeah. It's also like as a human being, what we have been given is this insane amount of potential in the mind and in the body's ability to manipulate matter and nature. But yet we don't have a real direction book. And we're sort of figuring out the abilities of this mind and the possibilities of society and our interactions with each other and the accumulation of information that we can all rely on each different aspect of our culture to contribute, whether it's history or science or mathematics and all this stuff comes together and the potential of it is almost unfathomable. It's almost impossible to really truly wrap our heads around and we only figure out how to do things right by trial and error. We have to fuck up and then go, oh, we can't do that again and we have to drop a nuclear bomb and go, well, that's a disaster. And we have to, you know, we have this incredible device, the human mind and we have a very little idea of how to utilize it properly or even less control or engineer, the engineer thought into how to develop people properly and to try to enforce that as a culture or to recommend that or try to just try, I mean, when you see the President on television, what do they always deal with, the leader of the free world? Well, they deal with conflict. They're constantly dealing with conflict and loss and finances and they're dealing with all these things that are important to people that are developed. But how much thought is actually given to developing people? How much thought, I mean, what is last time you heard the President of the United States talk about, what we really need to do is focus on the lowest of our ladder with the weakest link in our chain of human beings and strengthen that. When we have better country, if we have less losers, when we, I mean, isn't that something we should concentrate on but it never gets brought up. There's never talk about enriching poor neighborhoods or setting up community centers, finding ways to help young children that don't have guidance, bringing in people and have fucking companies like Haliburton funded. A lot of money, we build Detroit. Fuck Iraq, we build Detroit. Fuck going to countries and blowing them up and rebuilding them. Concentrate them, it's already fucked up by here and it's never done. And we look at it in terms of, it's almost like going from presidential run to presidential runs, like these four year terms that they do. In a way, it's almost like the idea of having a president and having these small four year terms, it's like you're always going to concentrate on what just problems as far as like conflict and money. You're always going to concentrate on what's on the tip of people's tongues all the time but not on the engineering of society. Yeah, it's all here in overvention. Yes. Right. So I'll just play and watch them all with whatever fucking crisis is coming up at the moment and it's not how we going to make it. So the society can be saying in 40 years, I mean, I don't care about any of that stuff. I mean, that's why there's a national debt. That's why there's war because it's just about getting elected. Like the Federal Reserve just said, well, we're going to keep buying $85 billion worth of US pressure. Even though we said we were going to stop because there's going to be a lot of action coming up and what are they care if they pass it, developed the unborn. I mean, they're going to be long gone. So we have this weird society that just these really narrow times slices, which is just all about whack them all and satisfying the noises people and keeping those people. But the actual work of preventing in the long line, which is so easy, the science is so easy. It's so simple. You know, reason with your children don't hit your children to treat them like their reasonable human beings. I mean, I'm a dad. I've been a stay at home dad for like four and a half years. Never had to raise my voice at my daughter. Never had to yell at her. Never had to hit her. Never had to have a time out. We just reason things through. They could stop doing that about 18 months of age to study show. They could stop the reason they could stop to negotiate. And if we had that, if we had that as a society, I can virtually guarantee you that would be almost no criminal. I agree, but don't you think that there's an economic aspect to that that really can't be ignored? You have the ability to do that. Very few people do. That's the real issue is that so many people give a working mom and a working dad and the kids by the time they see their parents, they mean they're really good or bad. It's four five o'clock at night. If they're lucky, you know, most of the time you'd be seated parents afterwards. So it's six, seven, you know. And they've been in there since eight o'clock in the morning. Yeah. There is us didn't everyone. They got to feed them, bait them. They don't really have time for quality interaction. It's very difficult. The idea that people have been sold that you can raise a child and have a full career. I think it's madness. You can't do it. You can't do it. Yeah. And this idea that daycare just kind of you put them in daycare and that's fine. It's just not true. I mean, statistically, factually scientifically, their kids who are in daycare from other 20 hours a week experience exactly the same symptoms of those who've been abandoned by their mothers. Like it's the experience of maternal abandonment at a very fundamental level that changes their neurological system, it changes their stress responses, changes that cortisol levels, permanent that you measure 10, 20 years later. It's still the same. So this idea that you can just march people off to work, hey, it's great for the government. I mean, government loves it when both parents work because then they got two taxes, two tax bases, two tax cattle out there, spitting money into the treasury, plus then they got to put the kid in daycare. So then there's somebody else who they can tax who's taking care of the kids. So the government loves it. It really offers the GDP because everyone's working. They get much more taxes. And the problems of having kids in daycare, well, they get shut down to the next generation and who they help cares about that kid's not going to vote right. Yeah, but what's the solution to that? I mean, it's going to be so difficult. Sacrifice. Sacrifice. You know, I mean, people go to war. You know, I mean, millions and millions of people went to war in the Second World War, the First World War. I mean, marching into hailstones of bullets and typhus and all that kind of horrible stuff that went on. You know, when we say to people, I say to people all the time, you know, if you went to college, you know, you live like a dog. Most people live like dogs when they go to college for four years because it was a good investment. Well, take that same approach. If you want to have kids, you know, both have to work. Just downsize. Get rid of the second car. Just when I asked me to go fight Japanese and you know, in some God for taking out into the Pacific, you know, it's just maybe moved to a small house, moved to an apartment just a couple of years when the kids, you know, kids' personalities 90% down by the time they're four. You know, so all you got to do is first couple of years to sacrifice. Have someone at home, breastfeed your child for God's sake. That's what nature intended and sacrifice. You know, so maybe you don't get the big screen TV, but you will know what you get. It's like a happy child throughout your life. And you get to develop a human being in the correct way. Yeah, it's so easy for us to say, you know, my wife is to stay at home wife, stay at home mom, and, you know, we have three children. and you know, we're very fortunate and everything works out great. But in a unique financial situation that can happen, whereas I have a lot of friends that are not in that situation. They're trying to raise children and they're also trying to put them in daycare during the day and you know, the wife just went back to work as we have bills and this and that. And you see it and it's not the way a child wants to develop and it doesn't seem healthy. No, I mean, historically, you know, but you're getting back happy when I look in the fields. You go hunting, you bring your kids into it. I mean, that's this supposed to be it's so weird that for the first century to say, children are supposed to be with their parents. You know, how would they be have a drift away that that even needs to be said? What do you think that is? Do you think that's just a desire for materialism and some sort of a rationalization that you can go after both that you can acquire all these things and keep up with the Joneses and just have someone else. Take care of the busy work of taking care of your child. What you do now is how it is. Yeah, I think what happened was and this sort of happened in the 60s and 70s. Right? So in the 50s, this whole amazing series of labor saving devices came out which freed women from the end of the treasury of, you know, dishwashers came out and laundry machines and vacuum cleaners and all that kind of stuff, right? So basically a huge amount of work was done by machines now which freed up women and of course a lot of them were like, oh, great. I think what's really been downgraded is the skills required to be a good parent. I mean, I've done some tough stuff in my life. I've built build businesses. I started this crazy show and all that kind of stuff. Nothing to me is more exciting and challenging than being a dad. I mean, I know it's a cliche. It was always and was wonderful thing, but it really is an incredible thing to do, especially if you don't do any of the aggression stuff because then you got to come up with other stuff, right? Because of dealing with conflicts, otherwise of dealing with quote bad behavior. It's really challenging. Now if you just spent any kids and yelling at them, I guess it's not that challenging and hell of a lot not fun, right? Because all you're doing is spending your whole day trying to control someone who doesn't want to be controlled. That's not fun. So I think that because we've got this hit on them and put them in timeouts and send them to bed without dinner and yell at them or whatever, I mean, it's retarded. Anyone could do that. You know, you can get an angry robot to do that, right? And I don't do that stuff. Then you have a really unique challenge of negotiating with someone who's three. I mean, how exciting is that? One of the incredible challenge that is, but because we've still got to hitting and the yelling and all of that, it's retarded. And so people say, well, this is stupid and not fun, so I'm going to go to work. But it's only stupid and not fun because you're yelling and hitting. If you didn't do that, it would be really engaging. And it's the most important aspect of our society, the most important aspect of our families, the most important aspect of our communities is developing good human beings. And it's one that we leave to everybody. We just go, look, I know you fucked your whole life up, but take care of this person and that person will in turn transfer everything that you've taught them and any way that you fucked them up or made them better. And they're going to go out into the world and spread that energy and it literally changes the tone of our entire society and culture. And it's fascinating when you see different cultures all throughout the world, if you study the different ways they interact with their children, how vastly different the culture itself becomes. Because of these styles of interaction. And our culture, which is thought to be universally one of the most materialistic, selfish, childlike cultures, is one of the cultures that embraces this idea of the two parents working, the childcare, this idea of how we've decided to promote becoming a human being. It's one of the most awkward, weird examples of it on earth. Could you imagine this year anniversary? And when Andrew got married a couple of years ago, he would be with his wife a long time. Imagine it's your anniversary and she calls you after she says, Joe, you know, that's our anniversary. We got a nice dinner, I got babysitter in there and you say, oh man, I can't believe what a cliche. I can believe you forgot. Oh, sorry. Oh my God, that's so embarrassing. But I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll pull out someone we don't know. And I'm going to pay the minimum wage to go after dinner with you. Now they may not speak great English. You know what they mean. I mean, they've never met you before, but I'm sure it's going to be pretty much the same as going after dinner with me here ever, loving husband. So let me just make that call to the agency to send out some half-broken English speaking guy to go after dinner with you and it's going to be exactly the same. She will be like, no, it's not the same because your way husband needs the same guy I don't even know. But why the hell would we think parenting is any different? Yeah. I mean, how the hell do you replace the bond of the, you grew the baby, the child that you're belly and you breastfeed the child and you know that child. But I'm sure some minimum wage stranger who's recating it and have a job every four months is going to be exactly the same as a parent. It's not the same. And the consequences to society is significant. And it's very frustrating to me when I communicate with people that are especially women that are single that are thinking about having a child in their own. I've had so many ideas and I get it. I get that they want a child and I get that they want a child and that they can't find a man. I understand that it's hard to find somebody for Pat will win. But God damn is not a terrible idea. It works sometimes. Sometimes it works. Sometimes you get lucky and you meet someone and somewhere along the line. Some people hold things out of the building in the way that doesn't mean that that should be your next step. It's engineered. It would engineered that way. God, such a disaster. Statistically, right? I mean statistically and factually there's no single was predictive for kids outcome than being from a single mom household. I hate to say it because I mean again lots of single moms out there really trying to do the right thing. Some single moms like husband got hit by a child. And all the support, all the vast majority of it didn't find the man or just ditch the man or whatever. And it is catastrophic for kids. The statistics are horrendous. 80% of rapists come from a single parent household. 85% of murderers. Again not that they all turn out that way. But when you see these significantly negative elements a lot of it gets traced back. There's this theory that says that the economy is kind of working this out fairly well. They say that if marriage rates have stayed at the 1970 levels. Because you know marriage rates are really low these days. And marriage is not necessarily the same as two people committing to stay together while they raise a kid. But we would have almost no deficit in government spending in marriage rates have stayed as they did in 1970. You know when majority of vast majority of it got married to stay in marriage and so on. Because marital disintegration communities are huge rise in welfare state, huge rise in criminality costs, huge rise in everything you can think of in society. If you trace back the deficit a lot of it has to do. This is breakdown of the family which is I mean some people say it's all engineer and I don't credit the ruling class with that much. I don't think it would be. No it is something that really has to be talked about. And particularly for boys. Boys these days having a real rough. The schools are really focused on girls and how girls learn. Boy, yeah that's kind of cool. Well the huge change has been boys like to learn hands on and like to learn vis-à-vis-à-vis. They don't like to just sit there and read about stuff. We'll see the teacher do stuff on blackboards. Not 30 years ago a bunch of feminists said, well girls get short change in school and it's all designed for boys. They sort of really shifted the curriculum and since then. Boys have been just falling behind catastrophic. They like so 60% of like people in universities and girls. And you know I think it's like nine times the number of boys around these psychotropic brain killing meds. Real. Because they just, boys don't want to sit still all day. But the society views girls as great and boys as like broken girls. You know if you just get them to be like the girls and sit quietly and you know with their legs crossed and all that. But boys are just getting a real rough in school these days. And again because they're growing up with our dads they don't have that role model of how to channel that aggression. And so you know it's real rough and this is why they just get medicated so badly. And then at Escalation talk about Escalation Escalation. You get one drug for ADHD and then you can't sleep so you get another drug for that. And then you start developing bipolar symptoms. You get another drug for that. And then oh my god I think he's getting psychotic. Another drug for that. Next thing you know living in facility for the rest of your life. It's monstrous. And that's a huge issue in the society. The amount of money and the amount of influence that pharmaceutical drug companies have on our society. The fact that this money is something that they count on. This is money that has been coming in. And once you have a corporation that's used to acquiring wealth. Well we have a bottom line. This is what we make. And why are we making less now? Well you know they're not going to step in and say listen I think we'd better for society. We earn less money. And so we're smoking credit with that CEO. Is it something else? That's to be really good. I'm going to talk about this in the show yesterday. Because it's a data roll. Oh a data roll? When a data grabs a hold of its prey they roll. But yeah I'm not going to be clamped down. Because you've got to see this. And I got to tell you I was haunted by that when I dropped this. You try to think of the idea of you spinning around as a fighter with your own making. It's like oh my god. Burn in my brain. That's not an opot in the world. You ever see a alligator bite onto a spray? Yeah they spin. They try and rip it out of the joint out of the sock or something. Yeah that's how they cut. That is not how my mental image to think of your mental image with an alligator. That's kind of like that. People who don't know my joke are like what the fuck are they talking about. But go see it because we're breaking it. But you had this great that we were talking about like it was fun. So people come to these. Well you know try masturbating and with pot and stay away. But I think there's something else too. Which is that you know why is tobacco legal and pot is not. Well is it never discussed? Because it kills 5,000 people in there. And because tobacco is a factory found product pot you can grow home. Right so if you enable people to self medicate. You know I don't mean that in a bag. I've ever self medicate right. Again I'm probably sleeping now. Smoke a bit of pot you fall asleep right. You can grow that shit at home in your basement in your backyard or whatever. There's no profit to anyone. So that stuff like the stuff you can grow to back. I mean when you get infected from a tobacco you would have to have a license to do so. Right right. So like you can grow tomatoes. Like you can grow your own tomatoes. But when you deal with anything that affects your consciousness you have to have a you know the government has to step in and allow you to do so. Which is you can't just make your own booze. You can't make your own moonshine. Isn't it leak? I mean there's got to be some sort of regulations. It's like you can you craft beer making right. But how does that work? You have to. Well I think as long as you don't sell it. I mean I think you can make your own stuff at home or whatever. But I think with tobacco you need like a big you know it's a certain place isn't a big crop and stuff like that. And so it's like it is already hard for us pot use grow it smoke. So I think it would be really tough. You know because we measure economic productivity this weird way. You know like if someone gets sick the GDP goes up. Like how is that saying? I mean surely sickness is a bad thing the GDP should reflect a negative result. But you know they go spend a lot of money on treatments and suddenly it's like whoa we're richer. You know and it's the same thing if you then have people smoking pot that they've grown themselves. Your GDP is going to take a huge credit and then all these people are going to be able to work who's supplying all this horrible stuff to people and so on. I mean the way we measure stuff now. I mean it's just completely insane. It forces everyone into these really really bad decisions. Yeah I wonder what one of the things you said that I really agree with about how boys are so and different than girls when it comes to learning. I just recently started volunteering at my daughter's school and she's in kindergarten and I watch boys do you know you volunteer like these tables set up and you have to everyone has to put together this little book and cut these pieces out and put it in order. And you watch boys do it as opposed to girls. They're different animals. I mean it's a completely different thing. They're almost like they're so challenged. Like the girls can just do to do to do to do to do. They're getting nicely and humming to themselves. And they start cutting in the lines and they're barely paying attention to what's going on. They want to run. They want to go do something. It's like that's how I felt growing up. I always felt like I can't wait for this fucking bell to ring so I can run out of here. Yeah. And I thought at the time, well obviously I'm not very smart and I'm not going to be good at school. And it wasn't that at all. But what it was was I'm not designed for this. Like there is a society and this society is a broad spectrum of human beings. And we have various tasks that we will do and we will be really good at and we'll have different occupations that we can choose and different ones suit different personalities. But this fucking cookie cutter shit that they do in school, they want everyone to be the same way. Because that's all they have money for. That's all we have resources for. We have the ability to stick you in this class from 9 a.m. to whatever 2 p.m. and do this stuff. And then we need you to listen and then you go and then you leave and we give you a great on it. That's the idea of that as an educational backbone that that is an educational foundation for a human being. It's not that it's not that people are history. You know, there's two things that are best the best predictors of empathy. Right? Empathy is what we really really need as a species. Like we're fucked with that empathy because we got these weapons of mass destruction. We got them through your weapons. We got like if we don't really work on empathy is the most important resource. So the question is how do you grow it? Two things seem to come up on the top of the list for how to grow empathy. I would never have guessed them. Sorry about it. It has to do to drive it. The two things that rise at the top when it comes to developing empathy. Number one, the presence of a father. Isn't that interesting because medicons are to be less empathetic and women more empathetic. The presence of the father is the number one predictor of the further development of empathy. Number two is free clay in nature. Free clay in nature. My daughter is really into this right now. We have toes that live by our house. We have a froggy pond, number of our way. And she's learning a lot about how to handle things. Delicately how to play with them and all of that. She's great with the animals. Free clay in nature. The presence of a father. Now what's happened over the past 40 years in our society? Kids don't get free clay in nature anymore. Most of it's scheduled shit in the gym. You know, with the dance classes and all that. And not wrong with those, but give them free clay in nature. The glorious anarchy of childhood where it's just like he doesn't have to do to go do something. Right? That's number one. Number two, of course, is the dads advantage from so many households. And this is why. In the last 15 years, it's sociography. One of the most malignant forms of destructive personality. Great sociography is done in the last 15 years. I'm not sure what that term means. Sociopathy people who grant you zero conscience, they use other people. They're superficially charming but never keep their promises. Yes, they have no conscience at all. And they don't have no measurable conscience. You can show them the most horrifying stuff where you and I, our brains would light up like Christmas trees. They don't care. They don't have any fatigue. And this is doubled in our society. To the point where now, like between one in twenty five and one in twenty people, are social capacity. I mean, it's time to direct correlation between not growing up with a father and not being... Well, those are two high significant risk factors. There's other stuff in a physical level. How do they calculate all this? So they just find sociopaths and work backwards, back-end. Well, they do big, you know, they do big studies. And they ask people all of the questions. And so you pass people relying to get stuff wrong because they just don't have empathy. They can fake it. They kind of know, well, that's what's expected. Right. And they actually feel empathy for other people. And you can find that with a series of questions. You can also measure their brains and find out how they react to certain stimuli. And how it's different for the rest of the population. And they do big studies on that. And then they extrapolate that to the population as a whole. We were talking about FMRI's before this recording started. It was dripping shit. We got another crappy luck order. We can audio engineer and put it all together. I don't have to say anything about FMRI's being able to measure various aspects of the brain and reactions to certain things. On my television show or on a viewer's scene, it's called Joe Robing Questions Everything. Well one of the things we did- Watching. We talked- Yeah, we went a bit with it. It's actually from that finding big foot show that they're talking about it long before my show. But we, I spoke to a woman who is a, she was an expert on Yuba, the EEG and FMRI. and FMRI. And she said that there was actually a court case where women was convicted because she had functional knowledge of a crime scene and it's based on FMRI. Wow. That she had functional knowledge of a murder scene. And the woman who was a neurologist felt that it was very dangerous because she said there can be functional knowledge of something based on how much have they talked to you about this crime scene. Have you formulated images in your head? Have they shown you photographs of this scene? Have they like what places and how do we know what aspect of it relies on personal creativity or the imagination to sort of concede and play it out in your head and then that this is registered on the FMRI. Fascinating fascinating stuff where we're getting to really understand the various components of what makes us a human being. What memories really tricky. Do you have these things I have these things to you? I have stories about my childhood and I swear to God I could not tell you if they're true or not. Like I could. I don't know if I heard that story so many times. I don't know if I'm infected. I mean I'm not sure. I don't know. I don't know if I get to the stories like oh I remember when you did this and I mean I don't know if it got extrapolated or it got like I don't honestly know. Like you know pictures of it didn't happen. I don't know if something and I think that's true for a lot of people. Like you talk yourself in and how to stuff. They did a study recently. They played what I wanted about people's ethical integrity. So they did a study where they got people to agree with a particular ethical statement. I agree with this ethical statement. I have an abortionist dad or whatever. They get ethical statement and then they had them close the book and then the book stuck a new word that made it exactly the opposite statement. Right. And now I agree with this thing that I formally condemned as the evil. Right. They opened it up and they asked them can you just read that again and tell if what you think. About 70 to 80% of the people would read it again and completely agree with the exact opposite statement that they've made not three minutes before and had great reasons for it too. Wow. I mean this is the level of fluid unreality that people live in. It's really dangerous. Yeah. We all have to fight this tendency for sure. Well I've had real issues with people when you talk to them about past events and they start giving an incredibly distorted self-serving version of it and I wonder whether or not they really believe this or not. And then I'm really I'm a big proponent of if I criticize something I criticize myself first because I think that if I criticize a various aspect of human nature like memory my memory is fantastic and yet fucking terrible. You know I can go like when I do the ultimate fighting championship I do the broadcast for the fights. I you know I can run a lot of statistics. You are great with names. Thank you. You know you are a person for me people might as well just introduce them to me with like hello I'm good. That's all I got three minutes later unless I concentrate you just like remains just trip off your time. I think right. Well especially when it comes to like mixed martial arts or something I'm passionate about I can remember details of fights very important things but like last night last night's show was amazing. I've been looking forward to it for a long time. I love how I like to be product like that was a killer. Oh it was a lot of fun. So it's 3,000 people. I'm on stage for an hour and 20 minutes and if you had access to my memory of that night it would be blurry snapshots. They really remember half of it. Oh yeah did I do that job? I remember if I did that job. I have notes. I mean I have a little bit of moment right. Yes you're in the moment. Yeah you can remember it too well. You were watching yourself. You weren't in it right? Yes. But it's a huge event for me. Of important once a year thing when I come to Toronto and yet my memory of it is this incredibly cloudy thing and it's like that is the case I think with most human beings when it comes to memory and we were looking we look at memory and try to pretend is it my memory is lock solid. You know it's in there I bolted in it's screwed in place. It's not going anywhere. That's nonsense. The mind doesn't work that way. There's various things you can remember. I remember how to use a espresso machine because I got it. I know I pushed a little carton in there and I pressed that button and the junk comes out. But you know the reality of my day like what went on today is just snapshots. Like weird flashbacks of food I ate and jokes that we tell that it's very strange that human mind. I think one of the emerging aspects of technology that I'm incredibly fascinated with is the symbiotic relationship that we're starting to have with computers, machines, Google Glass. I think we're going to develop an artificial way of recording things. An artificial way of recording life that's going to be like I'm going to be able to you know stuff I'm please check out my day. I'm going to drop off my day and you're going to roll with like oh shit why are you fucking terrified and this is what it is like crazy moment like what we want to be able to college on. Yeah and go fast forward into this lives and share. Which you know that a lot of lawyers are trying to get in touch with the NSA these days because the NSA records everything. And so they're saying look I mean for my court case I think you guys know his cell phone was here when he was talking on it and they say he was here but the company doesn't have records go back two years. You guys can get this guy out of jail and they're the freedom of information acts they're just hammer doing these guys trying to get facts out to get people out of jail or put people in jail. They don't want to really completely admit that they are recording everything. I mean when Obama addressed that situation it's easy to record everything than some things. Why do we have to do this on an offer and we said something important we know. We're just recording metadata. It's not a concern we're not spying on Americans. Yeah yeah. The fuck you're not man they're spying on everyone and they're putting it all in these gigantic hard drives and they're not the absolute right. No I mean hot drive space and so cheap. Now but I've always lived like this always being recorded ever since I went online. Smart oh yeah come on it's just smart what you do it. And it's showing now at this point in time that that is what's if you send something if you transmit something someone can receive it. Someone can pick it up. Someone can either intercept it. It's a very strange aspect but again as we were talking about before I think it we are in an adolescent stage of this relationship that we have to technology in this relationship. It's a very strange aspect, but again, as we were talking about before, I think we are in an adolescent stage of this relationship that we have to technology and this relationship that we have to information. I think ultimately it's going to get to a point where there is no boundary between your information or my information. I think when that really gets weird, it's with money. Because money essentially right now is just one's and zero's. And when you get down to this finite point of this finite barrier and that barrier breaks and there is no boundary between anyone and information, money is just information. It can start getting really fucking weird. Yeah, money is a great bullshit. That's both believing this bullshit and it's real, right? That's how churches get built. Yeah, but money is just this complete fiction as you pointed out. I mean, you know, it used to be used to be used to be some stuff to get to dig out of the ground. You couldn't just make it up like that, right? But being the Fed buying this, as we mentioned, $85 billion worth of traches. They didn't have that money. I mean, it's not like they went out and made it out. Man, that was a long shift at the beat that had to get those tips. Man, they just, they tied whatever they wanted to the bank account and we don't think that's going to corrupt human beings. I mean, give you a break. It's so strange. It's so strange. I mean, we live in the weirdest time when it comes to money as well because of the whole collapsing of the banks and the bailouts and the bank. The president getting on television and saying that he's going to limit the bailouts. The guys who we bailed out and he's going to limit their fucking bonuses to half a million dollars. But blacks, where's that money coming from? Is that our money? You're going to take our money and you're going to give it to these guys. It's a bonus for failing. Like the banks failed. And so they get a bonus. Like what do you say? Like what is this madness we're living well? Obama, of course, there's some theories. One of the main reasons he got elected was he took the most money of all the candidates from Wall Street, from the financial companies. And I mean, what's he going to do throughout the week, jail? Like they just did this fine. I think it was yesterday. A JP Morgan got hit with a fine of $920 million. And first of all, that's just bail out money. They're handing back. It's boomerang money. Here, you owe, it's back, right? But secondly, I mean, let's say that they did, they seem to have invented some legal stuff. They did legal stuff which crossed their clients a lot of money. Are the clients getting the money back? No, government gets it. It's like phone in the car, since they used to have any stolen my car. The car comes up and said, no, we found it. We're going to keep it. But we found it. I mean, the government, my way to government get the money for a while, JP Morgan did to rip off its customers. Plus, the JP Morgan employees aren't going to get racist because I mean, but the JP Morgan executives don't pay anything. It's a corporation. I mean, they can't pay. I mean, the corporation is just this abstract fiction that people make up to shield themselves from legal consequences. So everyone's like, oh, well, they got fine. They're somehow the JP Morgan executives are out that money. And it's like, no, they're not. I mean, they're never going to get thrown into jail for anything. Never. Never going to get thrown in jail for things that the average person would be locked up for the rest of their life if they were involved in fraud at that level. If they were involved, I mean, just think about what people go to jail for just for what they do with the stock market, the regulation of stock market. I mean, that is essentially how much different is that really than what goes on with the banking crisis. When you're talking about moving money around, you're talking about manipulating things and figuring out a way to profit from these manipulations. How is insider trading any different from what these guys have done? Well, it's not. And I mean, if you want to talk about manipulating the stock market, I mean, the Federal Reserve buying the treasury bonds is because nobody else wants those pieces. share, frankly. I mean, the Chinese are sick of them. The Indians are sick of them. The Japanese are sick of them because they know that they can't possibly be redeemed without hyperinflation or some other defaults. Right? That's either a software hard default. They know that their stock is junk. So the Fed is buying them just to prop up the prices. And they're doing that. So all the other governments don't have to admit that they're basically toilet paper is in Bob Oitre, you know, dollar bill toilet paper. And it's all just this crazy thing that it can't possibly sustain. You know, I did this show once. There have been about 240, like just paper only, 12-year accounts, right? Paper only money in the history of the world. 240 different ones. Different ones. Just different. You know, some government gets in power. They issue some bullshit currency and then it blows up and then they issue some new currency or whatever. And there's only one of them that's still in circulation from a couple hundred years ago. It's the British pound. So it's lost like 97% of its value. since the Fed came in in 1913. And people say gas is expensive. It's not. If you, gas is cheaper now than it was in 1960, if you pay for it and silver, if you pay for it in this paper or shift that they hand around pretending to get money, it's really expensive because it's been devalued so much. When I first came to Canada in 1977, I was like 11 years old. I could get a candy bar for it. You know now. And within like 10 years it was like a bug because they're just printing all this crazy money. Printing money is a great gig because you get to hand it out to all the people who are voting for you. And then the inflation hits like two years later and nobody can connect the dots. It's beautiful. And plus everyone blames the local supermarket to raise in the prices as if they want to. Right. But it's all the central printing money stuff is just really, really dangerous. And it brought down the Roman Empire. I was exactly the same way. They just kept putting more and more crap into their money until what was silver denarius, which originally 100% silver ended up being like one and a half percent silver with basically like zombie to you, but hair is shit thrown into it. And it just destroys the entire economy. And this is going to have to be this huge reset in the global economy. So how was that going to happen? What's fascinating is that now that we have this incredible access to information and now that people like you were putting this stuff out there and it's become a part of the narrative, people understand which wrong. It's not just a matter of it goes wrong and it takes years for people to put the pieces together and then you have to go to school and learn what's wrong. It's really right in front of your face. What's wrong? What happens now? Do you think that there's an adjustment period? Do you think that because of this incredible ground swell of information, do you think that it can be re-engineered? Can it be redesigned? Can we somehow or another bit corner way out of this? Well, there's a long term solution which I think is multi-generational which has to do with drinking kids' batter and raising the ratcheery and not using aggression on them and all that. So there's a long term solution. I mean the short term solution I think is just trying to invest in human capital, trying to convert paper currency into something tangible like real estate or gold or something like that. I think those are sensible strategies that lots of people who've been on my show and all of the economists all talk about. I think that's all good stuff. I think what's going to happen in the short run is obviously the government is going to run out of money. I mean no matter how much they print they're just going to run out of money. And then what happens is there's going to be talk of sacrifice. Now not the kind of sacrifice like forget the second car stay home with your kids that we've been talking about before, but like real hard-ness sacrifice. So they're going to say well we spent beyond our means for so long you see this happen before in history and they just basically turn on the dependent classes. They expect the welfare recipients to live unless social security recipients to live unless and they're just not squeezing the dependent classes because that's the biggest single bill. And also you will see which is of course is the goal of a lot of overseas terrorists. You will see the US begin to withdraw the imperial presence in the world. I think over 700 military bases all over the world that's an expensive stuff. Is that really the number now 7? I think 720 now. That's incredible. Oh it's crazy. Well we talk about like the Roman Empire when people talk about Genes Khan, conquering the world like that was nothing. Genes Khan is basically just a fuck machine. You know like a total of people in that section of the world can trace their lineage back to that guy. I mean he was working overtime. He never did a gate over all I think that's like trying to say it's pretty amazing when you think about how much damage they did. You ever really read or listen to Dan Carlin show hardcore history? Yeah he's been on my show actually. Yeah he's got a great shot. Great guy. Yeah his piece on the con, the wrath of the con, the five part piece on the incredible accomplishments of Genes Khan is Mongol hordes. There was possible for the death of at least 20 million, perhaps 70 million people, like depending on the ass, probably the course of his lifetime and the lifetime of the sons. Like it's madness. That's in bad shit man. With horses and stuff. Horses. Of horses with arrows. They killed at least 20 million people. I mean when you're on that? Half a while. Like that's a lot of people. You have tried pulling a bow. I mean those are those bows. Two that's not your compound bow. Yeah. Those bows require 160 pounds of pressure to pull. I mean like at one point you just like give a fucking arm flies off. You know they don't even like they don't even shoot an arrow anymore. You just arm goes across like a boomerang. I don't know what you do at that point. And they had women that could pull those bows. And shoot from a horse like that of all size while your horses thundering along. And also shoot sideways tucked under the horse. Oh right right. Couldn't get hit from arrows from the side. Right. There were like shielding themselves on the bat. I mean if that was still going on would you take narrowing that job? That's my job. No. It would be pretty exciting stuff. It would be a little bit of a flying helicopter. That was like a helicopter. That's right. It's a completely violation of the immigration principle. Yeah. Sorry. The beautiful thing about the UFC is it's a mutually agreed upon competition. That's a little bit. And a character contest. The contest of will and planning and discipline. And to me it's you know ultimate fighting championship is to me literally the ultimate in competition for human beings. As far as like I don't think everybody's for everybody. It's certainly not. But I think as far as like the amount of time and energy and focus and then the maintenance and the control of your emotions during a contest. Because you're literally putting your health on the line and your consciousness. You can get incredibly badly hurt. I think it's one of the reasons why it's so incredibly exciting. And the discipline you kind of have the name of the fighter. You're saying it's one guy who keeps a list of everything he wants to accomplish by his bed and like you can say first thing that he gets up and everything. And he just focuses on that stuff. Your right favorite does the same thing. Yeah they both hate each other in coincidence. Let me speak in theory because we talked about the fighting stuff. And I was watching the show last night and I was thinking about like why is this occurring? Like why people can be doing anything with their time and money that come in here to see some really funny stuff. And I was thinking about a lot of the stuff that you and the other two comics talked about is pretty visceral. Right. I mean you've got this great phrase that you use the monkey energy. You know like you got this crazy monkey energy when you can't pay your mortgage and you know but you've got to go out and do something physical because your body thinks it's like a tiger jumping at you and stuff like that. And I was really struck by dick fart jokes and stuff like that. I mean come jokes and stuff like that. They're funny. But I think it's really interesting to agree to which people respond to that. Because it's not a polite conversation. I've never seen a sign outside the box office rather than to yours. They say the most extreme possible language will be used to. Like do not. If you like Jane Austen your head is going to explode in here. Like it's just not going to add that same sign since the 1990s. Oh really? Actually that sign I put up. It's on my first CD which is called I'm going to be Dead Someday which I released in 1999. And the sign was something that I started putting up in comedy clubs because I got tired of people complaining. And I said it would contain this show will contain the most extreme content imaginable. Yeah. And it really did. Like I have a pretty good imagination. Didn't have less. Didn't have less. Well but no one that's good. I mean that was good. So I was thinking okay but why are people so drawn to this? Because it is a very common component of comedy and all that. And let me give you a tiny theory that can tell me that it's an outside non-commediate and I'm completely bullish. Yeah which is fine. But I had to some idea like we're supposed to be united in what to me is just a lot of crap. You know like countries, patriotism, agileism, our gods, our saints, our whatever, our clan, our... Like it's all nonsense. And it doesn't actually connect people. Because it's kind of fantastic. I mean country's... They don't even really exist. They don't really... Colors on a map. I call them tax farms. But they don't really exist like a real thing. But where we can connect. And I think where this comedy show last night really did help people connect was we are all mammals. You know and we have these bodily functions and we have these impulses and these urges. And these fantasies. Like the first guy talking about his fantasy of beer. Elgato. Like Brian Cowell. Really stuff. Really stuff. And anything again. And English enough to know that anything that marks the French gets up. Anyway. But so I think that there's this like monkey meat up club that goes on in comedy clubs where we do connect to that really visceral level of, you know, of shitting, of fucking, of farting, of sex drives of, you know, the guy took, and the elevators took. That one of the funniest things to be that night with the noise he made when he stuck for God to breathe when he's eating some. I think that would be the air right. That's hilarious. Because we've all been there. Like this food is so good. Why am I can't see that? I mean, I need to breathe too. Like that is it. We won't get there. And these are all such really common experiences that we really can't talk about. Because we live in these refined abstracts and countries and religions and clubs and all that. But here at this level we really do. I think connected in a very visceral way. And there was so much talked about in terms of connection. And I think the audience is laughing because we never get to talk about how we connect at an animal level. And I was thinking about the UFC as well. a lot of your life, I think, because they're not getting people to connect at a very visceral animal level. An animal that sounds bad. I don't mean it that way at all. I think this is where we do connect at the beginning. You know, we connect in sex. We connect in fighting. We connect primarily. And there I think a lot of your work has to do with that. And fear factor is also involved. That's really primal stuff. Primal fears that people have confronting them and overcoming them. People watching that. I think can really connect with that fear, with that desire, for the money, and the fear of the circumstances and all that. For the primal fear of competition itself, the fear of failing, the fear of overcoming adversity or not being able to. That's a real part of being a person is the challenges of life itself. And with fear factor, this is a stupid show. You know, don't get me on. I don't have any grandiose ideas. Get your comments and your tag links for that right now. It's a stupid show. It's a stupid show. It was entertaining. And I know people enjoyed it. But what is, well, what's fascinating to me is I have a background in martial arts and in competition more importantly. I thought most of my life from age 15 to age 22, it's basically all I did with my time. And so I understand what it's like to be confronted with a daunting task. I understand what it's like to be standing there when the referee looks at you and goes, are you ready? And then looks at the other guy and goes, are you ready? Go. And that moment that like here it is. That's an awful cliff, right? It's a very strange thing for us to just say ready, go and then go do something. It's really hard to do to anticipate. And also it's human beings. We can count on all these different variables. And one of the things about being an intelligent person and facing a difficult competition, whether it's fighting or anything incredibly hard, is like you are aware of the variables. You're aware of the failure, the way of the humiliation, you're aware of the embarrassment of failure. You're aware of the personal dissatisfaction with your own performance and depression that's going to come with that. And all those variables, they can combine to create like a constriction effect. Where you just almost can't perform. You're overwhelmed by the possibilities. And you just freak the fuck out. It's called being dwarfed by the moment. The moment comes and one of the things that I was good at on fear factor is to talk people through that. And just to let them know, look, you can fucking do this. You just go out and you don't think about anything else but doing it. All those other things are a trap. Those other things are demons. You gotta keep those demons at bay. Don't entertain them. Don't feed them. Don't give them water. Push them away. They don't exist. Well, you're gonna constrain those repeating the mantra that you can do this. And this is how you're gonna do it. Be in the moment and go do this. And I helped a lot of people get through that show because of that. And that that is a primal thing. That's what's, that's the difference between someone who survives an encounter with a Jaguar and someone who does it. You know, there's someone who paddocks and freezes up and gets killed and someone who runs away. And someone who figures out how to climb a tree. Someone who figures out how to pick a rock and smashing in the head. The difference between someone who encounters an incredibly difficult situation and learns from it or dies because of it. That's a primal thing man. I mean, that is one of the reasons why we're here is because people did confront predators. And the reason why children are afraid at night of monsters is because we have genetics that are monsters of jack-o-f. Jaguars and leprosytements. I remember reading this story about a guy who got bitten by a great red shark. And not like it bitten by a dog. Like it took his whole torso in his mouth, in his mouth, and it swam under water with him. And he was so dazed. He said he remembered it all very vividly because he wasn't head injury, right? He was against stuff then, right? But he was under the water and he was just being basically pulled along into the deep water by the shark, which had him in his jaws. And he was just dazed and he was like, I'm fine. You know, okay, what are we going to do here, right? And then the image of his kids came up at his wife and he's like, no fucking way. And he just reached up and he jammed his hand into the eye of the shark. Wow. And it shook him free. It let go because I guess that hurts. And he didn't imagine, right? And he swam with the surface and he lived and he made it back to shore. Because that's that moment where you just go like, no fucking way. I'm not going out like this. Wow. And that I think is that I think that's the primal visceral response for us before. It was just like, I'm going to surrender to this god-awful thing. And then it's just like, no, no way. No way. I'm fighting back this. Well, that's what's fascinating about martial arts competition is that everyone has a sort of no way thing. But the reality of no way is if you're in the ark to go with John Jones and you say, no way. It doesn't matter what you think. He's saying no way too. He's going to kill you. I'm walking to that. I'm like a fine red mist of nothing to say about ten seconds. A person has been, they've prepared their entire life for this moment. And it's not just the no way that you get when you're getting bit by a shark. But it's also knowing that that no way is coming every fucking day, getting up at five a.m. when your long car goes off and eating healthy and running and making sure you get the right amount of rest and take the right amount of vitamins. And that knowing that you have that instinct to say no way, but so does he. And that's not going to be good enough. Right. Right. You're going to have to control your body, control your mind, develop your skills, and have an intelligent approach to this very difficult task in front of you. And you talked about when you were a kid that you saw violence in your home for which I'm not going to cry to be sorry. Is it true that for a lot of these guys that they come from some rough backgrounds and some aggressive or violent backgrounds? A lot of them. Yeah. Almost all of them. And what do you think the connection is there? Because in some ways you sort of think, well if you saw that kind of stuff, wouldn't you want to get away from it? You do. You would. But sometimes you can't. And so you want to learn to protect yourself. That's what a lot of it is. A lot of guys were bullied. I was bullied not too badly. Nobody really hurt me. But I was intimidated by a lot of guys, like scared. And it gets in your head. The bully has to get in circles around your head. It's humiliating. It causes people to jump off buildings. It's a huge problem with human beings. This natural inclination to pick on the week to satisfy our own insecurities. And for me, I was a small kid. I wasn't big. And there were just too many moments where I was scared. And I was like, OK, this is not how I want to live my life. So I started taking martial arts. I was like, I really had a fight. Because this is just too scary. I was like, I want to find them. It doesn't get to end it. Exactly. This is going to be the rest of my life. And the environment is not going to change it. The teacher's not going to stop it. There's no way for my parents to stop it. If I don't act, this is going to be the same fucking day for the rest of my life. It was clear to me. It was clear to me that no one was going to help me. And as a boy, it was one of the core issues of being a boy growing up was dealing with the other boys. And this balance of power, which was so against me. I was like, what are the things a lot of the flanks in that story of the kids from the jungle? They think it's like some island somewhere where the plane goes down. I mean, it's high school. I went to boarding school. I mean, it's not some island out there. It's like walking into the school building. It's human nature. And there's the dance. Like, who's the alpha? Like, what's going to go on here? Like, who's going to be the one that controls the situation? Who's going to get the first pick of the girls? Who's going to get, you know, who gets to pick on people and get away with it? And that is a part of being a human being. And it's also a part of being a human being that, as you said, is developing in a society where children are not being raised directly. So you're not, if a child grows up with martial arts as a young boy, you would be incredibly embarrassed to be a bully. Because that is the worst thing you could ever be in a martial arts class. I am a black belt in Jujutsu, and I roll on a regular basis, roll me into spar with people who are complete novices. And I don't hurt them ever. I've never hurt one. You know, I just, and I coach them along the way. I'm like, you got to turn into like this. You're like, you're like, you're kidding my daughter because we're play wrestling. It's like four. What happened to me? I'd be two in that four, right? Well, I mean, sometimes it's a big, strong man. Yeah, they're a lot of interest. They're not a lot of interest. Well, they're untrained. But the point is like, if I like, she really hated them or beat them up or something like that, it would be a massive embarrassment for my school, a massive embarrassment for me as a martial artist. Like everyone in class would hate me because of it. There are people like that that do like bully and try to hurt like lesser ranks or novices. Those people are kicked out of class. Like, there's no place for them in martial arts. It's about developing character and then about representing that development in character, like having honor and having respect. And if kids learn that at an early age, there'd be no bullying in class. There would be none of that. There's always going to be people picking on people and people and making fun of people, but bullying is specific. Like, ganging up on people and trying to make them. That is one of the scariest aspects of growing up. And it motivates a lot of martial artists to learn. And that's what motivated me. So ultimately, it's like this terribly negative force channels itself and doing incredibly positive thing that really became a developing factor for every aspect of my life. And it became a real vehicle that I love to use, it's a vehicle for developing human potential. So no limit. But you find out because it's so difficult, you find out what you can do. And then other things become easier. Oh, yeah. I think the mastery of anything that's really challenging. I've been great things for self-esteem. Now, when you started taking the martial arts, what happened with the bullying? I mean, did you end up beating people up or did you end up having the confidence that they then found a weaker brain? I have very few physical altercations outside of competitions. I have like one or two small ones in high school that really no big deal. The nothing like crazy. But the fights that I had in tournaments were so extreme. You know, like so many knockouts and just so much. The violence of physical competition is so much more intense than anything you would ever experience in your average street fight. You know, like you're dealing with trained killers. Like you and another trained killer do this. So like there was no motivation for me to prove to anybody that I knew how to fight. And then somewhere along the line, other kids knew like, oh, that's, he's a black belt. Because this was that. And they just left me alone. So it became just scary enough so that they leave me alone. And then you don't, you avoid the fight. Yeah, you avoid it. Prevention is always under the view. And you have very little aggression because you're always training. So like when you train all the time, you're really tired. Like you don't have, you have no people think, oh my God, you have got to be so fit. And think of all the energy you'd have. It's like, oh my God, I'm just going to get from the futon to the cash. Somebody give me a wheel there. It was a famous Karate master who once said that the tardicas are not nicer. They're just tired from training. And that's not, they avoid these things because it's too hard to just get up for it. But I think that human beings have a massive amount of, you know, what I call chimp DNA, the monkey instincts. There's a massive amount of those that are not being represented by the way we live our lives. The bodies that we have are essentially the same bodies. The humanoids that lived 100,000 years ago are 50,000 years ago. It was very little variation. And the need for physical movement and the need for just activity and all these different hormones and chemicals that your body just naturally produces, they have to be satisfied. They have to be moved around. And I think it's a huge part of balancing your perspective in life. Balancing your view of the world is just to exercise these things out of your system. And for boys especially, huge, huge part of being sane. Yeah, certainly learning how to manage aggression is really awesome. I think one of the, yeah, I'm in strong atheists. And I think one of the things that was really harmful about religion was the idea that we are anti-body, that we are souls trapped in this prison of the flesh. And we're, you know, into to be these rockets that rise up to meet the glory above and so on. Because I think that gave us this feeling that the body is somehow. And it's very explicit in some forms of Christianity and other religions too, that the body is Satan's device to draw your way from God. The lusts of them and all that stuff that the community makes fun of and celebrate I think is very pro body. Right? Because it's funny and it's an enjoyable place to be. And I think that this hostility towards this called, in philosophy, the mind-body dichotomy that we're this glorious mind-tracked of this horrible flesh-y corks kind of thing. I think it's really, really unhealthy and I didn't really get that when I was young. Like when I was 20, I went to the National Theatre School. I was going to be an actor and a playwright and some of that for a bit. But what they did there, which I thought was amazing, was real body work, which I'd never been exposed before. I grew up in England's relationship to the body is, you know, it's crazy. I haven't even cleaned their teeth, but that's right. I love the taste of dindified us at the morning. It smells like empire. But when I did this body work, which was like, I don't know if you have the Alexander technique, which is a body-repositioning technique. We did gymnastics. We did sword fighting. We did stage fighting and all that kind of stuff, which is like in some ways more challenging. And we did stretching and I got into yoga and stuff like that. And I was encouraging this in my show because I had an idea with a pretty hyper intellectual audience. And I keep trying to remind people, you know, drive your brain back into the body. That is a seed of everything that you are. And, you know, if that doesn't do well, you're not going to do well in the long run. And don't split yourself off from the body, but that's a real thing in society where we are somehow not our bodies. And it has to do with the sole idea. We can continue afterwards. And I don't think I'm going to have any more reality off-frame death than I did before I was born, which is to say not at all. And this is where we are. And I really try to encourage people to really root themselves in that. You know, we have a second brain called the gut, which is almost as complex as the one we've got up here. And people say, I've got to get instinct. That's real. That's not an imaginary thing. This is great book by Malcolm Black, what I call blink. You should pick it up if you haven't read it or have. Yeah. Okay. So where he says, you know, people get stuff. Yeah. Like so incredibly quickly. And that's not an intellectual process. That is a full body process. And I think the people, you know, in terms of you say, how do we heal the world? I think our bodies detect immorality a lot quicker than our brains do. Like, yeah, I have those people that come around, you're like, oh, man, that's something not right about this guy. I don't know if body language. They don't look perfectly normal, whatever. It's a spike vacancy in the eyes or something like that or us overly stiff body posture or something like that. I think that if we could see you call them, I think exquisite goose bags. I can't talk you about the visit, Doug Stan, hopefully, the body in the desert. Yeah. Yeah. That you could have these bodies, but it'd be a thousand cool guys. And then one unbelievable douche bag. You were just ruining it for everyone. I think we can see those people, but I think we can mostly see them with the body, you know, with the brain. Because the brain we can talk us out in and out of stuff. But the body, I think, really connects at a very visceral level with the people around us. And I think if we could train people to be more in the body, I think they'd be better at detecting bullshit and better at detecting bad people and shunting them. And then we kind of isolate them and quarantine them, not breathe with them, not having them over fucking upper kids. And I think then we'd be able to pass that gene out of the pool, so it's big. Sorry, there's a hell of a lot of rant for me. No, I think you're absolutely on. And I think that the idea that the body is separate from the mind is really kind of silly. It's the way they work together. And if the mind is working over time and the body is falling apart, the mind's not going to be at its optimum. Even if you have an incredibly advanced mind and a beautiful knowledge and information, it would be better if your body was shaped. It'd be better if you were to limber. It'd be better if you were once stressed out. We experience a physical stress of a deteriorating body. It's legitimate. It's a 100% real. It's not just a vain thing. You want to keep your body in shape to look good. It's an ego thing. It's not. It's your some weird symbiotic thing. It's the mind and the body. And then also the intestinal flora. It gets really freaking when you start realizing that you're actually an ecosystem. Yeah, yeah. You want to find one thing. And if the ecosystem is even within the mind, that's as great there. Also the intestinal flora it gets really freaking when you start realizing that you're actually ecosystem. Yeah Yeah, yeah Yeah, yeah, it's one thing and the ecosystem is even within the mind as this great therapy called internal family systems therapy Which basically says that we are we don't have like a single self like we are a competing ecosystem of You know our parents and those who want stuff from us and are you know some of our own needs Which is also to please those who want stuff from us and it's all a competing And if you think that you've got like one ego You end up being a kind of tyrant because all these other voices in your head that they're telling you to do stuff Or encouraging you to do stuff kind of cap them down because we need unity What I think the idea that we are always in the state of negotiation with ourselves is really positive You know I spent years in therapy and I think it's just fantastic to work from that kind of approach that we have I call it the me ecosystem like me as an ecosystem And and it really is a lot of give and take and a lot of negotiation with yourself And of course if you can negotiate with yourself I think you'll end up with society while people negotiate with each other I think that the people who are tyrannical with their own identity and that being tyrannical of When others I think that the way the world is out there It's very much a mirror of the way we live internally and if we can be more a piece in negotiating with ourselves It recognized that we should not have a single dominant authority within ourselves But everything is a negotiation, you know, do I want to work out or do want to happen that I mean I have those negotiations with myself all the time and that way I can negotiate with my wife and my daughter My listeners and all that and I don't have a tyrannical part of myself that says well You just got to do this goddamn at no matter what because I'm always afraid that if that's the way it is for me And then in here that's how it's gonna translate to the world out there. I was feeling that the The most massive structures in the world that the government states armies and all that just Reflection of how we deal with ourselves internally and I think trying to get people to relax about how they deal with themselves internally And negotiate more than dictate I think is really important I'm completely rambling, but I hope that makes sense. No, it makes sense And the rigidity being rigid and not being able to be flexible about things is also a huge issue The ability to alter your ideas about things and not feel like you're a loser because you changed your mind You know like the ability to admit mistakes and to be able to express where the mistake went wrong and What what you believe now? I think that's very important I think one of the the things that I see in people that I admire is One of the things I admire most is the ability to make it wrong The ability to make mistakes the ability to admit admit personal failures and then the ability to grow from learning about that mistake and one of Things that I find to be one of the most incredibly weak and Intolerable things is someone who cannot admit that wrong. I can't communicate with people like that. I can't yeah, yeah I've I make mistakes all the time if you don't you know Maybe you're the perfect person, but if you do and you don't admit it we can't talk We can't well isn't most of life not working out. I mean, it isn't most of life failure. I mean, that's You know one of my favorite writers is Charles Dickens or you take Shakespeare Charles Dickens wrote like 35 novels of which like four or five or famous So he's the best novelist that we've ever produced as a species and he's got a success rate of 20 percent You know shit if it shakes me or like 54 plays Yeah hundreds of sonnets and of his plays maybe 10 are like regularly produced No, the Hamlets off that was most of that is not that so he had a success rate about 20 So the greatest conceivable genius isn't human history have a success rate of about 20 percent I've had some of my biggest breakthroughs from failures from my discussed in the failure or my discontent and my recognizing where what wrong and then my re-energize it and Refocusing like the stand-up comedy failures. I can literally point to the moments on stage like the worst bombings in the history of my career and Then the giant leaps that I made in progress after that. It's always been the case and I now out to this day If I have a set that's not so good I recognize that I hate that so I will now Refocus and that this is a good thing because this taught me well you got a little sloppy there or you got overwhelmed by responsibilities or what you didn't put enough focus in it whatever it was Now is the time to Recognize that just like every other time in the past you are now gonna grow and it's you'll be better than you ever were before Yeah, I did I did one show and I thought I did the right research, but I Didn't at all I did a show on healthcare and then this woman who was a doctor Who was pretty high up in the profession. She wrote me this long email detailing every single thing that I kept wrong in my show And so what I did was I you know, I'm like I just read this whole email Sorry, I just you know, I thought I knew what I was talking about Turned that I had them so far at my ass. I was seeing back out of my own eyeballs Good on you. Yeah, and it's a read the whole thing because if you're not correcting yourself How you can have any credibility because nobody believes that you ride all the time that's just impossible I correct myself all the time on the podcast because a lot of times during the podcast We're completely talking out of our ass Remember something and then I'll wait for and now I go oh, let me google that like I'll constantly google things When the middle I go okay, I'm full of shit because actually they proved it in 1972 that this is you know And I think that's really really really important especially when you have this weird responsibility Like and as I know that you do you have a massive following online and a lot of people very much respect your opinions You thought some things would and consider them very highly So when you know you say something or you go over something and then it turns out that it was incorrect or it was Your original assumption was based on some bad information It's so important to be flexible like that so important to be honest like that and so that people recognize like You're a human being and everyone who's listening as a human being and we're all essentially in the same boat together One of us may have focused more on a particular topic or one of us may have more talent in a particular area But we're the same goddamn thing. Yeah No, I think I think it is important and yeah Especially when you put out a lot of shows you just gonna get stuff Oh, yeah, you can't be an expert in everything and that's the question that you have to Read and you also want to model that behavior for people right I mean because if you're the defensive guy who can't admit that he's wrong I mean the kind of people who can't end up being comfortable with you another kind of people you want to Have around oh, this guy never admits he's wrong. He's an okay guy for me You want to have that force field that repels the people who who want that because that's not a good place to I have a very critical Forum and Sometimes critical in a bad way like there's a lot of contibre a lot of people just a really just negative people But a lot of really intelligent people too, but I really rely on it Sometimes if I have a show that doesn't go well or if I something happens it is a dispute about something I like I like the criticism I think it's hugely important especially if it's honest and it's intelligent because that was Available before and one of the resources of the internet that's so fantastic to make is that you can get opinions And you can get intelligent ideas from people that you would never be able to contact with 10 20 30 years ago yet wouldn't be able to and now you get them and you can interact with them in real time And it's it's a beautiful thing It's so enriching and it's so important for your personal growth and for the growth of anything you're trying to do to have these Intelligent people giving their point of view you may or may not agree and that's one of things I find along the way I'll read it a really intelligent review of why something that I did was not right and I'm like I see where you're coming from But I disagree entirely I can respect that but I don't like that. I don't like this that you're saying is good I don't like smashing pumpkins. I don't like grateful dad There's a lot of things a lot of people like that. I don't like actually I do like smashing pumpkins Shouldn't say that both the blue skies out the song is No, no, no, no, no excuse you. Yeah. What does that one song? I think it's the only song that I know what's that world is a vampire Do you know that? You were the first thing is more to that kind of music. I think than I am A lot of that song so I shouldn't say smash my temptation though. I gotta tell you my weakness is Oh Joe you gotta stop me if I do this. I want to nitpick back nitpick back So I talked with a lot of libertarians and libertarians god love them greatest people in the world But if you make one factual slip like six million guys Come down with you like we can read references. Can we have high balls? So at the other day. I was like I said something about tigers in Africa right? You know and like six million people emailed me dear God How can you believe that there are tigers in Africa Tigers are native to India? There's no times in Africa. No Thai is in Africa completely true except Oh No, no, no, no, don't do that when you're rolling you wrong I give an epic end with that. Yeah. Well, you know, people love that sport of calling people out on the stakes. There's a certain like scorecard that you keep. We can bust someone out of the high or bust someone out of the state. A misquo or a mistake. It's a big part of the debunking movement. I had a guy on recently, a guy named Mick West, who runs contrailscience.org. How did the contrailstyle stuff? Yeah. And it's all about his website is, he runs meta-bunk.org, which is a message for it. It's all about debunking conspiracies and ideas and incorrect thoughts. And one of the things that these guys love doing is debunking things for like a score. They like, for them, it's like, incorrect. This is what's right. And this is, they like calling people out on the state. Right. It's, it gives them a name I've talked with. I'm sorry. That's the wrong number. There are brains of coffee for my coffee. I've explicitly told you the right number. That's just off by three. Right. It's the right. You know, I mean, I don't think I should revel in it. Right. And also the level of importance of stuff, too. Like I've had, I've done great speeches about really important stuff and made one little era of people like, it's like, you know, big picture of people, you know? The sun has spots that doesn't mean it's not like there, right? Right, right, right. Oh, I also wanted to add to your penis knowledge. Yes, absolutely. And I really felt that this was essential to add to you. And I don't know if you ever figured this one out, but I watched the stuff you did on circumcision. Because we did, it was my idea, actually. And we did a video on circumcision as well, which started off with a video of someone getting circumcised, the baby. And it's like, if you can watch that, and still go ahead with it, I mean, you'll already check yourself in and get some answers. Right. But you had a question about, because I think in the show, you got the opinion that women said that the sex with unservent size penis was better. And I think you were looking that up in the show. And I don't know if you ever got the answer. But we found, I think we found the answer through various experimentation with fruits and vegetables. But what it is is because the foreskin has less friction for the woman. Because when you thrust, the foreskin has some gift. So it's less frictiony for the woman. And because it's less frictiony, it's more comfortable. It's just a rather rough and rough and rough. So you thrust and the foreskin has gift back and forth. And so it doesn't stress the woman's vagina as much through that friction. That's apparently, which is why I think guys who are second-sized need more lubricants and stuff like that. Like a good spray, it'll probably be 40 before you go in or whatever. But I'm no expert. I just wanted to mention that. And it prevents AIDS kind of stuff. What the fuck is that about? Yeah. Well, first of all, those studies are heavily suspect. They rely on self-reporting and stuff like that. And secondly, it actually, let's say it does reduce AIDS a certain amount, which is not actually being proven to do. It's actually kind of dangerous. Because then the guys think, well, I'm second-sized, I don't need a condom. But even if you are a second-sized, they still say, well, if we've got to take where a condom, if you want to do it, so it can actually be kind of dangerous and increases spread, if people believe that. Those are recent studies. So the 60% decrease in AIDS infection. People sort of say it's like, wait, wait. OK, so 60%. I said, are you still going to roll those guys? No, I don't need a condom because you know, what is that? What is that? And Molly that. Like, how do you justify those numbers? I would love to see how they figure that out. It's that guy. And you have a lot of sex with a guy with AIDS. He doesn't have AIDS. And then you circumcise him. And well, now he's even less AIDS-y. Like, how are you doing it? I mean, that's not known for an excess of soap. Right? I mean, this is really running down there. So there's that problem. The P&L cancer thing, I mean, even the American Society of Pediatrics, because they say, you know, you put P&L in cancer together, you usually will get a man's attention. You know, these are like, hey, hey, hey, hey, what? OK, I wasn't listening before. I picked up my ears at P&L when you added cancer to it. I really, really began to listen. But the numbers that go down are so infinitesimally small and the chances of getting it are so teeny tiny. I mean, it's like saying, well, but remove the baby's breast because she might get breast cancer like this. What do you think the support is about then the support for circumcision? The almost universal support that we find is in America. Yeah. In Europe, it's fine. Any non-Muslim kids who are circumcised. What is it in America? I mean, it's a barbaric mutilation of a baby's genitals as far as I'm concerned. I think it's some ancient, whole-shira moving half the skin of the penis. I mean, it's not just the tip. I mean, sorry, I put it bluntly. And you have to put shit into wedgie to put the baby's bone with the foreskin and hear it physically adhered to the penis. You've got to go in. Anyway, we don't have to. We don't have to go in all kinds of organizations. Details of deaths or mutilations, which are numerous. But the idea that it still exists is troubling to me. I don't. There's no rational sense to it. There's things that I get. I see a cause and a fact. And I see why people do it. I don't see that one. I don't understand it. The only thing that I see is perhaps a justification of the old ways and the fact that it's been done for so long. It's been a style of what people say I want the sun to look like the day. And I mean, how often a year sun and year has been comparing penises, is that a big family hobby? I mean, you're with an ad in dinner saying, well, it's longer and bigger. So I think a lot of it has to do with why does trauma repeat? Why does trauma? It's a big question. Why does trauma repeat? And I think partly why trauma repeats is it gets normalized. So you obviously made the great decision after seeing your dad to denormalize what your dad did because of hitting him up. You said like, this is not how man are. This is not how I'm going to be. So you denormalized it. But if you totally worshiped him, and he thought he was the best kind of he ever, and this is what men do, you would be most likely to be an actor. Well, I actually did until I saw that. It was one of the most, when I saw my dad hit my mom when I was about five, it was the first time I'd ever seen him strike her. And I never forgot the fee. I mean, it's really difficult to remember exactly what I remember, but I do remember very, very clear feeling. And that very clear feeling was, oh, he's fucked up too. Like, oh, I thought that my dad was my hero. And I remember being massively disappointed. I'll never forget that feeling of disappointment. Like, this is not what I thought. I thought my dad was this awesome, perfect guy. And he's not at all. He's a bad person. And this is a bad scene. Now, why do you think you had that response? Because some kids wouldn't. Some kids would be like, oh, I can't wait to drop and hit my own woman, right? I mean, why do you think you had that response? Guess I could have loved my mom. My mom was not a bad person. She was not an angry person. And when she got to get out of that, she was strong woman. She still is. But she realized at that moment, like, this has not happened. And she packed up our stuff and we were gone. But I'll never forget the feeling of disappointment. They're like, oh, when you're a child, you hope that your father is a hero. And to know that he's not. So I think for me, it was this very young introduction to close violence. Violence within the household was sort of a defining factor why I was terrified of violence. Why I wanted to learn to defend myself, like really early on. Like the idea that someone could just do that to you. Or that someone could do that to their wife. If someone could do that to my mother. Yeah, it is. I think that kind of rekindling from it. So you do normalize it. It was a bad thing. Do you do as a dad? I mean, I don't mean as a dad. I mean, I'm the idea that I would ever see that look at my daughter's face. Or I would fall from grace. Doesn't that terrify you? Terrifies me. I mean, I'm not like constantly trying to be like some statue of perfect fatherhood or whatever. But the idea that I would disappoint my daughter in that fundamental way where she'd have that crossroads with me and no longer look at me in that same look up to kind of way. I really think about that every day. Yeah. I never want to see that. I think the love that people have for their children often motivates them to be better person. Yeah. Be a better person. I know it does for me. I couldn't imagine. If I even raise my voice to my daughter, it's like, come on, seriously. You can't do that. You can't hit each other. You can't throw things through a window. You can't. The idea of hitting my daughter is insane. It's alien. It's impossible. And the idea of hitting my wife is so completely out of the idea of what's possible. I wonder what my feelings would be if I didn't grow up in a house of violence. I wonder if I wouldn't be so repulsive to me, having actually physically experienced it in person, up close. But I did. So I was inexorably that's a part of my psyche. That's that being a negative thing, that being a horrific crime. And it's also just a weakness. Like, I'll never forget of a man that's willing to do that to hit a woman like that. It's just so weak. It's so incredibly weak. It's such a failure of character and such a negative, selfish impulse to hit someone like that. It's one of the major things that's wrong in human interaction is the ability to hurt each other, to want and leave, to just reach out and injure each other and then express our ignorance and such a violent and selfish way. Yeah, and I feel that I'm sure you do too, but I feel that even more strongly with parents to kids. Who is so much bigger? Your wife can leave me. Your wife can leave you anytime if you're a jerk. Your kids can't think of nowhere to go. They can't just say, well, that's it. I'm getting divorced from you, dad. And I'm going to go find a better dad. They have no way to go. They have no choice. They're so tiny. And I think violence always makes you smaller than your victim. And I've got God here for you all. I mean, are you really so far out of options as an adult with all the choice in the world that you actually have to end up hitting someone's or tiny dependent? I mean, that makes you way smaller than that. I was reading some account of a guy who was losing custody of his child, him and the wife had gotten divorced. And I was reading this articulate, well-written account of the horrors of the legal system. Until I came upon this thing where he said that his daughter daughter was three, went back to the wife and told of a mild spanking that he gave her. And I'm like, oh, you're a douchebag. You're a line douchebag, and you're a piece of shit. You spank your baby. And what you're doing here is manipulating reality with your blog to try to paint yourself out to be a victim. You're fucking kid, man. I don't care if it's a mild spanking. You don't mildly spank a fucking three-year-old when you're grown, man. It's nonsense. It's crazy. You don't have to do that. They throw a temper tantrum, hover over them, communicate with them until it's over, and then give them a hug. You can't have anything to do with it. I mean, no matter what. But this is when I know it gets frustrating. It's been frustrating. I've had frustrations. And that's the number one thing that I always do when I communicate with my kids. I always tell them when I was your age, I was even worse at that. When I was your age, I just don't lie all the time. When I was your age, I used to do this all the time. I always wanted to be first. I always was selfish. I wanted to have all the toys. But then I realized that when you share toys, it makes it better. It's hard to realize that as a four-year-old, but when do you're going to figure it out? And that's why I'm telling it to you. But I have a lot of time. Relaxed person. I'm not constantly under the pressure to perform in life and like to do better. In a good financial position, I'm in a good relationship position. When I see people that are stressed out by life and then the life is overwhelmed and they're like, shut the fuck up in there. It's almost like they're overwhelmed by their play. And it's terrible on a child. Yeah, I always wanted my daughter to remember that I was a kid too. And that's what you're talking about. I don't want her to think that I'm some giant authority figure that's just in her life. In fact, I've told her so much about my child that she likes to play with me as a kid because I want to play with little staff. And then she wants me to come into the room as little staff and play that way. And I think that's great because I want to remember that. And I think, look, God, if we could just fix language. If we could fix language, I think we'd fix so much in the world. There's an old confusion saying it says, the beginning of wisdom is to call things by their proper names. I hate the words, just say it. Yeah. Just say it. I hate a mild spanking. Come on. I mean, don't call it war-calling murder. That's what it is. Spanking. Yeah, don't call it a rice-collet-kidnapping. Don't call it taxation. You call it theft. I mean, just use the proper words for things. We'd solve so many problems. You for missions are, you know, they just lack the plack in the arteries of the brain that confuse so many people. You hit your child. It's not a spanking. No, it's just a little swat on the bottom. No, no, no, no. If you're a spanking, it's to deter behavior. It's to change behavior, which means the child has to hate and fear. Yeah. And I wish people would just be honest about it. But they're kind of be honest with themselves and then they get mad at their kids for lying. I agree. The categorization and this thing that we do where we make one thing better than another thing, even though it's exactly the same. Like spanking is better than eating. You know, but they're the same goddamn thing. You know, like how about this, I mean, it's sort of unrelated, but not really. This thing that's going on with this, the pouring of chemical weapons that somehow another murdering people with chemicals in that fashion is way worse than using drones. These robots that shoot hellfire missiles and it's a building and kill 98% innocent, 98% women and children. Is that the actual statistic? Is that 98% Jesus? They're so bad at killing only the targets. Like the idea that these are pinpoint, precise. I mean, it's fucking terrifying shit. But yet Obama will be on TV talking about how these chemical weapons we have to deploy or the actions of a father holding his children begging for them to get up. What about the fucking kids you blew up from the sky? What about rockets launched from robots like some more well-in nightmare flying around cities with night vision where someone's got a remote controller in Nevada and they're pressing the fire button and launching these missiles. The idea that we need to take military action, we need to kill because people have killed. We need to go murder innocents because innocents have been buried in the killing Syrians. So to solve that, we're going to kill some more Syrians. I'm sorry, Syrians, not to kill the Syrians. And we're going to do it with pinpoint strikes. Meanwhile, they know for a fact they're going to move innocent civilians into those areas that are high risk military targets. They're going to move prisoners into those areas. They're going to up the body count. They're going to do it on purpose. And you know, I mean, the terrifying thing about, it's not just American weapons. It's modern weapons in general, is the fact that they will fuck with entire populations genetics. Like this is something I just did this study, this sort of review of the Syrian stuff in America's Outrage Chemical Weapons. And without even getting into Vietnam where millions of people were destroyed by these unbelievably horrendous weapons, the only thing America didn't use was mustard gas and nuclear weapons, everything else. They just threw from bombers down on this population. In Fallujah in 2007, they used this white phosphorus, which is basically just exploding glue that melts human beings. And they just fired it indiscriminately into the city. And they used these depleted uranium shells, because they good at piercing armor, of which there really wasn't much of an Iraq anyway. But this stuff has a half-life longer than the planet itself. And it's so screws with the genetics of the population, because it goes into the dastigos, and the lungs have been a 600% increase in leukemia. And in the years after this Fallujah attacked, run by America by the special forces, by the army, 50% of the children were born with birth defects. And a guy, a geneticist, who's kind of studying the city, says that he's never seen a more compromised, it's a nice way of putting it, basically, more fucked up genetic population. This is going to go on for generations. These genes have been completely destroyed by these weapons. And then they're saying, well, this guy in Syria, he used these chemical weapons and so on. It's like, but at least that stuff is not going to completely rewrite the genetic code of the population for generations to kill them. Well, definitely, they didn't either use them to play the uranium, even though there's a lot of evidence of shows that they did. They used it in Serbia, too. And I had to apologize to people, because I was talking about whether you used all these depleted uranium and all these guys from Serbia, right? And they say, well, we don't count. I mean, come on. I mean, they used it with us, too, with the same effect. And then that's also the cost of this Gulf Wars syndrome that all these people have come back with those horrible illnesses that mirror radiation sickness. And then the government has denied them medical treatment. So there's nothing wrong here. There's nothing going on here. It's a sad, sad statement that that's how we are. And most of the people that I meet are really nice. They're fine. I mean, you mean a lot more people than I do. they say the average famous person meets like 10,000 people a year or some crazy number, right? And but don't you find that most of the people that you, and this is the weird thing. The world is insane and so full of like the most soul-disgrowing evil. But yet most of the people that I meet are unbelievably nice. Yeah. It's just that weird. I mean, like who are these reptiles who run everything, because I meet these really nice people. And there's all the horrible stuff in the name. It's one off fairness. You live here. Yes, that's true. You live in Toronto. That's true. I don't live beautiful clothes. Yeah, it's a lovely place. And people are pretty nice and strong. Very nice. Yeah. Overall, I say 20% less douchebags in Canada than America. Well, you got to be a W factor, which we ran into a couple of times in the drive down. The BMW factor. Yeah. You know, that old joke about BMWs was a difference. I'm going to tell the joke to a 40D or something. And I'm going to talk to a pocket line and a BMW that would be a W there. And the pork you find the bricks from the outside. So other than the BMW factor, very, very nice people. They have a spring of income from cross-the-glowers. That's also always going to be the case when people are privileged or when they have more money or when they feel like they've worked harder and the other people are weak and lazy to get the fuck out of my way. I've got the Mercedes. Oh, don't people love to think that the accidents and both are personal virtues. I mean, they're just, oh, you know, we're a kiss a lot. You know, a lot of people who make it big, you know, like what went to poncho. It isn't a godfather like Steven Spielberg or something like that. She's a talented actress, a lovely lady. But she got a bit of a leg up in the business, right? But a lot of people are like, oh, you know, I have to be born to this great family. I happen to be born in the West. When you and I were born in Kenya, I mean, what the hell are we going to do with those? I was like, you know, a ton of rubber tires to our feet to run around. And I mean, there's so much of the good stuff in our life is kind of accidental. 100% and you need to go out. And the state's not for personal virtue is a really great failing because it really kills your empathy. And the flip side, it's also an incredible weakness that people have when they point to successful people going, no, they're going to love you. You're lucky. If I got a lot of luck, right? Yeah, you're a lot of luck. You're a lot of luck all the time. It's weird. Because you know, in your life, of course, you can five years of stand up before you got anywhere near TV or anything. I got to do that in that sense. I got it super lucky because that's really rare. It's really rare to get on a hit-set calm when you're five years in a stand up. Well, yes, but I bet you when you got that sitcom, you worked pretty confident. I took someching from the people who were more experienced on the set and you've done really. Not really. A really good thing about it. As fast as once you have failed? No, it's not hard. It's not a difficult processor of all the things that I've ever done in my life. Acting is without a doubt, the easiest. Because it's like other people's words that you just have to be credible and hit your mark. Certainly, that's a part of it, but it's also it's just not that difficult to just pretend. We all know what happens when someone gets upset about something, when all know what happens when someone's confused. We can pretend. It's also when you're acting, you have a chance to do it over again if you fuck it out. It's not hard. It's coming from martial arts and then coming from stand up comedy. Those two things which are incredible. Yeah, you don't get to work back and say, I don't do that joke again. Maybe once. But after that, people are like, well, he's not easy to screw or not. Yeah, I got to wake up from being knocked out. We're going to fight again because I see my head. Mulligan. Yeah, we do. Right. Not only that, it's one of those things that when you see someone on a camera, you see them on a screen, you see them. And this weird alpha male primate thing that we have where we think that the person who gets to talk is special. The person that's on camera is special because that would be like the leader of the tribe. There's this weird, it's sort of the high-jacked, our human reward system with media. And so because of that, when you see someone who's on film and someone's crying, you give them incredible accolades, you are amazing that film to change my life. It was amazing. All it is pretend they pretend to be a murderer. They pretend to be a murderer. They're pretend to be a murderer. They do what it does for 12 hours a day. It's not hard. Anything a four-year-old can do. I think if it was a mom and a random who said that, you know, I need to be a four-year-old, she only samples he was talking about. Anything a four-year-old can do, I not sure we should give big prizes for. Watch Ricky Schroeder in the champ. It was like six years old in his. said that you know I need to be a four year old show, he was talking about you know anything for your own can do I not sure we should give big prizes for watch Ricky Schroeder in the champ it was like six years old and he's fucking incredible at John that line is it sense Jill Haley on that. Yes. I remember that kid just gives you prizes. It's not hard to do and it's not something that requires like like learning to play the piano or learning to speak French requires a lot of average surgery or stuff which is really significant you know and our stand-up comedy is infinitely harder than acting and then granted I was acting in a very limited way I was doing a sit comedy. It's one of the more limited forms of acting but we also created a lot of the dialogue. In fact Dave Foley was probably responsible for maybe 50% of everything that got made on that show. He was like a secret producer because he was such a brilliant guy and so good at ad-living that what he would do is we had an amazing executive producer Paul Sims, brilliant really guy and created a show. They head writer and executive producer and a great writing staff as well but Paul was really open to us experimenting so he would they would give us a framework and give us a script but Dave would rewrite entire scenes and so so much of what we did on that show was ad-lib almost maybe 50% right so it wasn't just about reading people's lines being it's just an easier game it's easy it's like so my stumbling into a sitcom it was because of a bunch of lucky factors. A lot of number one that they saw me on MTV that they saw I got to saw my comedy special or MTV Half-R Comedy Hour when I was on this television show where it did like 10 minutes they saw that and it went well and then I got these opportunities to just open up from that and then this show came about and then I got on it it was a show that was already created it so it was all luck that was all luck and the idea that you get that successful after five years of doing stand-up is really really rare so I can't take any credit for that but then from there you know the effort there you once worked and even that I mean to do the Half-R Comedy TV special I bet you it was a hell of a lot of work and that comes out of years on the road and know and had a work in audience the timing and what works and what doesn't and all that so that's all work yeah yeah standing but it is good at stand-up that shit does not come in no no one who gets up there and can can kill an audience of strangers that's all work you can you just can't do it from the beginning yeah anybody who gets that you know a lot to average as just just go get a shot I wouldn't you know I mean you do it once maybe you will have a couple of good lines you've accumulated or you've developed over the course of your life some observations that you think are really funny you wrote them down they might be valid they might be good and then I work a couple of times but now when people are paying no people pay 30 bucks for it ticket and they say one you know one after another I mean I was just amazed because the hour and twenty that you were on stage last night I flew by for me you know at am I are you saying the coach you memory kind of flew by to you but I'm thinking the amount of work I mean the amount of material that's written and discarded and tested and discarded the amount of concentrated work that does an hour and twenty of making people laugh well that's a I mean man tip of the iceberg last night huge amount of work Kennedy when I'm not working on other things I'm not doing the UFC or from not working on my podcast I am always thinking of stuff like this is funny is it's interesting but it's also I've kind of designed my life in that the creation of material outside of the actual sitting down in front of the computer and writing which is critical you have that has to be done it's one of the things that a lot of lazy to eat is don't do they just have no money to get host it's instead of that you can't just do that you have to do both you have to do the writing down notes and stuff is important too but the actual sitting down and crafting the bits and putting them in order and figuring out a way you free ball when you're on stage and let it come when it's on stage because when you're on stage you never know whether help it happen but this will you have to be in the moment like when the guy came up to me at the beginning of the show and handed me the hockey puck what the fuck are you doing and it became like five minutes of me goofing on this guy yeah but it was yeah I had to do it this is the thing that happened you know this is what it's also it's stitching everything together it's the greatest between the stories that I was watching for last night how do you get from one bit to another and I hate to work bit because it just sounds like such an insignificant thing right but that's what we call them yeah but I mean so getting logically from one one bit to another is it is it really like how do you order them how do you have to do that if you don't people don't want to follow your train of thought what you're doing when you're doing a standard performance is not just telling you about your jokes but you're borrowing someone's consciousness you borrowing someone's mind and the only way it really works is if someone trusts you enough your thoughts are as they're as developed as they can be they're unique they're they're surprising they're stimulating to the point where someone's saying okay take me on this rod through your mind take me on this rod because if you're talking like I've seen a million comedians and there's so many that I've seen that they start talking I go I can't listen to this guy's mind because what he's doing is he's got like a one stop like his premises are short they're they're obvious conclude it opens nicely you wish us the challenge and there's there's no depth to the thought as there's no unique point of view there's nothing there they haven't done the work or they're not capable of doing the work whatever we wherever one of this I gotta get out of here because I can't give them my mind you know now do you want because you know you talk about you know being a positive force in people's lives and bringing you know happiness and you certainly did that last night do you want I'm that's all you leave the witness right also do you want people to come out of your show better wiser no how do you want them to come out of the show like it's not just how do you calorie entertainment that's all I would argue that you actually do put some you do put some you're so intelligent enough to put some real wisdom I think into what you do and I think that people can come out of your shows with some interesting connections that they hadn't thought up before I'm not saying you're an educator obviously but I think that there's stuff that it's not just a book yeah you know it's not empty calories right because there's a lot of thought in what you did well last night's set was particularly rich and ideas because some of the new things that I've been working on are there's a lot of stuff that I'm working on about this sort of weirdness of progressive thought lately like this really aggressive progressiveness that's going on where people are denying reality and they're doing it so because they feel like people have been marginalized in the past which is true but it doesn't mean you spring it back the other way you say much a stupid shit it doesn't make any sense yeah oh you judge people harshly for judging people harshly it's like yeah how does that work right that's right people forget it exactly exactly some of the most aggressive people I know are liberals it's really strange I mean there's an amazing video of the University of Toronto of this guy who is speaking about men's rights bar and fail is yeah yeah pretty much yeah and with these feminists are protesting these students screaming in their face these students that want to go see this man talk about women's about men's rights and about that you hate women and all this and they're incredibly aggressive the only hate I see is in the protesters the only hate not by the way incredibly ignorant to what this guy's actual words are and they didn't weren't even aware they didn't even bother doing the research they didn't even bother formulating a true opinion on these this guy's ideas they just decided this guy hates women and that's a weird thing like I've had made some posts about feminism online before and one of the things that I found incredibly strange is that I got called an MRAS hole and so I go what what does that mean it was a MRA so that I had to accept some fighting going on in the air to right now I didn't know what it meant at all it's men's rights advocate or I was like wait a minute a feminist a person who wants equal rights for women is saying that being a man who wants equal rights for men is an idiot or I can call it dodo an MRA dodo and oh Jesus Christ like well there they compressed sycra to go give me a call an MRA asshole yeah yeah no I didn't even know what an MR I mean I'm not a men's rights advocate and by any stretch of imagination I don't visit any blogs I don't visit any forums but I'm a believer in equality as far as like the laws and regulations as they apply to human beings and I do not believe that the laws and regulations as they apply to human beings this country aren't even for men as they are and women I don't think they're even for women and I don't think they're even for men yeah if it's a reportable laws are fucking horrendous for men and some of them are atrocious some of them are candid or god awful yeah day Foley for the longest time I don't know if he's resolved it horrible horrible anybody who's listening to this just google day Foley Joe experienced divorce and there's a there's a youtube video that someone compiled of just him talking about divorce it will make your head spend and I know it's not as good go back to TV yes because buddy last ten million dollars and it's last divorce yeah yeah yeah as he said it's not alimony it's all your money yeah that's it is it is insane it's insane and that's not fair it's not fair I don't care what anybody says I think that absolutely if a man woman at the worst the man should pay child support absolutely and if the woman was not working during the time of the marriage I think there should be some sort of compensation something fair it's something reasonable yeah some of the assets that he developed by focusing on whatever yeah sure absolutely but there's a terrible payments that's just not right it's not right and I have a friend who has to pay his ex wife they were they were married for 12 years he has to pay her for the rest of her life until she gets married so she plays this game she has a boyfriend and the boyfriend lives of her and he sends the investigators over to figure out the boyfriend's not there and then he leaves and the the investigators leave and the boyfriend moves back in and so he has to continue paying like she's cohabitating with a man and he still has to continue to send her money and it's just a manipulation illegal system and this guy has paid her millions and millions of millions of dollars she's in his four million dollar pacific policy at home I mean it crippled him financially and on top of that he had to pay for her lawyer but they went to it's gone through divorce and here's where it gets really crazy she went to every lawyer in town and consulted with them every good lawyer in town that she knew of so that he could never use them as counsel oh because they've accomplished the interest of that right on man it's a badness I mean she planted out she planted this divorce out for a long time was incredibly calculating and the idea that men don't deserve rights and because of the fact that women have been marginalized which is true they happen but that doesn't mean that that haven't been either I mean human beings deserve to be treated fairly that's true to you you deserve everyone deserves to be treated humanely I don't believe men are I don't believe women are I don't believe humans are but the idea that you could separate and be a feminist but the anti-men's rights well you're a fucking crazy person that you know you're not a humanist you're not a person who's looking at all human beings as your brothers and sisters you're a person with an agenda you're a person with an ideology and that ideology is that you're a teeny you're a teen vagina and everything that's on teeny penis can go fuck itself and that was the that was the feedback the blowback that I got for a joke about male feminists yeah no I mean I've stepped on that landmine a couple of times and I keep going back to it because it is an important one you know man in the legal system I mean not just with divorce but I mean the centipacy disparities between men and women what they call the pussy pass you know I mean it's horrendous I mean you call feminism Marxist with pennies socialism the original socialism with tits but that was a bad character in one of my novels I just call them feminism a sort of socialism with pennies and it's very true because I mean and then people call oh my god that's so terrible as I just went through all the founding major out to the feminist system that all Marxists all leftist and so on and also if feminists are so pro woman then where are they with Margaret Thatcher Margaret Thatcher was like the first leader of a western country she struggled up from nothing I mean it incredibly powerful woman but she was on the right to see so they hate her what about I ran I ran wrote the most influential book outside the Bible and the second most influential book and according to the New York Times review of books after the Bible you know reshaped Western philosophy in many ways it must be politics and the feminist hate or why because she was on the right because he's that's what they think she was not actually on the right but so I mean I had these sort of suspicions when they're sort of is it the leftist ideology or the pro woman now if it's the pro woman then they should be incredibly positive where are the feminists when people insult people like Ann Coulter where are the feminists when people insult Sarah Palin you know like Bill Maher called her a cunt I mean that's really pretty vicious like publicly openly right I mean where are the because they're on the right to Ann Coulter and they're considered to be on the right so they get a pass when people go you know they're too then say something bad about a woman on the left and so I think that it is more left than it is pro woman because when they choose between their politics and the gender they all seem to choose the politics of the gender that's why I say it's left it's rather than than pro woman I agree I think there's there's a lot of really emotional and non-objective thinking attached to feminism and there's a lot of there's a lot of really strange the one of the more more recent ones that I find incredibly strange is this there's this new trend of accusing men of rape if they have sex with a woman who's had something to drink this is a like a broad sweeping thing that's going through the internet and a lot of these it's really weird because it seems to be there's a lot of it in this what they call a skeptical community and the skeptical community seems to be like integrated with a lot of male feminists and feminists and this is something that they've adopted this idea that somehow another skepticism and this idea that they combine and I don't know if you're aware of the case the Michael Schurmer thing you know about all of us accused of some significant sexual improvotry right yeah no evidence what about that instead of other than a person who doesn't want to reveal their name yeah who he the guy who wrote the piece heard about second hand yeah he didn't even hear about directly from the person and this is the person who's supposed to have something not see like I don't understand his basis oh he has to be yeah he has any sooner but this is the idea of that being the skeptic community I mean one of the things you learn as a skeptic when you're breaking down any idea whether it's a religious idea or whether it's an idea about an event that took place is that a person's eyewitness account of any individual event is suspect and that it's one of the worst forms of evidence and it doesn't mean that a terrible thing didn't happen with this person but it does mean that if you look at the in the context of the way it was explaining in this guy's blog is that she was put in a position where she couldn't consent like what kind of weirdo language is that and then the the corroborating evidence that he uses in this blog is that a woman went to a party with this guy and he kept getting her drinks and he was flirty and that she got drunker than she usually does and that's it that's the corroborating piece of evidence that the man and a woman who are both adults were drinking together and she got drunk I mean you talk about removing yourself from personal responsibility that he this guy was responsible for you getting drunker like that's insane like that's insane for a person to say this and it will be drinks what choice did I have? It's kind of feminist like why would you how is it possible that a person who believes in the power of being a woman could think that a woman is so much weaker than a man that she can't control how much liquor she consumes and she's around a man yeah but the man somehow or another by being with her and drinking with her forces her to consume more than she normally would that's madness and there's no excuse called I was drunk I mean try that with drunk driving right it's our point is that okay yes you had diminished capacity while you were driving but you were responsible for drinking and getting in the car it's the one time where we're willing to alleviate someone of their own personal responsibility and only women a man is more a man who if a man is more responsible if a man a woman are drunk together but the woman feels bad about being counter in the morning the man raped her. The man was drunk as well but the man are always the aggressors and always therefore guilty I mean that's not human as I but that has taken and this is a long dark road that as a man and you know I'm sorry that if you're a woman it's really hard to get this we have had so much negativity over the past 40 or so years hurled at masculinity that I mean we're like half criminals just for breathing I mean if you look at the role models on TV how men are portrayed you know the homeless symptoms of the American dads like front end they take with all just idiots and sex trays and irresponsible and stupid yeah and the amazing thing is that it's true that if you look at the bell cover intelligence for women it's kind of spikes in the middle so many more women are average intelligence than men now you still have your brilliant women you still have your done with it but if you look at the bell curve of male intelligence much flatter which means that we have a lot more geniuses and a lot more complete idiots right and what's happened is everybody's focus on the idiots among men and have completely begun to ignore all the brilliance that men bring to the world all of the amazing and incredible inventions that men bring to the world and it's just we're focusing on this low cluster which is incredibly biased it's like say okay well blacks in America they commit a lot more crimes and we're just going to focus on that and say that's all the blacks are and it's all we're going to portray as blacks as criminals and blah blah blah I would be incredibly racist but the sexism of portraying man as idiots because we happen to have more cluster as a gender on that side and completely ignoring all of the incredible stuff that brilliant men bring to the world it's incredibly sexist and it's really hard for people to see I mean like the idea that that we were talking earlier the idea that a woman can competently raise children without a man around it's just taken for granted now it's absolutely not true matter essential to the healthy raising of children but the idea that we would recognize that as a society is just we're just disposable it's also a very unfortunate situation in regards to feminism that a lot of people are dealing with their own personal experiences that they've had with a few asshole men in their lives in regards to them not being sexually attractive or not fitting into a certain social group or not and then they have somehow or another extrapolated that that all men are pieces of shit and rapists or a massive amount of them need to be curved and laws need to be changed and if you get drunk with a girl and you have sexually or you're a rapist right I mean and a lot of this is based on their own negative interactions with men and the stereotype of feminism unfortunately is like there's a meme online this is feminism and it's a woman who has a the a holy of a sign saying I'm a feminist and she's fucking 300 pounds and you know and everyone's like yeah that's feminism you know like this is yeah you're right it's a big fat ugly or the no one's a fuck that's really unfortunate but the person the type of person that is a large unattractive woman is gonna deal with and immeasurably it's gonna be so much harder for for her to find people who are sexually attracted to her for her to find healthy relationships for her to if you it's it's an unfortunate reality in this world is that if you are not sexually attractive you are not gonna have as an easier ride when it comes to the opposite sex it's just a fact well I mean but sexually attractive in 300 pounds I mean somebody who's 300 pounds is from most people gonna be sexually unattractive but if they should lose weight and exercise that sort of a different matter that just comes out of a basic human competence but one of the things that I thought of like I grew up with a single mom and we lived because single moms are usually broke right I mean because it's a tough life and so when I grew up with a single mom everyone around me had single moms as well you know what's interesting is that the kind of men who float through single mom world they're not always the best kind of men right they kind of trash you right because it's like really competent and successful and intelligent men aren't falling the girlfriend problems of the single mom you know though rent housing get-ups right right and so I think what happens is a lot of these women have grown up in single mom households or in this sort of environment and so who are the men who are floating through that they tend to kind of be losers they tend to be pretty unstable they tend to be kind of parasitical they you know they don't tend to be very very best specimens of masculinity and so I think the breakdown of the family has created environment where a lot of girls growing up don't have a positive male role model in their life and the kind of men that they see floating through their moms bets tend to be kind of trashy so they're like well this is masculine it it's also very unfortunate that in the criticism of masculinity you've removed a lot of allies you know by blanket generalizations of men you removed a lot of people like myself who I can't support you on that even though I'm an entirely pro human being in and pro equality but when you make these mass generalizations and call someone men's right advocate asshole like that these these are nonsense statements and it's unfortunate that I guarantee you these we're not saying that all feminists are unattractive or all feminists or you know not not sexually viable but I guarantee you almost all of them have had a lot of negative experiences with men and it doesn't mean that all men are negative and it doesn't mean that there's not people out there that you would assume would be assholes that are actually very but you've got this this idea that's the it's easier to define the world by these rigid dimensions that you've sort of set up for yourself and when I when I read things that are from this feminist point of view they're so often aggressive and it's so often and I get that there's a blowback I do get that I get that they've experienced marginalization they believe that you know society is set up to support rape culture and all these strange ideas and that there's a blowback but I don't think that the way it's being handled is I think it's I don't think it's objective I don't think it's irrational and I don't think it's balanced and I find it really weird when really intelligent people attach themselves to these feminist ideas yeah and and but the problem is you know in Canada here I had a guy on my show Great Gap Bill Gergen who wrote the end of the family and he pointed out that there's a revolution that occurs I think that initially is necessary and I think this is also with blacks in America too there's a revolution that occurs that is initially necessary but the whole point of a revolution is to defund itself to end right so yeah I mean there was stuff that needed to be done obviously we talked about the certainly with blacks in the 60s and some stuff with women is kind of different right so because women there's always been this women and children first right like the vast majority of the people who died at the Titanic were offering up their lifeboats to women right because there has been a sort of women and children first and women have been kind of elevated there was no black people first in the South right there so it's a little bit different but there was I think some push for equality that needed to happen but then what happens is you get a lot of people who get heavily invested in this course and they becomes the ego their identity right like I fight for black rights I fight for women's rights and so on but then what happens is society will often listen and respond in a positive way and then what happens is that course begins to diminish and people are like you know supporting like I'm not going to support the abolitionist course because labor is ended like I'm just not going to do it it's over right I mean there may be other problems but that's not the problem right like I don't support a lot of you know that's let's deal with polio victims because we got this vaccine we don't really have polio victims anymore right so the whole point of revolution is to defund itself to end for people to move on with their lives but what happens is when you have a government you get these voting blocks and you get like in Canada over the last 10 or 15 years with Canadian governments giving $300 million to feminist groups that's not coming from Canadian women or Canadian men for that matter because you know a lot of it's kind of been dealt with but these groups continue by by poking these scams and by continuing these grievances and by finding the Trayvon Martin situation blowing an up into a race war and all this kind of stuff a lot of the stuff has been dealt with but because the government's still given the money they still need to whip up these kinds of hysterias that just to justify their own existence I mean the whole point of revolution is to end the whole point of I want to deal with measles let's get a vaccine and end measles you don't keep taking the same amount of money to year after year but if you have a government funding it then you have to manufacture these grievances which just keeps things going again worse the point of revolution is a resolution yeah and this resolution never seems to come play it's never gonna take place if your approach is imbalanced and you know there's just some things that are being there's some proponents of feminism they're endorsing one of them being the ability to withdraw consent equals rape the the ability that you mean half of the fact yeah that's after the fact yeah that's the same you can send it that's like we give you my coffee and then judging you with that when you walk out the room yeah take my coffee oh after that he stole my coffee because I changed my mind after the fact my day left well the idea is that a man can lie to a woman in order to get in bed with her and then if she can prove that he did that that she that he's a rapist because he tricked her with his words yeah because of course women have a lie I mean they don't use makeup they don't puff up their tits they don't ever falsify any of their people they don't tend to like a man because he's wealthy and hope to get pregnant with a leader I mean I don't see any feminists that are decrying that and that's a that's a horrible front to womanhood the thing that the only way that you can make a live in is to lie to a man and make him get pregnant so that you can get money from him from that on I mean with feminists true feminists should be horrified by that that repressed focus on the false rate accusations yes the false rate accusations accusations which in some studies are 20 30 or 40% of the study in the air force where they actually even women who have withdrawn their accusations 20 30 or 40% of rate rate accusations in some studies who knows what it is universally are are false I mean how horrendous is that and women should be coming down so hard on women who make false rate accusations because they make it so much harder for the women who actually have been right because then there's that problem or false paternity and the problem with false rate accusations is a very few women face face repercussions for them now I'm in my book if you came if you cue someone of a crime and you lied you get the punishment they would have gotten you should that's how it's agreed that's the double japanese player this football player has recently been released he got on tape this girl admitting that she lied about him being him raping her and her family received a million dollars for eight hundred fifty thousand dollars and now they you know they have to pay the money back but that's the extent of her punishment this guy went to jail for five fucking years you know and now he's just trying to re pursue what and have that report he'd still be there well not only that is just one of many I have three friends that were false we accused of rape I also have friends that were raped I know that there's I know rape is real you know I have friends that have been roofied and you know got out of danger because someone recognized they in the drug it's not it's very common you know rape is a disgusting horrible anti-human crime and I think rape is should be treated the same way as murderers you're you're denying someone that humanity you're doing you're taking away something some part of them you're removing a part of what who they are as a person it's kind of permanent yeah somebody's a little hard you can get a new car but there's something about sexual violations that it's kind of a permanent it's horrible but so is lying about it that's horrible too lying about a rape is just as harmful well they'll often get a man right yes yes and this idea of this idea of withdrawing consent you know that somehow or another you could do that and turn a guy into a rapist that's that's that's a hating thing that's a you don't you you what you're doing is you're you're you're hating someone who's manipulative you're hating someone who can con you into bed but that's been what men have been trying to do since the beginning of time like you're eating in the game of courting a woman and there have been men that wear shoes that would never wear and watches me would never buy and cars they don't give a shit about an apartment that they decorate just to get the woman to believe that they're like this it's all the lie my friend Brian you saw earlier tonight or last night first show Brian Callan so hilarious guy the first time I came over his house back when he was single he had Jack Carroll whack on the road sitting on his night table opened up with like a president and I you know I'm a predator so I came over his house I'm like did you ever read that you know I find weakness in people very quickly so I saw that I go you're not fucking reading that I go you're hoping a chick comes over and she sees that and she's like oh you read so much like a polar bear amazing he's there he says that laughing it's true yeah that's true I decorate my house pretend I'm smarter than I am I did that there was a Stephen Hawking book a grief history of time or whatever right and I had that on my yes and this woman I love through the death we went out for a while this woman came over and just like I called bullshit on the first thing I called I called bullshit on stuff later and I'm like no no I read it and she she did it she went over and she opened it and it creaked like an old bogey I could have never made open before so I didn't get this spine was completely like unvet like you know what you got me that's hilarious yeah we lie we pretend you know I've always I have this thing and I say people and I think a lot of thumbs we lie and pretend it'll be part of us because we're not happy with who we are where we're not really and we'd like to be we'd like to wish that we were someone better I always tell people be the person that you pretend to be when you're trying to get laid you want to be able to live your life optimally We like to wish that we were someone better. I always tell people, be the person that you pretend to be when you're trying to get laid. You want to be a life optimally, you want to really be an admirable person, be the hero of your own story, and be the God that you pretend to be when you're trying to get laid. And if you could find people who love you for who you are, I mean, my God isn't that easy. The problem with the pretense is, you know, it's fine in the moment, but man, you've got to keep that shit up. That's a lot of work. And you have to love yourself to unorder the B-Loved. If you have all sorts of flaws that you don't fix and you don't like various aspects of yourself that you don't correct, what normal person in their normal, in their sensible mind would want to engage in a long-term relationship with someone that's incredibly flawed, knows it, and does nothing about it. Like that sounds like a nightmare. That's all like taking out a dog that shits all over the house. You know, you're just taking out a giant problem. You got to fix this person. And some people do do that. They take on projects. You know, I mean, I have a friend who every fucking girlfriend dates is always broken. And you can never see that. Your problem is your own life has a mess. And you don't want to deal with that. So you bring people into your life that are more fucked up. And you could fix that. That's not their problems. And you can't give them advice. Because they give them advice, so you're going to fix them. But fix yourself, bitch. And if you did fix yourself, you wouldn't want these people in your life. Like if I date a 300 pound room and the fact that I'm 280, it looks better. Yeah. So I have to diet, right? I look smaller next to that. Yeah. I mean, I think that is a huge part of what's wrong with people in relationships. What's wrong with a lot of people in relationships is internal. It's what's wrong with you. What are you bringing into a relationship until you are happy with who you are until you're you're just a reasonable person who's objective about your own actions and objective about your own path and life and enjoying your own path and life. You're now worthy of a healthy, happy relationship. You haven't gotten your own shit together yet. Well, this is terrible. I think dichotomy where women get married to guys hoping that they'll change. And you guys get married to women hoping that they won't. You don't get to cut that long hair on you. Like when you have kids, right? You're going to keep exercising, right? You're still going to look great, right? And I know that. And I mean, the idea that you're with someone in the hopes that they're changed is just completely insane. It's like buying a viewer can hoping it's going to be about. I mean, it's not what you thought of. You would get the viewer going to think into what what bugs ridiculous. Well, there are a lot of women who'd like to do that though. We like to do something. We like to fix and change again. Yeah. We decorate him and he's going to be just great. If I throw things out, where's that? Where's that book? Shouldn't read that. What? Or, you know, there's still three atoms holding my underwear together. How did you put the garbage? I have a friend and his girlfriend. He went to the bathroom and his girlfriend was confronted by my other friend's girlfriend about the kind of car he drives because he drove a sports car and he had a Ferrari. He's a wealthy guy. And the girl from was like, why do you let him drive that car? He let him drive that car? Yes. That was her words. Like a guy driving a car like that. He's like, you know, he's like, he's like, why do you let him have that car? She was correcting him because she was concerned that her boyfriend might get ideas. Like, hmm, I can get a car like that too because my friend has a car. So she wanted to what she was worried about her and she didn't front of her man like to check him. She went to this girl and was correcting her situation over a fucking car. I mean, it was like decided. He's got time. Don't you have to do with your life? I was willing to go home and manipulate it. She was incredibly manipulative with this woman. And, you know, those people are not in my life anymore. But this woman was incredibly manipulative. And she, she was, the guy was like a wealthy, strong guy. But for whatever reason, this attractive woman came into his life and just started dominating him. She didn't work. He paid for everything. And she wouldn't let him do shit. She, she chose everything that he did. She dressed him. She bought clothes for him. And he was not allowed to buy a sports car. She's not just anything great about having a sports car. But I don't understand if you're going to be a capitalist, you've got to be a materialist, which they clearly were in this big, giant house. You should be like, buy whatever fucking car you want. If you're really not bust your ass in worth 12 hours a day, I'm not saying there's any great honor or nobility and buying a Ferrari. Because if you really want a Ferrari and you've got a lot of money, buy a fucking Ferrari, who gives a shit? That reminds me. Best moment in your computer, Joseph. Because I'm doing it, I'm doing debate with him on Monday. Because we have slightly different ideas about how the future should go. And we have debate. And so I listened to your, you show it, which is really enjoyable. And I love the bad question. He said, you know, they could make better cars. You know, like, the Ferrari, they could make that better. You're like, no, they absolutely could not make that car any better than it is. Anybody comes in like that was like, I mean, that's the pinnacle of human energy. Like, I'm going to shut the fuck up. Yeah. I mean, unless you're going to have like an angel's wings and wheels that you cannot improve that car, that's about as good as you can. You know, that's that sort of silly socialist ideology where you don't vet your facts out before you start blabbing. You know, you can't say they can make a better Porsche. No, they fucking race the 24 hours of lemons. They, they, they compete against the best cars in the world. They brilliantly engineer these vehicles. Guys, they're like, yeah, the update for the Porsche is the fucking telewatering stock. That's no better way to get around for that. When people talk to me like that, if they can make a better car, no, they cannot stop. You don't know what you're talking about. You don't know the history of what you're saying. What you're doing is saying something that goes along with your ideology. You would like it to be true because it would make you more brilliant. Good. Make your points. But if you have to bend facts to meet your theories, that makes it really it. Right? Well, it's going to be a slave to the facts. Right. He's got a great thing going on. He's got a really interesting thing going on, but it's very culty. You know, there's a lot of cultiness to that. And it's also, it all falls out the window when you realize these are stock broker. He was for a question. He still does. It's how he makes his money. Really? Yes. It's a day trader. Doesn't he get people that like rip out their kidneys and email them to him or something? Isn't that what people say? He's trying to run a cult. He's a very smart guy. Yeah. And I don't think he's going to do a shit. Yeah. He's sort of a frustrated musician and a day trader. Yeah. Very bright guy though. And Mark's playing the stock market. And Mark's gang is made and then you kick it out when she had a baby because, you know, exploding the working classes is really bad. Yeah. Exactly. Just kind of do it as well as the capitalist. That's my problem. There's a lot of those guys out there that become intoxicated with the attention that you get from having good ideas. You know, and that's a real common occurrence in human nature. Whenever someone gets to talk and people listen and go, you're amazing. Amazing. You don't go, hmm. Is that person just dumb? This is not a man. I need more of you. All the smaller people out there. You move you and your second cousin, especially if you've bred together, bring me your children. They'll just fit right in. I'm always the first point out that every single thing that ever comes out on that is essentially just some things that have bred. And you very humble about that. Like you openly say, like I'm smart enough to understand this. I really get that, but you're just my thoughts. And that is important. Yeah. Because I mean, nobody has the answers. The best, I mean, I like what Socrates did. The best you can do is provoke thought. I mean, how many answers have we given the people in this conversation? Yeah. Not really many. I'd say, don't get your kids. That's not the one. The reason with your kids, maybe you stay home with them, if you can. That's kind of the greatest one. But those are sort of, make that such common sense that the fortune could be. But big answers, man, I think they always really worry about that. The moral instructors have made it kind of usually complete control for each of the assholes. I 100% agree. I think it's almost impossible. I think we all together can work things out by talking and exchanging ideas and exchanging opinions and agreeing and seeing each other's points of view. I think we could help that way. We can all help each other. But the idea that one person is going to be the moral authority or the voice of wisdom. It's a very dangerous position. It really is. I've been, there's a few things that uncomfortable saying people shouldn't do. But outside of that, I have no idea why they're just going to make you the happiest in life. I mean, yeah, don't steal, don't kill, don't rape, don't, yeah, fine, fine, fine. How many people really do that? Not many, right? But actually, how people should live? I mean, man, if we could start pointing guns at each other, we could start having these crazy, lost, throwing people in jail for the runbits of vegetation, I think that would be a great step forward. You know, let's just start pointing guns at each other and guess what I've done. Outside of that, I have no idea what people should do to make themselves happy. That's because you're legitimately intelligent. And half the time, I'm not even sure myself. Right? I mean, yes, if they're saying, what should I do with my day? That's going to make me the happiest. It's nice to have to choice about it, right? But as to what other people should do, you know, who they should be with and what careers they should follow. I mean, that's really it's impossible. It's hard to know. It's a very important point that you bring up that especially because there's so many things that people like that I don't. There's so many things that I like that people don't. Like I've had really, it really tells your friends and go, well, how do you like this mixed martial I don't know. I just do. I like it. I understand that it's a controlled violence. I understand that it's disturbing for some people to watch. But to me, it's been a part of my life since I was a boy. And I find it incredibly fascinating. Sorry you don't. It's okay. And by the way, the people that I've met that are mixed martial artists, the fighters are some of the nicest people I've ever met in my life. And one of the reasons is that they've conquered their ego to a certain extent and that they have a much better control over it because they're being checked over and over on a daily basis in the gym. Oh, discipline is highly underrated, bro. I think it used to be more highly rated discipline. I mean, the discipline to say when you're wrong, that you're wrong. I mean, that's what bothers me so much about people is these lazy edges of their permission slips. You know, like it. I was, when people do like really stupid shit, baht of me, it's just like how is that? How do you give yourself permission to do that? Yeah. Like how is that? How is that on your list of possible things to do? And still be happy about yourself or even like how is that, you know, I hit my kid. How is that like how is that even on your list of possibilities? Like how do you have to like, why would you say no, I'm not going to do that? Like and have to discipline to not do it. That seems to be pretty obvious. Very underrated aspect of being a man, of being a human is having a code that you live in. Yeah, it's something self discipline. Like, you know, I mean, the guys who get up at five and work out and stuff like that. Like, you know, the other day I was like, yeah, I can, like, most people are like, I'm kind of tired. Should I work out or have an app? You know, and, you know, part of you is like, oh, an app that you really nice right now. Which one of you is like, saying, I'll go in and do that? Doing that. Doing that. Doing that. Doing that. Doing that. Doing better. I'm just sleep better that night because you didn't have an app in scrip just like all. So just that kind of discipline is really lacking. We, I think we used to have a lot more of it when we were really confronted with nature a lot more. And now we live in this fuzzy city way, you can get everything 24 seven. It's all easy to come by and so on. And we come kind of, and the materialism to me comes with the laziness and the laziness comes with the debt. Because we talk about national debt and so on. I mean, in America and to some degree, it's almost as bad a candidate too. People like have debts way bigger than their income. And that's kind of laziness too. Like, what's with the deferral? Like, why not defer some gratification? You know, if they're going to study on kids, it's called the marshmallow study. They take four year olds and they sit them down. They say, you get a too much wellness now. Sorry, you get one. You get you can have too much melers now or you can have four marshmallows if you have two, if you have one now and wait. There was take two now. Well, know there's some of them that will defer real and there's some of them that won't and that they track these kids through life. And they find that consistently, those who are able to defer gratification just do a hell of a lot better. I bet you that when you go to do fear factor and you're like, if there's one thing I don't want to do today, it's fear factor. Do a nine year old time we did fear right now. Like you were. But I mean, the discipline to just get up and get, I mean, important, what do you all know? 90% of success is just showing up. That's kind of just have the discipline to do it. When you don't feel like doing it, the deferral of gratification, I'm sure with the training, there's time with your dress pick or you pull the muscle and you're just like, well, I gotta go back and do it all those times. Like that cheesecake looks like I'm drooling. Like, isn't I? I'm here. But you just don't do it. And I think that kind of discipline, so you say that the fibers are like really great guys. I think it's because they probably really work that muscle of discipline to the point where they have a cut, which they have a set of personal responsibilities and they don't let themselves step outside of that. And so there's a kind of security in people who have a lot of discipline in whatever field it is that they're working in. I really like being around people who've got a lot of discipline because you know they're not just going to do some random shit. It's also inspiring to me. Yeah, I like being around people that work hard. So it makes me feel like I should get things done too. When people accomplish things around you and they experience joy and success and they experience this feeling of like, wow, I did it. I pulled it off. That's inspiring. It makes you want to do the same. It makes you want to and the more things I accomplish and the more things I do well, the happier I am as a person. I find this a direct correlation. Do you have a plan? I know you said you said it's a little bit grab what you can as far as your career goes and a little bit on the less than plan side. But you have a sort of an idea of what you want to go five years, you know, 10 years kind of thing. No. No. I'm here. I'm here. Listener overrated. Yeah, well, I'm here. You know, what I'm doing right now, I love I really I like to keep doing it. My plan is to continue to do it. But if I, if everything maintained exactly where it is right now, I don't think I would do anything differently. I think I would continue to work on my stand up. I continue to do the commentary for the fights. I continue to do podcasting and I enjoy all those very much. I continue to try to be the best father I can. I continue to try to be the best husband I can. All that good stuff. But other than that, no, I don't have any plans. My plans are just enjoy life and I enjoy life very much. My plans are to maintain that enthusiasm and that happiness, the joy of life. And spread as much of that as I can. Inspire people if I can. And just inspire people by enjoying myself. How other people have inspired me by enjoying their lives. I'm an inspired constantly but people love their craft. Like people who love their profession. Like people love what they do. So it's very infectious, you know, so that's that's the only goals I have. And that's I mean, that's sort of the definition of a happy life that if it continues the way it is, yeah, that's pretty damn good. And you know, and maybe grows and maybe maybe gets, I would like to get better at everything that I'm doing that I enjoy. But you have to. Like in jujitsu, you don't maintain, you get better in comedy. You don't maintain, you get better. You continue to focus on it and you learn from your past experiences. You're going to improve if you apply intelligence and focus to anything, you're going to get better at it. It's not like you can become a master at comedy. Even if you are a master, you know, you call yourself a black belt in comedy, there's always room. There's room in jujitsu, there's room in martial arts, there's room in everything. I love the disciplines but know them. Like you can't ever say it's the end. It's no end. It's never ends. There's no like you're never a total master. It's not possible. I mean, you can teach and you'll have a certain amount of math. Like there's certain moves that I can teach someone in jujitsu. But could I teach you jujitsu mastery? Something you have to pursue on your own and most likely you'll never achieve. You might have a master, you might be masterful over one particular skill level. But then someone else come along that is much more skillful than you and master you. It's a constant series of levels and it's fairly infinite. And then there's also the physical challenges and the athletic ability and all sorts of tangibles that different people bring to the equation. But I think that in pursuit of those things is where you find yourself. And that there are really the interesting aspects of it is the growth that you achieve in those things, whether it's through the growth in writing or comedy or anything difficult, those things manifest itself, manifest themselves in the rest of your life as well. You get better at everything. I was going to ask you, is there a green guest for your podcast that you know, in terms of what Kenneth he was alive, has brother on, he was a fascinating guy. The green guest I think I've already had, I know. I like more of the same. Neil deGrasse Tyson was great. He has one, charismatic guy. It's great to have someone front and center rational thinker putting it after the masses. The beautiful. Maynardine from Tools, great, grand hand concert. There's someone in great guests. I enjoy doing it. I enjoy just talking to people. But I think it's broadened my perspective immensely to be able to have these kind of conversations. Like you and I sitting down here for hours just chatting. I think that's really difficult to pull off in the real world. You know, in the last word, green to have a podcast, it's really hard to just set aside three hours where we're just going to talk. It's hard. Oh, it's an incredible privilege. I mean, I feel incredibly fortunate to have the opportunity to have conversations like this. Other people I do on my show, I mean, you know what? But it's going to be a dad. I got all the parenting experts with a university coming on my show. It's like, whoa, you know, so I get to learn and how do people get to learn? I mean, it's an incredible privilege. And this technology that makes it possible. It's fantastic. Yeah. They're like, look how little we're using here. You have a camera set up and thank goodness you have a backup record. For the first 27 minutes, we didn't even get this. And that was the gold stuff, baby. But this is just a little piece of, you know, electronics and to plug into the wall. And that's it. And maybe a million people will hear this more than a million. More than a million really because each one of my downloads is over a half a million. Right. It's a minimum. Should a million? Can we start again then? Because I would say like a a little rusty. Yeah. It's actually charming. Yeah. But is that, how many times you've been to a stand-up comedy show before? I used to do a lot. I mean, I used to go to a lot. When I was in the business world, we'd have clients come up and I'd always want to take into a comedy club because it sure beats a movie, right? Yeah. So I used to go see a lot of comedy. I did a little bit, you know, just some amateur shit when I was, oh, you did a stand-up? Yeah. Little mice and stuff. And yeah, just opened my stuff. And it wasn't really my thing. But it was fun to go up and try. I was like doing that sort of stand-up, the clear-fetch thing. But I love stand-up. I think what you guys do is like fantastic. I think it's just a real ray of sunshine in human life. And what you give is you give permission for people to be to be funny themselves, to have fun. And the joy that you guys have, the ones things I love most about stand-up, you know, the breaking bit. And you did it a couple of times last night, where you did something that's so funny that you yourself found it funny because maybe it was under a earth or something spontaneous or you had a thought because that's seeing somebody have joined the moment is really, really enjoyable. I only want to do that if it's real. That's really real. No, I know. It wasn't real. There's some people that do like fake breaks and little laugh at their jokes, a fucking billion times in the row. And every time you see them, they'll laugh at it the same way. It's kind of gross. But last night, I was working on a bunch of new stuff. So there's one other reason why I thought it was so funny. Yeah. And I mean, you know, going back and forth with the crowd. I mean, it's really amazing to see the energy that you have. I think people don't see the kind of energies that really energized stand-up comedian has. They may see it in a rock show, you know, but this is the lead singer or some pretty victory stuff or whatever. But when you go to see stand-up, you see somebody who's really putting out a lot of energy. And I think it reminds people that they can be in candescence. They don't have to be like these dull embers, which most people touch through their days and their cubicles or whatever. I just dragged it themselves around. But I think seeing people really energized, it reminds you that it is inspiring. It reminds you that you can be energetic, that you can be powerful, that you can be commanding, that you can be generous. Because stand-up comedian comedy is very generous in my opinion. Because so vulnerable. I mean, you're out there like, I need to get a get a laugh or not. You know, like I did acting. And I didn't do much comedy. I did some. But I mostly did like the serious stuff. And if the theater is quiet, you can just pretend that they're really moved and, you know, trying, you know, all this sort of stuff. But if you're going for laughter, I mean, it's there. It's not. It's hanging out there. Right? And so I think I'm not going to tell you your job. Because of course, you know, it really times better than I do. But what I really love about the stand-up is just that openness to honesty, the vulnerability and the energy. It's fun that you call it generous. A lot of people think of it as selfish because what you're trying to do, you're the only reason why you're being vulnerable is because you're hoping that you're going to get a laugh. You know, you're, you're, but you can't make it a laugh. The laugh has to come honestly. Yeah. Right? I mean, if you bomb, nobody laughs out of generosity, right? And there's nothing to do. Yeah. Or like, and then the ex-lors come out of the woodwork. And you're just like, then you're fighting a losing battle and all that. Now I do. If you anybody who provides a service is a vulnerability, I mean, you're out there selling your CDs of the street points is a vulnerability. And so I view it as a very generous thing to stand-up company is to, of course, you get paid and you're not in custody. It's not like self-sacrifice. You enjoy what you do. But the audience has to know that you really care about them having a good time in order for it to work. I stay around after the show and take pictures with everybody. You do. You can do that. You can have a doctor to take your layer and, uh, you can take the headbutt and tunnels or whatever you do. That to me is a part of the generosity idea. I think it's important that it reinforces the relationship that I appreciate them very much and, you know, I'd be happy to take pictures with them. And if it takes an hour and a half out of my day after the show's over, that's great. Fine. I like what the show is. I'm so far away. Yeah. You're only preaching a real work day at that point. I need to lie down. Get me some cold comments. The day I'm on the show, I actually put in work. What is the prep if you don't? I get the curtain. Well, right now I'm working on a lot of new material. So right now there's a lot of writing involved during the day of a show. I like to sit down in front of my computer for at least three or four hours. Right. Because it really like fires up all my synapses and coalesces all these ideas together. And then before the show, I write things down physically in the long-hand form. But like the day of the show, I got all the stuff that I wrote about the Toronto Mayor. That was all I wrote that the day of. That was all new material that I wrote specifically because it was silly guy. I thought I had the, that's crazy. Yeah. So amazing gets out of two. It was good stuff. I've forgotten about him because, you know, I try to blank out on politics as much as possible because I know it's like the end line fluff and the wind that'll sting your eyes. But that's my prep. I feel like I can definitely be shown without that. I mean, I can just go and do a show. I have enough material I can just go do a show right now. Like, you know, we'll open that door. There's a comedy club and I get on stage and it'll work out. But to do it best, I have to prepare. I have to write, especially when the material's new. There's like a lot of stuff that I have to make sure there's certain tag lines after a member. And it's like, there's so much memory involved in so many paths that have to end in this also. Experiments. I have to figure out what's the right path. Like sometimes I'll open up with this and then I'll close with that. Like, you know, like last night I closed with all this stuff on being a vegan. I would get the last line away. But that last line was like a brand in my head. I like thought about that all the way. Oh, I would, you go see the show. If you had listening to this, but that last line was like that was the perfect choice for me. Oh, thank you. Well, that's how you want to end it. Boom, thanks. Good night. Yeah. Leave me one thing more. Yeah. I wanted to ask you because I, this is something that I ask of pretty much anybody who I think is a thinker. It's like looking at this crazy life that we live. Do you have a positive outlook for humans, for culture? Do you think that we're going to work this out? Are you a voice of doom guy? Or do you think like, you know what I think this is actually moving in the right direction ultimately? Yes. Oh my God. I have just so many words. The most important question I give you one way. I think that the world will go how the most important and energetic people will make it go. Right. So I don't believe that I'm along for the right. I am not a big movement in history kind of guy. You know, like Hegelians or Marxists or something, you know, bullshit and technical, they all believe that there is a historical movement and you know, the zeitgeist and this and that and the other. And we're all just kind of along for the ride like, you know, he grits on the back of a hippo. I don't believe that. I believe in the single great willpower individual theory of history that when people who have ability and intelligence and passion and commitment, they're the ones who make the world go in a particular direction. Right. Founding fathers did it one way and it went, I can get a pretty positive direction, you know, once the slaves and women got caught up at the all-manry or kind of thing, it went into a pretty positive direction. You look at Rose P.M., the reign of terror in the French Revolution, and by the very bad direction. If you look at the Soviets, the Russian Revolution in 1917, the Lenin and company, they're going to be seriously bad direction. It killed like 70 million people in the Soviet Empire. Right. But these are all individuals. They're all individuals with particular abilities making choices. So I don't believe that the world is going to get better unless people who can make it get better. I think in entropy as things get worse. Right. I mean, the lowest common denominator, the worst demagogues tend to take over, but you can really fight against that. I'm a single hero of history, like you just, you take a stand as best you can, and you shine that light as bright as possible. And then most people will simply go one way or another, based upon the willpower of the individuals that they listen to and the clarity and the focus and humility of the people they listen to. So I think that it goes the way we want it to go, but it's not going to go there unless we make it go to a better place. I think you're right. I think it's a brilliant way of putting it to. I think we do get energized from others and the people that do have power and influence, do have also an obligation to energize people with ideas. Yeah. Look, if you know how to do the Heimlich and someone's choking on a fishbone, go help that person. You know, if you can swim and someone's drowning, go help that person. You have ideas to make the world better. You think you're really good. Go do express them. Yeah. I mean, I mean, I don't believe in unshelves and positive obligations. Like if you choose a contract, then you're bound by that contract. I don't think you have to, but you kind of a dick if you don't. You know, like if you're like, oh, I don't want to give that guy a cracheotomy because this ravioli is really good, even though you could and save the guy's life. It's not like you should be thrown in jail for that, but it's really douchey. You know, I think if you have verbal abilities and you have skills and you have energy and you have education and you have some capacity and give them now how easy it is to broadcast to the world. By God, you kind of kind of owe it to the future. You know, because all the great stuff that we have was people putting themselves on the line in the past. You know, all the great, like the freedoms we have, the political freedoms, all people fighting hard and a hell of a lot harder than we have to fight. You know, the guys that the founding fathers, they face down the British army for God's sake, they could have got muskets through the head, right? Muskets boss through the head. What do we got? Oh, maybe some people might say bad things about me online. It's not exactly Joan of Arc stuff, right? So we have an incredible platform. We have so little downside to bringing light to the world, but that's what drives me every day. It's just, I want, especially when you come at dad, you really, your whole timeframe extends. It's not about your life. It's about, you know, my daughter's going to outlive me for like 40 years, I hope, right? 50 years. And it really is about, I just kind of let the ourselves take over because ourselves love to do to be in charge, right? And the problem is good people to hunt that bossy because good people like living that live and, you know, I don't want to be in your face and in your business and, you know, what I can accept, but ourselves love to be in charge and they keep congregating at the top of power. And I don't want to be at the top of power. I don't want to be a politician. I don't want to have power over others. I think that's the ring has to go in the fire. There's no way that the years that I grew. And so the problem is that bad people are just anal and motivated and douchey and power hungry. And they just work like assholes to get power over others. And good people are like, well, I only want that power because I'm happy and I'm in love. And you know, I've got a great life inside of it. I don't want to boss everyone else around. But we have through this technology, we don't have to have political power to have an effect. And we don't have to be a professor and teach maybe 5,000 people in a whole career or write some book that maybe 10,000 people read. A million people can listen to this for what you and I spending a couple hours having a great fucking conversation. I mean, who what matters are we? And we can do that now. First, I'm in history. It's incredible. There's no playing at the stake there. We're not bitten by the life as witches. We're not being thrown into, you know, Russian glides like Salchin eats. And I mean, we have this, it's win-win. We have a great conversation. The world hopefully gets some nuggets of wisdom. And we turn the ship a little bit more towards the light. I agree. I think that's a great way to end this. All right. Thank you so much. You're on your website for my listeners. JoeRobeyn.net. JoeRobeyn.com. All books are free. All podcasts are free. Now advertising because I have the business sense of a box of G string. And your YouTube channel. Oh, yes. YouTube.com forward slash free domain rating. Well, you know, I think you have a great business sense because you've accumulated this massive following. So if you wanted to sell something, now would be the time. You built up the awesome core audience. And I've held off from selling something. So the first thing I sell is going to be great, baby. Yeah. Just so on gold. Actually, but I am, well, I mean, it's not for sale. But a documentary is coming out pretty soon. I've had a good fortune to work with Sean Lennon and some other great musicians to use. What's it about the documentary? It's called Truth because I'm very modest. It's basically, it's a documentary about what's wrong with the world and how we should fix it. Another film for the South of Cossa. Let me know when it comes out. I'm happy for more. Thank you very much. Joe. Good time. Have a real day. It's basically it's a documentary about what's wrong with the world and how we should fix it I'm not a pro for this, I'm gonna let me know when it comes out I'm happy for a moment Thank you very much Joe Good time, very well, thank you very much Thanks a lot of fun