The Joe Rogan experience. Yeah, that's what I realized. That something was going on. I didn't know what it was. A lot of it was anger, man. I think it was. I don't know. Nothing. No specific reason. I tried. I mean, I tried like, um, I've just done a ton of yoga. I did. Yeah. Isn't that amazing for leaving anger? Oh, you're so peaceful after you get out of there. Yoga. Meditation. I tried the ketamine. I was doing nasal spray. No, I did shoot him. Oh, did you really? Did you do the IV? Yeah. You went to doctor? Succession. Yeah. With a therapist in the room. Did you trip balls? Bro. I felt. Talk to me. There was a moment in the joke. But I thought it was a tonsel. There was a tonsel. I thought it was a tonsel. A tonsel. Maybe you are. You would probably have to totally have to be shot. Maybe we're all cells in a tonsel. Because you know how like an atom, if you think of an atom, most of it is like empty space. Right? Yeah. Just like a solar system. Right. Maybe that's like the whole universe is like an atom. Oh, I'll be shocked by that. And you really are an atom and a tonsel. But that the reveal and that wouldn't be, I need something to do. I need something more than that. So when you thought you were a tonsel, tell me what the experience was like. OK. So they put you in the thing. You're sitting there in the chair and then suddenly, like, you have your eyes closed. And you're talking with a therapist the whole time during this place. Is he talking too much? No. You're like me. No. I don't think I'm glad you talk. Because it's hard for me. The most I've ever talked to in my life is a couple times a few. I'd like to get at me. OK. So I'm sitting there in the chair and the man named John, the sharp, the sharp, you're in there with a sharp. It's a sharp one. I thought it was a councilor or something. I mean, it's a council. He had a whistle around his neck. I see one. Oh, it's a little bit dicey. But it was sanctioned. It's in a beautiful facility. It's a nice facility. So go in. They put it in you. I'm sitting in the chair. Got a whistle. I think it would like, it might have been a safety piece he had from being a child or something. He could have been, I don't know, lifeguard. I have no idea what the past was like. But he was a nice guy, but he's a therapist. So I'm sitting there and I start dreaming. You know, like a regular dream, you know, I start dreaming a little bit. and I'm still talking to him. And then I start talking about being a kid, you know, I love thinking about being a kid and stuff. And so I start talking about being a child. And then I start talking about my dad. And now like the darkness is starting to have like kind of shapes in it and things are starting to feel that I'm talking about a certain, a feel real. Like this feels real. I'm sitting in here with you. And there's this table here. And this, so I can feel this feels real. Jamie's right there. So things like that. I'm talking about start to feel. that has a feeling, not just a vision. So I started to feel, I was talking about my dad and next thing, you know, I'm spending time with my dad. Like I'm with my dad. Whoa. And I, you know, and I ain't gotten to spend time with my dad in 20 years. So like I'm, and I remember, I got to let my dad know that I loved him. I didn't know if he ever knew, you know, and it was this crazy thing. Dude, I'm sitting there and I'm balling crying and like, I didn't plan on that when I went in there. But it felt like I was really with my, like it felt as real as sitting here with you, which for somebody being deceased and going, it was so powerful. I would think that that would be a hard thing to share with someone you don't know. I guess that maybe that's where the Academy really comes in and I didn't, uh, it didn't bother you. You didn't know. And I'm okay with shit. I shared a lot of, I share a lot of, like, I share a lot of emotional stuff. So I think I'm probably more prone to it, maybe than some people. But I would just imagine that like if you don't know this man and you're sitting down, it's like an intensely personal part of your life. Well, he became the therapist became just somebody I would check in. I would say, John, is everything okay? Am I okay? Cause I started to feel then I started to slide down the edge of the universe for a minute. What's that like? It was, it was, it was hard. It was hard cause you don't have any ropes or anything. I mean, you're out there to us. You're like, you know, hope solar, your solar hope or whatever that guy who's who climbed that guy, you had them on. Free solar Alex Homme. Yeah, you're like that. If I put this no, but there's no amount. No ropes. No amount. But you have, you do have a bag of chalk on your belt. I didn't notice that. But I felt like a crypto currency. I felt myself like going through these channels. And then I came back to another moment. I got to spend time with, oh, I got to see my mom when she was a kid, which I thought was kind of interesting. And just see that she was like a happy child or something. You know, or just, I don't know. So there was moments like that for me that were extremely intense and real. And otherwise there was a lot of moments where I was just out of my, I was out of the chair. I remember some points thinking, how am I ever going to get back into that chair? They'll never get me back in there. I was just so far in my head. How long did it last? It felt like it lasted for about maybe, maybe 13 minutes, but it was an hour. Neil Brennan told me about it first. He was the first guy telling about it. I'll never forget. We're in the hallway of the comedy store. You know, Neil's intense guy. Yeah, he looks at me and he goes, uh, he's like, I was tripping. He goes, I didn't know what it was going to be because I was fucking tripping. And it was for him. It was to deal with depression. Yeah. He said it was very effective. Wow. To help them a lot. I took away from it. If you had like a severe tragedy or something like that, then it would really help. For me, it didn't feel like a long term solution. It didn't help me with my anger, really. So what do you think your anger is coming from? I don't know, man. I don't recognize you as an angry guy. Like you and I have only had laughs. Yeah. You and I have been hanging out. It's always been just like this. It's fun. Yeah. I think some of it's maybe responsibility. Responsibility makes you angry. Yeah. I think sometimes I think maybe I think I thought that whenever my life got a like whenever I got more success in my job or something that I would feel some satisfaction. Something. Like you feel like you made it. I thought I would feel like yes. It's different. Right. Appreciate it. I feel happy. And I'm not saying I'm amazing in my job. But once I started to have some success in my job that I would feel different. I see what you're saying. And I just didn't. I don't know. You're still the same. Everything's still kind of this. You still have all the same things. You know, do you ever have imposter syndrome? I've heard about it. You don't have that. I don't know if I do. The idea is that you can't believe that you're successful and you feel like eventually the world's going to wake up and go, why the fuck am I paying attention to this guy? So you're talking crazy shit. But it's cousin getting bit by a gig. Well, that happened on Halloween. You know, that's my favorite joke you do. What happened in Los Angeles, dude? It feels so cute. If I can have to in Los Angeles, the guy was dressed up like a baby deer and my cousin loved to deer hunt. That was a crazy part. So the dude comes out and he's, you know, his first instinct is to feed him or whatever, you know, sprinkle that piss out there or whatever. And the fucking dude bit him, man. That's, you know, that's new. Some guy biting you. Is it new some spot? I don't know. This guy might be a spot. I'm willing to go with you and blame new some watch the entire episode for free only on Spotify.