The Jerogan experience. When we sued Monsanto, there's many, many diseases that are linked to glyphosate exposure, including non-alcoholic fatty liver cancer is very, very closely linked. A lot of kidney disease is, and then severe damage to the microbiome. Because it's designed to kill plants. And there are structures in your gut biome that are critical structures in your gut biome, which have plant-like metabolisms, which are destroyed by glyphosate. And so what happened is glyphosate, and glyphosate was originally developed as a tank scaleant. So to scale the calcium and other deposits, metal deposits, rest deposits from the inside of underground tanks. And in 1973, Monsanto had to stop producing DDT, because we passed the laws at that time. And that was its flagship product, and needed another product. And I figured out that glyphosate, somebody at some point apparently threw some glyphosate on the back in the yard. And everything like green died, where they touched it, where it touched it, I would say. And so somebody said, oh, this will be a good herbicide, because it kills all plants. Originally, Monsanto developed it as herbicide, but the way that it was applied initially from 1973 to 1993 was in backpacks prayers. So guys were walked down the corn feed at cornrows early in the season when the corn was competing with nearby weeds for sunlight. And they would shoot the individual weeds. And then in 1993, somebody figured out a way that glyphosate, there was a certain bacteria that glyphosate would not kill. And they said, we could take a gene out of that bacteria and put it into a corn seed and develop a corn that cannot be killed by glyphosate. So they developed around a ready corn. And that corn, you can pour glyphosate all over it, and it will do nothing to it. So now you could fire all of those workers who were expensive. And you hire one airplane, and they fly over the fields. They saturate the entire landscape with glyphosate. Everything dies except the Roundup Ready Corn. And a couple of years round of ready corn was now 90% of the corn, 95% of the corn in the United States is now round of ready corn. But it was still being, and then they developed it for soybean and for barley, for sorghum, for a lot of other plants. But it was still being applied early in the season. And then in 2006, they discovered that if you sprayed it on wheat late in the season, it would desiccate the wheat. In other words, it would dry it out. And one of the big losses for farmers is wheat, is if it rains during the harvest season, you can't harvest it because it gets moldy. And so if you can spray a desert in it and dries it out and kills it, you can harvest it right away. And it won't get moldy. So all the wheat in our country started being sprayed that year in 2006 with glyphosate. And that's the year you saw this explosion of celiac disease and gluten allergies and all of this stuff that people, you may have noticed around that. But they also, the first time they were, and excuse me, the first time they're spraying it directly on food, because it used to be. They were spraying it early in the season. And it would wash off and corn would get higher than that weeds and you wouldn't have to do it better. But now they're spraying it directly on our food. Sorry. No, it's OK. So when they started doing this, there's a direct result. Like you can see the increase in celiac disease. You can see, is this like documented? Well, no, these are, no, that's not documented. I mean, these are, there's a whole range of disease that are now, you know, that people are, that's a scientist at different levels of science, have linked to glyphosate exposure. Here's the thing. And when you litigate, when you're suing somebody for a chemical exposure, you have to go through a, a, a, a threshold called the dowelbert hearing. And the dowelbert hearing is a hearing that says, is there sufficient science that it's now considered kind of mainstream that we can show this to a jury? And the judge has to make that decision because the judge doesn't want people saying, you know, coming in and saying, you know, a loud noises made me crazy, right? Right. There has to be before, and then a good attorney might be having to convince a jury that, yeah, this might clank a crazy cause he heard loud noise. So the judge needs to make a threshold decision about whether there's sufficient science to show a jury. And that is a very high threshold. So of all of the diseases that are probably caused, probably almost certainly caused by like the same, the only one to pass that threshold was the case that we bought for, for Hodgkin, not Hodgkin's lymphoma. So at that point, we had enough rat studies, enough human studies, we had about 10 of each. And we were able to go to the judge and say, this, we got enough science on this now to show that it's that non Hodgkin's lymphoma is being caused by glyphosate. So those were the only cases we brought. The other thing, but there are a lot of, you know, really interesting studies that show links between injuries to children and the amount of glyphosate and a woman's urine and the mothers urine, you know, including a lot of, including sexual development, it's an endocrine disruptor. So, you know, similar to phthalates, like phthalates or an endocrine disruptor, probably the most disturbing endocrine disruptor. And this is something we should all be looking at is a atrozy. Because atrozy, which is now ubiquitous, it's everywhere. But you can take atrozy and there, you know, this, you, what is this Jamie? Jamie, you can look up. You can look up this study. I think the guy, this scientist's name is Tyler, I think, and that might be his first or second name. But they took atrozy and they put it in a tank with 40 frogs for three years. They put it below the exposure levels that EPA considers acceptable to humans. And 30 of those frogs, they were all male frogs and they were double z, you know, male frogs and they were super males. And 30 of those frogs were chemically castrated. Four of them turned into females and produced fertile eggs. So they took male frogs, gave them atrozy, and 10% of them turned into female and produced fertile eggs. And we're subjecting our children to exposure to that every day. What is atrozy in the water? It's a pesticide. Here it is. Report toxic herbicide found in many Texans drinking water. That's it. That's from 2018, November 20th. And what, you know, what does this do? Is sexual development and children? Nobody knows. We know what it does to frogs.