Okay, so here's my theory. The death of the US auto industry was a bigger deal than I think we realized maybe a harbinger, hopefully not perhaps a harbinger of what happens to the country going forward. So Detroit dies and people are like, oh, Detroit's such a mess. My wife is from there, so I've been there a lot. And but you never thought like that would happen to the rest of the country. Oh no, we're going similar ways. We are. That's exactly right. Yeah. I live in the greater Toledo area and it's maybe Detroit. Exactly. Home of champions, park parks. Yeah. No longer. So I guess the question is if we want to prevent this from spreading like the cancer that it clearly is, are these important to know the cause of it? So why did the auto industry, which was the most important non defense industry we had? Why did it die? I would say largely regulation and the nature of trying to find more profit and where you ship things. It was a lack of pride in having a workforce in the future tomorrow. And those are the two things I would stick with. Because since, you know, in my opinion, I've been a car guy for a long time. Wait, you mentioned the Eans, everyone blames the unions for the destruction of Detroit. I think that's a secondary symptom. I mean, that's a big thing, but I think culturally it has to do more with where we're going, what happened. I mean, the automotive industry right now, if you look at new cars, I don't own a new car. The vehicle I own is early 2000s. The newest. Yeah. And honestly, I haven't taken like that. And you're a professional car guy. I knew you. Yeah, no, I work on all my own stuff from exotics to building race cars, helping students building airplanes to to finish stuff. Like I know automotive history. And honestly, kind of the sweet spot for cars to daily driver the 1980s and 1990s. What? We just got worse since then. In what ways? Consumer culture, you know, they try to find new ways to make money, give something to buy a new model year. Cars haven't really gotten any better since the 1990s. They're coming in more like a cell phone. And then you get more and more and more regulation, which just stymies the automotive industry into building just the one thing. It's why all the cars look the same. That's why there's no real innovation. That's why anything interest ends up being wildly expensive. And then the two things that are always used is, shall we say, the scapegoat is either the environment, the EPA or safety. But it's not always about that. And if you're really worried about, those are scapegoats. Well, that's scapegoats, but reasons to force things into be a certain way. Because if you speak up and question anything, they'll always say environment safety. It seems like that's always the way. But we're always just quagmired in this regulation and direction. We were blowing my mind. So I guess I mean, getting older is a process of realizing how many of the lives you've internalized and believed. And I guess if you would ask me when I woke up this morning, what destroyed Detroit, I would say, I'm not actually even that against unions, to be honest with you. But I would say, well, everyone says the unions and EPA and safety. Ralph Nader. Oh, yeah. And the UAW. True. But no, true. It's deeper, you're saying. Well, it is. And okay, I'm an individual. I build stuff. I think about the nation, individual's community, my family, my friends. Like we want a car that gets us there, that we can fix, that we can afford, right? But it's not what we're making. Another thing, which I want to mention two points. The other thing that's happening nowadays is we don't really innovate or make anything new anymore, that people can afford really. And I'm finding another, it seems like a symptom across culture of just everything now is about money from one pocket to another. It's not about really creating something new or building tomorrow. And I started to see that in the automotive industry with the nature of hybrids to electric. They have a purpose, but they're not a solution for everything. But the political push and powers are trying to make it a solution for everything. And I look at this and go, no, no, no, no, no, this isn't about what's best for everybody or even the environment or anything. This is money from one pocket to another and a power play. What does that mean money from one pocket to another? So the, it's kind of a, it's a deeper discussion that led to when I built what I called the Omega car, which I built at high efficiency diesel car that I thought would be more recyclable, low environment impact affordable and a good car in a direction to go. And if I make, can I just back up a second? I don't know what I saw. So you know, my teens and twenties, I'm just a normal car guy. I like fast cars and going on dates with pretty girls. That's pretty much all I care about. So fast cars and fast women as well. Well, they say in Kentucky voters that they say, uh, beautiful horses and fast women. No, I meant beautiful women and fast horses, something like that. But no, that, that was kind of what I cared about. But my grandfather always talk about politics and things going on in the world. And while he didn't really care so much to look into it, things stuck with me. Yes. And I remember in, was it 2008 when Obama was running, people are all excited. I'm like, okay. And I remember watching all the presidential stuff. That was kind of the first time I really started paying attention to politics when I was a younger guy. And we're watching the Democratic National Convention in Obama's talking. And I remember, and I remember thinking, this guy's full of crap. That's just my gut feeling. I didn't, I didn't know where it came from. I didn't really know that much of politics, but I'm just like, this guy is full of crap. You didn't think he was black Jesus. No, no, I mean, you sound like a racist. I'm just, I don't care. I don't care. That's this for it. So I just thought he's full of crap and some listening get to the point and he goes, and I'll help Detroit retool. So the energy efficient cars that tomorrow will build here for the sake of the nation and world. I'm like, bullshit, you're not gonna, this isn't, you're not doing a Kennedy speech like we're going to the moon for the decade is out. You're not gonna do it. I just, I just, it just, it ticked me off and I've remembered it to this day. And of course we have the, why did you know he was not gonna do it? Cause Detroit's not gonna change. She's not gonna change that. Like a politician changes their own oil, let alone know how a car works of the industry or what to do with it. Fair. No, with no respect, I would say. No, and I can think of some, you know, military leaders and such saying things that I'll be a little kinder about. We don't want to take advice from, you know, pants suits in Washington. It's like what are they, what do they know about it respectfully? But things like that go across the board. So I'm thinking he's not doing anything. Well, the other thing that interesting happened was the financial crisis 2008, 2009, right? Now I didn't fully understand what was going on with that. Again, I cared more about going on dates and fast cars and politics and things going on at the time. But the family business we had was a small town, public golf course in the Midwest, you know, 18 holes worked our butt off. My father worked seven days a week, six o'clock in the morning, 10 o'clock at night, every day throughout the entire season. So we worked. And now like being in a small town, everybody makes funny. Oh, you're rich. You just sit on the golf course all day. I'm like, no, we're changing oil in like diesel tractors and backlapping mowers and mowing and putting on baggots and doing family business, right? To backlap a mower. Oh, sorry. That was so, you know, a fairway or green. Yes. It's not a rotary blade that cuts by kind of like whacking the, right? It's actually, it's a reel which comes through and slices on a blade. Yes. Well, they get, they get dull. And so you have to sharpen them and it's dirty and you beat up your knuckles and that's kind of the work you actually do in the winter of the golf course. I can't like with a file or oh, no, you have to run them backwards with a dirty compound and with like grit on it and have to adjust it. Oh, it left. It left. It left. Yeah, you left. Right. Exactly. Exactly. Thank you. Sorry to interrupt. No, it's all right. I just kind of bring that up because that was my world of time. Yes. We're tard and we saw that. But at that time, I started to see how it was affecting people in little Tiffin Ohio, on a daily basis, loans, housing loans, business loans. And I also saw how that affected eventually when the family was thinking of selling the business, you couldn't get lending for something like that. And I started to see how that that hurt everything, but where I was going with it in relation to the overarching things with the automotive industry. So now we're bailing out the automotive industry, tax dollars, huge amounts of money. Okay. Huh, paying attention. And I'd lived in Columbus Ohio at the time ahead of my little shop working on vintage race cars and things like that and ride my motorcycle around. And after we were bailing out the automotive industries, I kind of remember back and I'm like, so wonder is Obama going to try to make everything efficient. right now? Are they going to do anything? And I see us, we just kind of doubled down on making bigger trucks and muscle cars and things, which I have to tell you, I love big trucks and muscle cars and fast cars. Okay. Like if you can afford the fuel and do what you want, don't don't get in my way. You can pry my sports cars out of my cold dead hands. Okay. Yeah. But you know, doesn't mean I don't necessarily want something that could be better for a daily driver or I can't think of something that might be more efficient. So I was noticing that. And I'm thinking this is this is wrong. Something's wrong here. And just in what I was doing and researching various materials and thinking of building cars and kind of what I do, you know, I started to realize there's a myriad of ways that we can mass produce cars, automobiles that will be less toxic, less environmental impact, cheaper, more efficient than what we're doing. Because in a sense, all of our cars are stamped metal boxes with chairs bolted in them. Yeah. We've been doing this since the mid 1930s. We have. Not much has changed. It's been a long time. And I'll say this also, which I think you might enjoy as a history guy. So that's our 71 Blackbird right? CIS byplane, Mach 3. They came up with that in the late 1950s. We had to go to the trouble of getting all the titanium I think from Russia at the time, which required a zillion shell companies and orchestration just to get the material to build it. And we build an aircraft effectively in the late 1950s, 1960 that'll do Mach 3 and can map hundreds of thousands of miles of the Earth's surface. And before GPS existed, be able to plot the stars through broad daylight and through clouds in the late 50s. And we're still making cars like the 1930s now. I think that's BS. So to be fair, you've also seen the death of innovation in aviation as well. That's true too. I mean, the 747 came out in 1969. True. We've made it and I was born that year 55, six years ago, when was the last time we built a plane that cool, 1969? We haven't. And to be fair, there's a lot of things that we still like to be 52 bomber. It's still around. But is eternal, they joke, you know? And so there's a lot of great designs from back one that are still perfect designs now and can be up or graded. It doesn't mean that we have to have innovation for innovation state. Some things just work, but sometimes you need new things. But as a younger guy at the time, I was, I was frustrated by all this and I'm like, you know what? I'm going to build a car. I got a point to prove. And my thinking at the time was it can't be electric because nobody knows what the heck a kilowatt hour is back then. We're not accustomed to thinking like that. We think miles per gallon. How fast is it at zero to 60? You know, things like that. That's kind of the two things that matter most people and can you use this and how much does it cost? She's like, okay. I want to build a car that'll be representative of something that can be mass produced that let's say it costs about $20,000 or less. I mean, diesel turbo diesel. So I looked around for what I felt was about the most efficient engine reasonably available and built the car. Now I said something like 11 years ago on video. So I can prove it. I said it will get over 100 miles a gallon and it will do zero to 60 and under five seconds. Now I built the car. I even showed it at a private like car event with sports cars and exotic cars and told everybody about my concept. But when I got it all together and done, I realized I don't have a voice like what am I going to do with this thing? If the world doesn't know what exists and nobody hears about it, it doesn't exist. You felt like Nikola Tesla at this point. I'm sure perhaps I don't maybe I you know, he's an interesting character. Yeah, for sure. Certainly and I sat on it. I just put it in my garage for a better part of a decade because I didn't have a voice. But other things going on in life, I was doing my nonprofit genius graduate show really I believe then because we can go into some big problems with American educational system. Especially higher education. I think we're stymying our youth, the families in the future. And I think it comes from predatory lending and loans you can't default on. And I think the schools are creating this vacuum monster that is not the real world with majors that are not providing jobs and creating an environment for political radicalization. But that's another topic. But the reason I say everything you just said is obvious and it's crazy that it still exists. But let me just back up to the vehicle itself. Yes. Yes. And without getting boring. Now it's coming back to that. But what explain how you get a hundred miles to the gallon on diesel and it goes zero to 60, under five seconds. Like how what is that? How big is the motor like tell us about the gong? I should question. Yeah. So I don't know what you drove here. But let's pick your average car SUV. Yeah. Put it in neutral. How hard is it to push it? Pretty pretty hard. Pretty hard, right? Yeah. But when you work on cars, if you spend your day pushing around cars, you start thinking about how efficient they are. Look at a car and SUV going down the road or semi. How aerodynamic do you think that is? Not super aerodynamic. No. I drive a silverado, not. Yeah. There's nothing about our cars that are remotely efficient at all. So how do you get that? You just make the actual car not so much the drivetrain. You're not looking for a magic bullet. Everybody wants a magic bullet. You make the car more efficient. The lower coefficient of drag, somewhat lighter weight where you don't need weight. Just less rolling resistance. You make it actual efficient good design. We don't do that with the automotive industry anymore. And the reason I chose diesel is because people would understand that. Diesel is also a very flexible fuel. We can make biodiesel. You can make diesel effectively out of what's left over from the meatpacking industry. The front making industry. Sure. The agriculture you name it. And this is fascinating too because, and I got to get into why I talked about the car. But since that time, I got word back from people kind of more in traditional automotive medium. What not? No one would talk about it or write about it. And I'm kind of pissed me off because back when I was in a concept and I just talked about it a little bit on my YouTube channel. Some places would report about it. But why is it when it was just a concept and a YouTuber was trying to do something efficient and like maybe eco-friendly and whatnot they'd write about it. But then when it actually did what I said it was going to do it they wouldn't. So it actually gets a hundred miles to the gallon. Yeah, for first time out I didn't even have all the fairings on it. I haven't even tuned it. It was a hundred and four point seven to miles to the gallon. Just drive it to the countryside normally with stop signs and turns and such. Just jumping in without even tuning it more. The first time I took it out we were just idling and doing hard pulls and everything else. I looked at him like we just got like 88 miles to the gallon when I'm trying. That's crazy. Well, and the other thing. gas is pretty it was like three bucks or something. Right here. Yeah. I mean it's expensive. It's more expensive than Europe. Like okay, I have some gas guzzlers for sure. I like V12s and stick shifts and straight pipes. So tell me about the engine and this vehicle. It's largely conventional. It's turbo which is good for diesel because it allows you some flexibility to cruise more. But if you want to make power you can crank in the boost and do some things to make it efficient. You know, and I experimented even with some catalytic converters and such that will even be better. So there's nothing crazy about the drivetrain. There's no magic bullet there. What about the other thing? I got to point this out. Yeah. That drivetrain when I started had 130,000 miles on it with no spring chicken. What was it from? What you've got out of Volkswagen pre diesel gate. Diesel gates. Interesting thing to talk about too. But what's diesel gate? That was the big scandal that Volkswagen went through with allegedly cheating their emissions. Oh, that was back in 2015, I think. That was a big scandal. Which is interesting because in looking back on it now it seems to tie into more with not regulating a car company so much for the betterment of all. But an attack. It's the way it kind of looks like to me. an attack on Volkswagen. I would say diesel because Volkswagen was in, I don't know about now, but certainly was the best and most efficient. The engine I use was from back in like 2000 when they made Volkswagen. Yeah, good engine. And it's manual more efficient that way. The transmission's manual. Yeah, manual less parasitic losses. It's just it's really cheaper to produce gets better miles to gallon. And you know, back in the day sports cars if they were manual would have better zero to 60 times and such. no longer true. Yeah, no longer true. Our automatics have gotten a lot more interesting and whatnot. But manual transmission still makes for more efficient driving. Yeah, because there's less parasitic drag. There's less losses in the drive train. Huh. Interesting. Like meaningfully more efficient? Well, especially in that time in the 2000s probably could be five to seven miles to gallon on the highway. Oh, wow. Maybe even maybe only like three, but it's still a lot. And you consider millions of cars over years. For sure. Even your car. Yeah. And it doesn't all have to just be about like, oh, we have to do this for sake of environment. These are costs that hit people's pocket. Oh, I was the whole point. I wasn't thinking about emissions even. Yeah. So, well, that's amazing. So, and what about what about emissions on this vehicle? I'm trying to get like in regard to mine or the whole scandal. It's it's the basic stuff that diesel would have. I mean, you've got a pretty serious catalytic converter. You've got the exhaust gas regulation and such. And that without getting an overly nitty gritty, diesel does have some things about it that the EPA likes to go after. But it's kind of strange. And I'm curious to see what happens in the future. So you probably, I'm sure you saw this. Supreme Court ruled differently on the Chevron deference, of course, which I'm really fascinated to see how that changes the nature of the way laws are interpreted. So the bottom, the question before the court was, can federal agencies create legislation when the Constitution says no Congress creates the laws? Right. On how it's interpreted. Right. But for generations, the federal agencies, including EPA, but all of them from the Department of Education to the Department of Defense, have come out with regulations that have the force of law that no one ever voted for and that no elected official had a hand in. So it's anti-democratic, right? That's the idea. That's probably the reason why so my friends complain about the ATF. I think they're pretty good at making laws. Well, the ATF is a kind of other problems like shooting innocent people, but yes, no, absolutely. But they create regulations that no one voted on and that no elected official administers. So it's like, as a citizen, I have no recourse. So that's not democracy. That's tyranny. Yeah. Right. So that's the conceptual. No, exactly right. It's not looking for a way around something or a loophole, but like what is right? Like what are we actually doing here? Oh, so we're going to law a vote on it. Yeah. And the beauty of the Congress is they have two or six years between elections. So they're pretty accountable to voters and if voters don't like the way they vote, they can turn them out, at least conceivably, right? One hopes, one hopes. But the undersecretary of douchebaggery is completely beyond the control of any voters. So like that's again tyranny. Right. Yes. Yeah. And that affects things greatly because when you over regulate things, it just makes it difficult to innovate or go anywhere. Right. And the thing of it is, so going back to the car, the car I build, so I mentioned you got a hundred, four point seven, two miles to gallon and I video recorded the whole thing because I want to know what is this thing actually do because last year was a very important year. It was an election year. One thing that also drove me nuts, so if you look at, so the Biden administration and even Gavin Newsom's pushing electric vehicle mandates, like large electric vehicle mandates, not like back to the Clinton era when I was like, I don't know, one to 2% of vehicles sold by certain times need to be electric. No, they're big ones. And I had a huge problem with Biden's administration doing that because I'm like, this destroys innovation. You know, and the other thing you go into, and I don't want to beat up on electric because it, you know, it has its purpose in places. I think all kinds of drive, trains and energy do. And I don't mean that it's just like political BS rhetoric. I mean that genuinely, but it's not a bandaid fix. Also, how are we going to charge them? Are great? Yeah, how? I tell you this. So I did some math with all this. Let me tell you this. So the next day, I'm coming right back to this point on the math. The next day after I did the initial mile per gallon testing on my car, I did zero to 60 times with it. So I put accelerometers in GPS in this car. So my 93 Dodge Viper RT 10 C7 Cora Grand Sport and my neighbors Tesla Model 3 rear will drive with the full charge. My car, the G100 4 miles a gallon, beat the Dodge Viper by two tenths of a second and exactly match the Corvette Grand Sport and the Tesla. Damn, that's without light computerized traction control. It's me just driving it. Everybody loves and appreciates first responders when things go haywire. They're the ones who show up and make you safe, protect you, not just you, but the entire country. Most people agree they're heroes. But what happens if they can't show up? First responders cannot be everywhere all the time. And if there's an emergency, particularly a big emergency, there aren't enough to go around. So you have to be your own first responder. Before an ambulance arrives for a doctor can help, it is up to you to protect yourself and your family. And if it's a medical emergency, you could be out of luck because you don't have the right medications. Most people do not have the medications they need at home. There's an answer to that. It's called the Jase case. It's a simple but smart solution to a problem. Most people don't even think about it. It's a set of emergency prescriptive medications created by medical experts. You've got peace of mind knowing that no matter what happens, you are totally prepared. Even if you're a prepared kind of person with stuff stored in your cellar, you probably don't have the right medications. But if there's an infection or any kind of crisis and you don't have access to first responders, you're going to want a Jase case medications on hand when they matter most. Go to jase.com and use code Tucker at checkout for a discount. Jase. JSE.com checkout code Tucker. So what was 0 to 60 in the 4.61? And I probably could have done better, but honestly the tires are over a decade old now because I built the car a while ago and such. that was real world driving and yeah, I gave it and I got videos of it. If you would have looked me out, did you beat the Tesla? It matched the Tesla, but that was only with the Tesla's full charge. You would consistently get a little slower every time as it would lose juice. Just because the nature obviously, the electric vehicle just gives you massive advantage in. Yeah. And the Tesla simply just stick your foot down and that's the best it's going to do. My car would actually probably be to if I gave it some clever traction control and such in it to be honest. But that's not the point. If it is, so I'm like, I'm going to run some numbers. Just out of curiosity. Well, what is the carbon footprint of burning one gallon of diesel? Oh, interesting. Okay, EPA has got numbers for that. Okay. What's the carbon footprint on average United States electrical generation, whether it's nuclear and coal, whatever, national average of the carbon footprint of a kilowatt hour of electricity. I'd say like you're in a perfect world charging your electric vehicle at home. And then I just did the basic math on, okay, what's the carbon footprint of my car? On diesel, get an over 100 miles a gallon versus the electric car charged at home, national average over 100 miles. My car beat the electric car at a lower car. Yeah. And it has a much lower one to manufacture. And it's easier to fix. So that's when I went, okay, I also did some other fun math. Respectfully towards coal, I think. But hold on, just to be fair, can it be turned off by remote by a politician? It doesn't like your politics. Thank you. No, it can't. No, it can't feel comfortable with it. Oh, you don't. Well, how are we getting? I don't care. I just want to say that way. I like your spirit. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, thank you for bringing that out. That's very important because the other thing about. I drive a 1987. Well, don't sir. Yeah. For real. No, I get a big gun in it. Yeah, good. Good. I try. I shouldn't say that. I get too excited. But it's true. You remember the days of school, like you could have a gun rack, because people were reasonable human beings and a community. California, we didn't know what a deer hunting there. It's where she could still be. Yeah, exactly. But when I can still do it, I kind of get my independent spirit. I'm like, I'm going to put a gun rack in my viper, not because I need it just because America, you know, I totally agree. But and that's the other thing that the electric car. So when I look at it, all the governmental control and what it appears to me globally is going on with much of that in the push. And the other thing that doesn't make any sense. So the Biden administration doing the big electric vehicle mandates and such and push, that excluding Tesla from their meetings at the White House and something and all that. Really. So what you're telling me is the thing that you want to do with industry and cars and transportation is super important, but not as important as the politics with the guy with the biggest electric car company in the world. I don't like that. Well, they're just criminals. We know that now they're a crimp that was a crimp. Yeah, no, I, or getting a station running our country. I know. I think a lot of my grandmother who was, you know, married my World Two vet granddad, of course, she always said, give him a fair trial and hang him in the morning. And that phrase has been ringing in my mind a lot. And she sounds like my kind of woman. So, but let me, let me just back a little bit. So you create this vehicle in your shop right there. Yeah. Yeah. And you think that you could build it for 20 grand is that true? Yeah. Okay, 20 grand. So it gets a hundred and four. And that's pretty. Of course. Oh, yeah. At scale. Not as a prototype. Wow. It does gets a hundred and four dollars per gallon. It matches the Tesla off the line. You get to 16 under five seconds. Yeah. So that's like kind of the dream package right there. Yeah, because he runs on a readily available fuel that you can buy any. Yeah. And I only put a, we have the infrastructure for it. Well, yeah, you can fill up it a gas station. I only put a five gallon tank in it. Because at a hundred miles a gallon, like I'm going to need to get out and, you know, have a cold nature or stop it a gas station before. But if I put a bigger gas tank and I can drive from New York to LA. And on one tank. Yeah, of course. Okay. Now, I have to point this out because there's lots of smart people watching. They'll get it. Okay. Things like crash testing, airbags, climate control, that's yes. Okay, great. It'll add a few hundred pounds more to it. Maybe I'll make the car a little bit better. But the other thing that happens when you actually develop and build something like that, you tune it better. I still can get those numbers and meet all of those same. Okay. So can I just ask like at that point, it's like if you invent something. That is truly useful and that, you know, at 20 grand ish, a new suburban is like pushing a hundred grand right now. Like the cars are out of control. Yeah. Who can afford that? Why couldn't agree more? If you're just spending that much money on a car, go buy a vintage Ferrari or something. You know, I don't know that I've ever bought a new car in my life. And I don't plan to. But, but people want to. Whatever. Leaving that whole aside. But what you just described is something that like almost by definition would be successful. So why can't you find someone to build it at scale? Well, it's 2025 and we live in the in a wonderful country, but one that has involved into a lot of industrial complexes and they don't like change. Yeah, but I mean, you know, no one wants AI. We're getting it anyway. Well, yeah, but right. We're getting massive change. It's power. That's power. And control and money and they can do it and they will. I have to say one thing, which I think you may appreciate. AI effectively is a synthetic God that we're creating. Of course. How much of a biblical warning disaster is that? Oh, you don't have to dig too deep to be. We're destroying the entire human experience. I just wanted to say that. And people themselves, right? Yeah, it's it's a human being. Because I know that'll end way pecs of the golden cow. And by the way, I've done, I don't know how many interviews on the topic of AI around the world. I've been doing a lot of different countries to learn just for myself more about what's happening there. And the one question that no one can answer is, like, what's the benefit of this? Like how are we control for others? Yeah. None of the benefits. Yeah, whatever. I don't want to sound like an old guy. But I feel like one I hear this topic. So, but anyway, just back to the point, like why specific? So you've been talking about this on your podcast on YouTube channel. Yeah. And which has a lot of yours. Yeah. the point. Why is it so you've been talking about this on YouTube channel? Yeah. And which has a lot of yours. And why is it called you to say, you know, I'll friendship a couple hundred million bucks and we'll just build a facility. And the difficulty with things like this is so, okay, first of all, you think, how do you do that? Okay, with what I'm talking about is not something that can be reasonably just scaled from a garage. Like what am I going to do? Just just build a few little ones here. So I would buy you get something selling. Right. What's it look like? Oh, it's it's a bad interview or I haven't even asked the basics. It's it's it's pretty cool. Um, can you describe it? Give me a word picture. Try things in quite looks like it. Uh, it's slippery. It looks like a cross between an exotic car and a little bit of a bonnet will solve flat scar. Wow. You didn't mention cyber truck. Does it have hard lines? No. Really? Well, I'd like it to be efficient. Oh, rather than just interesting for aesthetic steak, respectfully, I don't mean that as a dig. No, I'm not attacking this. I personally think it's incredibly unattractive. It's a cyber truck. Yes. Um, I just like the mean, I respect the cyber truck by the way. Did a cyber truck review. Yeah. I think it's a really interesting vehicle. I'm glad it exists. And, but I'm just saying aesthetically. Yeah. It's pretty good looking. It's a little different because we're accustomed to seeing what we're seeing angles for me. Oh, no, I was talking about my car, not the cyber truck. Okay. Sorry. I'm obsessed with this. No, the cyber truck. The best meme is there's a DeLorean and an F 117 nighthawk, right? Yeah. And F on something's like the military guy and the loyards kind of like the mom and the night hawks like, uh, what do you mean he's my son? He doesn't look anything like me. And they show the cyber truck and he's like, Oh, you know, I'm more like 1935 Packard, you know, just soft blind. I have a 31 Buick Faiton. Is it pretty? Yeah. Yeah. Of course it is. So anyway, I keep it on up to you. Tell me what it looks like. What would you compare it to? Something that people might well, it's mid engine. Okay. So the engines within the wheelbase, but behind the cockpit, um, it's two seat. It has a butterfly doors similar to like a McLaren F1 in that regard of efficient. Um, it has something of an open tail because I it was very important the way the air flows around it, but also underneath it. Um, so that I can make it highly efficient. So, you know, the bottom of the, it's a monococ structure where it's not like a tube frame with the body stuck on it. The whole car is itself the structure as well. So the air, the way it flows over it through the radiator in the back also to the heating of the motor and the way that then intersects the trailing edge and the way the air flows around it. It's just all designed to be designed efficient. Sounds amazing. And you can even use the structure of the showy that chassis or the structure. So I can even make the stereo system very small and effective and efficient because naturally, acoustically, it works out well for that too. So it's a lot of fun with design. I just, every once in a while, you need somebody who looks around at the world and goes, this is wrong. We can do better. I can do better. I'm going to do better. And that's that's just show you that the same. Can you register it? Yeah. Just like go to the DMV and register. Yeah. It's registered no different than like an assembled vehicle or kick out. This is a lot of ways that are modified vehicle. It's just like make car image. Yeah. Amazing. Car guy stuff. What do people say when you drive it around? I keep it relatively under wraps because respectfully for as much time as it took me to build and what it represents. I consider it kind of valuable to trust out there and the wild with people on their cell phones and stuff. So I kind of go with a low profile, but people are definitely interested in an amored by with it. But they're not beating down your door. Correct. And that was the other interesting thing. So nobody reported on it. Even though, you know, I got a few hundred thousand views on it when I said everything I wanted to say and show it and did the numbers, right? I would think if somebody builds a diesel car that represents being affordable and recyclable mass produce that gets great fuel efficiency and has a low carbon impact and all people to be into that. Well, one word I got back from an automotive media was telling. They said, we don't report on dirty diesel. And the other was diesel's dead. And I thought about that. And I go, hang on. Diesel's like one of those used fuels. There are. Wait, who wrote that? It was said. It wasn't written. It was said to us. These are like professional car reviewers. Correct. They won't touch it. They won't write about it. Why do this is obviously a much deeper question, but why do the worst people in the world, the most small minded, the stupidest, the meanest, the people with like the most unbalanced, unhealthy personal lives? What are they all going to turn on? Do you think? That's a better question for you. But I've been pondering this for like 35 years. Well, understand it. There are certain personality types. And I see the worst ones is kind of the we talked about like the dark triad personality traits, which is like, you know, psychopathy and Machiavellianism and narcissism, et cetera. You know, these kinds. I'm going to get a lot of trouble for this. But like, I thought about that. No, I, I'm in around. So in the normal car world sports cars and such, making trouble. I love exotic cars. I really do. Okay. Like when I was a kid, my dad showed me the movies, Grand Prix with James Gardner and Lamall Steven Queen. Please tell me you've seen at least one of these movies, right? I don't know. Okay. Well watch Lamall with Steven queen just getting a good vibe. Steven queen being himself and just Lamulls on straight in at Lamall early 70s Porsche flat 12 against the Ferrari V 12 just saying it and like as a kid, I'm like, I want that. You know what I mean? So I love exotic cars because for me, something like a V 12 Lamborghini is like, yes, I can't be Steve McQueen at Lamall, but I can drive this. You know what I mean? Yeah. But nowadays are paddle shifted and anybody that wants to flex can buy them. So if somebody ever said to me, Hey, Casey, I need you to find me the most narcissistic sociopast possible. I'm like, no problem. Let's find the most Lamborghinis. And the reason I bring that up, not you say they're paddles, meaning the anybody can drive the big take anymore. Right. Don't take any more skill or appreciation for the machinery, respectfully. How were they? Were you like double clutching and like how hard were they to operate? I mean, like when when those standard trends, things like that back when you're like carbureted, like anything, you got to treat a muscle car right a little bit, you know, something this carbureted or no, you can hardly David's. Yeah. I mean, if you got, if you get the privilege of driving something like an old Lamborghini for our from the 70s or earlier, you got to be a little sympathetic. You got to understand the transmission. You got to be able to rev match gears and such. You're not going to be doing wild burnouts and such. You got to understand the carburetors and letting it warm up and appreciate it. And we're in industrial age where you don't have to do that. But to answer your question relating to journalism, I make that joke about certain things, attract certain personality traits because those personality traits can do well. So, you know, they also say Washington, DC is Hollywood for ugly people. That's for sure. And I think a lot of the traits of Hollywood to Washington, DC to journalism are the same kind of manipulative sociopath tendencies that you can lie to somebody with a smile perfectly and find the structured, crazy chess game to ruin people's life and power play your way up and find power in the game. I mean, I mean, I mean, everything you're saying is true. But I just disappointing to see it in journalism, not because crap they're got less with weird personal lives going to journalism. And they're cowards, of course, most people are unfortunately, but they have no curiosity. I know. And that's what drives me insane. Thank you. So if there's one quality that defines journalism and a journalist, it's the desire to know more. Right. And they spend their whole life trying to, you know, attack you, call you a racist for lying to know more. It's insane. So somebody called me, well, actually, you did call me. I built this car that gets 104 gallons. I mean, miles to a gallon. I'm not even a car guy really, but I'm like, well, that's kind of crazy. On a diesel motor, really, engine. Yes. And, you know, I tried to be polite and qualify myself. But I just thought it was amazing. I was like, really, is that really true? I guess you get video of it. So I guess it is. So I don't know why if I was a professional car viewer, I'd be like, I'm coming to your house. I want to see what this is. Yeah. And to be fair in a manner of speaking, I didn't really invent anything. I just designed something better and thought about the world independently. And like, I'm doing this. It needs to represent what we actually can do and where we can go. And I just, I have to do this. Not all sleep fades are made by pharmaceutical companies. You probably heard about eight sleep by now. They develop the country's most innovative products for sleep. Almost everybody in our office uses something they make called the pod. And they love it. And there's a reason that professional athletes and lots of other smart people do too. You add the pod to your mattress, like a mattress cover. And it helps you get a better night's sleep and fill with vitality at the start of each day in an intimidating way almost. It's amazing. How does it do it? Well, it uses advanced technology to track your sleep and automatically adjust the temperature of your side of the bed to what's perfect for sleep and temperature makes all the difference. It's backed by over 600 million hours of data. They've also used those insights to create their new product sleep, but later now if you get quiet before you get a bed fall asleep faster and stay knocked out longer. No grogginess, no weird side effects is better deep sleep. So if you're ready to take sleep and recovery to the next level, go to eightsleep.com slash Tucker to get 350 bucks off your pod for ultra full refund for 30 days if you don't love it. It works. Were you obsessed? I don't think it's s. No, but I mean, did it was it the kind of thing that occupied your thoughts in bed and like were you really fixated on it? I mean, yeah, because I designed the things in my head. Yeah, I'll do like a drawing or an engineering drawing or something to communicate and show somebody else, but I'll run all the simulations and design and the entire structure and everything in my head. And my wife gets on my case sometimes. So we're going to date or she's like, I can see the hamster will turning. I'm like, I'm sorry. That's how creativity works. You just, you know, germinates in your head. You got it. You got it. I get a name. But no, the, the journalists I appreciate you saying that because they, they follow along. They want their power within their bubble. But the thing that's kind of crazy to me when I say they're gutless, you would think they would actually get better views and more clicks if they broke them old to show something interesting that maybe goes against popular narratives, but they don't. Oh, they spend their lives do the flea ignoring things. I mean, they're megaliths around the world, including in the United States, huge stone structures. And nobody, including, you know, any structural engineer in the United States has no idea how they were built in the pre, you know, internal combustion age in the pre industrial age. Like there's literally not even a good guess as to this, how this was built. And I, of course, I don't know the answer either. But I mean, that's such an amazing thing. When were the pyramids built? Nobody knows. How are they built? Nobody knows. I can't get that out of my head. There's a lot of... And again, I'm not pushing a conspiracy theory. I'm just noting what we don't know. Yeah. And I don't know why like everyone's like, shut up, shut up. What? Now, glad you said that. And there's a lot of other structures that are popping up more nowadays in archaeology. And there's even guys that do like surface lidar and they're seeing things and fields and such. And it's silly. It's playing with that is for people who don't know what you're talking about. It's in people perfectly. I don't know it as well. But I think through the satellites and stuff that we can use now, like nerds. And I mean that in nice way, spend the time like looking over, it shows the exact topography of the ground exactly without vegetation and all the zones underneath it. Yeah. So if you start seeing geometric shapes and stuff might be something, it might be man-made, you know, or at least made. Yeah. Well, any other thing is so maybe not too long go 10, 20, 30 years ago. We think, oh, we've discovered everything. We're brilliant. We know everything. It's not true. I know. I know. I really, I don't know if I'll have time or what the future will bring. But I really want to do some videos where you go to interesting places the world to see and find these things. And one thing I'd really like to do is motorcycles around Saudi Arabia. Yeah. Because it is a fascinating kingdom with some really interesting history. I was just there. Well, yeah. Yes. And I was out in Lola, which is the a truly action. Right. Yes. I see. You want to see it. I want of them right out from me. Yeah. It's quite amazing. But the archaeology there, which is, you know, the studies have a lot going on. They're building a whole new society. Yeah. And I don't know that they are, you know, focused on like most emerging nations are not focused on archaeology. All of the archaeological sites of significance in the Middle East and then, you know, the nearies of the Levant. We're discovered by the Brits in the French. Right. All of them, they'd sat there for thousands of years. The locals were like, yeah, too busy trying to stay. Well, they knew it was normal. I don't want to say normal to them, but that's their home. But it took people from the outside to be like, wait, what the hell is that? You know, where was whatever? Sodom and Gomorrah, you know, yes. Yes. Yes. I mean, how much that is biblical land like the land of Midian, you know, which they know. But the point is that process of discovery and of creativity is driven by a common impulse, which is curiosity. Yeah. And so when you don't have curiosity, you're never going to discover what we're creating. But more important, I think, for the moment we're living in, it's like, why don't you have curiosity? Why is curiosity discouraged? Like that is a very deep, and I don't know the answer, but I find it scary. There's something sinister about that. Don't ask questions. Well, why social media is doing it to us? Yeah, but why? What's the well, I mean, I don't even have very interesting, crazy views on anything, but I know just from talking about World War II, there are people alive who are in World War II. It's like it just happened 80 years ago. People like denounce you as some knot, I couldn't be more against the knot. He's just a record, but it's like, what was Rudolph has doing in Great Britain? That's like a really interesting question. No, not a lot. They murdered Rudolph has in spandow in his 80s. I think it's really clear that he was killed. So he wouldn't say why he flew over. People just won't talk about this. But it's like, but why? Why is that scary to anybody? What are in the megalith thing and the archaeology thing? Why are these scary questions? Well, what's the answer? I don't understand. I'll say it. So you said relating to your your cars about control, right? Yeah, I don't want this because they can't control it. It's the same thing of like saying you can probably this, whether it's a sports car or firearm out of my cold dead hands. If people don't ask questions and they're not interested in their own history or culture or the past or any others and they can't relate, it's easier to keep them in one place and you're thumb on them. I think that's, I mean, look, if, but I don't begrudge people a lack of interest in anything. I mean, every person makes his own decisions about what he cares about. And yeah, and, you know, his beliefs is religion. All this thing. I'm like very, I guess liberal in that sense. I just, I'm worried when people attack me for being curious. Yeah, I don't, I'm not all that people on this call, right. You know, whatever, a lot of which is like totally fake. There's nothing right about it. Their left us or their true, you know, obeying the same masters, sort of attacking you for asking, oh, just asking questions. It's like, yeah, I am just asking questions. Like, that's okay. In fact, that's like the nature of human existence. Western civilization. That's what Martin Luther did. And the thing that frankly so dangerous about, no, it's perfect. And frankly, that's what I think so dangerous about AI. Yeah. The journey, the life journey to find the wisdom to learn to seek the truth, will that stop it? And then who's controlling it? Well, the iPhone has not made us better informed. You know, the internet has not made us better informed. In fact, it's centralized control over information in effect. Um, Wikipedia is the first search result and Wikipedia is completely controlled if you discover them for the intel agencies fact. And the results in Wikipedia are shaped subtly. Sometimes not so subtly to produce a worldview. Yeah. That is inherently dishonest. Yes. It's not true. And if you get your history through Wikipedia, I look at Wikipedia every day. I'm not, you know, there are certain great things about Wikipedia, but, but big picture, you're going to have no idea what happened in the past. If all you do is read, but no, how can you? I mean, we can think of so many popular things through history that are just that way where people only know one superficial level. Are you kidding me? Yes. No, it has. It is made everything more extreme and pigeonholed everything. You know, and it's a dumber like people don't read books. Well, here's something I noticed just from now on really good. Oh, no, you're right. Well, just from doing automotive YouTube. Yeah, it still works the same as every other YouTube and interaction and all that. I it's kind of a fun way to put it. So I was a car guy before YouTube, right? I built cars. I did all that sort of thing. A lot of people have become more prominent in the automotive region of YouTube. They weren't as big a car guy. They kind of just rose up as an interesting character. And they're happy to be somewhat famous, make some money, do their thing, get acknowledgement. And as I, I grew that, which is funny, because the entirety of the reason I went on YouTube was just to try to get some exposure for the nonprofit I was doing, because I couldn't get any with traditional media. I was kind of pissed off. Yeah. So I ended up there for that reason, but kept it going because it's like, okay, well, I've something of a voice. This is good for the nonprofit to give it exposure or just try to have a life and go summary, you know. But what I noticed is they call the people that are creating content, the influencers, they're the influenced because they're always chasing an algorithm and the algorithm wants to keep you in one place. It doesn't let you evolve. It doesn't let you do anything. No, it's totally right. It's a, it's a pseudo reality. And I see how that affects the culture and young people. I don't like it. No, it's a snake eating its tail for sure. I wonder the like, I'm sure this has occurred to you. And I'm terrible at business. So don't take my advice. But like, since you have designed something that has inherent utility and obvious mass appeal, and I, I'm naive enough to think that still matters. Like if you make a great thing, people want it and they'll pay for it, especially if it's cheap. Why not just do like a crowdfunding situation where like, all right, you know, design this vehicle like it's 104 miles to the gallon on diesel fuel, which you can buy anywhere. And that, you know, can match an electric vehicle off the line like who wants to send it money and let's make this thing. Right. Well, that's how you scale it, right? So in my thinking, if you do a crowdfunding type of thing, that's very grassroots respectfully. Yeah. And I would have to go a different direction with the car where they'd kind of of almost be like self assembled prototype type things. And that's, that's cool. But honestly, the thing that I kind of worry about doing that starting a small scale versus something else is that I don't want to do something in a sense too good to where they try to change the, the laws and ruin the ability for people to build their own cars. I know that sounds a little kooky, but the other thing is if you think of like private equity guys and such, typically they want to faster return on such. And the problem is when you're thinking of something that frankly upsets an industry and relates to the automotive industry, how do you integrate it? Can you use the process to make smaller parts that can be profitable and industry? Do you start smaller like that? Do you want to do all big scale and create a car company from the ground up? Because that's no small task, monetarily speaking. No, it's not. And there's only so many idealistic rogue billionaires in the world, you know? And that's generally what it takes unless you have a government that wants to make something happen. If you can make a vehicle like this for 20 grand, want to just sell it for 50 grand on the internet by one. You have a point, but you got to scale that to a point that works because there's a big difference between doing something in a small manufacturing to mass production. But it's got to be a way to get it out there. I mean, well, Elon's first car with Tesla with a roadster was the Lotus Elise chassis with a different body and electrified. And the guys that I knew who had those originally were rich guys. They had for our original amberganes. And that was their cool toy to start with. What's this car call, by the way? The Tesla roads, you're your original one. Oh, mine. The Omega car. I called it the Omega car. Yeah. I'd like an Omega car in forest green. Could you do that? Oh, yeah. Actually, yeah, we're not. I'd buy it in a second. Can you ship them? You can. You can. We got to talk about a prototype, something though. Maybe we'll make something special. Yeah. Well, just fly rods. Yeah, for real. If you can't use it, we'll get it in. You know, I'm getting one. So I just want to go back to something you said it in the very first moments of this interview. You said that you don't own any of your obviously car guy. You build cars. My happiness is way too wrapped up in the ability to just drive my own car. Yeah, I love, but whether anybody's around or not, I don't care. Just let me drive my own car. But you like wrenching on them too. Yeah, it's rewarding. I don't want to say you want to do it all the time. No, no, I try to, my hands have healed up enough. I won't bleed on my white shirt today. That's nice. But can I ask like, you said that you don't have any vehicle older than early 2000s newer than early rather. Yeah, newer. I beg your pardon. So why is that like what's bad about cars made in the last 25 years and please be very specific? Oh, I will. The first problem with new cars is you lose money handover fist to depreciation. Yeah. And then if you have to take out a loan for it, you're also paying interest on that. Yes. And one of the fastest ways I see normal people in general lose money is on new cars. Yeah. And they do it because they're afraid they can't work on it or service that's exactly right. That's basically the only real exactly right. But then you get dealerships that just find new ways to not do their warranty work because that's where they make a lot of money. And that's that's a separate thing. So a new car, I mean, that's nice if you can afford it, but rather than buying a new $100,000 truck or SUV, I'd rather buy this nice use one for our 15 or 20 and spend the rest of the money. I'll go, you know, if you got it, go buy a vintage Ferrari or a muscle car, something cool, you know, at least keep your money. It has some fun. But it's more than that. Cars I would say in the last 20 to 25 years, the evolution is not for the sake of the car and the person and so much of the experience. It's more for the sake of the nature of dealing with regulation and keeping a profit margin and building it. And when you do that, you make things that are inherently more prone to failing in the future and less serviceable. And that's not good for ownership and or actual lifespan. So everything, I mean, I grew up working on a motorcycle with a carburetor and so kind of building the carburetor, adjusting the flow ball, you know, had timing light at just the points. I mean, all that stuff, just like really super basic mechanics and you know, there are lots of downsides that they break a lot. But you could understand it. My feeling is the vehicles that I have had that are newer. I mean, I have no idea how they work. I don't feel injection is still kind of a mystery to me. I'm sorry to say that it is. It works the same way as a carburetor. It's just meadered and more complicated. Well, I guess this trend toward making everything electric. I bought a truck last year. A Chevy truck was always had. And I was at a gas station and all of a sudden on the dashboard, it says, stop, we're downloading information from the internet or while you were driving. No, I was stopped. It just specifically wanted you to stay stopped so it can so it could, I don't know, download softwares. I sold the carburetor. I brought it back to sold it. They went in all your data to provide it to insurance companies to wreck your lifetime. Is that true? Okay, insurance companies will be the downfall of cars and driving. Agaring to it. And the other things, all the cameras that are out there, everybody's putting cameras on their car. I'm like, okay, you guys are on their car? Well, you've, I'm sure you've seen it. Like people are buying little cameras to see what happens if somebody does something stupid on the road. You can use that to protect yourself legally, right? That's why they sell it. It's never occurred to me. But yes, okay, what happens when those are mandated in every car everywhere? What happens when you're completely mandated control? Car shuts off at exactly $55 speed limit. No matter what, it's just another method of slippery slope of control. And it'll come from insurance companies and the law enforcement can turn off your car from afar, correct? Yeah. And they do. Well, with certain cars. Yeah, so what's the, when's the last year you could have a car that can't be controlled? Oh, that's a good question because I don't mess around with those cars very often. Um, or ever, you, is it fair to say one that are connected to the internet or satellite in some way, you know, on star kind of came about with your mirror. And I don't really know much about it. But that was kind of the first, I think mainstream way when we saw cars were being specifically connected to something beyond yourself. So would you say pre 911 cars or say are not there? Let's say for in terms of that. The other thing too, in the early 2000, the system hand bus system came out hand bus. It was to make wiring more efficient. You theoretically have less wires, but everything is tied together. It's almost like a spinal cord of the computer and it has to speak to each other. And that was something else. This kind of a beginning of the end and being serviceable in the future and not creating cars with a lot of glitches. It does feel like everything is, you're going to have like fly by wire cars with, you know, we already do. The other thing is a couple of small points that are also happening were the right to repair your own private properties under attack. That's for farmers. What does that mean? Well, I think there was a big thing going on with John Deere tractors where farmers couldn't service their vehicles. They have to take them to the dealership and have to plug in with the computer that only the dealership has through the company. And forgive me if I got this wrong, I think it was John Deere. But that's something that's happening everywhere. Because if manufacturers of dealerships want more money, well, they want you to service with them. If they make it so you can only service with them no matter what, well, then they're going to in an authoritarian way force you to let them make them money, which is frankly another method of control. And when you start adding all those things up, you just keep taking away all the power for the people before eventually you get to a point where will you even be able to own your own car anymore? And will you driving it be a liability to where if we have self-driving cars, it just takes you there at the most efficient time that whatever that it wants you to, wants you to. So that's like an attack on human autonomy. Yeah, it's where it's where that's going. And so I had a Harley Davidson, you know, since I was in college in 1971, which you know, I could kind of understand great bike. But I bought a new Harley last year and they delivered it, you know, big fun bike fast, you know, like six speeds, which is actually comfortable, crazy to me. And that's just the transmission is like, correct. I mean, my bike, you downshift, you got to pop the throttle. I know it turns spring in the throttle. You got to pop that to get it down. And so the shifting in this thing was just like beyond belief. But when they delivered it to my barn, they said, I would talk about how changed the wheel, obviously. And then he go, you know, no, no, no, we don't, we actually recommend bringing it to the dealership. And I was like, yeah, but it's chain oil and motorcycles, like not hard. And they're like, well, you know, they're gaskets and gaskets. Why don't you be a gat? Why did you have to replace a gasket to change the wheel? Anyway, I brought it back to the dealership. Didn't want to. Oh, really? You're like, and now I'm done with the gaskets. I did. And they were great. I don't mean to attack them in any way. They were awesome people, motorcycle people are great people. And they definitely were. But I didn't want a motorcycle where you had to replace a gasket. I mean, like pop the jugs off. Okay. But maybe like you could have a little like copper o-ring or lumen o-ring or something on the drain plug. But like, well, of course, you always see this one of those crazy modern manufacturing thing where you have to do some off-hand. And did they're like, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. It was like, I'm not rebuilding the lower end. So, change the oil. And they're like, you know, most of our customers bring that back to the dealership. And I don't know. I didn't like that at all. And I felt like there was a scam involved. Yeah, which is the one you described, right? Yeah, it just triggers something kind of in your back. It's like something's going on here. Yeah. Well, and I don't say those things in a like, who he can spiritorial type of way. But it's literally where we're going. And you know, when I see things like that, and I mentioned about, it'll be insurance companies that ruin it for everybody. Because the other thing is what happens when they start making it where you can't drive your older cars anymore? You don't feel like you can't trust the things you hear or read like every news source is hollow distorted or clearly just propaganda lying to you. Well, you're not imagining it. If the last few years have proven anything, it's that legacy media exists to distort the control you to gatekeep information from the public instead of letting you know what's actually going on. They don't want you to know. But there is a hover a publication that fights this that is not propaganda. One that we read every month and have for many years is called in Primus. It's from Hillsdale College, Michigan and Primus is a free speech digest that features some of the best minds in the country addressing the questions that actually matter. The ones that are not addressed in the Washington Post or NBC News. The best part of it, it is free. No cost whatsoever. No strings attached. They descended to Hillsdale will send in Primus right to your house. No charge. All you got to do is ask. Go to tuckerforhillsdale.com and subscribe for free today. That's tuckerforhillsdale.com. No charge. All you got to do is ask. Go to tuckerforhillsdale.com and subscribe for free today. That's tuckerforhillsdale.com. The only way that stays in democracy is if the citizenry is informed. You can't fight tyranny if you don't know what's going on. In premise helps, it's free. Don't wait. Sign up now. So I always hope that cash for clunkers. Do you remember that program? Yes. That was a little early before I started paying attention to that. Well, the federal government basically paid clunkers, like perfectly fine cars, built before a certain date. You could redeem them for cash. And then they just, they melted them. And I felt like there was something pretty sinister about that. But maybe I'm just like one of those paranoid wackos who don't think Randy Weaver deserved to be killed. I don't know. Maybe I'm just on the fringe. If an industry, no, if an industry is no longer about innovation and it's so big that it can't fail and it's pushed to go a certain way. Well, then the best way to ensure that it succeeds is for sure to buy something new, even if it's not in your own best interest. Exactly. But it does, you know, you raised the question, which is how do you service vehicles made before 9.11? And that is why people don't want them. And I must say, made before, you said you must make before easier to service no one's made after it. Well, no, I mean, it's like if you buy an older vehicle and I drive an older vehicle. So I know it's like you can't just, I mean, you have to know someone who can fix it. Of course, to an extent. Yeah. But are we entering a world where there won't be any mechanics who can know what a carburetor is, for example? I don't know about that so much. It's specialized, but they're simple. You can look at it and know the basic principles that are going on. It's the newer stuff that's crazy. Since my father-in-law, recently got my mother-in-law this nice new recipe, I think it's a BMW, I think it's a hybrid SUV. She likes it. And my father-in-law look at it, go by over like, there's a lot of servos and things worrying and buzzing. And I don't want to say it, but I'm because I'm saying it now. It's kind of like, when is this thing going to break? And how much is that going to cost? Yeah. No, you're not going to reasonably fix that. And then when that thing is older, that all these highly specialized little mechanisms and circuit boards and servos or whatever go bad, who's making that? And is it worth making it anymore? Or is it just another giant complicated toxic, wasteful thing that we go on on this vicious, consumer cycle? No, they just crush it. Well, a some older cars, you can still fix this goofy story, maybe, but I bought a for $8,000. I bought a 1996 Rolls Royce off Facebook marketplace, kind of as a joke. I'm like, I don't know. This might be kind of cool. I love the car. And I ended up fixing enough for how much nothing. And I got a car that in 1996. It run. Yeah. It's great car. Taking off family trips and all in it. I didn't have to do that much. Yeah. It was like $170,000 in the 90s. But where I'm going with it is, what do you roll? Hey, look, I may not be wealthy, but like I can live well if you got a toolbox and some know how and you think for yourself, but where I was going with it is that car's fixable, the way it's constructed, what kind of engine does it have? It's going to be a it's all aluminum, natural, I ask for a V8. The transmission's General Motors based. So when I needed stuff to fix it, I just got it locally. It was no big deal. And sure, there's some things that are old Rolls Royce on it, but it's built differently. It's built where you can actually repair the park, not just be a parts changing type of mechanic like modern things. And people get into technology for technology sake nowadays, but it's the philosophy of design that goes behind it. We're locked in this consumer, industrialized, only new is better, more complicated, more expensive, more regulated. When the mentality and the know how, should we say over the first half of the 20th century, we built things that could actually be repaired. We built things that can be serviceable that can last to an extent. So why are we not still using good design and engineering mindsets and technology, direction with modernity in a way that's actually useful for people and communities in a nation and rather than just an industry? I'm most struck by, I mean, because we've deindustrialized is part of it. So that makes sense to me. You know, why, why can't we build this or that thing? Why won't we been to the moon, you know, in 50 years? Assuming we went in the first place. I kind of get that because there are fewer competent engineers. Everyone's a marketing major. Okay, that makes sense. What I don't understand is the decline in design across and not just in automotive, but across across the society, the civilization actually. We're making things ugly, aren't we? Why is that? That's a cultural issue. I was in another city. I won't name it, but a nice kind of tertiary city. But a growing city with a lot of nice people on it, affluent. And I was driving through this was last weekend. I was driving through an affluent neighborhood with one of my children who's a design person. And I said, that's that house is black. This is new built. There's brand new house. Yeah, I mean, normally that would have meant in Europe, you got the black pill like don't come here. We got in the day, right? Like if you're an Amsterdam. Like what? Amsterdam, I saw none. And then I said like three more. I said to like, do these people hate themselves? What is this? Choose it's disgusting. And I felt that way. But like what? Why would you ever paint a house black or why would you build like what the hell is going on with design? What's your theory? Actually, I went in college in Montreal, Ohio State, third generation there. And originally I was going in for automotive designer product design. I really should have gone into engineering. That's my forte. But we're going with this is it's house within fine art in colleges. Yeah. And I generally just like modern art. Okay. I think that if you don't have the technical skill to do something actually beautiful, then I don't care about your your who who abstract ideas, right? But where I'm going with this is so called art in design and product design has been influenced over the 20th century going back to like the Frankfurt school in Europe, which frankly was a lot of communist mindset that infiltrated the art world. And it's made sure it's anti Western civilization. It's a Christian. It's like a beauty point. It's the simplest thing. In fact, I gave you this small detail. I ended up hating my experience there. I ended up quitting after like a year and a half and designing my own major just to get the hell out of school because I was kind of pissed off actually because there was one specifically I remember in this one class we get to design something for the whole semester, right? And we're going to design Oh, bathroom scale. I'm like, okay, I thought about it. I'm like, this sucks. With the way they're teaching us to have an aesthetic do the simplest thing possible, which is somewhat communist taken away, you know, it seems almost so that's the imperative. Make it as simple as possible. The simplest most boring thing possible. I'm like, what is the point? Let's just have a white room with one wassily chair in the back of it. We'll just sit there and hate our lives. Like anything beautiful, anything classic, they shied away from design literally pushed away. What about natural natural beauty? That's not their thing. It does seem like there's a very intense like almost visceral hatred of nature coming off design people. It's like strangely. Yes, strangely. But in regard to the start of to tell you, so the bathroom scale, I thought to myself, this is going to take a semester. It doesn't even have to function. And if they just want to make the simplest thing possible, okay, here, here's a round piece of glass with an LCD display on it that tells you to go eat a salad. Like, well, I don't want to do this. And so I met with the academic advisor and I said, I will meet all of your academic requirements for this class. But please let me design something at my level right now. Let me design a car. And they said, no, they would not let me design it. Just because there's too much initiative and too much creativity. There wouldn't let me do it. Did you pay for this experience? Yeah, sadly. And that's a problem. International system. You know, libraries are free. Yeah. You know, there's a lot of nice people out there that can help you learn. But so I stayed around in that program for another semester. I didn't do anything the whole semester the night before the exam and presentation. I just Ferris Bueller, a bunch of stuff together and ran around. I don't know, got to be plus. And I just designed cars on things on my own. But how insane is that that in college when you're actually paying to be there and they're supposed to be design a product design that they won't actually let students do what they're capable of doing or push a boundary or go anywhere. They literally keep a thumb on you like that. I quit the program after that. And I stopped caring where, fortunately, when I was in high school and hopefully people have teachers that actually care than matter. I had art teachers that made the world a difference for me and a lot of other people. Yes. That was huge. And people write things off now in, you know, pre college things like shop, home, vocational art, engineering drawing. Those are some of the most important things you can possibly have. But we got rid of all of those things to push college prep way more than, I don't know, third wave feminist literature. I don't know. The re rethink what you just said and ask yourself, do I really mean? Do I mean what I said? Well, that I don't know that architectural draftsmanship is more important than say the color purple by Alice Walker. You mean the things that actually make you contributing functioning individual members society that elevate beauty and truth over like garbage by some low IQ and a happy check. Yeah. Yeah. The go into an academic vacuum that's not the real world that's fueled by loans you can't default on whether there's going to be a job for you or not. You know, I would say beneath your car design exterior lies a fairly incisive and bitter critique of the society. I think and look around. Yeah. I don't like liars. I don't like being lied to and that goes culturally too. I don't know that I completely agree. So how, I just have to be clear on this. How if there are other eccentric people out there who would like one of these vehicles that you've designed? How would they, would you be willing to make them to order? Yeah. I could do that. You have to think about the structure of who wants to do what? You know, early adopters are usually people that can afford something. It's going to cost more than 20 grand. Yeah. Yeah. You're building something. But certainly that can be done. I could make lower production numbers and you could build something and a bit of a movement too from the ground up will be cool to build it with the gas tanks efficient to get coast to coast or, you know, I'd be very doable. And the other thing is, I, you know, I like to do amateur race driving and vintage racing. So I like to make cars that are fast. And for me, it's kind of fun. The idea to make things that get over Armando Gal and that beat Dodge Vipers and Corvats and Teslas. You know, that's what we did back once, bustle cars. Well, so how do people find you if like, if you made it this far in the inner? I'm shockingly easy to find. You are. I'd say perhaps a little scary. So maybe find a nice method rather than I just think out the window one day and go, so you're not giving your home address. Not at this moment, but are you open to kind of custom builds? Of course, I'm open to doing things. I mean, you know, I have a nice enough life. I have a wife. I have a cute daughter, a nice neighborhood and neighbors and toys to play with. But there's more to life than that. Can you find mental work for you? Like, of course, you have been mentoring college students for the last decade plus I could call a half of them. They got a great job. It's a larger question. I mean, the trades are not dead. Correct. No, they're not dead and they're vastly important right now. More people should be going into them. I know. You wouldn't have all the student debt. But in your life, if you all of a sudden got an order for 15 of these vehicles, could you find the people necessary? Yeah, I could put that together. Wow. Okay. Well, even if there's something that I don't know, I'm going to find it. Yes. Like you make it happen. But you know, one man can't do everything by themselves. You know, if you if you're building something and nobody wants it, well, that's a problem. You need to build something somebody wants. And if it requires a team of people coming together, whether that's with talents or resources or finances to do it, then you find a way. Do you think if you start doing this, the government would jump on you? It depends on how you do it. It is a game. And to be honest, when I when I look at the car and what I've done with that or with the educational nonprofit or anything else in life, I look at how do I have the biggest positive impact I possibly can? You know, and right now, the biggest impact with regard to the cars talking about it. So people do know what's possible. So hopefully maybe they kind of, you know, wake up for a second from the cell phone to look around and think that that's that's a vastly important thing to do. So I think it has tremendous value there. But you know, I want to build something, you know, I'm an America first kind of guy like why in the heck are we not building these things here? Yeah, why we should. You know, and I give an example. I've been around the sun 43 times in my life, right? When I was younger and we're working a little town golf course, that's a family business. And a lot of the guys that golf and our golf course were blue color. Everybody there's largely working class old World War II vets. That sort of thing, right? Yeah, it's Toledo. Yeah. Yeah. Well, and that was even Tiffin. But the plan of making is or from my Grindelmore soccer around Toledo or something, I'm like, nothing's changed. Nothing's changed in the last 50 years. There's people out here. They want, they want to work. They want a job. They want a community. But what's going on out there in the world that doesn't allow people to have that anymore? And that's, that's what frankly ticks me off. And usually I get ticked off and then I think and plan and do something. Yeah. Well, there's an instinctive hatred coming from our leaders for those kind of people. I know, it's pretty obvious. I know, Casey, I really appreciate your taking all this time. Amazing. Thank you. And I'm going to order a vehicle from you. I appreciate it. You're fun. Thank you. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the cusp of fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's immoral. What can you do about it? Well, we could wind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it. A way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's just subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.