So, Andrew, thank you for doing this. So, you're so controversial. I love that. Yeah, married man with six kids who pays his taxes, you're still controversial. Controversial would be not paying your credit card bill and putting the banks out of business, convincing other people to do the same, not paying their federal taxes, forcing the US government to pay attention to its own citizens. You're doing none of that, so as far as I'm concerned, you're a non-controversal law-abiding man, but you are doing one thing that's pretty wild, which is... participating in the building of a new town, it sounds almost like a Christian utopian experiment in Tennessee, but I don't really know. Can you tell me what it is and why you're doing it? Um, it's not quite that. It's not the Oneida community? Yeah, yeah, we're not building, you know, some kind of Anabaptist community. Okay, you're not the shakers. No No, really, it's a company, you know, Ridge Runner is purchasing land and sort of facilitating a lot of things. Like, you're familiar with the big sort, where people are leaving blue states to go to red states and things like that, where it's along those lines, where people were leaving. Like, I left Minnesota, a very blue state, everyone's now familiar with our governor in that state, Tim Walz. Don't hire him to babysit no, I would not he would be the last person And and you know, so we wanted to leave there many people want to leave places like that my my friend CJ left, California Gavin Newsom stayed to come to Tennessee and And so it's it's a platform to to be able to you know draw all of your your friends together It's like well, we can kind of live anywhere Why don't we why don't? We all live in them? the same kind of place and bring our families, bring our businesses, and build things together. So it's sort of a platform for drawing people that are spread out all throughout the country and can leave these places that are not great, you know, living in large cities or suburbs where they're just totally disconnected and really isolated, alienated from normal life, and you can have the. American small town experience once again. So sad to hear you say that about Minnesota as a Scandinavian. I always thought of it, was told, you know, it's like where all the Swedes are and it's kind of, you know, lots of Saunas and, you know, red cheek children and it is clean and reasonable. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Not the case anymore. Why did you leave there? You know, for us, it was- Are you from there? From there, yeah. Born and raised in Waseca, Minnesota. My children were the sixth generation of our family that lived in that town. Oh, gosh. And- In the town? In that town, yeah, in the town of Waseka. Are your ancestors buried there? Yeah, there's six generations that are buried there. Even one of my own children that passed. um that you know all they're like we lived a couple blocks away from the cemetery where all of my ancestors were buried. Oh gosh. Oh, that's very heavy. place like that. Yes. And it was, you know, after the 2022 election, where the Democrats took control of the the state senate finally, and Tim Walz could do whatever he wanted to do. He, the first thing he passed was in the wake of the Dobbs decision, full, full abortion allowance, even up to birth, Like, you know, there were the stories during the election about you know, even like post-birth abortions that took place in Minnesota. I went to the state Capitol and spoke to the first committee when that bill was being heard. And I mean, maybe later your guys can pull up that video, but I just went there and said like, hey, you think you won an election. You think you can do this and just murder children, but God is not mocked. Like he's... he's going to come with vengeance about what you're doing. And of course they, yeah, they, they're like all these, you know, 60 year old liberal ladies senators here are looking at me, scoffing at me and just staring daggers at me. And hating what I'm saying. Uh, how, how dare he cut this. Christian Nationalists come here. Lots of luck to them. Yeah. And so that's the first bill that they passed. The second bill that they passed, and these are the first two legislative priorities that they had. The second one was a trans rights bill, which allowed the state to take your child out of their custody or your parents' custody if you opposed a transition. And my oldest child is 12. A minor child. Minor child, yeah. My oldest son, he's 12 years old. He has autism. We homeschool all the rest of our children, but we don't have the resources to be able to educate him with his autism. And so he goes to a special ed. And I'm well aware, especially if you see the things that happened in 2020, 2021, all of the activism, trans stuff in the schools, all the Libs of TikTok kind of stuff, that the majority of trans children are on the autism spectrum, right? These children are targeted, right. And I'm thinking, okay, he doesn't talk about school, he doesn' talk about home at school, he categorizes all of his life, he just won't do it. So I would have no way of knowing like what is going on there. They could be putting him in a dress and calling him a girl name and I would no idea. And then when I find out and I oppose it, Right. Boom. CPS comes, takes him out of our custody and he's gone forever and they can So that's when you go So that's when you go Randy Weaver at that point, for sure, and you don't want to go Randy Weafer. Like it didn't end well for Randy Wever. No. Doesn't end well for anybody. No, I don't want to go down that road. No, nobody does. Nobody does. And so it's like, we need to get out of here, right? We cannot trust the whole system with our child. They could steal him from us, right. This could happen. I don' want to be the test case for that. I don''t want to to go through the legal battles and do all those fights. I want my son. I don's want to live in a place where that's even conceivable that that could happen to you. It's insane. And so it was at that moment, I'm like, we need to, we needed to get out of this state. This is, it's not a place where I can raise my children and I'm thinking like long-term, right? We, yeah, we've been in this place for six generations, but it's a wonderful town, you know, amazing place. I mean, it is home. I love the people there and many of them are going to be watching this. Well, you must know all of them. from my youth. You know, you go to the store and you see, you know, my wife and children hated when I would go to store because it would take, you, know, an hour to get a thing of milk because I'd just stop and talk to people I've known my whole life. Oh, I love that. And it's a wonderful play. Like, it's hard to leave that, right? Because it's, you know it. You're familiar with everything and all of the people and just the way of life. And- where your family's buried, six generations, that's just, I had no idea. That's so much to give up. That must have been. I can't, I can stay in a place like that. There's no future for my children, for my family in a place that's that far gone, right, that has been destroyed. And you see so many of these other states, you know, California, Washington, adopted all the same things that Walls' Minnesota did. What I want to get back to the Rage Runner and the town that's being built, which I assume is a fascist Christian theocracy. That's what the TV news in Nashville said. Sorry, I'll get that one. Mr. Phil Williams, the journalist. Little Iran, except Christian, right, okay. But why do you think so that the three, I mean, I have my own theories, but you've lived it much more personally than I have. So you tell me, why do you think states like? Minnesota, Oregon, Washington, California, have gone to a place that, I think by any objective global standard, there's no country in the world that would nod and say that's okay, except maybe the UK. Yeah, yeah. How did they get there? I think, I mean, for all of them, the political power was captured by the left, political and cultural power. I mean I went to college in Minnesota in the early 2000s, and you could see the seeds of all of these things beginning to form. And so all of the institutions were captured, and especially culturally in Minnesota, people Thanks for watching! people are very nice, right? It's not a myth, Minnesota nice is very real. And right, the ethos is if you don't have anything nice to say, right, don't say anything at all, which I just swim completely against that tide. But it's, I mean, not to point to genetics, but it's real, it's Germans, it is Scandinavians, Norwegians, Swedes, some Finns. It's like these are gentle, non-confrontational people for the most part. Yeah, they're very kind, people that are, to a fault, unwilling to give offense. Yes, yes. And very, very tolerant of other people. Yes, they are. And that gets taken advantage of, right? So you can have- So they take our best qualities and subvert them against us. Yes, and you can see that in other places too, like on the West Coast as well, right. And especially with, like, Christians, this is done all of the time, where you're told, well, we need to love other people and be kind and be Christ-like, and that ethos gets subverted and used to these ends, right, where, well, how dare you, you know, talk about these things, like how dare talk about these thing from the pulpit, these things going on. Like, it offends a lot of people. No, it does. I mean, I come from a family like that with some of them have strong views, but they would never impose their views on you under any circumstances. They're just just not in them. It's a very specific Northern European culture where they just don't want to, don't wanna get in your face. But it leaves them defenseless a little bit, I think. Yeah, and, you know, I mean, maybe I'm, maybe I'm unique, you know, maybe my personality type is, is such that I just, I can't do that. I can see like evil stuff happening, taking place and not say something about it. Not say, this is, this is insane. Like how, how could we, I mean, just think a hundred years ago. And that's sort of, you know, my book is, right, if you go back 100 years and you think about your great-great-grandfather and you told him, hey, they're going to take little kids and little boys and remove their genitals and turn them into girls, right? Are you okay with that? Do you think that's all right? Like what would they do if that was even proposed? Like they. They become violent. They become the Ming Dynasty. Yeah, that's right. That's right. I can't believe we have that. Yeah. We're bringing that back. They would go insane. They would fight. They'd become violent if that were happening. And we're like, well, you know, I really want to keep my job, so I'll put the pronouns in my email signature and on my LinkedIn, you just go along to get along. I have contempt for them. So, my theory is that those are the most secular states. And Maine is another one of the most secular states, unfortunately. And those trends are rising there as well, famously. And there's something about, there are lots of left-wing ideas that, or liberal ideas, or socialist ideas that like, well, I don't disagree with all of them, honestly. But some of them I do, a lot of them really disagree with. the transgender thing, the abortion thing, human sacrifice and turning your children to eunuchs, those are so clearly expressions of cultish religion, of pagan religion that like, I can't turn away. I'm like, the Canaanites did this. I know what's going on here. This is not, you claim you're secular, you're not secular at all. These are religious rituals. That's the way it feels to me. Yes. Absolutely. It is, and that's part of it too. I think the things that happened, like when I was in college in the early 2000s, you know, you had the new atheism and everyone was like, it was just cool to be an atheist. Like, oh, I'm agnostic. I don't really believe in your- Who's that guy? Who is that there's like a really absurd person posing as like a genius who is one of the leader there are probably a bunch of but who is the most famous one? Or like Richard Dawkins or Daniel Dennett or Christopher Hitchens. Well, he was a marvelous guy, but totally wrong on that. He was legit smart. No, there's another one, whatever, who's always running around. Or like today, like James Lindsay is one of those types. Who's James Lindsay? He is this atheist guy that opposed wokeness and things like that, but wants just a free liberal society like it's 1995. I'm all for a free liberal society. It's just that there isn't one. Either you're moving quickly toward, I mean, I will never give up my views of, I will ever stop being liberal on the most basic level, which is I actually don't want to control you or your beliefs because I don't think you're a slave. I think you are a human being because God made you. Absolutely. That's my view. And so I don' want to break down people's doors to make sure they're adhering to what I believe at all. I hate that. However, It, you're either moving toward order or you're moving toward chaos. You're moving towards, you know, a society rooted in some sort of transcendent belief or you moving toward traniism, which is another like transcendent believe. It's like, you pick a religion. Yeah, it's not whether, but which. There will be one. And that's part of it is like the new atheism, all of those things that broke down Christian mores and Christian, just cultural Christianity that was imbued all throughout the American public life, takes all of that down, but then there's a vacuum and that vacuum gets filled up. And what's it been filled up with? Insane stuff like this, child sacrifice, all of it. Like, it is a new religion. It isn't a question of like, well, we're just going to have pluralism, we're not going to any dominant religion. No, there will be one. There will be a God that you serve and the one that we are serving now is some kind of demon. Well, I think that so much better put than I could have than I could have formulated that. But yes, exactly. Perfectly put. Exactly. You're going to worship something. Yeah. And now we're worshiping something really, really dark as a society. But it's it's particularly pronounced in the states that have abandoned Christianity the most aggressively and just come up with this new pagan religion. So, OK, so this is going on in your state. You're the six generations in one town. Boy, that's got to be pretty rare right now. You've got six children. You have a child buried in the cemetery along with all your ancestors, and you leave, all of that. What's going on in your church? Were you a church goer at the time? Yeah, I was pastoring a church. Oh gosh, yeah. Okay. So, you're involved in church. Yes, I am. Yeah. And it's a church with wonderful people. And, you know, they're there because they more or less think like I do. They like hearing what I preach. You know, they like all of these things. And so, it's extremely difficult to leave them as well. Um, but it was, it was difficult because it was very small church and the things that I'm preaching, right? So, I take the pastorate there in 2021, so after the lockdowns, after all of these things, and there's an incredible amount of discontent among Christians because their church has been shut down, their leaders have failed them, and so we had many families join us, you know, after that. know, overall, right, the people, you know, in Minnesota, right? They don't, they're not used to the kind of preaching that I do, the kind of Christianity that I have where it's like, no, I believe the Bible, like, God is real, and He has spoken, He's revealed Himself to us in the Bible. And therefore, I believe all of it. I'm not embarrassed by any of it, I'm going to tiptoe around the things that might be controversial. If anything, I am going to lean into those things and I'm gonna preach all of it. That runs totally against the evangelical Christian ethos in America today. Really? It's all about, you need to be nice, you know, make Jesus very inoffensive to people and that's how you bring people into your church. So I'll say, I'm not an evangelical. I've always liked the evangelicals. I've have always defended them. I'm very sympathetic. As a non-evangel, I mean, I'm exactly sure what an evangelical is. It seems more like a cultural descriptor, but I'm completely opposed to abortion. So that has been, for me, the reason that I've Always defended them, but I always thought that the evangelical's were really forthright about their faith. Another thing that I liked and We're way more on the kind of fire and brimstone side, which I'm for, by the way. Good, yeah But you're saying that they're not. Um, that, that was certainly, I, you, you look at like, you know, the eighties and even in the early nineties, like you have the moral majority where they very much were that kind of fire and brimstone and they've, they've been vindicated by everything that has happened. I'd say, it's hilarious. Lent is here, the period before Easter, the 40 days, and it's a unique chance to get closer to God. That's the point of it. Hallow, the world's number one prayer app can help you do that. Joining their prayer 40 challenge. It's a great way to connect with Christians all over the world and unite in preparation for Easter, which is the payoff of this season. It's called The Way, it helps participants focus on how Jesus is the way to heaven. If you join the challenge, you'll embark on a spiritual journey with some of America's most convicted Jesus followers. Powerful stories, prayer, you grow in your ability to sacrifice, that's what Lent is, it's a sacrifice, and taking thought-provoking sermons and true stories of faith in action, which are amazing. This year is gonna be the best Lent ever, thousands of people praying together all over the world and you can be part of it through Hallow, which by the way is in use in my house and a nightly topic of conversation. So you can sign up at hallow.com slash talker. When you join, check out thousands of guided prayers, meditations, music, and everything. There is a ton on Hallow all designed to help you find peace and closeness to God. Download the Hallow app and jump onto the Lent Pray 40 Challenge right now. But throughout the 90s and early 2000s, they really changed course, right? As the cultural trajectory is changing, they adopted, you know, the very secret sensitive movement where it's like, well, people are secret sensitive movement. What does that mean? It was, it was the big movement in evangelicalism in the 90's and early 2000s. where we're going to make it as easy as possible for people to come into the church and believe in Jesus. And so we're not going to focus on things that might offend them, we're not going focus on sin and repentance and things like that. We're just, just come on in and have a good time and know that you're welcome here, right? Come as you are. We'll meet you halfway. Like that was more or less the... Why do you think they did that? Um, I think... know, a friend of mine, I think I could call him a friend, Aaron Wren, he's written about this, like, neutral world, or negative world, neutral, positive world, where, you know, in the 70s and 80s, Christianity is generally understood culturally as a positive thing. Like, if you said, oh, I go to church, I'm a Christian, I'll go to that church, people will think, oh, that's a good guy, he is an upstanding, decent person. But by the mid-90s, it was sort neutral right it was sort of Well, that's just a cool thing that you do right just like collecting stamps or building model trains or being part of the Lions Club but by the You know by the Obama years by like 2015 You're in negative world where if you're an evangelical Christian you are suspect. You're you're probably a Nazi You're probably bigot. You probably a white supremacist, right? That's the attitude that people has Can I ask you to pause just to state for the one millionth time, the Nazis were not Christians. They were not Christians, but they love to throw those things around it. Noxies are Christians, no. more christians were killed by the nazis than any other group just a fact um so anyway no the nazis were not christians so i just i'm sorry i had to say that Good to make, you know, yeah, because they'll clip this and they'll say, yeah. Oh, Andrew Isker is saying that the Christians are Nazis. But so that period of time, like there's these widespread cultural shifts in the country. And so I think a lot of it is just in response to that, where you're in that neutral world. And you had figures like Rick Warren or Tim Keller who sort of adapted these things. So Tim Keller is in New York City and he he tries to adapt Christianity to your upper middle class, striver people in New York City, or to make it easy for them to come to church. So, he wouldn't ever talk about homosexuality or if he did, it would be, well, that's not so good for human flourishing, but we're not really going to talk about that too much. There's the former president of the Southern Baptist convention J.D. Greer, you know, famously. said in a sermon, well, the Bible just whispers about sexual sin, but it shouts about financial sin or greed, right? So, they want to downplay- But it shots about both of them. It does, and the two are connected, right. Right, if you're greedy for money, you're also going to be lusting after the flesh, like the two go hand in hand. But it's to down play things that the culture does not want to hear, right? Because you'll be branded as a bigot, as intolerant, as a bad person if you're just like, well, this is what the Bible says, like this, you know, fornicators, adulterers, sodomites, they will not inherit the kingdom of God. Right? If you say, yes, I agree with that, well you're a bad person, right, you're, you are outside of polite society if you say those things. And you can reject it. You can reject Christianity itself. And you're certainly welcome to in this country and in all countries, actually. But it doesn't just say this parenthetically. No, it's- Like included in a sidebar, it says it again and again and the church I grew up and they're like, well, there are only four times where, you know, in the scriptures where people, you know where homosexuality is attacked. And it's like, since no one ever read it in my church, No- No one knew, but I finally read it. What the hell, why not read it? And I did, and I've never been anti-gay or anything like that, but by the end, I was like, oh, there's a really clear message from the Hebrew scriptures all the way through the Christian to the New Testament, and again, and again and again. So again, you don't have to believe it, but if you're a believing Christian, it's not whispered at all. Yeah you do! SHO- Yeah, you do have to believe it if you're a Christian, like if you claim that you, that this is the Bible, that God spoke in this, right? And so, they're very fearful of those kinds of things, but, I mean, the interesting now that we're in you know what Wren calls negative world is is that young man who were raised, most of them, like raised secular, right? They went through the whole new atheism thing. They never went to church, they never grew up. I mean, I talk to so many guys, so many young men, I see, connect with me on X and places like that where they're like, hey, I was not part of the church at all. I was a Christian. And I see all of the evil everywhere, right. I see the things like you were talking about, like they are sacrificing babies, like they care about this more than anything else, the ability to murder a baby. They see things like the Ukraine war, where it's like, our rulers just decided to have a war and kill millions of people for absolutely no reason. And our proxies have banned the majority Christian faith, the majority faith, which is Christian, in Ukraine. And I just wonder, just to go back to the atheists for a second, what do they make of this? Like it just, I understand, certainly understand being agnostic, like I don't know, you know, I get it. Yeah, I can see why someone would have that viewpoint. For sure. I think that's a pretty normal, you now, place to be. I think it's wrong, but I don't think it is crazy. But to be an atheist, to have determined that there is no God, what do you make of the things you see around you? Have you never held someone's hand while he dies? What do you think that is? You've never felt anything that is clearly outside of what science describes? How determined are you to ignore your life that you become an atheist? What is that? Do you know any? Yeah, I- I mean, it's funny because most of the people that you talk to are like, when they espouse kind of atheist ideas, right, they'll retreat. It's kind of a Martin Bailey thing where they'll retreat to, well, really I'm agnostic, I don't really know for sure, right? So there's very few people, very few, especially now, that are like no, I'm an atheist, there definitely is no God. Right. Okay, well then, why is murder wrong? Yeah, yeah, exactly. Well, because it is, well, okay, I think it's right. So how can you tell me it's wrong? By what authority? Because you feel that way? That's your authority? Your emotions? And you would see this, I remember. So like the people you were saying who are atheists, some of them are smart, I assume. to that. I remember watching, you know, a previous guest of yours, actually the man who trained me in ministry, Doug Wilson, debate Christopher Hitchens, and they had that discussion, right? And it was shocking to watch Hitchens say, well, it's common human experience, you know, solidarity with mankind, that's why I think murder is wrong. And of course Doug says to him well Well, if you saw someone being murdered on the street, you think that's bad, right? Well, why? And he goes into his whole spiel and he's like, well, what if it's a pregnant woman and her baby's being murdered? You would just say, well no, no, you need to have a medical license for that to kill that person. Like he got- What did Christopher say? He's like oh, you're being flippant. You know, you wouldn't go down that road. Yeah, what's so sad is I knew Christopher very well and always liked him enormously for his erudition, his ability to recite long passages of Poetry, Philip Larkin and Orwell and, you know, he was just a, he's a reader, like a real dedicated lifelong reader and a wonderful dinner and lunch companion. I had many, many highly drunken dinners with him before I quit drinking. And, uh, but he was such, and so I love. Christopher, but he was a moralizer, whoa. And I never, I was much younger, 25 years younger than I am now, and I never sort of put it into my mind, like, how can an atheist be a moralized? Doesn't even make any sense, actually. And I agree with him on some things and disagree with him others, but he was always like, in the pulpit, actually, and a lot of the atheists are. Yeah. What is that? Well, I think so much of it is, is atheism really is, is like- Moralize It's hilarious. Well, it's a Christian heresy. They want to have all the things of Christianity just without God there, so they want to be able to pursue all of these things. They want be able to say, this is right and this is wrong, but have no authority to ground it on, just by their say so. It is such a conundrum. It's wrong. Okay, why? Yeah, you can see why it's breaking down Though, um, today, um... it's own silliness. Yeah. Yeah. It creates this vacuum and it's being replaced by something. So, all of the moralistic energy is still there. And now it's gone to things like transgenderism, abortion, Gaza, whatever. Like, it goes to all of those routes. It goes to BLM and rioting. Yes, that's right. And so, it's highly religious. Because it's in us. It's in us, we can't get away from the conviction, the true conviction that some things are right and some things aren't. Yeah, it's fundamentally human. Absolutely. So but an atheist would have to by definition be utterly not non-judgmental about everything like on this you think they should be but They're the most judgmental people. It's unbelievable. I mean Christopher at dinner was always lecturing about the Kurds And I'm nothing against the Kurd's. Yeah, I don't know much about the girls. I ran into them in Iraq I they were the most bloodthirsty people in Iraq. I did notice that Again, I'm not against the current, you know, I've not an expert in Kurdishness but um He, man, he would like lay down his life for the Kurds. I remember thinking, what is this? And it was the need to sort of find a good guy and a bad guy and put yourself on the good guy's side. Yeah, yeah. And that's human. It's human, yeah, that's totally true. So what did you say to your church when you left? It was one of the hardest days of my life. I believe it. I tell them, I'm leaving, I am going to Tennessee, and it was difficult. I still have a connection with them, a relationship with them. I'm still trying to find them a pastor to replace me, right? It's hard for me to do that because like, well, you left, Andrew, you want me to go there now. But they need one, and they're wonderful, wonderful people who have blessed me. immensely. And I just told them that, no, I have to leave Minnesota. There's a place for me there in Tennessee. And it's ultimately what is best for my family's future, right? There's place where my children can grow up. Because part of it, too, is it isn't just the things that we're leaving, the political cultural things that we're leaving in Minnesota, but it's also you know, over all the things that have been done to the Midwest, to everywhere where my children grow up. And if they want to have a career and a life and a family and a success of their own, there just isn't much for them in small town Midwest. And so they'll all just fly the coop. Like, I mean, this is what happened, like when I graduated from high school, most of the people that I grew up with, they all left. They went to the Twin Cities. They went other cities for work and for careers. And so that same thing was likely going to happen with my children. And I look at it and I think, well, my family's been here for six generations. And whether it's going to end here, right? AND I want to be in a place where we can continue that, where we can be rooted, where my children have the ability to stay in a place. And so many friends are coming to Tennessee where we are. They're bringing businesses there. And once you build things at scale, the more stuff you're able to do, the businesses you're able to have, the more opportunity is for young people. And and so Right, if my children want to stay where we are and continue that on generation after generation, like we actually will be able to do that. Right, that's, it isn't, it wasn't so much just, okay, we need to leave Minnesota, but it's also we're being drawn to a place for a particular reason. That there's a- The Tennessee dream. There's a future there. The hope of refugees from time immemorial. What did the other churches in the state say as the state itself became a place that faithful Christians couldn't live? I mean, there are a handful of churches there that are very strong, right? There are Christians there that oppose these things, but they're so, so vastly outnumbered. Like, when I went to the state capitol to, you know, oppose the abortion bill, there were lots of activists on both sides, pro-life activists and pro-ritual sacrifice activists, but there were no other Pastors? there. I think one of the Catholic bishops did a Skype call, Zoom call. But beyond that, there were no other pastors. And I'm thinking like, my church is like 30, 40 people. I do this, you know, I tent make, I do a full-time job and then do this. I work tiny. I'm small. I'm insignificant. And there are churches with 15, 20,000 people, prominent men in the Twin Cities. And all I had to do was just send an email to the clerk of the committee, like, hey, can I have two minutes to speak? No one showed up, right? No one is there. And it's like, no, they're going to, like murder babies up to birth, like enshrine this in our law, try to make a constitutional amendment for it. All of these things. And no one is opposing it. Like I'm the only one that came. I quoted the Bible and opposed it as a Christian. All right, they. There's just so little fight. Christians built your state, and all of it, and every bit of it. And it's so telling when you go to the twin cities, I think of them as Protestant and Catholic. I think them as Scandinavian in Minneapolis and Irish, and others in St. Paul. But both of them, especially St.Paul, just littered with churches and schools, and it's just like the infrastructure of those cities was built by Christians. And so it's a little bit crazy that first of all it's been taken over by people who who have made a point Yeah, just you know just stick a finger in the eye of Christians to make it impossible for them to live there It's like you're being driven out of your own Homeland six generations Yeah, I mean, this is what happened with, with my wife, my wife is from St. Paul. Her, you know, father's side of the family is Polish Catholic, went to St. Casimir's church. Exactly! That's exactly in my mind what I think of. In the neighborhood that they, they were in, it was all, all Polish people. But now it's all, it's on Hmong, right, everywhere. It's all Hmong and Somali, and everyone there just left over the last What happens to their churches and parochial schools? Well, St. Casimir's Church is there, but it's largely empty, right? We went there for a funeral a couple of years ago, but there's, I mean, people still attended, but it was not like it was. Most of the parishes there have shut down, the church schools have shut and they've moved out to the suburbs. And so, that was a Polish neighborhood. It was, right, this ethnic enclave. If I can just say, showing myself to be an ethnic nationalist, the Poles, they're just like some of the greatest people I've ever met. I don't think I've even met a Pole one. I have to say they married one. Yeah. I just think they're great people. I don' t know. I've met many I don t like, but just salt of the earth, smart, hardworking, serious about faith and family. Yeah. Great people. Yeah. I doubt it was an improvement, the change to St. Paul. No, it's like when her parents finally moved, like the whole area is just run down, lots of crime, and it's sad because it was, you could see the remnants of what was, like you drive through St. Paul, you see some of the old buildings and how beautiful they were, how much care people put into these places, and now they're just falling apart, bars on Windows everywhere. Factory workers like basically tithing to build the infrastructure of church of churches and schools. Yes and their own homes Yeah, you know people with no money giving yeah the maximum amount to build all this stuff for their families And then it's just some Politician decides. Oh, this is too white. So we need to yeah Yeah, destroy it all and destroy all the people it it's a crime on a level that only historians will be able to assess clearly, but um Yeah, okay, sorry. So, can we just, before you get into what's happening in Tennessee, I'm so discursive, it's my fault. But what, why aren't the fearsome evangelicals, who I will still defend, I'm just saying that. The laity absolutely defend them. Well, the laity know a million of them, and I love them. In fact, there's some working here right now in this office. But the preachers, like, where were they during all of this? I mean, I think it's largely the contemporary evangelical mode of being is, I mean so much of it, I look back to it being, you know, going all the way back to something like the Second Great Awakening, right, where the purpose of, the major change that took place there is, it's all about conversionism, right? And it becomes a big show and marketing and... and all of that. That's where you got the Ten Revival. Yeah, yes. Yeah, Charles Finney, those kinds of things. Well that's kind of in the DNA, at least somewhat within evangelicalism. So to put a finer point on what you're saying, the point became the more souls we convert, the more people who profess faith, that's like the scorecard that we use. Yeah, that's the metric that... that everyone follows. And so you look at it and you think, well, if we just water it down a little bit more, make it more palatable to people, just get more butts in the seats, then that's the metric of success, not the internal development, discipleship of people, not actual repentance and conversion, not fundamental life change and so forth. that traditional Christianity always was. It's, if we just get them here and, of course, if they put some money in the plate and they're attending, that's what matters. So, you see churches where it's like, okay, we have amazing production values, we a great band and all of these things, and it's all of these entertainments to get people in, or the sermon is sort of like a self-help talk. There isn't really Bible in it at all, if it is, it's like tangentially related to to something that the pastor wants to say, it's not, all right, we're going to go through a chapter of Leviticus today and explain what the sacrifices are about. Well, there's no, there's none of those things. And so, you see many evangelical people, right, have not been taught really any Bible or theology at all. And you see this in like surveys, like the Barna group does surveys, right? What people believe about different things. And they haven't been taught any Bible, they don't know it. And so. Then when, you know, when the liberal says, well, the Bible condemns eating shellfish and pork, and in the same way it condemns homosexuality, so what do you have to say about that? And they have no idea how to explain that, what that is about. And their faith is shaken. God didn't destroy two cities with sulfur and fire because people were eating pork. That's right. He destroyed them because they tried to commit gay rape on an angel. Yeah, and they'll just say that with, well, the sin of Sodom was in hospitality. No, it wasn't. It was gay rape. Yeah, I mean, the least hospitable thing you could do. I mean just read it if you want. Yeah, it's pretty out there. Yeah, it's like, well, yeah, the least hospitable thing you could do to a guest is to anally rape them. Yeah, so all the men of the town came out they demanded. Yeah, we need to know these angels to have sex with these Angels and then lots like um, I've got some daughters in here take them Yeah, just kind of takes a lot off my christmas card list for saying something like that. But whatever he does that It's in genesis and they're like no we want to rape the dudes like so it's like It's these are not you It's pretty straightforward. Yeah, yeah, I mean, I actually, I just read Genesis 19 to my children and there were some questions from the kids. It was funny, I read that a couple years ago for the first time, I'll admit it, and my wife who's a very serious and wonderful person but a serious Christian, we were on a walk and I told her what I had read the night before and she's like, what? You know, she's, I mean, she just like, she's the model for me as a faithful person, but she was like, no, that's no way. And I was like it's in there. That's what happened. Yes, yes, yeah. And so, I think about that and it's like, I mean, it's funny. Like, even at my little church, I just preach through the Bible, right? So, I'll just take a chapter and I'll talk about it. I'll explain what's going on, all of these things. And I mean I have some wonderful people there, older people that have been Christians their entire adult lives and they're their seventies. And one of them said to me, you know, Andrew, that's the first time someone has ever preached from the Book of Judges in a church service. It's a good one. I went through the entire book, and then, well, let's do Ruth, and first Samuel and second Samuel, and it's like, wow, there's so much there, right? So much there. I mean, I had friends come down that were sort of new and becoming Christians out of being secular their whole lives. And they're like, whoa, the Bible is extremely metal. This is wild. There's so much political intrigue happening in 1st and 2nd Samuel, yeah. And I'm like, yeah, and I'm explaining it sort of in like this, you know, Mearshymer-y, real politique way. And they just like at the edge of their seats like, whoa, that's crazy that that happened. And and so I love it and I can see why I I don't claim to understand a lot of it for the Old Testament Starting to figure out the New Testament more but just having read it cold a couple of times Just like a book like you would read Anna Karenina or Moby Dick It's like the wildest coolest most interesting most profound like those are not overstatements at all Yeah, and I think everybody should it's the basis of Western civilization. I don''t know why people don't read it There's obviously a reason Or even if you're an atheist, how could you not read the Bible? Like everything we have is founded on the ideas in this and like you're basically Deliterate if you haven't read it. Oh, I know I mean you even you can see this it's it's so funny like when journalists write about the Bible and They're like, oh, there's this weird Illusion here that and it's like he's talking about a whale swallowing a man I don't really know what's going on and it like that's the book of Jonah How do you not? How do not know what that's about? But they just have no idea Well, it's just so compelling. Of all the New Year's resolutions you're likely to put off, the one you're most likely to put off and keep putting off is buying life insurance. And you should have life insurance, it is kind of crazy not to, because the future is unknown. You've got to have life-insurance. But you may not have life assurance because it's a huge hassle and it can be a huge rip-off. But there is an answer, policy genius. It makes it very easy and much cheaper. You can find life insurance policies to start at just 292 bucks per year for a million dollars of coverage. And some options, and this is the best part, are 100% online and let you avoid unnecessary medical exams, the guy with the gloves. You don't want that if you can avoid it and you may be able to avoid it. 40% of people wind up looking back and wishing they'd had better life insurance or any life insurance. It could have helped their families enormously. Policy Genius can fix that for you. Peace of mind, that's what they're really selling. The address, policygenius.com slash Tucker, or click the link in the description to get your free life insurance quotes and see how much money you could save and how much hassle you could safe. Policygenius dot com slash Tucker. Even Leviticus, which I read on a flight to Europe when I had made myself, cause you know, I had eight hours on a plane. and I texted my wife from the planet, I was like, this is excellent, actually. It's just excellent. I thought it was gonna be all like sacrificing doves because you have your period that's in there. But like 95% of it made sense to me. Well, and it's real, like it's tangible, right? It's, you know, in theological terms, incarnational, like the real, tangible world that people interact with, right, that's there. And people always ask me, like, well, Andrew, what's your favorite book of the Bible? And I love to, I mean, sometimes I love to get a rise out of people, but I tell them, well Leviticus is. And they're like, what? Really? And I'm like, yeah, like, I mean, I'm a pastor, my calling is to to preach the gospel and to lead worship. And that book right there, all of it is about how do sinful people draw near and approach the presence of a holy, just, righteous God that cannot bear sin at all. And there it's laid out for us, all it. And even like you look at Leviticus chapter nine. Like you read that maybe you remember reading it. I'm actually, you know, going through this with my church right now in Tennessee. But Liberty Church chapter 9 is the entire liturgy of the church right there, each of the sacrifices. And all of the, like, Western liturgie for 2,000 years basically follows it, right? You're called into the presence of God, you confess your sins, I mean, probably like your Episcopalian upbringing, Book of Common Prayer, like you probably track with this. They never admitted that at our church. Yeah, that's right. Maybe they didn't have a confession of sin of yours, but there's a confession of sin, right? Then there's an ascension, right, the ascension offering in chapter 1 of Leviticus, right? The worshiper puts his hand on the animal, right saying, like, this animal's me, and then the entire thing is consumed, is burned up, right. Ola, right where the word holocaust comes from. Consumed, burned up goes up to God in smoke. that's you, right? That's when, and then the New Testament, where it says, right, the Word of God is living and active sharper than any two-edged sword. What's the sword of the priest that cuts the animal and puts it on the altar and burns it up? Well, that's what's happening when the church hears the Bible read and hears it preached, right. You're being cut up by the Word God and ascending up to God in smoke. And then the next part of the service is the offering. Well, that's communion. Right, you sit down and have a meal with God. then you're sent out, right? The entire liturgy is right there. Like, our actual worship that we do now, right, after the death of Jesus and resurrection of Jesus, right. Sacrifice is done away with because He is that sacrifice. And we're going through all of that each time we worship and renew the covenant with God. And like you see that in Leviticus and it's like, Whoa, actually, there's so much to learn here in this book about. what we are doing every Sunday when we worship God. So I'm like, yeah, this of course is my favorite book, right? Not just because I'm autistic and like lots of rules and regulations, right. It's like reading the instructions on the Monopoly game, you know, like, no, it's there. Like so much is happening, it is beautiful. And the prescriptions or the prohibitions more precisely are surprisingly like sensible. Yeah, yeah. And one of the challenges to atheism is to explain why the atheist would agree with the overwhelming majority of what's prohibited. Yeah. Because it's in him, he knows that's wrong. Don't have sex with your sister. Okay. Oh, okay. And most people, most atheists would be like, yeah, well, obviously, but of course He has no grounds upon which to say that. There's literally no law he can appeal to to say that. He says that obviously because he grew up and is reared and absorbed by osmosis, like Christian culture where that's prohibited. I think that's right, but I also think in primitive cultures that have never had exposure to Christianity, I mean, I don't know that there are many cultures where most of the prohibitions in Leviticus would be considered crazy or esoteric or like, why would you ban that? It's like everyone like, of course. Well, even, like, you think about this, there's a pastor theologian, brilliant guy, Peter Leidhardt, who wrote a book, delivered from the elements of the world. And in that, he shows, I mean, there are tons of just amazing stuff in this book. But one of the things that he shows is that, right, God makes these restrictions for Israel in the Old covenant that sets them apart as this holy people, as the priestly people. And, but elsewhere in the world, right, they all have something like that, right? All throughout the ancient world, their gods had something like a fun house mirror version of Leviticus where it's like, okay. All right, here's all these rules about sex and what makes you clean and unclean and food you can't eat and can't heat. Like the Egyptians had this, the Babylonians, the Persians, the Greeks, all of them have these kinds of- The Mayans, the Incas, the Aztecs. The Norse, like my ancestors, the Germanics, like they all had these rules. And it's, well, it's because in the ancient world, right, they're all under their own particular gods, right? And what Jesus does is he comes and he he takes the world back from Satan and from all the demons that ruled over the ancient world, and now he's reigning over heaven and earth. That's actually like the book of Revelation. Right, that's actually what's going on in that book. the much maligned Book of Revelation. Yeah, like, I know you had, you had John Rich on, you know, last year, and he's talking about dispensationalism and things like that. And I was like, oh, I'm gonna be in Tennessee, I need to meet him and talk to him about this. Did you? I haven't. No, I have no way of getting in touch with him. Maybe after this. If you're watching. He's a good man. Oh, I love, I mean, he was like the soundtrack of my youth of country music, like he wrote all those songs, right? So on that basis alone, right. But he's talking about like dispensationalism and what has happened in American Christianity for the last 130 years, how it's actually a novel new thing. And for me, it was like, yeah, I looked at that. I mean, I remember growing up and that's just everything like left behind and the rapture is coming and all of that. And when I- So I missed all of what you're talking about. Yeah, it's a thing, especially, and of course, I'm very critical of it, but these are the best people in America. I believe it like the people that have like six Trump flags on the back of their truck. I totally agree Like they they also believe that well the rapture is coming tomorrow We need to be ready for it. And so i'm anytime i'm critical of it. I'm like Okay, i'm not critical of the people like there's not a moral defect that they believe these things I totally, first of all, thank you for saying that. Second, I feel what you're saying, especially with evangelicals. I look at these, you know, greaseball preachers who I honestly, I find disgusting. And then I see the people who go to their churches and I'm like, oh, I love you. You're exactly my kind of people. You're the most decent people in this country. You're trying your very hardest against headwinds that are so unfair and you're doing a great job anyway. And I just love that. I really mean it. I love them. So I never want to criticize. Ever. Yeah. Right, because... Yeah. Yeah. And so, like, whenever I'm critical of that theology, I'm like, I have to make sure people know, like I'm not criticizing you because you're great, awesome people. Like, even when I first went to the town in Gainesboro before we decided, you know, before we made our move, it was right after the hurricane, which it wasn't far from there. And this is a town that, like they don't have a whole lot. The median income is not very high in this town, but I'm driving around in every gas station. Where is it? Gainesboro, Tennessee is in Jackson County. It's like North Central Tennessee. And yeah. And so every gas station, every gas station has like signs up like, Hey, we're going to, we go into Western North Carolina to go help out. And it's like, like people that don't have a whole, like they're, they're taking their time and, and what little money they have to go and help people. And meanwhile, you know, the Biden administration is sending billions more to Ukraine and to, and to Israel and everything. And they're taking their time. It's like, these are wonderful people. They are, and I will say for Trump, whatever people think of Trump, I know Trump well enough to have talked to him about this kind of stuff and, you know, away from cameras, and his affection, love, gratitude toward those specific people is totally real. Yeah. And you can argue about whether, you, know, which policies serve those people best or whatever, but it all, the leadership begins with love, and if you don't love the people you lead, you'll mistreat them. and you see it reciprocated. Right. But it's totally real and completely real and it's emotional and he's like, I love those people. And he eats McDonald's in private. Yeah, that's right. So that is, I just want to say that because I know that for a fact, you know, a lot of politics is obviously fake and, but that part, that specific part of Trump, like loving people like that, oh man. It's the people that are, you know, the most maligned in our country, like, like the, the only people you can make fun of are like rural Southern Appalachian people, right? That's free game. You can criticize them all you want and mock them. Like, you Know, Jimmy Kimmel can, can make of them all day long on his show. Um, no other group of people can you do that for. And, and they're the people who have been, have been dispossessed of their country the most. And that's just a big reason why we moved to this place, is these are the people that are hated. I wanna go live with them. I wanna be around these because they're great people. Wonderful people. I live in a place with a lot of people like that and, you know, every third person has a child or grandson who's died of a drug OD and like there's no year-round work and there's just a lot problems and these are like, you can pull into their driveway on a Sunday and they will just, they'll have a six pack and they'll give you two of them. I mean, they really are just the most generous, kind, hilarious, wise, just good people. The best. The best that this country's ever produced, in my opinion. Yeah, absolutely. And I'm not. I'm not from those people at all. So I'm like coming at this like, wow, these people are incredible. Yeah, absolutely. And so, you know, I think about that, right? And I think about the theology that has been, that has shaped, you know, their outlook. And it's understandable because, like, you're, especially in the midst of, like serious decline. It's like, well, actually, it's sort of attractive to have this eschatology where everything is coming to an end, right? You can understand what people would eat that up. But the people that actually built America, right, you know, the Puritans and all of the settlers of this country, you think of even like the founding generation, that theology did not exist yet. That wasn't until the middle of the 19th century that it came into being. They were actually optimistic, right? They viewed this continent as a place for Christians to build, to grow, to have future. interesting point. Well, I've never thought of that before. So, dispensationalism, for those who haven't followed it, is normally criticized and defended because of its interpretation of what biblical Israel is now. So it's like, it's a super electric topic, both theologically and politically. And people get utterly hysterical about it and start calling you names or whatever. Yeah, so there's that but you're saying That the deeper or a deeper problem with it is that it makes people pessimistic. Yeah. Can you flush it out a little bit? Yeah, so I think if you think, if you go your entire life believing that any minute, the world is going to come to an end, that I'm going to float up into heaven and my clothes will be here and everything, we're gone, it's done, it is over. Well, that takes a people that ordinarily are very low time preference that build things for the future that that delay gratification and all of those kinds of things. And it flips it around, it makes them very high time preference. Where it's like, well, if the world's not gonna be around tomorrow, why invest in anything for today? And you can even see this in terms of architecture, right? You think of the buildings that churches have, well, they're in strip malls or they're, you know, just they're kind of ugly. Yeah, yeah. And you look at the buildings- It's like a former pet store in the strip mall. Yeah, And you look at the buildings that Christians had before this was the dominant theology. And they're gorgeous. They're beautiful. And there were very poor people that made them like you said earlier. He said earlier now And it's like that right there, like you see it tangibly. And you think about that in terms of all of life. That is so smart. And what was the phrase you used, low time preference? Yeah, low, low-time preference. What does that mean? It's like an economic phrase, right? So, right, your preference in terms of time. Please respect my ignorance. Yes, it just means that you're going to wait. longer for things. It's sort of like the marshmallow test with little kids. Yeah where in five minutes you'll get two marshmallows or he can eat this one right now, right? Well, the child that says, oh, I'll wait, I want two, right. Well, he's gonna go on and have more success and so forth versus the one that has, that immediately grabs the one and eats it, right, well, that's low time preference. It's a people that will delay gratification, who will save and invest and build things for the long-term for the future. And for future generations. Yes. Yeah, they plant oak trees. Yes, who plants oak trees? Yeah. Well, I mean, we're going to in tennis We want to have bring back the American chestnut in We want bring that back you putting in evergreens, please. Oh, I think everything yeah, I'm in there's there's pines. Yeah, there's these don't neglect Don't neglect the pine. Oh, yeah. Yeah. I know it's a fast growing tree relatively speaking, but it's It's beautiful. It's the answer and cedars if you can if you have water Yeah, I don't know if we'll be able okay. Okay. Yeah now we're gonna since you're a preacher old testament scholar What was the inside of the temple clad with a cedar? Yeah from lebanon exactly. Yeah God himself said cedar. That's right. Yeah an accident. He was pretty specific about it. Yeah It smells great. Maybe there's a reason my sauna has cedar on the inside. I always tell my kids that. Just think of it like the temple. It's my senior church, yes. That's right. No sacrifices, however. Well, here's something you may not have known. This network almost didn't exist. Trademark issue almost prevented us from launching by blocking us from using the name TCN. Now, a company called the American Country Network owned the rights to that trademark, and we were not sure if they would give them up. Looking back, American Country network could have demanded a lot of money. They could have held us up at gunpoint in exchange for the name, TCN, and a lot businesses would have done that, but they didn't. They were incredibly nice. They gave us the name for free, and they gave it to us quick. That's when we realized, this is not your average company at all. These are really, really nice people. And we're glad this happened because it let us get to know the American Country Network. It turns out it's a great place. Its leaders are excellent people of the same values that we do and we think that you do. American Country Endwork is a family-friendly conservative Christian group bringing the best country music to millions of households across the country, and it's growing fast. They launched just last year, they plan to reach 40 million homes in 2025. As the only Nashville based country music network left, there's only one, American Country Network is here to stay. We really cannot recommend them highly enough to you and we're grateful to them for their kindness to us. They did it for no reason other than to be nice. So we're especially grateful for that. We always are. So go to acncountry.com to enjoy everything they have, including their 24 seven live stream. We hope you will. I'm sorry, I've gone so far. Now we're But so your point is that dispensationalism not only has specious theological elements, which I think very obviously it does. By the way, the whole theology was like laid out in the end notes. It's not actually in the Bible. It is like interpretation in the Yeah, I mean, John Nelson Darby and Cyrus Gofield, and they'll claim that they're antecedents from the early church. Well, this guy believed in something like the rapture and it's like, it's always very, like you said, specious. Yeah, that's my read as a non-theologian, but it does seem incredibly silly, but sincere. Yeah, exactly. People sincerely believe it, so mark them. A hundred percent, a lot of people I really like and respect, so I just want to say that. But you're saying that the cost is even deeper because it changes your worldview and makes it very difficult for you to engage in the labor of, for example, loving people around you and building something beautiful, which are also Christian imperatives, is that it? Yeah, I think so. And it also, yeah, so it forces you into an immediacy, right? We've got to do everything right now because there isn't going to be a future. There's not going to, I mean, I heard this all the time growing up. Well, you know, we're not going to be around, we are going to raptured. So why plan for the future? Why build things for the feature? Why plan? You heard that growing up? Oh, yeah. This was just everywhere in evangelicalism. Did you grow up in that? Yeah, yeah, yeah. I did. And I remember in college when I was first getting into more historical theology or thinking like, what did people believe before the 19th century about things? For the first 1800 years? Yeah. Well, there were various different eschatological schools. Like there's all sorts of different views of how the end works. But when I first get into that and I'm thinking like, oh, I don't know if I actually believe in the rapture. And I remember being in college and in campus ministry and telling people this. Like, I dunno if I really believe in that. I mean, it was like I just uttered the greatest heresy of all time. Like I could have said, I probably could have just denied the Trinity or something, right? And they would have been like, oh, cool, that's interesting. But saying, I didn't think there was a rapture, what? Are you serious? Right? Like that is central doctrine to many Christians and it has this deep, emotional connection. Because, I mean, if you've grown up your entire life hearing this and it's just assumed by everybody, right, it's hard to break out of that even though the everybody of the historic church of millions or billions of Christians, right, is actually a tiny minority in the history of the church that has believed that. but presently. It's a majority of evangelicals. Yeah, it seems like that theology is dying, that's just my sense, but I'd be the last to really know. No, I think your instincts are correct. I think some of it is, I mean, some of it too, especially in the latter half of the 20th century, right after, Israel is formalized as a state in 1948, well, that gives like big confirmation that, okay, things are happening. Like, there's an Israel in Revelation and a temple in Revelation, so it's happening, guys. So, we've got 40 years, right? 1988, that's the end. Well, then that doesn't happen. And then people make all sorts of other guesses. Oh, was I? I wasn't even aware of that, so the idea was 1988 saying that the world was... Yeah, 40 years after 1948, right, that that's when the rapture is coming. That was a, you know, I think it was, there was a book like 88 Reasons Why Jesus is Coming Back in 1988, right? And I'm sure it sold a lot of copies and then, of course, didn't happen. Wow. But… The Mike DeCaucus lost. No, I mean- That's not obviously the rapture, but... you know, whatever, we'll take it. For people in Massachusetts, maybe. it was. But yeah, it's just so interesting because, like, I look at it, like you look at Matthew 24, right? That's the big, you know, the big text that people point to. What does it say? Where Jesus says, well, there's going to be wars and rumors of wars and earthquakes in various places and plagues and things like that. But right before it, right, Well, Jesus is in the temple. he's fighting with the chief priests and he's telling them, you know, he's just, he is fighting with them at Passover. So, thousands of people surrounding them, he is embarrassing them in the temple and his boldness. This is really shocking to people who haven't read it before. The rage that he displays at the leadership, the religious leadership is just like, it comes right off the page. And which is so ironic because you see evangelicals who are like, you need to be more Christ-like, right? Which means like wimpy and weak and inoffensive. Sweeping into the temple and knocking over tables and driving people out with a whip. And then going into the Temple and giving this parable, right, of the vineyard, right? He's like, first I sent this servant, you beat him and stoned him, and then you killed another one. Well, I'll send my son, they'll respect him. Ha ha ha ha! it's the air, right? If we kill Him, we could take the vineyard for ourselves, right?" And he asked, what's He going to do to these people? Well, He's going to come and He's going to destroy all of them. And it's like, and they knew, right, the hilarious thing, I think, like reading the Gospels is, right. Jesus is giving parables and the point of the parables is actually to conceal what He's saying. And people are like, well, what's that? Even His own disciples are like what's that about? I don't really know. Like, it doesn't make any sense. but he's telling parables to the chief priests and the Pharisees and all the leaders of Israel, and they're like, oh, that's about us. I think it says they understood it was about them. They knew, it does. And they decided to kill him. Yeah, so the parables are like obscured everybody else, but when it's about them, like, oh, he's talking about us, right? And- But talk about speaking truth to- the power, I mean, like, I don't know how that Jesus was kept for me as a, you know, lifelong churchgoer, I have no idea, but you just read it, I would recommend everyone read it. Non-Christians alike. But he's there. he's there. He's right there. And especially the Gospel of Matthew, I love it because it is- But Mark too. Yeah, all four, I mean, obviously all four of them, but like Matthew in particular is so cool to me because like you read it and the way it's organized is Jesus is recapitulating the entire history of Israel, right? So, right in the very beginning, he goes out into the wilderness for 40 days and 40 nights, right, just like Israel's in the wilderness for 40 years is tempted by Satan. He comes, right, after he crosses the, or goes, is baptized in the Jordan, is like crossing the Red Sea, goes into the wilderness, then after that, right he is, he's preaching a sermon on a mountain, expounding the law, which is Moses on Sinai, right? And after this, he is telling parables of the kingdom, like he's David, or like he's Solomon, writing Proverbs, writing Psalms. um, and then begins all of these excoriations of the high priesthood and the Pharisees and all the leaders of Israel, well, what's that like? It's like the prophets, right? So, he's reliving the whole history of Israel in his lifetime. What's Matthew doing there? What's the Holy Spirit doing there, it's showing that Jesus is Israel, right. He's the true Israel, right. As the apostle Paul says, he is the chosen seed of Abraham, right, he the one that carries out Israel's mission, which is You know, I'm kind of doing the weave too, like doing the weave. It's Trumpian. It is. People, I mean, when I'm preaching, people are like, Andrew, you're doing the Weave like President Trump. But like Trump, it's interesting. I try not to do the hand motions and things like him too, but we all have our own rhetorical style. But it's, it is interesting because, right, like the whole dispensational thing where It's like, okay. right, the Old Covenant still somehow sort of exists and there's still this, you know, this distinction between Jew and Gentile out there. Well, like, the Holy Testament talks about this, that no, right, that separation that existed in the Old covenant, right? They're brought together as one in Jesus, who is the true Israel, the true, the successful Israel, Israel that's obedient and goes to the death and is vindicated by being resurrected. And that old covenant, it's done. It's over, right? Those distinctions between Jew and Gentile, they're gone. Who says that? only about a thousand times in every book of the New Testament, so to come to the opposite conclusion does make you sort of wonder, like, have you read it? Yeah, exactly. And whether you believe it or not, that's just not what it says at all. Yeah. And so, you think about that and it's like, okay, these two are brought together. I mean, the whole book of Acts is about this, right? That the Holy Spirit not only goes to the apostles and the Jews in Jerusalem, but the Gentiles get it too. Like, Peter goes to Cornelius and he believes. And now here is this Roman, right, this Gentile, and the interesting thing about that too is there's this misconception that the only people in the Old Testament that believed in God were Jews, but it's like everywhere they go, there are these Gentile God-fearers that believe in God, and Cornelius is one of them in the New Testament. Well, it's all through the New Testament, and in fact, Jesus calls out repeatedly gentiles as the most faithful, repeatedly, the Roman officer. Yes, again, like, I mean, he says this in the Gospels, like he's talking about, right, the faithless and adulterous generation, right? He's talking about Israel. And he's saying in the resurrection, right, Sodom and Gomorrah and Tire and Sidon, they'll rise, right. Sodom destroyed for trying to rape angels. They will rise up judgment on this generation because if things that I'm doing, right, if the Son of God appeared to them and preached to them, they would have repented, right? And Nineveh, right this Gentile city in the Old Testament of Assyrians, right brutal, bloodthirsty people, right. Jonah shows up and he preaches, and his only message is 40 days Nineveha is going to be destroyed, right he's gleeful about this. King hears about it, he repents, he makes all the people in the city wear sackcloth and ashes, and it's like, well, I don't really know what's going to happen, but this looks serious, we better repent. And, I mean, we're going to go into deepweeds here if you let me, you know, this is, I'm not filibustering like President Putin did, but, right, you look at the book Jonah in particular. he flees not because he's afraid of the Assyrians, right? Like that's what people think, is like he's scared to go there? No. Like you read the end of the Book of Jonah, and he's arguing with God at the end, and He's saying, I knew that you would show mercy on these people, right? I knew you would the mercy, that's why I didn't want to go, right. He was out with God, like trick God into not being gracious to these Gentiles, because he knows in the law, right, in Deuteronomy, right, one of the signs that Israel is about to be cursed is that he is going to call nations, right, the Gentiles. Right, nations that do not know him to himself. He's going to go to the Gentiles and away from Israel. And that means judgment is going come upon Israel. So, Jonah knows this. He is like, I am going the opposite direction. I'm going to Tarshish, to Spain. because I am not going to let God judge my people, right? That's why he's angry about this. And it gets even more interesting because Jesus talks about the sign of Jonah to Israel and people think, oh, well, Jonah's, he's talking about the resurrection, being in the ground for three days and three nights. I mean, that's symbolic. That's typological. He's drawing on the typology. But it's not about that. It's that what's going to happen? Gentiles are going to hear the gospel and not you. Yeah. Right? And that judgment is going to come on Israel, right? Judgment is going to come this generation. And that's what Jesus says at the beginning of Matthew 24 is these things are going happen in this generation, right. He is walking with disciples in the temple, and they're marveling. at the, we would marvel too. I mean, beautiful, like the whole thing is clad in gold on the outside is gorgeous, beautiful. Giant, I mean massive stones that you, it boggles your mind how human beings can move these things and build this stuff without, you know, modern power tools, right? They're marveling at the temple. And Jesus is like, what are you looking at? Do you not know that not one stone is going to be left upon another very soon? And they're like, oh boy, when's this going to happen? Well, 37 years later, actually. Yeah, well, I think it's, we can debate, you know, I think- Well, whenever, but it's- 40 years. I'll be autistic on that point. The second revolt, it's normally said to be 70-80. I think the resurrection is in 30. I mean, we're coming up on 2,000 years of The point is, the Romans, it's actually crazy, the effort that they, I mean, I'm sure you've been there, to the site. I haven't. Maybe one day. Oh, you should go. Jerusalem is the most amazing city and they've, anyway, but they just went to such a great effort to separate every stone. Try everything. So how much, they didn't just burn it and sack it, okay, got it, but they actually dismantled it piece by piece. How many slaves did that take? How much money did that, how much effort, human effort did it, why would you do that? Why would you bother to do that. So, okay, I just want, and I'm so sorry for the discursions, but I want to get to your destination, which is Tennessee. Can you be a lot more specific about what you're doing there? I know there have been attempts to paint this as some sort of white supremacist enclave or theocracy or whatever. What actually is it? Can you describe it? No, so really it's a real estate venture to build communities, to build, and I'm even hesitant to call it like subdivisions because it's not subdivisions, it'll be, it's large properties, two, three, 10 acre lots where people- Has someone already bought the land? Yes, yes. The Ridge Runners bought the parcels. It's being divided up and sold as we speak. And one of them, my church is gonna build a church, like right at the center. And so it's, so imagine, you know, so there's kind of two kinds of development that happen, or really just one kind. It's just build massive cul-de-sacs of divisions, houses for black rock, that kind of thing. And like, that's not how America was built, right? Like my town, you, it's founded in the middle of the 19th century. And, like, the first thing that gets built, like everywhere else, were churches. and the schools, and that's not featured anywhere in any subdivisions or real estate. developments at all. There's no place for people to congregate and have an actual community. Yeah, yeah. You see all of these ones. I mean, I've seen some of the plans in like places around like the Dallas-Fort Worth area where it's like they have a lazy river and they have all these nice amenities like that. There's never like a church, right? There's never anything that the old America once had. And so, yeah, my church is going to build, it's building there, families from all over the country. Some of them, you know me, I've known them. And they've been dying to get out of their blue state city, you know, horrible existence out of the traditional subdivision into a place where they can have land, where they can have some chickens, maybe a cow, like live like Americans used to, and be out in nature and enjoy beautiful things, right, to build something like that. Because that's happening like everywhere, like it's development, right? especially in Tennessee, I guess. It's like here in Florida, just exploding, right? So many people moving there because they're trying to get out of these places. And so what gets built, right, black rock style subdivisions and just hideous buildings. Yeah, and very anti-human, right. And so this is development that is human scaled. It's built for people to enjoy actual life, right for people to congregate in the same area where they hold you know, similar values, right? You don't want to live in a place where everybody hates you and hates what you think and hates that you love Donald Trump, you love your country, you love you God. I've done that. Yeah, you don't, you know what that and tons of people, it was like, oh, wouldn't it be great if I had neighbors that, you know we pretty much agreed on everything. We agree on everything politically, culturally, all of that, and then you don' even have to talk about it. just have normal. normal life together. Your kids can play with their kids and grow up together. That's the kind of thing that's being built there in Tennessee. And so I'm so excited to be a part of it. The fact that there's a church at the center of it is a red flag for the authorities in most places, and certainly for the cultural commentators and the media, and it was any other religious institution, of course it would be great, that would be your cue. They're praising the Muslim communities in Texas, for instance. Right, or the illegal alien communities in Texas, or whatever, but a Christian church is, and I don't think any Christians should be surprised. I mean, the Bible says you're gonna be persecuted for believing this, and they are. All right, prediction come true. But tell us the response to this, this dangerous venture of yours. Well, you know, like locally, the people in town and in the surrounding area, even despite like the news attacking us and things like that, the the people that I've spoken to, the people I've met in the town are very enthusiastic, actually, especially when they see the things that I do, see the podcast I do or various things. Like, oh, you're not at all like the TV man said you are. And of course, these are people that we've been describing. Like, they don't trust the media, they don' trust journalists. So they're already distrusting of that. I'm like, oh it just seems like you really like Donald Trump and the United States and Americans and the Constitution and our freedoms. And you seem like a just normal conservative kind of guy. And I'm, like, yeah, I am. That's, I'm an open, open book. Like, there's no, you know, what you see is what you get. What I, what I believe, I earnestly believe. And so, so people are very, have been very, very kind. But the state legislature hasn't tried to mess with your zoning permits or anything like that? No. And the thing is, it's like, well, the company itself is not saying, well this is a community, like that would violate the Fair Housing Act, right, to say this is a Christian-only community. It's just that my church is allowed to build a church there, right? There's no law against that at all. And I can call up friends and say, hey, you want to move here and be part of our thing that we've got going on? What are the costs like? Oh, the cost of living is... extremely low. There's no income tax in Tennessee, just like Florida. And so it's, especially compared to large cities, much, much cheaper place to live. So a lot of people are like, oh, wow, that's only going to cost me this much for a home. It would cost me two or three times that if I were to build something like this and I get land to have... Are our houses being built there? They're starting to be. Yeah. Yeah, my my my friend CJ actually is right in the right the beginning stages of building his His dream house. He's one of gonna be one of the first ones That's quite a Concept do you think that and you've written a book about this called the Boniface option, which Was controversial but also loved Like all good things. That's right Maybe you're speaking self-referentially, but, uh, or- No, no, no! I'm not! I was just saying like, you know, it's pistachio ice cream, you know, like not everyone loves it, but the people who do really do. They really do, of course. So, but I think you suggest that, that like it's time for sincere Christians to be in fellowship with each other, like physically. Yeah, yeah, especially because, you know, you see, you sort of like online communities where people are like, oh, I like this pastor, I liked the sermons that he preaches, right? I agree with this theology and I'm being formed in shape. You kind of, you band into groups online where you sort-of self-sort and there are these massive communities on the internet. It's like, well, what if. What if we took that, this digital community that exists, and what if we made it in real life? What would that be like? And that's sort of what, at least for me, what I'm trying to do is, what if bring people together in real-life? What kind of stuff can we do? I'm just trying to make it on my own, just eke out an existence, but what if all did that together and multiplied our respective bandwidths. What kind of stuff would we be able to accomplish? And you expect to have businesses there too? Yeah, people are already moving their businesses there. And the exciting thing is, and it wouldn't be just like the people moving in, where they're the only ones working at these businesses, it will help the people that are from there, the local community, which is, you know, throughout the... you know, because of macroeconomic forces, geopolitical things, things that were done to our country, all the manufacturing and real good jobs that used to exist in a place like this, those are all mostly gone. And so, what would it look like if we brought those things back? How would it bless the people in that area, right? That's a major part of it. Yeah. And, so, that's the exciting thing is, well, we can, we come to a place like this. We bring our friends that have, you know, some of them have remote jobs and good incomes. They can, people will spend money locally and businesses will spring up because of that. People will bring businesses and need employees and the people in the area will flourish in a way that they haven't for quite a while. That's the pioneer spirit. For people who are interested, what's the name of this again? Ridge Runner, so the Highland Rim Project. Highland rim project. Highland RIM Project, yeah. So the website is ridgerunnerusa.com. Look at that. for you, do you expect, I mean, what you described in your home state, in your hometown, it's basically the persecution of Christians, the people who built the United States. And that is a trend. Do you expect... Where do you that trend to go, to the extent you can predict it? That's the most difficult thing, of course, always making predictions, but I think it will go in two directions. So you have the left, I mean, you see this right now, just how violent they are. They're just itching to destroy things, destroy people. They're burning Teslas, they shot President Trump, right? They're very, very, violent people, and of course like the political apparatus on their side loves that. They never condemn it, they never say these things are bad. And we saw the same thing. The Youth Brigade Yeah, they were supposed to be in 2020, right? The same exact thing. And there have been instances of churches being shot at and burned down and bombed and things like this. I think those kind of things will continue to happen and continue to get worse, especially in blue states and blue cities where it's basically allowed. George Soros just handpicks all the prosecutors and they're not going to enforce these laws. And but on the flip side, they're still like tens of millions of Christians, very conservative, evangelicals and the like. They just got President Trump elected, right? And political power is being wielded. And that's always the thing is like, for so many years, we were told that no, no, our enemies have all this political power, but we're gonna restrain ourselves, we're going to follow the constitution, and we're just gonna expect them to disarm themselves for reasons. And that sort of way of thinking among conservatives is quickly being discarded, that the only thing you can do is confront power with power, right? And President Trump, and Vice President Vance, that they're wielding power and that wielding of power is going to defend Christians in this country. And so, I think that conflict will continue to become more stark. The two visions for the country will become more black and white. It will become more obvious that Christians need to band together. leave places where they have no protection whatsoever, where people like Tim Walz or the next governor of Minnesota, probably Keith Ellison, who is an Antifa Muslim. That was a terrifying thing, too. It's like, this guy, maybe he knows who I am, and what could that guy do to me? To leave a place like that where you will very likely be persecuted. They want to have a foil. The whole thing on on Christian nationalism. I mean, this is why I wrote a book on that, is in 2022, the media is just attacking like normal, decent evangelical people that happen to like Donald Trump and have skepticism about the election, the vaccine, everything, and make them the boogeyman. And they would always say white Christian nationalism, they always put those things together because they happen to be white. And even though they espouse no white nationalist tendencies at all. They have no race, theology, whatsoever. Whatsoever at all like they're they're like, well, I'm totally colorblind They have a universalist theology, unlike the fascists who run the U.S. media, who are like Nazi race-mongers. Totally race-brained. How many people of color, we're going to count you by race, which they literally do in this country. Who's the Nazi? I know. They're obsessed with it. They don't do that in church. When people come to your church, they're like, how many blacks do we have today? How many Hispanics? How many Pacific Islanders? Don't you like, we have Christians? Well, the evangelical leadership definitely does, right? Well, they've fallen for this. of course, but never forget how poisonous it is. Absolutely, yeah. Yeah, it is. It's like, well, no, we just have Christians, right? And so, no, I think those trends will continue. But I'm hopeful, I'm optimistic, right, I'm espousing this optimistic eschatology. So, of course, I am optimistic. I'm always hoping for the very best. And I think that especially if the kind of evangelical Christianity, right? Historic. Christianity, the Christianity that built Christendom, that built the West, that built America, if that comes back, right, the kind of Christianity that sees Jesus in the Gospels, like we were talking about earlier, and sees a man, right? A man that is on a mission and is totally courageous and attacking God's enemies, right to their face, knowing it's going to get him killed, right. That kind of, Christianity that preaches like that, that speaks like that, that... sees a God that is real and is your God and He loves you and He loves what's true and good and right and there's justice and He is going to bring justice to all of His enemies, right, to all the people that hate Him, all the people that do just monstrous evil, right? That kind of Christianity, that makes a comeback in America. Well, that's an America that has a future. I have to say, I think that the hallmarks of courage among them are cheerfulness and optimism. I do think that. And you have that, you know, for a dangerous, theocratic fascist. You seem very optimistic and cheerful. So thank you for spending all this time. I really appreciate it. Thank you. Thanks so much for having me. It was great to meet you. Yes. Nice meeting you as well. Thank you.