[Music] We just had this lady on the other day who was friends with this dude that I just learned about named Jose. I'm sure you've heard of him. Joseph Frell. Oh, yeah. I know Joe very well. You know him personally? Yeah, we're friends. Oh, really? I just learned about this guy. Yeah. Yeah. And I was just blown some of this stuff. Yeah. What do you make of that research? I mean, this is the title of that book. What was it? swastikas and flying saucers. Yeah. Well, Joseph has I don't know where he is now because he wrote his first like basically he became known as the Nazi UFO guy. Okay. Like that was really his original training Yeah. was in um what's it called? Petristics. So studying uh Eastern Orthodox religio like Eastern Orthodox Christianity. He's like a bishop in the in the in the Catholic Church of of Russia or something. Yeah. I think well I think Orthodox Orthodox Eastern Orthodox some version of that and um but he he's a really highly intelligent man of course and he got into studying the Nazi UFO connection and looking at the Foo Fighters and uh particularly in Europe as potentially Nazi third Reich technology and so he went into that in several books. However, you know, the real the thing with Joseph, I mean, you would have to ask him directly about this, what he thinks today, but I know that he became very very open to an extraterrestrial interpretation of the UFO phenomenon over time, cuz like in the early years, I think it was easy to interpret all of his work as saying all of this phenomenon is uh secret tech, earthbound secret tech. And I don't think that he's in that place. at least the last few times that we've talked I didn't really think that he was um so I don't know you know we're always evolving we're always like we are constantly thinking through like what do I um what do I think this year as opposed to last year and it's important because uh speaking for myself I've I've gone to a lot of different places as to like what I think is actually happening when we talk about UFOs or now UAP I always love talking Are we rolling Steve? Yeah. I'm wondering, Ste, are we good? We are rolling. Oh, beautiful. So, I always love uh the opportunity when the opportunity arises to talk to somebody like yourself cuz I've only talked to maybe three I roughly three maybe four people on this show that have been studying this topic for over 25 30 years like yourself. Most people have been in this stuff just you know for a few years recently since like the emergence of YouTube. Um, but I think it was like the first one was James Fox, then uh Jason Georgian Johnny, Steven Greer, these types of folks, and uh you I've noticed that you've been in a lot of some of like the biggest documentaries on this topic. So, um it's always just so interesting to hear people's takes on this stuff when they've been studying studying it for so long. Um but for people that don't know who you are, can you just give like a brief summary of how you got into the stuff in the first place and what you've been doing ever since? Gladly. Steve, my audio sounds really odd. Maybe it's just my my uh my headphones. Okay. All right. Uh yeah. Yeah. So, um I got involved in this subject uh a little over 30 years ago. So, it was in the like 199394. Uh at that time, I was trying to pursue a completely different life. I was working on a PhD in history, cold war studies at the University of Rochester in upstate New York. And u I was very much into that. I had previous to that I had studied a lot of European history, a lot of diplomatic history. So that was really my background and I was in a bookstore in upstate New York in Syracuse actually and I think it was 1994 and I saw on a display stand a copy of a book by Timothy Good called Above Top Secret, which is kind of a classic in the UFO field. And uh it was the subtitle of that book that really caught my attention, the worldwide UFO coverup. And I was like, "Oh, wow." It's like, it's 1994 and I didn't know anything about UFOs. Uh, like essentially literally nothing. And I had only heard I'd seen, you know, some old documentaries. I' I'd watched Leonard Nemoy on In Search of and seen some of those things, but I really didn't know anything. And I'd only heard claims of cover up and this and that. So, I remember flipping through Tim's book and I thought, "Wow, he's got some like interesting documents. He had names of people that I was studying in my own research and I thought, "Oh, wow. UFOs departments that I was looking into and uh UFO connections there." And I thought, you know, this is like a completely like unofficial version of history here. Is this true or is this nonsense? Right? And that was really my question. So, I bought the book and I like the book. It's a great book. And at the same time, I got on to what was then the baby version of the internet. uh all of the Usenet groups, people yelling and screaming at each other, but there were some good uh threads there and there were a couple of people that I really learned from and I just went down this rabbit hole and I thought I'm going to spend two or three months of my life and I want to find out is there something to this or is there not something to this? Is this a waste of time uh like all of the other people in the academic community were assuming at that time or is there something here? Because here I was I was studying basically the presidency of Harry Truman. I'm looking at the early Cold War, 1950, and I'm thinking there were claims that there was a very big UFO coverup going on by then, and these were not trivial claims. And I just thought, what I don't like is having a big question mark hanging over my head on an area where I was trying to become an expert, and I just wanted to know. I just wanted to know. And so, I thought I'd spend a couple of months to look into it. And I got hooked. I got totally hooked. like I discovered there were some very powerful declassified US government documents that were obtained through freedom of information which itself didn't really get going until the late 1970s um when Jimmy Carter kind of strengthened FOIA at that time and so at that time uh a lot of very interesting US government military documents were released that they wouldn't prove that UFOs are aliens but they did prove absolutely proved that these flying saucers that the government was telling the world nothing to this it's all hoaxes misidentification they proved that no actually military personnel were seeing objects described as flying saucer shape invading sensitive airspace that they were not supposed to be doing engaging in maneuvers that were supposed to be impossible being chased by our aircraft and essentially playing cat-and- mouse games over and over again, right, for years and years. And you know, you read and then you read uh statements by the director of scientific intelligence of the CIA in 1952, a man named H. Marshall Chanwell, who's telling his boss, Walter Beetle Smith, director of the CIA, that uh this phenomena is uh being seen at such altitudes and over sensitive military installations in such a manner that they are not attributable to natural phenomena or known types of aerial vehicles. That's a direct quote. And you read that and you're like, how else can he put it other than saying, "Boss, I think we're being invaded." So, I read enough of these documents early on to think there's absolutely something that is at least worth investigating. And then it opens up like a thousand other questions like where are the other academicians? Where's the university crowd looking into this? You would think if you want to debunk this, fine, debunk it. Let's look at the actual evidence here and deal with it. But they would never deal with it. They would never deal with the fact that like why was the first director of the CIA, a man named Rosco Helen Carter, a member of a UFO organization called NIKAP in the in the 1950s until he clearly under pressure resigned in 1962, just before NIKAP was trying to get congressional hearings back then. So the CIA was created the same year Roswell happened, right? Or was it a year? No, 1947. 1947, right? Although you could see the predecessor organizations, the OSS during World War and then something called the CI which was in 1946 going into 47. Uh and then out of that you get the Central Intelligence Agency. That's all with the National Security Reorg that happened in 1947. So what do you think was going on? What do you think happened at Roswell? What I think happened at Roswell was I think there was the recovery of of something that was highly exotic that we probably did not make. You don't say Roswell Corona. You don't think it was any human manufacturing or any human technology? No. I had so so um Jason I think you know who Jason Georgiani is right. I had him on recently and he was explaining to me how General Corso, I think it was, had some sort of report of the Roswell crash and he mentioned stuff like Velcro, Kevlar, night vision, all these human technologies being recovered at that crash site. Yeah. Phil of course he wasn't a general but he was um an officer in the US Army and uh in the late 50s early 60s worked under a very important general named Arthur Trudeau uh where he said in his book uh the day after Roswell was published in 1997 he stated yes my assignment at that time was to um we had we had our own little cache of alien tech essentially and Corso said his job was to kind of segue weigh that out to private industry as quietly as he could. And he did say things like Kevlar and things like uh high tensile fibers and things like I think fiber optics perhaps. I think he said I remember night vision and velcro. Night vision. Velcro. I forgot. Yeah. But I could I could. So well that's that doesn't uh that doesn't debunk the Roswell. I think Corso is very much uh stating that Roswell did happen as something extraordinary. But like so the the the implications of that would mean that either A aliens use Velcro and Kevlar and night vision or B that it was just some man-made thing. Well, no, there's a third possibility which is that you know when you're we're being all theoretical cuz like I wasn't there, you weren't there. But if you are imagining that you've got a team of brilliant human scientists studying this like magical alien tech that they can't figure out, they still might be able to generate some pretty interesting ideas as a result of that, which might be uh variations, you know, of some of the alien tech. I don't think that's impossible at all. So Velcro, yeah, I don't really know if the aliens use Velcro be kind of a handy thing uh for your sneakers or whatever footwear they got. Um, but other uh I mean it seems to me that if you've got something as exotic as technology that theoretically could be thousands of years ahead of us or more that a you could struggle in figuring out a lot of these things. Material science uh I think notoriously is said to be one of the most important areas that human scientists are trying to replicate and material science. Yeah. like um you know just the other day Hell Puto off is on Rogan and he's talking Yeah. Yeah. And and Hal has talked about the so-called meta material. So what is the meta material? It's this artifact that uh was sent out to Art Bell back in the day in the 90s and then Art uh entrusted to Linda Molton How and then Linda over a number of years kind of passed it out to different scientists including Hal Putoff and Eric Davis. They looked at this and so what they found was that it was layered with I mean ultra ultra tiny layers of bismouth and magnesium and I think titanium in ways that we still do not necessarily know how to manufacture. Um and so that would be the material science and that would be an important thing like you'd need to master if you want to do what flying saucers do. You need to have the materials that are sufficient to be able to withstand whatever you need them to do. or in the case of what House speculated uh to what was his phrasing? He said uh to serve as um a wave guide uh for high frequency electromagnetic waves in the terraertz range. When I heard him say that the first time, I'm like, what the hell are you talking about? But really, what it seemed like is a kind of anti-gravity, anti-gravitic type of a thing. So you'd have light or electromagnetic radiation hitting this thing and somehow in some way that I cannot understand uh it would produce a kind of effect on gravity. Wow. Interesting. Yeah. So in other words, this is really interesting to me because you know normally for years and years you're thinking how do they do anti-gravity? Pardon me, some kind of propulsion system, some kind of engine. But no, if it's in the the skin of the craft itself, Yeah. that's a really kind of nifty solution and maybe that's part of what they do. Wow. Yeah. The only uh my introduction to this whole anti-gravity theory was the Bob Lazar story and how he talked about that little basketball size uh reactor being inside the craft or whatever. And it somehow like repelled things away and he explained it. It was a great explanation that made sense to my brain. How basically you like you're falling through space by creating this crazy like heart-shaped propulsion uh pocket, right? Oh, this is above my my pay grade in terms of understanding it, too. But uh there's a couple of different theories that people have had as to how these craft do what they do. Mhm. U this episode of the podcast is brought to you by my good friends at Verso. Have you ever suffered from waking up too many times at night because you have to use the potty? Most people in their 30s and 40s deal with a condition called nocturia. Waking up to go pee pee, and it only gets worse with age. Your bladder holds less, your sleep gets lighter, and your hormonal changes mean your kidneys keep pumping out urine instead of saving it for the morning. The only shot I have of getting a decent night's sleep is between 9:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. before one of my kids wakes me up. And I actually heard Andrew Huberman say recently that every hour of sleep you get before midnight counts for 2 hours of sleep after midnight, which is why I started drinking evening being by Verso. It has 3 g of glycine proven to calm an overactive bladder, dropping nighttime bathroom runs. It also helps you fall asleep faster, stay in deep sleep longer, and feel sharper the next day. Plus, it's melatonin free and has clinically studied ingredients shown in multiple human studies to calm the mind, support mood, and promote restorative sleep. and it tastes good. I personally like to heat mine up before I drink it because it's like a nice warm cuddly hug before bed. Since I started drinking evening bean, it's helped me go to sleep earlier and get a solid amount of deep sleep before my kids wake me up. Plus, you fall asleep really fast and wake up feeling refreshed. And don't take my word for it. Check out some of their incredible reviews they have listed on their site from the people that have experienced better sleep with Evening Bean. Click the link in the description or head on over to ver.so/danny s/danny and use the code Danny to save 15% on your order. Again, go to ver.so/danny and use my code Danny to save 15% on your order today. Thank you, Verso, for sponsoring this episode. I'll just finish answering your first question, which I didn't properly do. Like, how did I where did I go and how did I get into this? So, I started I'm looking at um all of these early documents. That's really what got me in. So, I I was always a document kind of a person. And I wanted to know uh what was the as far as we can understand the classified attitude that was taken during the 1940s and50s especially uh that's where I started and I I will just say and we can go as far as we decide here but that the conclusion was very clear that the US national security community knew some elements knew this was real. This was not made by the Russians. This is not made by us. someone else is operating this. We did not have control over it and absolute secrecy had to be maintained over this at all cost. Like that was a conclusion I came to pretty early on in looking at these documents and uh and then just reading book after book after book as I was able to scrge them up at the time. This is back in the 1990s. And um and I published my first book on this in 2000. I self-published it and then and then yeah in in 2000 that was still kind of a tough thing to do. Uh but then I I got picked up by a different publisher and um and then that was that was the start of my entry into this field back in the early 2000s and I have never left. It's it's kept me um in its grip ever since. So your theory was that the your conclusion was that the national security state knows about something that is not from this earth? Yeah. And has that conclusion evolved at all over the years? Yes. It's it's developed and it's deepened, I guess I could say. I've never I've never since then formed the conclusion that it's fake or that it's not a concern. I've never gone there. But there's different variations of how it works. Like I remember when I first published that book, uh I got an email from astronaut Edgar Mitchell who uh was Apollo 14. Mhm. And uh we it was lucky for me he was the first uh kind of famous person to endorse my work. It was like great. Oh wow. Moonwalking astronaut. And but he said to me, "Look, your your theory about the coverup is not exactly right." It's like he said he believed that my theory was that it's like the government and like the president's in on it and everyone's in on the secrecy. And I don't really know if I truly believe that, but maybe more back then. And he said, this is like I don't know, 2001, 2002 early. He said, "I don't think it works like that. It's it's very privatized. You know, there's a lot of a lot of uh fingers in this pie, and it's not all uh federal government." M and um and so over the years like a number of people in that crowd including Hell Off and including a number of other folks would drop me a little little drops along the way, little breadcrumbs um and um indicating like we've got a privatized system like more and more you look at it it's there's government there's classified elements to this but there is also an element that is beyond government. Yeah. And it's kind of nebulous like who are these guys? Is it all is it all think tanks and corporations or is it something else? And I I don't know the full answer to that to this day. But uh but that's a big part of this. So you're dealing with a kind of a labyrinth of secrecy. And to the extent that it's privatized makes it much more of a challenge for people to use like freedom of information for example. Right. Right. Well, that's by design, right? Yeah. Yeah. I think so. So that all of that was an evolution through my years of looking into this. I have to say uh one of the uh biggest turning points for me in this whole topic was that documentary that you were a part of um about Paul Benowitz. from wasn't the Magic Man. Magic Man. Yeah. Oh, wow. That was uh Mark Pilkington, I believe. I did that one 2005 six. Yeah, that blew my mind. That totally that totally blew my mind. Um such a first of all, such a well done movie. And uh two, it really like was eye opening to see to like the the extent that the uh the intelligence people and the people in the air force, NSA would all work together to basically scramble the mind of one individual just to alter public perception of something. Yeah, that's an interesting one because to this day uh the interpretation of what happened with Paul Benowitz is it's a that is still an open question in my opinion. Oh, really? Well, to the extent that what why why was uh Air Force Office of Special Investigations or CIA possibly or any of these other groups going after Paul Benowitz to screw with his head? They were like uh a great book on this was done by Greg Bishop called Project Beta. Project Beta. Yeah. It's it's a very fine book. I don't fully agree with every conclusion that Greg has, but he did a really excellent job and he needs uh deserves kudos for that. But the the basic question is what? So Paul, for people who don't know this, Paul Benowitz was a uh kind of a a small US defense contractor in the 1970s. He uh lived right near Kirtland Air Force Base in uh New Mexico. and he's able to see uh and by he's by the Manzano weapon storage area there I think trying to remember this now anyway so he's watching things going on over there like bizarre aerial activity and he's got he's got sophisticated tracking information equipment and things like this to to look at it and he's convinced that there are flying saucers or something like that happening and he's a good patriotic American he literally wrote to President Reagan uh after 1981 about this like saying you've got to get on top of it like and so he was becoming uh a hassle and a potential security risk for the people over at Kirtland whatever they were doing. So Greg argued and I cannot remember what uh the Magicman documentary actually argued here. I think the claim was that essentially like 30,000 foot view is that he was a conduit of disinformation in the UFO community to poison the well of the UFO community because they knew there were Soviet spies there. Yeah, that well that's potential. Okay. Um that's what I took from it. There's definitely espionage and there's definitely the attempt to muddy the waters of the UFO community. But the question is what was Paul Benowitz actually observing? So was he observing um advanced US defense systems that were then being tested or was he seeing something more than that? And and I tend to think that maybe a little bit of both. I don't think it was all just uh uh that they were only protecting their own tech. I guess that's my own position. I think I think Benowitz was seeing things that were not not all ours. And I only say that because when first of all there were a number of other people who are associated with this who firmly believed he was seeing more than that. But also when you look at the the uh history of violations of sensitive airspace of US bases across the entire US, this is an old story. So it's not a unique thing to Kirtland. It's something that and and through the 1940s and 50s and 60s and 70s and 80s that was all still happening. It never stopped. And so I think it's very premature to just dismiss it all as saying he was only looking at our own secret tech. I I actually don't believe that. Um, but the fact that they went in and screwed with him and convinced him that it was aliens and allowed him to convince himself. That's what Richard Dodie would say. And Richard Dodie was very much involved in all of that. Wasn't there a part of that documentary where they claimed the NSA moved in across the street and was beaming information into his house saying that the aliens were trying to comm or they were aliens trying to communicate with him? They were coming to Earth cuz their planet ran out of water. They're going to be here in 15 years or something. Lauren, is that Magic Men? I actually can't remember that. So that that's that's what I remember from the Magic Man documentary. Maybe. Yeah. I you know, maybe. Yeah. And then there was the whole part about the cattle mutilation, which was wild. You know, how they were doing the underground testing for they were mining. Uh is this a MNA Hansen case? Is that there was a All of this was going on at this time. So there were cattle mutilations happening all in the mid and late 70s out in the Midwest and out in the Rockies. And uh and Benowitz Benowitz got like really really really deep into this. That is for sure. And uh he hooked up with uh University of Wyoming Leo Sprinkle who used to do uh hypnotic regressions at people. And there was a woman, her name was MNA Hansen, and she was uh God, I can't remember. Did she she witnessed a cattle mutilation, I think, or cattle being lifted up, but she was also uh supposedly taken to an underground facility herself and Leo Sprinkle did the regression and Benowitz, I think, was there. And they all got really deep into this. And Benowitz eventually was uh committed for at least briefly for psychiatric evaluation like in the late 80s. It this really got to him. It really messed him up and uh it got seriously damaged his life. It's very sad and and it does seem like he was being used for disinformation. Yes, I think that's absolutely true. And and um I wrote about this in one of my books, my second volume of history uh called UFOs in the National Security State. And my my feeling was you look at the the mid and late '7s and two important things were happening to threaten the secrecy of the UFO subject at that time. One was as we mentioned the release of documents through freedom of information. This was a new thing. This had never happened before. You know, in the 50s and 60s, the US Air Force could say, "We don't know anything about these UFOs. I mean, it's a little bit uh it's obviously people are making mistaken assumptions and and things like this, but we're not really into that. We have this Project Blue Book and we're not really finding any evidence of aliens, and they could get away with that until in the late '7s researchers were petitioning the government for documents pertaining to UFOs. And holy cow, like they got a lot of them proving that the Air Force was lying. They were lying through their teeth for years. And so that was one thing. So the Freedom of Information Act was a threat to the secrecy. And if you're if you're on the other side of that trying to guard the secrets, you have to be thinking, what is our exposure here? What do we have to worry about? Is if they shake the tree enough, is something going to fall out of that tree that's really compromising? Right? like that's like what came out was compromising enough but anything worse. So that's one problem. The other problem was this was when UFO crash retrievals were starting to become a thing in researchers all in the late '7s. This all happened at once. Prong number one was FOYA. Prong number two is crash retrievals. And so we have like people like Stanton Freriedman researching Roswell for the first time, things like this. Uh but there were other crash retrievals that people were looking into and or revisiting. Uh there was a a researcher no longer around called Leonard Stringfield who back in the 70s and ' 80s was actively cultivating um ex- Air Force and ex-military people getting all kinds of stories about crash retrievalss. It was it was kind of a first like no one was a magnet the way Stringfield was at that time. And so he started to publish his research bit by bit, you know, in these tiny little UFO journals that no one was reading, but they were coming out. And so again, if you're managing the secrecy and if there were crash retrievals, which it looks like there certainly were, you've got to be concerned like how long can this go before someone actually uncovers something that's truly compromising that we do not want out. And so the theory, and I think this is probably true, is you muddy the waters and you you um put out information that would sew the seed of doubt into documents. And this is one argument about the MJ 12 documents that came out in the mid1 1980s. And it's possible that that's the case. And uh and then the the campaign against Paul Benowitz that we were just talking about could be part of that as well. This is like kind of the Empire Strikes Back. you know, you've got all of this uh all of these threats to the empire of secrecy and the late '7s, early 80s, they make the decision in the early 80s like let's let's um do something about that and which is the case like to this day new documents may come out and you've already got people saying is this real? Is this lies this info? It's amazing to watch. It's very effective. It's really a fact. I mean, so if they were doing if they were going to that extent with uh with Richard Dodie and Paul Benowitz in the it was the ' 80s that was happening. If they were doing that in the '8s, imagine what they could what they have the ability to do now with the internet. It's it's it's highly sophisticated obviously and and very likely they've got smarter people than we do and uh they're probably many many steps ahead. I I think it's very tough to deal with them. Not impossible, but yeah, I mean it's and it's we're going beyond UFOs here or UAP. This is in a whole array of things. I have no doubt. But uh the UFO subject, which is the one that I'm most interested in, I think definitely uh you know, we're in an era now since 2017, New York Times and Politico, they do their articles at that time and it kind of breaks open the space a little bit where people can talk about this a bit more without necessarily their careers being destroyed through ridicule. So, that's good. But to think then that uh the national security crowd is just going to walk away from the table and say, "Oh, yeah. Here you go. Here's all of our secrets. Yeah, sorry about that. We were wrong." No, that's not going to happen. There's too many far too many reasons to maintain this and to fight every step of the way. So, what I believe is happening in terms of all of this, like this has been an argument for almost a decade now. A lot of people imagine what you're going to look like 6 months from now. Now imagine you had him hair the whole time and how much better you could look. You're allowed to have thicker, fuller hair, and HIMS is the perfect solution to bring your head back to its original greatness. Try Hims hair loss solutions and you'll be joining hundreds of thousands of subscribers who found their hair again without ever leaving the couch. Here's the deal. Hims offers doctor approved clinically backed treatments like finasteride and minoxidil. the good stuff that's proven to actually regrow your hair in three to six months. Whether you're into chewables, pills, sprays, or serums, they've got a solution that will fit your vibe. No awkward doctor visits, no waiting rooms. Just answer a few quick questions online and a medical provider will see if the treatment is right for you. If it is, they'll ship it straight to your door for free. No insurance? No problem. One low price covers everything from treatments to ongoing care. And with hundreds of thousands of happy customers, HIMS is pretty much the go-to for getting back that thicker, fuller hair and your confidence. Why wait? Hims has you covered, literally. Start your free online visit today at hms.com/danny. That's hs.com/danny for your personalized hair loss treatment options. hymns.com/danny. Results vary based on studies of topical and oral minoxidil and finasteride. Prescription products require an online consultation with a healthcare provider who will determine if a prescription is appropriate. Restrictions apply. See website for full details and important safety information. Make your hair great again with HIMS. It's like, are we dealing with a covert op by the government to have a controlled and false release of uh UFO information to serve their needs? or what I believe is we're we're looking at a factional struggle within that community where there are actually people who do believe in getting this information out to whatever extent they believe they want it out. I'm not sure if they even want it out fully themselves, but to some extent, but there's still the the secrecy group, if we can call them that, that is absolutely not resolved to that at all. Not not reconciled to that. And they will fight every step of the way. Yeah, I think um when we when I had Jesse Michaels in here, he was I think he told me that as far as like all of the information that exists about this stuff on the internet, he he was saying only like 20% of it needs to be fake. He's like 80% of it can be real and still no one will ever know what to believe. People will just fight about it. It's probably right. It's I think it's even less than 20% that needs to be fake. Wow. Really? Yeah. I don't I don't I mean um I think so because there's always Look, you've got trolls out there. You've got hardcore skeptical people out there, of course. Oh, it's crazy. People treat this like a religion. Yeah. They will hammer on any any little thing that just seems a little off and they'll just go after it, you know. And you could have uh I mean, we just had this congressional briefing just the other day as we're as we're recording this in the very beginning of May. You had Oh, I missed that. Well, it was very interesting. So, you had Dr. Eric Davis, who was hardly ever Oh, I did see this. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. Uh Eric Davis, anytime he talks, you really want to listen to that man. But why is that? He's worked very closely for many years with Hell Putoff. He's worked with Robert Bigalow's National Institute for Discovery Science back in the 90s and early 2000s. He is a man who interviewed Admiral Thomas R. Wilson in 2002, which was a whole big thing. That came out in 2019. That was a big mess, but it was all true. Davis meets with Wilson after Wilson had retired from the Defense Intelligence Agency. He had run the DIA and this is connected. You interviewed Steven Greer. So Steven Greer was very much a part of this. So back in 1997, all right, Greer and Edgar Mitchell, the astronaut, and a few other individuals were going through Washington DC and and Greer, you know, look, he can be very polarizing, but he was he was right on with this. And I will always say this, in 1997, Greer was like, there are uh black programs that are rogue that deal with ET tech reverse engineering. They are beyond the formal control of the US government. And so they're trying to get audiences with different people to talk about this. And they get to meet with Admiral Thomas R. Wilson who was uh head of intelligence for the joint chiefs of staff at that time. This is April 1997. And they give gives a presentation and Wilson and I know this is absolutely true said I'm going to look into this. The head of the joint chiefs. Yeah. Well, he's head of intelligence for the joint chiefs. Okay. So or he was deputy head of intelligence for the joint chiefs. He then became head of intelligence for the joint chiefs which was head of the DIA. So he was important and he goes on a two-month uh wild goose chase actually within the Pentagon's bureaucratic structure. We can go into more detail if you want, but the short version is he finds a number, not just one, several special access programs, that is ultra ultra secret programs dealing with ET tech. He contacts the managers of one of them and uh and he's actually able to get a private in-person meeting with them. They are the the program manager, the security manager, and the uh the corporate attorney, right, for the for this. It was a private contractor. We don't know that it was Lockheed, but that's what the betting money is. So, he goes to meet with them and he says, "It is your We're getting back to Eric Davis. I promise you." Okay. Wilson says, "It is it is your oversight that I am not overseeing this program. You need to bring me in. you don't have you do not have proper oversight of this and they are like no we're we're fine we don't need you well that's that's a real problem what and he finds out from them I remember Greer telling me this yes right and he finds out like this is they have a an intact saucer according to what they said to him uh they've made painfully slow progress in understanding it uh they had what is called the bigot list bi- t and it's an acronym deriving from World War II anyway that's the list of people who are allowed to be on us and it's like 500 people. And Wilson's in in uh is reading the list. He's recognizing very few names from the DoD. They're almost all in private industry. And he says, "No, I need to be this is this is part of my purview." And they're like, "No, it isn't." He says, "Well, I'll complain." They're like, "Be my guest. We're not afraid. We're not afraid of you." And he did go back to DC. He did complain. And he was threatened with his career. He was threatened he'd lose a star or two along the way and take an early retirement. and he got furious, but he ended up playing ball. So anyway, he because he was there with Edgar Mitchell and there was another Navy uh commander named uh Willard Miller who was part of this and Miller, these are Navy guys. So Miller, Mitchell, and Wilson, they're all Navy. Uh apparently uh Wilson and Miller chatted about this after and Miller I guess learned that Wilson had failed in getting access to this program and so somehow this got back to Edgar Mitchell the astronaut and Mitchell was in with the National Institute for Discovery Science that's Robert Bigalow that's all these other guys right Davis okay P off okay and many others And so they all knew they all knew that there was this failed attempt by the head of intelligence for the joint chiefs to get access to this program and he was denied access. So it's kind of a big thing like you know you learn this fact and you're like how do we get to Wilson? We want to talk to him. So Wilson retires in O2 and clearly Eric Davis who is part of the Ned's group he's the one he goes out and he he interviews Wilson. He got he he got the scoop and he writes up roughly 15 pages of typewritten notes of his conversation with Wilson. I am mentioning this because someone in that group and I cannot say who it was unfortunately. Oh, you know, but you cannot say about I knew I read that I read portions of that document back in 200. Okay. So, still secret six. Yeah. 2006 and 7 six seven 2007 and then um and I read the portion where Wilson is telling Davis this technology was not made by earth not made by man not by human hands and in the Davis notes it's italicized and I remembered reading it struck me like very profound you know this is not made by human hands so they all knew that So Davis gets these notes and the only reason those notes leaked out at all in 2019 was because just a year and a half earlier Edgar Mitchell had died and his estate um well it got it got leaked out. So there was a a friend of the family who was able to get some of Mitchell's documents. M those documents went to Australia and from there they were JPEG and by the early part of 2019 they were quietly circulating around like the full notes that Davis had written and then it leaked out it leaked out enough in the spring of 2019 that I uh took it upon myself to do my own little YouTube video on it and I think that's what blew it open in June of 2019. But that's Eric Davis. Like, so Eric Davis is and he's also part of this legacy remote viewing program too, right? He was a part of Put Off. He was with Put Off and and Sarati and all these SRI guys. Is that right? No, I don't think so. No. No. And I don't think Sarati was part of the SRRI thing. Um, okay. That's Put Off and Russell Tar. Oh, that's it. Okay. And uh I I I know and adore Russell uh as well. He's a he's a wonderful man. But um we can get into that, too. I I'm not an expert in remote viewing, but my wife is a pretty damn good remote viewer. And yeah, I'm serious. Wow. Tracy has done some great remote views. No way. Seriously great remote views. Yeah. Um but no, I've been interested in that for a long time. It's absolutely amazing. Yeah, it's amazing. And it's it's real. That is absolutely real. Unbelievably, it was wild listening to um Hal just talk about that on Rogan's podcast. And I've had a lot of people talk about that on this on this show before and it's uh that the way he described it with Rogan was uh it was very very cohesive. Like it made a lot of sense the way he did it. Yeah. It's it's absolutely extraordinary. Mhm. Uh I'll just try to wrap up our thread. Yeah. Yeah. Where were we? Eric Davis and the recent congressional thing. Yeah. So like that was um Oh, and the reason I brought that up at all Yeah. Davis was talking and he's like, "When you hear Eric Davis, as I said before, like you must listen to this man. In my opinion, he has a stellar reputation." And so on the on this briefing, he's talking about like, "Yeah, there's different types of aliens that I've become aware of and like he's quite explicit." Davis is saying this. Yes, absolutely. But what everyone jumped on was uh unfortunately, and this is not to uh to disparrage Lou Alzando because I personally like Lou and I respect him a lot, but he put up an image of a what was supposed to be a UFO and it Oh, Lou did. Yeah. Yeah. It was very quickly uh you know, debunked. Yeah, pretty much. It's like, you know, irrigation circles that when you fly over, it looked like it looked like a white UFO with a shadow below. Like if it could look like that. When I looked at it, I thought, "Oh, yeah. It looks like that." I see these things on X on Twitter all the time and I just like sometimes I just don't have time and I scroll right past. I saw I saw what you're referring to, though. Yeah. That got very quickly and and people were just hammering on that. And but like the whole point is like all right, people can make mistakes and maybe you could say like you shouldn't make the mistake. Okay, fine. Whatever. But I don't think that any of that was in bad faith at all. I absolutely believe he did that in good faith and it was just it was a mistake and you shouldn't have made it, but okay. Mhm. But this is what, excuse me, you're hearing people h, you know, focus on. I'm talking about the skeptics now. You got Davis with these amazing statements. You had uh Admiral Tim Galedet during the briefing with very impressive statements and um Christopher Melon who's always on point, made very good things, had very good things to say and more Mike Gold of NASA, but they they focused on this mistaken photograph the whole time. Well, the debunkers, I mean, that's what they they'll do. You know, they they look for the debunkers. I see what you're saying. They look for the one little thing rather than you look at the big picture of what these other individuals are saying. It's what did you take away from that whole thing? Well, we are if you think about the news stories that have come out in the last week from our from this moment that I'm here with you. Today is what day isth. Monday, baby. Yeah, that's right. Um, just a little over a week ago, I think Jesse Michael put out his Harold Malgren interview. How Harold Monggrren fascinating man. This is a guy who was adviser to four US presidents including Kennedy. Kennedy Johnson Nixon four. What? Yeah. He was 89 years old and then died immediately after this interview with Jesse. When you get I mean everyone pull that up. I got to see this. So busy. No one has time. But that is a hell of an interview. And Malen god he he got very sick immediately after this and he died shortly after that. But you listen to this man. He was a brilliant economist, maybe genius level. I mean, absolutely top-notch intellect. And he was razor sharp during this interview. So, he was he was great. Was he whacked? I doubt it. I mean, I don't I don't think so, you know. But anyway, what he said, we see it being pulled up here. Yeah. I touched the UFO 12 days ago. Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So, anyway, we had that story. Mhm. Then we had um trying to get these in order. Oh, Matthew Brown who's uh the uh latest we can say whistleblower interviewed by Jeremy Corbell and George Knapp. Very interesting guy. And then um we had uh we had we had put off on Rogan, we had the congressional briefing and then just yesterday there is a new a new one and I don't know how powerful this is or not but uh Dr. Gregory. Oh man. Gregory. This was put out in the Daily Mail uh by Josh um Boone. No, Josh. Uh forgive me. He's a friend. I like him. It'll come. Um anyway, that came out in the Daily Mail. What was it about? Was the He was He was an Air Force major and he was a NASA Dr. He's looking for it. Dr. Gregory Rogers. Rogers. And it's by I want to give Josh's props. He deserves it. Click on a link. Maybe maybe it'll be in there. Scroll. Josh Boswell. Josh Boswell. Okay. Yeah. Yeah. He he he and Christopher Sharp. They're both very good younger journalists who do very good work on this. Anyway, so this man Gregory Rogers was a NASA doctor. Uh worked on a number of shuttle missions and said in 1992 he's down by Cape Cape Canaveral, I think. and he saw uh CCTV footage of a he was shown this by another Air Force officer of a flying saucer that had USAF markings on it. US Air Force flying saucer. He said this thing did things that we we did not have the ability to do. Tilt at an angle while hovering uh rotate this way, rotate that way. Uh but he supposedly and look this has not been vetted. I mean, you know, but this is all just new stuff. He said I was I asked him where do we get this and he said the guy just pointed up and indicating it was like from up there from outer space. So it's it's a new story. Is it true? Is it not true? I don't know. But think of this in the last less than two weeks those all of those have come out. Like that's profound. That's powerful stuff. uh more than a decade ago, you would have had to wait like there would have been years in between stories like that. Yeah. Drinking from a fire hose. Exactly. So, um so I don't remember why I got into all of this, but yeah, I guess we're I asked you just like what your your what your ultimate takeaway was from that recent congressional thing with Eric Davis and and all those guys. We're looking at a kind of pileon effect, you know, with uh the momentum of all of this these new revelations, new claims, maybe might be a better way to put it, but more and more new information is absolutely coming out at a rate that is unprecedented. We've never in all of the history of UFO research, and that's this is something I I can speak very confidently about. There has never been anything like the time that we're in now. This is this is unprecedented. And where it will lead is a really good question. Yeah. Yeah. So, so over the last couple months, uh I mean like my emotional my emotions on this whole topic vary. It's like a I ride this roller coaster of emotions on the UFO topic from being a I get burnt out on it super easily. Yeah. Uh I get like this UFO fatigue. Um and then I also go back and forth between like is it really aliens? Is it time travelers? Is it DARPA? And like, you know, my recent thing has been like this is just this has to be all just military mixed with internet psychological scops or just like like you just alluded, feeding us this fire hose of misinformation just to get everyone confused so nobody can no like it doesn't matter what the truth is because there's just everything's out there and everyone's fighting about it. There's too much noise and no signal. Yeah, I'm very sympathetic to that. And as far as the burnout goes, I I totally I've done this for 30 years. And uh my wife could tell you like when it's after dinner time, I I almost like I have to think about other things. I can't I can't do UFOs anymore. Like in the old days, I would go to like 2 three in the morning just like Mhm. And nowadays, like I do it in the morning and the afternoons and then I have to I have to end it. Yeah. I have to have other things going on in my life. So I I can sympathize with that. But as far as like what's going on, the reason uh that I I still I very much believe that the significant portion of this phenomenon is from non-human intelligence. And the reason I believe that is I look at the earliest history of this uh particularly the ear like post World War II but even there are some very I would say good not perfect but good accounts from prior to World War II that are worth looking at as well. And so when you look at some of these early cases and then particularly when you read uh the declassified documents that I mentioned earlier that are available, it's hard for me to square that with a secret US black budget project. It just doesn't because because all the intelligence officers that we know of at the time in the ' 40s were looking into this and there just is there's nothing that I have seen that really make even you mentioned Joseph Frell's work. Yeah. Yeah. Were we on camera when we talked about Joe? I can't. Were were we, Steve? I don't remember. I Well, anyways, we were talking about Joseph Frell before this thing started. And um and I'm a friend of Joe's and I respect and admire his work a lot, but I don't even think that he has made a clear-cut case that it's definitely all like, you know, third Reich Tech and all of that. I mean, there's definitely the Horton Brothers, which was or Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's the Horton brothers and uh and I think now I think we're seeing more and more support for the idea of a 1933 Italian recovery. Italian. Mhm. This is I think Grush talked about this, right? Grush talked about it. Malmrim Malmgrim in his interview with Jesse Michaels and Eric Davis in his congressional briefing talked about it. So we're seeing all these different uh perspectives coming in on this. Uh the real man who researched this is an Italian researcher named Roberto Pinati who looked at a lot of the original documents that do exist in Italian from 1933. And um interesting. So I think yes like this goes back farther in time than a lot of the American researchers like cuz we're so American centered like Roswell it all starts there. Yeah. Uh, no, no, I think there's even in the US there were prior cases to Roswell, but certainly this 1933 case. So, you you think the the fact that these cases or crash recoveries, retrievals, whatever you want to call them, they go back so far earlier than the the 1940s, you think that points to it being of non-human origin just because of how advanced it was and how early it was? Yeah, I I think so. That's what I that's what I believe in. And where where do you think they would have come from? I know we're being super speculative here. I'm just saying like if you I would say another planet. Another planet, right? Or or uh there's a couple of different ways to look at this. So, you know, Haluto off wrote a very interesting paper a number of years ago on uh ultraterrestrials, this concept. And it's a it's very interesting paper. I highly recommend people read it. And and I think his take and he just mentioned this the other day in his interview, but maybe there's been a group that's been here a long time that originally comes from elsewhere. They've set up a shop in some manner, which I think is a total totally possible. I would I would imagine that the extraterrestrial hypothesis actually still makes more sense to me than anything else. I mean, we can get attracted to interdimensional theories, but does anyone actually even understand what another dimension would be? Like, how does that work? How do they materialize in our I don't maybe it's it's possible, but I don't really understand how that's possible. I can understand how it could be possible even despite the vast distances to go interstellar if you can manipulate spaceime in some way, bending spaceime. We have math for that. Gan Miguel Alcubier in the 90s apparently came up with some version of warp drive mathematically. The problem is finding the amount of energy. Yes. Sufficient to do it. But same thing with I think that's the same thing with time travel, right? I think so. Yeah. You know, so I love I love Michael Masters time travel theory. Uh yeah. I don't know if I've I'm on top of that one. So maybe you can you can educate me. But uh but I guess I'll just say I think the fact that they come from another place still makes the most sense to me. Uh the fact that we would be of interest makes a lot of sense to me. The fact that Earth would be a very interesting place also makes a lot of sense to me. I think uh all of that makes perfect sense that if you have the ability, if you've achieved a technological capability to detect advanced life elsewhere, which I don't see that as impossible at all. Um I mean, we're already looking at exoplanetary systems and looking for life signatures and we just started with this business. So if you've been doing this for a thousand years or more, um maybe you can detect consciousness si, you know, you can go, we talked about remote viewing. Yeah. Could they actually have the ability to detect advanced consciousness? I don't know. Maybe they can. Or maybe there are other technologies that we just haven't envisioned. So, they could find us and then could they get to us? Yeah, probably. I don't see why not. Uh, at least in theory, I think it could be entirely possible. And we would be interesting because a there could be a lot of life in this universe. But how common really would planets like ours be? We have we're in the Goldilock zone, but it takes a lot more than that, right? We have the moon is in the We have the moon. Incredible. Which is uh it's it's uh what's the word? It's it's the perfect terraforming device. It's one I think it's 120th the size of the sun and 120th the distance from the sun. I think I'm getting that math right. Oh, it's a lot less than 12th the size. Maybe maybe I'm getting that math wrong, Steve. Maybe you can correct me with the the uh the fractions there. Anyways, the fractions are exact. The exact uh size comparison to the sun and the exact distance from the sun is sun is equal. So, it creates that perfect eclipse and so that makes Yeah, that's actually that's an amazing thing if that's if if that's a significant part. The fact that it's a stabilizer of our environment is very significant. Uh it's it's always got one side turned to the earth. That's I'm can't remember the word for that, but that could be significant. Totally locked. Yeah. Thank you, Steve. the fractions of the distance the distance ratio and the size ratio find that and then it is you know it is the perfect terraforming device for us and uh yeah it's sun size and distance ratio there you go you can figure that out let us know Steve that's your homework assignment but but we have we also have water and land so we but we're not completely covered in water either so we have enough water for life to evolve in the water but Then we have enough land out of the water that life can crawl up and evolve on land. You know, I mean, that's kind of an interesting thing right there. And we've had enough uh stability over Mhm. hundreds of millions of years that we can allow complex life to develop on. And I mean, yeah, that's that can't be very common. Now the universe is big enough that you could think all right maybe one out of a million systems might have something like this or whatever it is and that could still be enough to develop um advanced life and which I think I come to believe I'm not a I'm not a expert in this at all but I I tend to think that life anywhere is going naturally to want to increase its complexity uh just because life competes with other life for resources and energy from food. And that intelligence is one necessary evolutionary adaptation that would be useful for any life form. And not just humans. Dinosaurs were intelligent. Hell, not not maybe compared to us, but compared to previous life forms, they probably were. Intelligence is always increasing. Yes. And uh you know, our body plan just allowed us to hit the sweet spot. We developed these hands that can do things and manipulate our environment and that further increased our intelligence, I believe. So I think I think life naturally will do that given the proper conditions right and I'm going to guess that you know in enough parts of the universe those conditions have existed so that you then develop life and then it gets to the the critical point where it develops its own ability to kind of manage itself which we're maybe kind of doing and we're developing art you know strong AI and uh all the other technologies that'll go along with it nanotech and who the hell knows what quantum computing and what kind of crazy diabolical mixture will come out of all of that. And I think that that's probably what what other life forms have done because I I suspect that that what life what intelligent life will do is it is guided by the requirements of constantly developing that intelligence. In other words, uh it's not about like our society isn't about the human race anymore. It's really about meeting the needs of the demands of a highly integrated, digitally advanced, artificially intelligent system of which we are now just a part. like we think it's working for us, but I think we're serving the system and we're serving the system that is becoming ever more complex and and that intelligence will just kind of take off on its own because I think it's the intelligence that's the dominant factor, not necessarily our biological contribution to it. Interesting. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if anyone actually ever thinks that or if I'm the only person, but this is what I I've come to believe like we serve we serve the system that we have helped to create, but really we're just we are simply actors or we're just we're the caterpillar. Yeah. We're like the servants of of what high intelligence demands and we we're that's what we're doing. What do you think we look like? What do you think human beings or what comes out of human beings ends up being in like 50 to 100 years? Well, it all depends on It's summertime, boys. And you know, the instant you step outside that sweat's going to be on you like morning dew. And the humidity doesn't help. For me, I've become a human petri dish of stench. If you've been struggling with the heat and humidity, I have great news. Today's sponsor, Mando, has just launched something that takes sweat control to the next level. Introducing Mando Deodorant Plus Sweat Control Solid Stick. It's double protection. Finally, you can kick the sweat and smell good doing it. This has been a godsend for me, especially in Florida during the summertime when I do a lot of activities outside, including going to the parks, recreational sports. Just a walk through the parking lot will have me smelling like a dumpster. But when I use the new Mando deodorant, I almost smell too good to be true. This ain't your typical deodorant. its clinical strength and two times more effective at controlling sweat. It kicked sweat and odor for over 72 hours. Even after 12 hours, sweat was still reduced by 92%. Mando is known for using premium ingredients like gentle mandelic acid. Mando deodorant plus sweat control solid stick. Don't wait. Grab yours today at shopmando.com and experience double protection. Mando starter pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with a solid stick deodorant, cream tube deodorant, two free products of your choice like mini body wash and deodorant wipes, and free shipping. And as a special offer for our listeners, new customers can get $5 off the starter pack with our exclusive code. That equates to over 40% off your starter pack. Use the code danny dny at shopmando.com. That's sop-do.com. Please support the show and tell them we sent you. With deodorant plus sweat control, Mando's got you covered. Say goodbye to sweat stains and hello to long lasting freshness. You know, because all that we do is we adapt to the environments that we live in. And we are now radically changing our own environment uh technologically in in all different ways. And so clearly you're seeing uh probably a speeding up of of human evolution is probably happening, right? I think it is right. uh experts would be better able to say this than me, but I think it's quite I mean, look, even technology, right? Yeah. In the last 10,000 years, we're not the same as we were back then. So, uh and we've domesticated ourselves. It's just like you look at domesticated sheep as opposed to wild sheep, well domesticated humans as opposed to wild humans before we started settling in uh large communities and societies roughly 10,000 years ago. So, we're we're going on a path. So what we're going to look like uh the the you know the problem with our future is that every every new technological leap you make whether it's mastering the use of fire or stone tools or now working at it, you know, getting to AGI and whatever else we're going to get to means that you become dependent on that for your species survival. Like honestly like once we've had fire for like couple hundred thousand years, right? It would be very difficult to probably for those people to survive without it. Yes. Because you become dependent on it. And then not only that, but the fact that you have fire means you have to develop all of these other technologies because we have to maintain the fire. We have to protect the fire. We have to uh find and and process the right kinds of wood. like all of that that that prompts further intellectual development. Same with stone tools and all that. So once you develop that, you have to maintain it. And now we're so so deeply embedded in our technology. Can you imagine? You know, Spain and Portugal just went without electricity for 5 hours last week. Five. I have a sister who lives in Seville and uh trust me, I live in Florida. I had to go through a lot of hurricanes and like Exactly. So, but they were like they were freaking out, man. They were not h they were not happy. So, imagine if we had to go without electric, forget internet, just electricity. Mhm. Yeah. It sucks. Even worse for a week, two weeks, a month, forever. It would suck. It it would it would more than suck because most people would probably not live. you know, going back to this, you know, this technology conversation and the evolution of human beings, uh, is really, it's something I've been thinking about a lot recently and it really came, it was interesting because I think Hal and Rogan touched on it a little bit on their conversation, but, you know, one of the ideas that I've been throwing around is the idea of like this this ESP telekinesis having these senses that are not apparent in everybody. buddy, but they're kind of like extra. Some people have have them more than other people. And especially when it comes to things like remote viewing and ESP. So like ancient human beings, right, before we had the development of language, before we had the technology to record memories externally and you know when we constantly were uh trying to avoid predators to stay alive. Yeah. And before before we had anything like I'm sure we had some sort of extra senses that have atrophied since we've developed language since we've developed computers. We don't have to memorize anymore. Everything's on a computer or iPhone. You know what I mean? Absolutely. So I feel like that is radically we have senses that are radically have been diminished diminished and atrophied over millennia. My wife and I talk about this a lot. This is like our one of our pet theories that we've been uh hashing around for a couple of years. Uh excuse me. I totally believe that that's the case. We actually our uh the brain capacity of the human being today is less than it was among um our ancestors even more than 10,000 years ago. I think it's like the amount of a golf ball or no more than that. I think uh maybe a baseball amount of of a brain. We have less. We have we have a little bit less. That doesn't mean that we're less intelligent. It just means that domestication has enabled us to need less because the brain's expensive. I mean, in terms of energy, like it's it's not free. And so, you you have to have a reason for it. It's got to provide an evolutionary benefit for you to use it. And uh very like I think that you're right. I think that's true. Like we've probably atrophied. Um, and what that of course this is this is material that I'm just barely I shouldn't even really talk about, but you hear people talking about microtubules and the brain and the ability to access quantum information in some way. And I'm probably saying this wrong in countless ways, but but essentially that we have the capacity to perceive some various forms of non-locality. you know, things that are far away that logically you wouldn't think we're able to perceive, but hell, remote viewing proves that you can. And I think uh it's a fair theory or a fair notion that our ancestors did a better job at this than we do. M and another thing about Okay, so so we were just talking about how like there's other Goldilocks planets and there might be there there definitely are we know of that are really really far away, but like we are so rare in this solar system. Um all the different species that exist on Earth, I think out of So this is kind of getting into what Mike Masters explained to me. He's a anthropologist and he was explaining to me there's over two million species of animals. I didn't mean to interrupt you. Isn't he the one who um Am I getting my people mixed up? He came up with a paper about a year or two ago that got a lot of attention. And I I should stop. I I'm probably getting it wrong. Anyway, keep going, please. Yeah. Yeah. So, he's an anthropologist and he and his and he's wrote a bunch of books on on uh his his I think his it's not his most recent one, but one of them is called the extraterrestrial model. And he basically explains, you know, having a background in in this stuff and evolution is that there's 200 species of cat there's 200 or two million cataloged species on planet Earth. Out of the 2 million, 20 of them are hominids. Out of the 20 hominids, we are the ones that developed technology that was able to escape the earth. So we are like 0001% of all species human beings on Earth. So that is extremely rare for Earth which is an extremely rare planet being such a you know having the moon the way it is being this having so much water and land being inhabitable teaming with life. So now let's go look at all the other Goldilocks planets that we know of that are so far away. How how many of them have the same gravity, the same atmosphere, the same how many of them are water worlds or not? And what is the likelihood that those beings that evolve on that planet, that Goldilocks planet, are going to be exactly like the 0.00001% right, that ended up being human beings on this planet. So he's like basically the case he made was it's virtually impossible for them to have two arms, two two legs, upright walking hominins. There I disagree. I I disagree with that. I think respectfully because I'm I'm sure he knows what he's talking about. But no, I think that our body plan is probably not unique to us. And I think if you're going to again, I think because what life does, life evolves and life adapts. And so if the necessary thing that you have to have is an ecosystem that can support enough diversity of life for this to happen. And yes, you need water and you need land. You need both. And so it's going to be very rare. Like I completely agree with all of that. I think that's entirely right. But the fact that our body plan is an anomaly. I don't agree with that. I think our body plan is probably I don't really, you know, do we really truly understand what is the mechanism of evolution? What is it really? Is it truly just random mutation or is there something else going on? I I'm not going to pretend that I have that answer, but I think that somehow life didn't Jeff Goldlum say this in Jurassic Park, life finds a way. And I think that life does find a way through adaptation, through the need for survival and luck. Yeah. But like this is if you're going to engage in planetary domination of any capacity. Honestly, I think this plan, this body plan of ours might just be the best way to do it because what you need is an ability to manipulate your environment. That's key. And so hands and fingers are perfect for manipulating environment. What's better than that? I don't know of anything that's been better. Uh and then the thing is once our you know oustralopiththesine distant ancestors of four million years ago or three million years ago they realize oh I can break this stone wow this is really useful so that encourages further intellectual development just just even napping stones it's like that's a skill so you're working cognitively here and so I think uh adaptations I don't think it's impossible that life would form from adaptations similar to our own uh that you would have humanoid uh beings in other that develop that way in other planets. You know, I I just think that uh I remember as a kid reading like what certain scientists thought like life elsewhere would look like and some of those ideas were kind of kind of goofy when I look at them now and I don't think they make a lot of sense because a body has to be efficient and it's got to and so you're looking at all of these different factors that go into it and it seems to me that bipeedal standing upright with a couple of extra hands to do your job like that's really that's quite useful and I could imagine that happening elsewhere. What do you got, Steve? Oh, the crab species conversion. Yeah, it's similar to what he was talking about. Like you have five different species that have independently grown crablike bodies. That's just what works in the ocean for little creatures like that. Independently, unrelated. Yeah. It's convergent evolution. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Um which means basically species that have are not related to each other can due to the environments that they live in develop very similar uh Yeah. like you know bats can fly as well as insects can fly and birds and that type of thing. Yeah, that makes a lot of sense. Um when I brought this up to Greer, he was he was explaining to me he believes it has something to do with morphic resonance. This theory by uh Robert Sheldrake to win theirs it's like some sort of a quantum idea. It's a it's a quantum theory essentially. So, I guess one of the examples that Sheldrake used was this a monkey on one side of the world discovers some sort of technology, figures out how to crack a crack some a coconut open with a rock or whatever. And at the same time, this quantum in this quantum field, the monkeys on the opposite side of the world figure out the same thing. So, he thinks that might tie into evolution between planets. He said, "This isn't just on on Earth." Yeah. Hey, I I' I'd entertain that. I mean uh you know there's the secret life of plants which came out over 50 years ago which talks about like there's all different ways uh we know that we know that uh fungi under the ground are somehow I don't understand it can be a means of communication among plants right all right so how does that work I don't know so there something like that could sure why not Steve what' you find about the sun anything Yeah. Come up with a goose egg on that. I got a ratio that I don't understand. Oh, come on. Well, it's certainly less than 120 the size of the sun. That was a good It's a 1 to 43,000 is the is the moon's ratio to the uh what the distance to the sun. And the Earth is similar at 1 to 11,700. I don't know what that means. I don't know. Google, what's the distance? What is the distance of the Earth to the Sun? Earth to Earth. All right, we're not going to waste time on this. it, I give up. Um, so how So explain to me h what made you want to um start working on this project involving USOS specifically? Yeah. But one of the most uh rewarding uh little rabbit holes I've ever gone down. So I have um I mean I've had a long-standing USO simply means unidentified submerged objects, water-based UFOs or water-based UAP. That's it. Um and you know I've I'd heard of this type of phenomenon for many many years. Uh it's always been very interesting. I mean to me intrinsically it's interesting to hear a story about an object that comes out of the ocean making a big uh display like that and I thought I mean how many how many of these stories exist? I have a website uh with a lot of amazing members and uh they'll ask me questions. One person asked me a question about a particular case from 1945 near the Aleutian Islands, a little island called Adac Island out there. And there is a case from the summer of 1945 where a US transport ship world war the Pacific war was still happening. Uh they were returning from Japan to uh Seattle and they were by the illusions and apparently an object appeared to have come out of the water. A discshaped object circles around the ship twice and then takes off. So that was a case that was somewhat known to me and it's known to other researchers. and I just did like a little bit of extra research and I'll put together like a little video things like that from my website but I got really intrigued by it and I thought to myself this is back this is three years ago so in 2022 I thought what other good cases are there like I just wanted to pull them together and I started to realize there were a couple of books that had been done on this there was book back in 1970 by an American researcher named Ivan Sanderson a very good book uh there was Another very good book by uh the recently deceased researcher named Carl Feint who wrote a very good book on water and UFOs uh but not much else. There was a couple of others here and there and I thought I want to collect them. How many can I find? Like that was where I started and are they good? And and I just got more and more into it. I started doing more of these little mini presentations for my website and it just became by the summer of 2022 it was kind of a mania and I thought I'll see if I will do a book see what I come up with and that turned out into uh what will be a three volume project. The first volume I just published a couple of months ago and that and that will be followed by the other two which will be out this year. I've collected about 700 cases. There's many more than that I've no doubt. Uh, I eliminated quite a few in, uh, looking for them because I really wanted cases that, uh, had some meat on the bones that you could kind of work with and give a good description of. So, I've got about just under 700 uh, from around the world. And some of them go back kind of far, not not into the distant distant ancient. Uh the first really good case that I consider good is actually only from 1717, so like 300 years ago. It's pretty good case though. And then they become better over the years. Uh a lot more detail. And I just started collecting them. I wanted to breathe like fresh life. Uh 99% of them are completely forgotten even by like experienced researchers. I think they're just completely they've gone by the boards. And I thought, uh, they deserve they deserve a fresh retelling of them. And I wanted to do that. And then it just morphed into more and more things. I ended up getting a really great illustrator, uh, a man named Alan Lavine, who's a wonderful man, and did beautiful illustrations for this project. And I did a bunch of other things. I wanted to put each one on a map. I did that and and I did a I ended up doing a statistical analysis that I did not anticipate doing when I started but that became kind of a significant thing too and that taught me more about this phenomenon just looking at some of the statistics that seem to jump out at me. So all in all like you you're seeing this phenomenon evolve over especially the last couple of hundred years. It's like a little dance like we're they're observing us. We're observing them and and there is reason to believe that they're that they adapted that they've adapted their some of their behaviors due to our radical transformation of our own technology especially over the last century. I mean it's kind of an amazing thing. You know you think of where we were in the oceans a little over 100 years ago. We the first operational submarine didn't deploy until the year 1900 and that was just like you know barely able to get in there. So we were we were not really going deep into the water until the 20th century. So now we have hundreds of them circling the oceans loaded with nuclear warheads on Exactly. Exactly. So that's a major like imagine you're them. Let's say you you are them. You're here. You're watching these humans, these observant, intelligent, multi-fingered humans who can manipulate their environment, who are now organized into these collective, aggressive communities we call nations, peering over the fence at each other with deadly weapons that could end the entire planet's existence. And you're watching this and you're you're realizing, okay, so they're probably this far away from developing strong AI, from quantum computing, and from leaping into our world. Like, when's that going to happen? Right. Cuz like you can see the whole trajectory. You know that like a few generations ago they were all living in wooden huts and now wow like about to reach the singularity. Yes. Exactly. So I have little doubt that any observing intelligence like they can see this whole thing play out. And so they're watching but but I have no doubt that we have our own little unique variations on the theme of developing intelligence. Maybe we're more aggressive. Maybe we're not as a I don't know. But we're certainly very aggressive with each other. We're high highly territorial. So they're watching all of this and they're seeing, you know, 1950s we start developing nuclear submarines that can stay underwater basically forever. And we're now we develop these uh underground sonar systems that are mapping all activity or increasingly more and more uh underwater activity including anomalous activity, right? Mhm. And not just Soviet or Russian subs, but everything. Yeah. Uh and so they have to adapt. And I think when I was looking at the statistics of this um this whole thing happened because I finished writing all the cases and I'm talking with my wife and she's like you know it would be a great idea if if for each case you had like bunch of categories so that someone could just like look at the categories like uh what color was the craft? What shape was the craft? What was it doing with the was it under the water? Did it emerge from the how close are the witnesses? And I'm like, damn it, that's a really good idea. I didn't want to do it because it was a lot of extra work. I had to go back over every case and siphon out that information. But it was a great idea. And I did do it. And I'm very glad I did it because then that allowed me to put all of that into a spreadsheet and look at like almost 700 cases and like 20. It's a big spreadsheet. So, it's like a database you've built. Yeah. And anyone can download. It's a free download. I have it linked on my website. You can go check it out. But basically, I'm an amateur with statistical analysis. I can't pretend that I'm some genius at it, but I you can still see things. So, one thing I noticed is one category was I broke it down into day or night. Simple. Did this happen when the sun was out or when it was dark? Like very simple little metric there. And one thing I noticed was that up until around 1967-68, it was almost exactly 50/50 day versus night. And then suddenly starting in the late 60s, USOS. Yeah, USOS. Exactly. Starting in the late 60s, it goes to 75% at night. And it was it remained that to this day. 75%. Now, I mean, does that mean I just had too small a data sample and I need to get more cases? Yeah, maybe. Could it be that I I was just somehow uh not selecting a broad spectrum of cases? I mean, all of that's possible. I don't think so. I try to pick what I thought were the best and most meaty cases and something seems to have happened in the late60s. How do you go about mining all this information? Do you just look for and just scrub the internet for cases involving usoss or do you interview specific people? Ask them a little bit of both. Okay. Mostly mostly pulling out the information from there are a couple of uh websites where there's a lot of information. So, one is the National UFO Reporting Center that's run by a very wonderful man named Peter Davenport who's run it for years and uh they've got 100,000 or more cases there that he's collected going back many many years. So, that's that's important. Uh MUON, the Mutual UFO Network has a database which I was they graciously allowed me to use their database which is nice because I'm not a MUON investigator, but they uh they knew what kind of work I was doing and they said yes, you can. And then uh I mentioned Carl Finte earlier. He uh had a website where he collected a bunch of these cases. So I looked at all of those. And then there's books and like out of print magazines from the 1970s that I'd look for and just get them and and um find these cases. Where are people seeing these UF USOs in the for the most part? Is there is there is there one spot in the world where they seem to be most mostly condensed to or confined to? And second second question is what kind of people are reporting these? Yeah, there are hot spots. We probably part of the problem with USOs is we're all like we live on the land. We're land lovers and so usually you're not out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean. So that's a problem right there. Uh navies are the US navies, but they don't like to talk. You'll get Navy stories from some Navy guy like 20, 30 or more years after they retire when sometimes anonymously they will report something to some uh website somewhere. Yeah. Like that happens and I I've tried to collect all of those. They're very interesting. But basically we are, you know, so when people see these, they're usually on the coast or maybe they're on a lake or river, but if it's an ocean base, which is most of them, it's along the along the coast. That's where people What about like um oil rigs? Yeah, a couple of them. There's a good one from the Gulf of Mexico. Am I Gulf of America? Gulf of Mexico. Where am I? Gulf of America, brother. That's where we are. Right there. Golf right there. Exactly. So, one of my There's quite a few from the Gulf here. Quite a few. And uh one of my favorite ones, this is from the National UFO Reporting Center. It's from 2017. It's not that long ago. a uh guy operating on a rig rode into New Fork, the website, and he uh described this. He said, "I was with a bunch of other guys on our rig, and there was another rig." He said, "A couple of miles over this way, and in between this humongous, gargant like football field plus size object comes out of the water, dripping water, flying saucer, disc field." That's what he wrote. And we're watching it drip water. we're kind of blown away and it just zips off. It's gone. Now, how do you investigate that? It's almost impossible. So, Peter Davenport wrote as an addendum to this case. He said, "I spoke with the witness on the phone. Peter will do that sometimes." He said, "I found him to be highly credible, highly this and that." And like apparently this was a very well spoken, believable individual. Peter found him credible. And that's really all that we have on this. It's a pretty interesting story and I I tend I mean I read the account and that's one of the cases that goes into the third volume of my studying. Did that corroborate any other accounts? Were there any other similar accounts with football fields? Really? Yeah. Also, not just us, but you got UFO cases of gargantuaniz objects that have been reported over over the years. You wonder like what are they doing? It's like a small city, you know? It's the best place to hide. It really is. The oceans are Yeah. You know, there's a a really great guy uh named Dr. Kevin New out there. He teaches I've heard of that name. Yeah. Yeah. Kevin's a really good man. He teaches at Albany and in New York State. I think he's on our list, Steve. He's coming on the podcast. Is he really? Yeah, he's good. Good. Good. Shout out to Kevin. Well, yeah. He um he made a really uh a really good insight on this and he just said, "Look, you know, look at the ocean." So, a lot of things about it. First of all, it's non-compressible. In other words, the pressure is constant. So that could be that could be helpful. It's it's certainly a protective like if you are from a place where maybe our solar radiation is not necessarily the right thing for you. You come from somewhere else, the ocean is a protective place for that. It's uh temperature variations are far less in the ocean than they would be above the ocean. and a lot of other things. He said, you know, there's a lot of good reasons to if you are from somewhere else. What if you are from a water, right, society? Sure. Well, the oceans might be feel like home. So, there are good reasons. And then, of course, there's the skies are just littered with airplanes. So, there's that's there's that. Yeah. And and if you if you are interested in these human creatures, well, you know that they live on the land, so they might hang out in the ocean, stay out of the way. So there's good reasons that the oceans would be providing you have the technology to do it. But if you've got that then sure why not. The uh you asked for hot spots so I'll answer that. One is Puerto Rico and particularly I think I think uh all around Puerto Rico really but especially the the east, west, and northern coasts. The southern coast. Yeah. But I think I just haven't found as many. But along the um uh you get like northwest Auadia man. Um or you go out to the east uh the the US Navy's got a big presence at place called Roosevelt Roads there facing Vie Island. There's a lot of activity there. But north of the island you've got the great Puerto Rico trench which goes almost 30,000 ft down. It's like it's super deep and we cannot we can't get down there. But there are I'm sorry. How deep did you say it was? Uh about 20 28 29,000 feet I think maybe close to 30,000 feet. So you're talking you find a mountain almost six miles down. It's it's not quite as deep as the Mariana Trench in the Pacific but it's you know close and it's quite large several hundred miles. So you have um there are a number of pretty good cases from that area. He's showing pulling something up. And who um who is reporting these cases in Auadia or around northern Puerto Rico? Auadia. Yeah, that's not exactly at the trench, but it's uh you know, not that far from it, I guess. Right. Or around this area roughly. The cases go uh good Puerto Rico trench cases go back to the early 60s that I found. Maybe even in the 50s, but they really start to collect in the 60s, early 1960s. Uh gosh, there's some good Auadia cases from uh the 70s and the 80s and the 90s and the 2000s. Like they they've got a throughout. There's quite a few interesting ones. There's a picture. Click on that. Puerto Rico the Puerto Rico trench. Go to that one to the left over there. Top left. Yeah, right there. Blow that up so I can see it. Oh wow. Tilted. So that's that is on Is that northeast south? Is that oriented the right way or is that reverse? It's It's northern plate is over here. Ah, so that north is to the right. Correct. Yeah. Yeah. And that would mean that Auadia is where? On the top left. Top top right. Excuse me. Top right. Okay. I see where you've got it. Yeah. That gets really deep right there. Wow. Yeah. It's It's super super extremely deep. Are there military people that are reporting any of this stuff? Yes. Yes. Absolutely. Uh well, reporting is a hard way to put it. So years after the fact Mhm. it comes these stories will come out you know in in variety of ways. Yeah. So Puerto Rico is one hot spot. Uh we hear a lot of talk about California's Catalina Island. Oh yes. Near LA there. That absolutely the entire uh Atlantic seabboard of the United States going into Canada. Uh Florida where we are is extremely very very active on all sides of the peninsula. Florida. Yeah. Absolutely. But going all the way up the eastern US coast. But then that's See, here's the problem with this. So USOS just like UFOs or UAP now. It's very US dominated in terms of reporting. Americans report this stuff way more seems. Well, we have better reporting infrastructure. We've got MUON and we've got the National UFO Reporting Center. And so we're able to get these other regions of the world. I don't really think that they have the the same infrastructure for collecting these cases. Right. It's hard. Now, there are some are Italy, the Italian researchers have collected a lot. They do a lot of very good work out there. Um um and you get some good cases out by Norway and Britain. Absolutely. What about South America? Yeah, South America there's good. I I mean I would have tended to think I'd find more because I you just you kind of like know there's a lot of activity going on in South America and there's a decent number of USO cases. Yeah. So down by Buenos Iris and Argentina also all along Brazil. Brazil's got a lot Brazil's got a crazy history just in general of UFOs. Yes. Absolutely. I recently learned about that uh that Jacqu Valet book where there was like a massacre down there. Polaris. Yeah. Yes. at the Amazon um the Delta re reaching out to the Atlantic Ocean. Wow. In the late '7s. Yes. Yes. Yes. Um and there's a lot of those that are gen genuine USO cases. So, uh many of those were seen in the water, coming out of the water, entering the water. That's an incredibly ecologically important area part of this world. I mean, it's it's the most massive amount of water flow I think going into any ocean on the planet. The Amazon River. Yeah. Out of the Amazon. It's massive. Uh this this is incredibly ecologically important and rich like estuary where you've got um it's very it's just very important. So maybe there's part of that that's going on. Maybe they're interested in that. Yeah. Um but anyway, yeah, there were some cases in the late '7s there where people were uh killed and and severely injured uh by these objects and that that definitely appears to be the case. Yeah, it was a lot. It seemed like the way it was described to me was that there was like a it seemed like a a slaughter of people or a lot a lot of people being being murdered and not in a kind way by something. Yeah. And in fact, there are claims that this type of thing goes on to this day. Not necessarily in that specific region, but other parts of South America. I have really I have I have heard. How recently? Like quite recently. Uh there's a gentleman I know named Tim Alberino. I really like Tim. Uh he went down where the hell was he? Was it Peru? Maybe. Anyway, just in the last few years, some very bizarre cases of uh like human mutilation type cases um that he was looking into. Have to I I I wish I could And these are with these are with I wish I could remember this a little bit better than I do. Are these with um indigenous people or are these with sophist like like like uh English speakaking uh indigenous not living completely indigenous lifestyles but you know very kind of uh like rural Yeah. South American type. Yeah. Yeah. I mean they have some technology so they're not they're not uncontacted tribes. No. But they are uh Wow. They live a more basic kind of a life than than we might hear with technology. And they describe Did were there any details to like who was responsible for this or like what their what their descriptions were of who was doing this stuff? Well, there's you know Tracy's in the next room. She could probably jump in on this better than I could. Uh but I'll just say that uh there's reason to wonder that this was a human operation going on. That is not necessarily an alien thing. that this could be some kind of really uh like a diabolical covert op type of a thing happening possibly. I I I don't want to say much more because I I'm afraid I'm going to say something that's not accurate. Oh, okay. I see. Um but yeah, this is look, this is a subject where I think I you know, I started this 30 years ago thinking I'm going to go down this rabbit hole for a couple of months and here you are like it just opens up uh all of these fascinating and sometimes disturbing possibilities that are out there. You know, out of all the USO cases that you went over, which one was it? Were there any that stuck out to you or that Many really quite a few that I think are just amazing. What? I can I can throw out a couple for you. Throw out a couple. Also, I I do want to I I want to know more about that 1717 case. Yeah, I'll tell you that right now. That's right off the coast of Martineique. That's in the Caribbean. Okay. So, it's not that far from where we are here. We're in Florida. uh the name of the captain. I cannot recall his name. Chevalier something. Uh he wrote in his log. This is so there this is at um it's after midnight so it's dark. Uh there was I I looked into this. There was like a half moon out. So there was some light that was available. And what he claimed to have seen uh was a a vertical orientation like a like a rod. he said was like a a mass of a ship. So like you I envision like a a straight perpendicular rod of some sort but above the water uh moving along with his ship. It's not the best case but it it's not the worst. Like it's it was I decided to include it because he wrote it in a very matterof fact way. It was like 177. 1717. Wow. Yeah. This is way before submarines obviously. Uh absolutely. and uh the 18th century which that is part of there. I don't there's not many that I have found. There's an interesting one off the coast of southern France I think from 1740. That's kind of interesting. And then there's one from a river a little small river in Scotland in 17 uh 67. And I think that might be it for the 18 only like a couple of cases. it really starts going. The first really good one that I just was kind of really taken by took place in 1825 and this was on a British vessel where they had just returned from Hawaii. In fact, uh well, there's there's a lot of interesting stories going on here, but they were coming back from Hawaii and they were going down the Pacific uh and they were going to end up in Chile. Okay. So, they were down by uh the Cook Islands. So, it's like way down in the south part of this Pacific, the Pacific Ocean. And it's 3:30 in the morning. The ships uh there was a naturalist aboard the ship. I think of like in the movie Master and Commander. They, you know, the buddy of uh Russell Crowe, the captain was this naturalist uh that they had aboard the ship and it's around the same time period. So, I'm thinking something like that. He writes in his log, his 1825. His name was Andrew Bloxom. We've got his name. His his um book is published. You can find the PDF online. I have a link to it from my book. And he said, "Yeah, 3:30 the uh the watch on the ship reported a spherical object emerging from the ocean." He said it was like uh it looked like a red cannon shot coming out of the water. So, it was like a deep orange type of a color. Wow. But incredibly bright. He said it was so bright and he literally said you could pick a pin off the deck. It lifted up uh to a certain elevation and then went back down into the water and then came up a second time and then went back into the water. Now, you know, how many naturalistic explanations can you think of that can account for this? I can't think of any. And Bloxom writes this in a very straightforward way. I mean, you read the rest of his diaries. I read some of it. I mean, he was clearly a very uh meticulous, very rational man and uh very intelligent guy. And this just this one bizarre entry in his in his journal from August 12th, 1825. That's a heck of a case. And I thought that's like the first really really cool case. Do you remember how close or how far they were from land? They were off the Cook Islands. So those are I don't know how close they were to that. They were I I don't think they were close to land. I think they were out there. They were out in the ocean. I don't know exactly. So he said, you know, and there's some other good ones from the 19. There's one from uh is he what's that there? I I found the story block Sam with a with an X. Where is it? I just found it. Oh, you got it. Yeah. Well, this is the story. Good. Good deal. Yeah. Any What does it got? You got illustrations or what? Yeah, I think this is the illustration of that event. Oh. Or at least it's included with the story. Oh, okay. Looks like an iceberg behind it, right? Yeah. That they weren't by icebergs. Yeah. Cook Islands. There wouldn't have been icebergs. No, but that's the name Andrew Bloxom right there. Interesting. Yeah. The HMS Blonde. Correct. That's the ship. God. And what year again? 18. 25. Yeah. Wow. And what was the size of the thing? Do they I He you know I don't think he was a direct witness. I think he was reporting what the night watch reported. So there's that. So he's not a direct witness. So okay, you can take that away from him. Okay. But they um I don't know if they had a really good size estimate. I I get the impression it was kind of large. I mean it was noticeable. It was very bright. Lit up the deck of the ship. by the way. So, fast forward about 150 years to 1971. Okay, this is going into my next volume and uh the USS John F. Kennedy aircraft carrier. So, is near Puerto Rico just saying uh they had just they were uh just finished what were called car quals carrier qualifications. So they had done this is a very involved series of uh exercises and they had just completed that it's 8:30 July 2nd 1971 and the man operating communications and we have his name he he in fact uh reported this to Steven Greer 25 years ago and it's rep it's in Greer's book disclosure which he wrote back then and he his name is James Cop with a K and he also reported this to a couple of other um websites uh at the time. So he's operating communications on the J the JFK carrier. Mhm. 8:30 at night and he says suddenly all of the communication he he discussed the the way the communications on the ship were. He said incoming and outgoing. He said suddenly everything was just gibberish. Everything coming in was just garbled messages. He's like what what's going on here? And then he hears, I'm laughing, but it's really, it's kind of not that funny. He hears on the intercom someone screaming, "It's God. It's the end of the world." So, he's thinking, "What is going on?" He goes, he's able to go out and look and he sees almost what is described in in Bloxom's account from 1825. He sees a glowing orange sphere hovering above or near the JFK. He said it gave off about half the strength of sunlight. So, it's kind of bright. That's true. And uh there there are sailors who were having a really difficult time emotionally with this. Uh one he said later definitely had to be sedated in some way or another and whatever. So he's watching this for maybe half a minute, not long, and then the ship goes to battle stations, general quarters. So they've all got to go. So he has to go back to his uh communication station where he says for the next uh 20 25 minutes uh the ship was on general quarters and the communications were just down. And he also uh stated that he believed that the weapons like aircraft like um I think what do they have F4s, they were not operational. So the the aircraft would not fly or weapons would not operate. So anyway, I I mentioned this because that glowing spherical object, I mean, to me, it's almost it seems like it could have been identical to the one from the 1820s and you get this same type of glowing globular sphere. Wow. Yeah. Like what is that? Right. What is that? I wonder how many of them there are, you know, because like the most the the first one that I ever heard about was the Tic Tac. Yeah. And that thing was like zooming around, zipping around, and and uh I think I think there's a good chance there was something below the water there, too. Oh, you think there was a bigger ship that it came out of or something like that? I think so. Yeah, there's talk about that and it's not 100% confirmed, but that's what I I think is probably the case. But yeah, well, we the Tic Tac's a great case for sure. Absolutely. For sure. Um I mean that one's like apparently it's documented on all of his uh his radar, right? Even though it hasn't been released. Well, yeah, there's and there's a lot of good witnesses for that. Um Kevin Day, who operated the radar aboard the USS Princeton, who's a very decent man, is a friend of friend of ours, uh was there and uh has talked about this in great detail. And of course we have David Fraver's testimony and and um um number of the other witnesses now have come out um who have have discussed it. So I I don't think that we have any doubt that something very very unusual happened there for sure of extremely high order of intelligence as well. I mean, anything that can appear at the what's called the cap the cap point before you get there, they get there. Uh, it's it's like time travel. Some Well, Puto off called it space-time metric engineering. Maybe that's what they're doing. Wow. Uh, in some way, that's San Diego, right? That's not anywhere near Catalina. It's off the coast of that happened off the coast of lower Baja California. Oh, that was in near Baja California, I think. Yeah. a little south probably south uh west of San Diego I think. Okay. Not not that far, you know, right? But off out out there in the Pacific. I have there's a lot of crazy stuff out in the ocean. I have a friend who lives in Tijuana and he says there's all kinds of like UFO stuff going on out there, especially like in the W like USO type stuff and stuff that you really don't hear about in like the media in the US. Yeah, I I think that there's a lot of anecdotal information in Mexico. I have u you know we spoke to uh a couple of years ago a gentleman who had an interesting USO uh account uh off the Yucatan part of it you know on the other side. Oh really? But yeah I think I think I don't think they get reported officially. So they're just like the stories are floating around there as it were. and uh how I I have no doubt there's far more cases that are connected to Mexico than we probably than I have been able to find. You know, the just the reports from like uh Robert Hastings with the UFOs and nukes and the the the saucers showing up above these nuclear missile silos and things like this. I can imagine that there's not some crazy case of like a UFO like stopping a nuclear submarine or something or interacting with like a big nuclear sub. Well, we have some pretty good accounts. Actually, the best accounts of that. By the way, I'm a very big admirer of Robert Hastings work, especially on nukes. Very, very important. So, I'm glad you mentioned him. But, uh, yeah, the best nuclear submarine stories that I've been able to find, I mean, there's a one or two of American, but the Soviets, Soviet Union, um, yeah, they have some, we we learned about them. I think a lot of this happened when the the Soviet Union fell in in 1991. And for a while there, a lot of these stories came out, a lot of KGB files and this type of thing. And so we uh the Soviet Navy in the late 60s and through the 70s and pro probably beyond reported something and I'm sure I'm going to mispronounce this. It's spelled uh Kavaki. It's a Russian word. It apparently means frogs because these things would make a croaking sound in the water. So, Soviet submarines, and I think this is most active in the northern Atlantic, very strategically important area if you're operating submarines, and they were encountering these and at first, so these objects would be in the water. Uh, they'd hear these bizarre croaking type sounds apparently and wonder, is this Americans? Are they what is is this some kind of new technology we have to worry about? And how were they hearing it through their equipment? Hearing yeah through their equipment. And apparently these things would like circle around them. That's not easy to do to circle around a nuclear submarine. Uh but that would happen and uh there would be multiple ones of them. Uh they'd be surrounded. They never got a sense that these were acting in a hostile manner. M uh to your question like are they engaging in that? I don't I don't I'm not aware that the Soviets believed that these kakaryi were operating in a hostile way but they were spooky and I think they they definitely spooked them and there was a um apparently a formal classified study of them that was supposedly within the Soviet military structure. I it's not available that I'm aware of, but Yeah, it's interesting because you only have your your equipment to measure what's going on outside. You don't really have those submarines don't have giant windows to see like no what's going on out there. So those things could probably evade any kind of detection. One of the things that just fascinates me about uh these USOs is like whenever I write about any of these I I try to whatever extent possible to put myself in that position to because you want to be you want to be accurate. You want to be analytical but you really want to like I want to feel what is it like to be there. So imagine it's the Cold War, it's the 1960s or '7s, and you're in the water and you're hunting for the enemy. You're a Russian, you're hunting for the Americans, you're American, you're hunting for the Russians, and it's pitch black and you know, and then there's this other thing. There's this other presence there. So spooky. I mean, it's not hard to see why there would be secrecy from their point of view about this. I mean, honestly, I mean, uh, but the amount of drama. Is my microphone. Am I okay here? Oh, is he good, Steve? This up. Am I okay? Pull up just a little bit just in case. I don't want to mess it up. Yeah, he's good. Okay, thank you. U I I just have to think like the drama, the human drama has got to be off the charts for these people to have experiences and that was one of the real draws for me to uh to engage in this project. Yeah, that's one of the things I think about a lot too like you know there's various ideas of like how many people in the world know the truth about this stuff, right? Like how many people that exist on Earth know everything outside of the compartmented, you know what I mean? people that have all the pieces to the puzzle. Maybe maybe a hundred, 200, 300. Yeah. I mean, I spent 30 plus years and I'm not one of them, right? You know, Ive I've tried I try to get a handle on it, but uh there's massive gaps. I I have it. I always imagine like if you were one of those people, if they do exist, if there is anyone who has the whole picture, the whole every piece of the pie, what that must do to your worldview and your your you know what I mean? just like your life and and and separating your work life from your home from your family life if you have a family life if you can if that can exist knowing that right about 15 16 years ago I think I I coined a phrase which is still out there I still hear it's called breakaway civilization so it's the idea that you coined that phrase yeah it was my little thing yeah oh wow um and I was thinking because I'm interested in uh the study of human civilization is a very um kind of I I once read uh the condensed version of a book by Arnold Toinby, a really great historian. It's like the Mozart of historians in my opinion. And he wrote this Arnold Toinby. He was a he was a genius. Okay. And I think he died in the 40s. Um but he wrote this something that is really not popular anymore. or he did these meta historians like he was looking at the grand progress of of human society and what is it that makes a civilization and so he did this comparative study of human civilizations. Anyway, I was reading that at the time. This is 2007208 and um I thought you know what about a civilization that develops out of the classified world that we don't know about um based on Roswell tech or whatever other advanced tech that is kept secret. We had examples during the cold war of of separate scientific infrastructure in the Soviet Union. They had a separate scientific in infrastructure that in a lot of ways was based on some really bizarre things. They had uh this guy named Trophy Lysenko who had these very unusual ideas about uh biology and evolution that were only uh designed to conform with Soviet communist ideology and but it forced an entire infrastructure to go down this deadend path basically of research. So like there are now that's something we know about but could you develop I I asked myself based on EUO tech that is kept secret um which I was really thinking a lot about of course at that time to the point where you would have breakthroughs in terms of understanding whether it's gravity or material science or understanding who these beings are that you cannot share with the rest of the world but you that doesn't stop you from continuing on to develop this. And so you you end up going on your own path and you kind of break away intellectually and cosmologically and maybe technologically uh from you know us us little pearls living on the surface but you you are aware of anti-grav research. You have the ability to go off world. Maybe you have the ability to learn who these other beings are more than so that would I call it a breakaway civilization when that's broken away from our own. That doesn't necessarily mean that they all live on Mars in like what's that alternative three type setting, but it could mean as you were just saying, you've got a job in the classified world. You go off, you punch the clock and you go into your classified project, which then through that you probably go into through another classified project and maybe a third. And so you've got all these layers of cover and then you do your work, you're in the breakaway, and then you come home, you say hello to your spouse. How was work, dear? Oh, it was a pretty good day. you know, and you can't really talk about it. So, that I think is probably that was my my vision of it. Other people have have taken the idea. Joseph Frell, we talked about Joseph. He has he actually wrote about it as well and you could you can go pretty far with it. Um I'm us I'm more cautious about it than almost anyone else that I've heard uh talk about it, but I do believe that there's probably something like that. Well, if you were uh one of the executives of one of those corporations that did have this technology that's been evolving since the 50s with some sort of crazy physical understanding of physics that uh the rest of the world doesn't even understand. And you now have weapons that are more powerful than the United States military, Russia, China, all of them combined. And the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff wants some answers. You're going to give them the double bird. Yeah. You're going to say, "Fuck off. You're not getting any of our stuff. We could take out every single military on the in the in the snap of our fingers. So like you you you don't have to answer to anybody. Yeah. If they're that independent. I mean that's a really good question and you're getting into a a key area which is how what is the structure of this secrecy for real? Like who who's running it? Who's who's the guy in charge? And does he answer to someone else? Does he answer to them? There's all kinds of possibilities. Who does he answer to? Right. Exactly. And you know, this is I don't know. I don't have that answer. This is interesting. You know, the I had this lady on recently, this woman who uh tracks money uh in the government and government spending and budgets and stuff like this. And she was a head she was a worked during the Bush administration and she was a part talking about Katherine Austin Fitz. Yes. Yeah. She's a great friend of mine. Oh, really? Love Catherine. I just had her on. Fascinating. And she was she's a brilliant lady. She was explaining Yeah. She was explaining like how the money that went missing when Donald Rumsfeld did that press conference the day before 911 said there was $4 trillion missing from the from from the receipts for the Pentagon. I think his quote was 2.3 trillion. Yeah, I got it wrong. 2.3 but uh Yeah. No. Yeah, that's all right. And basically, you know, she looks at this whole thing from a balance sheet perspective saying all these trillions of dollars have gone missing and there's they're not accounted for. And if this if these things went to black projects, you know, what we're speculating about with companies that have all this crazy tech is is not that far off. Yeah. A couple of things. So, first of all, everyone should know who Katherine Austin Fitz is. She's she's a real a great benefactor to our civilization and she is a gem and a brilliant individual and a wonderful person. She's like a absolutely decent wonderful. Totally. Um so but she's also she has opened up this whole area. Now the thing about the 2 point first it was 2.6 trillion in the summer of01 that was 2.3 and that number actually they supposedly got it down to zero uh if you want to believe that. But but but the what they really were talking about as I understand it and Katherine could probably do this better far better than me. It doesn't, to my understanding, necessarily mean that $2.3 trillion went missing. You're talking about unresolved uh discrepancies in the payment. So, you've got all these different accounting systems within the Pentagon and you've got uh so there's a lot of opportunities for duplicate transactions to be recorded and so I don't really know how much money gets siphoned out. There's definitely, I mean, I completely agree, a lot of money that's gotten siphoned out. And what is the exact number? It's $2.3 trillion would be, you know, the Pentagon's official budget in 2001 was something like 300 billion. So, you're talking a factor of eight, right? So, how do you lose eight times your annual budget? It beats me. I don't know what how that works. My accounting skills are not very good. But clearly we are talking about uh one thing Katherine said to me I think and she's probably written it. She she talked about when she first she became assistant secretary of HUD housing and urban development in the correct first Bush administration back in 1989 and you know her thing was always finance. She's a financial whiz and she described and Katherine forgive me if I get this slightly wrong. She said, "I want to look at the uh the full budget of HUD. Is that it?" And they're like, "You're not authorized." And she uh said, "The hell I'm not authorized." So she said they eventually wheeled in, she described the library carts, you know, like where you have library books, like one after another after another filled with stacks of papers. And she I think she said something like, you know, God could not sort this mess out. It was designed, it was so it was it was uh physically unuditable and and one of her points I definitely remember this was uh it was it was like designed by default physically impossible to audit the US government and and she made a very uh many many astute observations. She just said look we have a system where these people are uh they do not adhere to the rule of law. They are above the rule of law. Yes. And I I think, you know, that puts it as well as anyone's ever done. Yeah. It's a it's a ter it's a terrifying idea that there all all this money is going to some stuff that we know and and then Well, think think of one thing here. So all of our history, right, we I'm sorry to interrupt you. All of our history has been a extremely hierarchical structure. So you've always it's always been this way. You have a king, priesthood, guys in charge, and they own everything. They control everything. But in the last couple of hundred years, we like to think that we have this democracy of some sort where everyone's participating and it's egalitarian. And yeah, that's that's what we actually have is it's a pretend democracy. And both parts of that are equally important. You have to have the people need to believe that they have a kind of democratic system or else they'd be very unhappy because we want to think that we have a say in our system. But the reality has always been uh there's always been elites. There's always been the guys on top. And throughout all of the 19th and 20th and now 21st century, their goal has always been to figure out how do we let the people keep believing these little fairy tales while we keep running things the way we've always done. And that's really what the system is. And so now it's a system that is inherently dishonest. It has to rule by lies because and and that that distorts all of our politics, too, because everything's now out in the open. You can't really um Yeah. Everything's got to be kind of tossed out there for the people. And it's all a series of manipulations one after the just we get propagandized 24/7 basically what it is. Sure. Yeah. And it's built on lies. And that's why they can't ex disclose certain things because they feel like that will unravel a whole another layer of lies that will that will make people accountable for things and people will go to prison. I'm sure I'm sure there will be a lot of really terrible consequences for dulging some of the secret information that go back to UFOs. I mean uh 15 years ago I co-authored a really a cool book with a man named Bryce Zable and it's called AD after disclosure. So that was that was the I think the only uh booklength treatment on like how could disclosure happen, what would how would it how would it rock our world if it were to happen? And it feels like a different lifetime. I 15 years ago 2010 was a totally different world. Uh it feels like but but um one thing that I've always felt is that a genuine reveal of this whole UFO UAP subject like a true reveal is highly highly destabilizing really to Yes. 100%. 100%. And this is why there is an absolutely like we are never going to give this up. Like there are factions that will never give this up. They will never look think of it like but they will never give it up. They'll never willingly give up this to protect us or pro to protect themselves. Protect themselves to protect the system that's in place. Right. Sure. May they may rationalize it to say you people don't know what you're getting into. We're protecting you. Like I could see them justifying that. Maybe they're right. We we don't know all of it, do we? Uh I believe in truth. I I like to think that most of us believe in truth. And if I'm going to have faith in anything, it's going to be a faith in in truth. I I what else if you cannot believe in truth, what else you got? Like so I I'm going to believe in that. Uh however, so let's say now in 2010 when we wrote this, the country was not nearly as polarized as it is now. So in 2010, we're envisioning the president goes and tells the world, well, you know, uh, this thing happened, this sighting occurred. We can't really ignore it anymore. Yes, it's real. Uh, and some and some of them are not human and they're here. That would be disclosure, right? That's kind of what we all imagine. And so even under that scenario, I think it's way more complex now. We can get to that. But even in that scenario, uh I was, you know, even in 2010, I I was all over 9/11. I got into a lot of trouble among some UFO researchers because I was uh an early 911 conspiracy guy. Were you? Absolutely. I still am. Really? Not going to be insulted by that pack of lies. We'll come back to that then. Yeah. Yeah. I'm, you know, there are people far more conversant with that than me. But yes, I'm My dad worked at the World Trade Center back in September 01. He had the day off. My dad had the day off. What? My dad was a retired New York City cop at the time. And uh he had a really cool job as a fire safety director, as they were called, at the Twin Towers. Yeah. He shared his job with a really nice man who I knew who was killed that day. His name was Billy. And um yeah, really affected my dad. It was a real real tough thing. So 9/11 was a very personal thing on that level. I mean, anyone who went through that, of course, I'm not saying like more for me than anyone else, but my dad was was there. That's crazy. So your dad your dad knew a lot of people that died and you I'm sure you did, too. Yeah. A lot of firefighters, of course, and a lot of good people. One of my theories on 911 is that um that people that were closest to it and affected by it the most emotionally and personally are the ones that have and I could be wrong here though. I think you proved this wrong, but those are the ones that have the least capacity to entertain any of No, you're right. any of the alternate ideas of what happened, right? That that don't go with the narrative, right? They they seem to be the ones that go with the narrative. The one the people who are more disconnected from it or even born after You're totally right. Yeah. Yeah. I almost wrote a book. keep wondering about this uh on false flags, the history of false flag operations in our world. I I got I got really into it and uh in fact I I did a I wrote uh a little TV series for Gaia television um number of years ago on the history of false flags. You can go find it. Go to Gaia and go look for it. Um that was much less than I had actually researched. I did a lot more research on false flags than I did for that series. But, uh, one thing that a false flag does to people, it's a it's a real psychological head game that you play on people because you're creating this massive trauma for your society. It's an emotional trauma. And what you're doing is this horrible, horrible thing happens and people are naturally going to be deeply upset by it. And then what you do, this is the genius of it. You find the solution immediately. Whether it's Hitler invading Poland and saying we were attacked by the Poles, which he did, or any other, there's a lot of false flags. America is the king of false flags, especially after World War II and uh all the covert ops that we have done. But anyway, you create a catastrophe, a trauma that people freak out over and you identify it. You you connect the emotion to the intellect. So you have the emotional connection to some kind of here's the explanation and once once you get that um people like my own dad my father uh you know when I started really looking at 911 I used to talk to my dad on the phone about this and um I have to be careful because I could get emotional uh so just forgive me here. Sure. Sure. But um my dad learns that like Richie, are you looking into I just saw this PBS thing and it just showed he talked about the pancake theory that was put out total theory, but it was that was put out within a week of the event. This guy comes out and says this is how it happened. Like no, you have no freaking idea. What was what was that theory? Roughly the the the planes crashing caused a pancaking effect. Oh yeah. of the one floor and the other floor and all the way down and it did not happen that way at all. But it was so anyway that goes on to PBS which is total CIA op anyway. And my dad bought into it. Of course he did. You know, I don't blame him. Uh and then he he was like he really had a struggle with the fact that his son was going all into this alternative theory about 911. And I talk with him every week on the phone and um and he came around. You know, my my dad um all right, we'll have to talk about something else. So, let's move move on. We'll come back to it when I can collect myself. Sure. Um we were talking about uh disclosure and um what it would look like and what the incentives would be for disclosure and how um you you did mention that you think disclosure nowadays would be far more complex than it would have been. I do. Yeah, I do because um well because Trump, if I can am I allowed to say that on YouTube? Yeah. Um you know, he hits the scene in 2015 basically. Actually, it will do better on YouTube if you say Trump. Yeah. Well, and you know, I mean, how do how do you talk about this without uh 50% of the population their pants and you know, so whatever I end up saying, someone's going to be upset. But but basically you have a guy who comes in that is the ultra most polarizing political figure that we've had since Abraham Lincoln. Mhm. Lincoln was a highly polarizing president if you really go back. Mhm. But uh here comes Trump and and so now we're at a point where whether it's Trump or anyone else, whether if it was Biden, it would wouldn't be no different because a president who comes up there says anything on this and you've got half the country, half the world maybe saying, "I don't believe you." Yeah. They're not going to believe it. So that's that's a complication where we're in a kind of a posttruth world essentially where how do you how do we actually reliably fact check? You have so-called fact checkers out there now and we all know it's nonsense. So difficult and they're so politicized and they're so ultraabachmentoriented it's obvious people just lean into their audience. Yeah. So I think that really complicates uh disclosure as well. Um I mean look, you know, we were talking earlier in this conversation about the congressional thing and yeah, skeptics will just how they'll just jump on anything and they'll cause a lot of noise and it works. Yeah. Well, I I've thought about it and I think I'm probably in that camp where if the top top level of government came out and said aliens are real, I would probably think the opposite or something. there's some sort of weird mix, right? I mean, there's definitely a large amount of people out there who um for you can't really blame them that whatever the government tells them, they they think the opposite's true. You're probably going to be right to a certain extent. Think of I think of the UFO reality as a mountain, right? As a massive Mount Everest. And so, you're going to disclose that. You're going to disclose that whole thing, right? Right. You think so? So, what they'll do is they'll take like a little freaking sliver and say, "Here, this is" and it would be a true sliver, right? But it's certainly an incomplete and I'm sure it's a sliver that will provide the cover your ass rule very effectively to make you look as good as possible. Yeah. So it's going to be deceptive. Yes. Any kind of real uh official attempt at disclosure is pro is almost certainly going to follow that model. I still maintain and I I've caught a lot of hell for this and you know what can I say? But I do think that a lot of the people who are pushing this now, like people like Hell Puto off, I've known Hellpov for over 25 years. I admire and respect him and I think he's I think he's on the right side of this. That's my belief. People can say you're, you know, you're naive. Well, whatever. Uh Lu Alzando, I'll say the same thing. Uh Christopher Melon, these are establishment people in a way that I've never been. I'm not an establishment guy. You're a journalist. I'm a historian and I guess I do journalism. I don't know what I am. I'm a researcher, right? But I'm not I've never been in that world. So I don't have I don't think like they do. Like I don't think like a guy like Alzando. People complain that he's harps on the national security thing, but he's army counter intelligence. What do you expect? This is what you pay him to do. Like that's his job. Yeah. He his salary is to look for threats. Mhm. How do you expect someone who's to do that not not to do that? So, but I'm not I don't look at it that way. So, I don't have a lot of their um you know predelections to that. But I do think like there are people who have a like they're doing this in good faith. They're they're not they're not like saying haha, you know, we're going to screw them over. I mean, everyone's got their angle. Everyone's always looking out for their self-interest. That's human nature. You can never not expect that. But um but there are definitely the secrecy the real hardcore secrecy group that I think they are not and that they're those guys do operate very effectively. Do you have um sort of like a a checklist or do you have any sort of way to qualify people who come out in the public and start talking about this stuff to whe whether or not or do you even think about it whether or not people are credible? Are they are they strategically putting out disinformation or some some sort of a mixed bag? It's a very fair question and I don't I don't know if I can like I can't give you a mathematical equation to say this is he fulfills all of these criteria. There are certain things because there's people there's people that that could be a they could be just uh well I think it's I think it's complicated. I think that there's people that are out there to make money and to like sell books and to do these kinds of things, but they can also be useful idiots to an extent. Yeah. Yeah. uh and have more or less people in the government trying to encourage them. Look, the best thing that you can I everything you said is totally on point. I would just say there are certain criteria that that any responsible researcher should adhere to. So when f first of all you you want to you know we went through a period a decade or more ago when you'd have all of these totally anonymous so-called whistleblowers that were out there and or or people who said I worked for this department or that department but they provide no no background where you can verify anything like the first thing you need to know is did this person actually work where they said they worked like did they did they do that? Uh secondly, you know that you have to not jump to conclusions. It's probably the first best thing you could do. And and wait. You have to wait. Someone comes out with a claim. I I would I would I don't like knee-jerk reactions to um whether pro or con that go too far. Like you want to take your time with these things. Uh this is why like I'm not always really comfortable talking about the every like latest little story that happens even though I I person I feel pressured because like I've been doing this so long people want to know what do you think it's it's really I've noticed that with this topic it is hard to avoid talking about specific people in this community. Yeah. And you like and it's hard not to go chasing after the latest headline. Yeah. Which is a problem because ideally what you want to do is you want to stop and wait and go slow. Yeah. So that other researchers who know more about propulsion than you do, who know more about the history of aviation than you do, who know more about the history of this department than you, like you want all these people have a chance to chime in and provide their own perspective and that just takes time and it's nuanced. Um, but no, I don't know if I have a sure shot uh answer to these things. I remember when Bob Lazar, you know, was he's still I guess a little controversial. It was much more controversial in the past. And uh part of it is like you you go by for me cuz I wrote about him over 15 years ago in one of my books and it was really difficult like I didn't know what do I think about Bob Lazar. I didn't know back in 2007 2008 when I'm finishing one of my books and um I ended up thinking I believe this man and and I believed him because of the consistency of what he said over a number of years. the fact that I never felt he tried to go for reach or to try to uh go into an area that was different. He and when he didn't know something, he would say so like and then and then of course I I did get to meet a number of people who knew Lazar you know somewhat well not perfectly but and I got to know George Knap uh also very well during those years. I have a tremendous regard for George. So, um, I ended up, you know, this is how I made my decision on Bob Lazar. Fortunately for me, I What was your decision on? That he's legit. He's telling, he was telling the truth. Mhm. Yeah. It seems to me that that he would be a great candidate for the CIA to choose to come there because he's so easily discreditable because of his background and some of the stuff that he was. Yeah. Yeah. They That's right. Um, like the the the brothel and the other stuff. And Yeah. He did uh security work for I think a Nevada brothel, I was it security? He put in some cameras for them or whatever he did. There was the weird thing about his wife that happened to the first wife I think who like committed suicide. There were marital issues and he went and got married like while he was still married to her. There was a bunch of really which was it's such a cluster of logic when you're thinking about this stuff because you got to think like all of these things which are utterly irrelevant right story. Exactly. So, it's like on one hand, why would they choose this guy to do this thing? But then if you're looking at it from the reverse side of the lens, if you're some intelligence operation trying to do something and protect yourself in case the cat gets out of the bag, you want people to question him and discredit him to think he's a liar possibly. But, but actually, if you hear his story, like the way he tells it, he made the initiative to do all of this. So, he he was very unhappy with his employment situation at the time. Mhm. He had met Edward Teller, right, the inventor of the fuse for the Hbomb and I think the original Doctor Strange Love, I I suspect, uh, in Los Alamos in the early 1980s, I think 1982, and had a very good back and forth conversation because Lazar Lazar is a crazy like he's a brilliant guy and he developed this jet car, right? Right. And it made the cover of the Los Alamos local paper and he's meeting with Teller and apparently Teller says, "Uh, call me sometime, young man." And you know, they had this kind of conversation and a couple of years go by and Lazar's like, "I'm going to" and he he was able to get a the job with EG&G, which got him out to S4. And then the only reason that he went public is he uh Bob Lazar, forgive me if I'm getting any of this wrong, but he started talking about it to John Lear and his his friend Gene Huff, who was a real estate friend of his at the time, and they start going out to watch the uh displays of the craft. And I think the second time out, they got caught and he got into some serious trouble. And you know, had that not happened, I don't know. I think he's talked about this. It's like, you know, maybe I um I should have stayed in in the stayed in the in the biz and I I could have but he would have been a lifer and we would have never heard about him, right? So, it's possible that he was selected for certain possibility. Yeah. You know, maybe they they might have psychologically profiled him and think this is a guy that he doesn't seem to give a He says what he says. Did you watch the interview with him or the It was I think it was like a more of a debate or like a a conversation with him and Stanton Friedman. Uh no, I knew Stanton Friedman very well and I know exactly what Stanton, you know, uh Yeah. Stan never ever ever ever believed Lazar's story. He called him a fraud. Mhm. You know, when I I first uh the first time I met Stan was in 2001, long time ago. I was brand new. I was I was I still had nice black hair, hope in my eyes. You could look carefully, you could see it. I had all of I had big round glasses still. And uh I wasn't yet 40. And anyway, so I I meet with Stan and he wanted the first thing he wanted to know about me was what was my position on. That's the litmus test. Yeah. And I was like, at that time I hadn't even I wasn't even really conversant with Lazar's story. I had just worked my ass off to get the story of UFOs up to 1973. That was the end of my first volume. And uh Lazar, you know, he was after that and I was aware that I had to study him, but I hadn't yet really gotten on top. But Stan wanted to know like if I had the proper perspective on Lazar and I actually I've always uh I mean I really appreciate and respect Stan always will but I did not appreciate that. I felt that he was trying to pressure me in a way that I just don't like. Don't don't tell me what I'm supposed to think on this. I'll come to my own damn decision. And even at that time I was not inclined to dismiss Lazar's story. But I I kept it off to the side until I felt that I had spent enough time to research it. Yeah. And um yeah, at that time this is still in the early 2000s and the late '9s. And but a lot of Lazar's interviews were available transcripts that he had done in like 1990, '91, '92. Um he read them all. He doesn't do anymore. He doesn't do any interviews. No, but in the early '90s he did quite a bit. Why do you think do you have any idea why he stopped or do you have any uh serious? It's hard for me to speak for him. Uh the impression that one gets is that he just got sick and tired of the field and that there was you know it's like time to move on. It's like I put my information out there. This is a crazy community which it is and was uh you know we don't really do a good job at uh managing ourselves. It's impossible. Yeah. And there's also there's all these other whistleblowers that come out. And one of the most recent ones that really screwed my mind up was um the guy who went on Jesse Michael's podcast. He was talking about kidnapping kids from Indonesia after an earthquake. And then Michael Herrera. Is that the So Herrera cor this guy corroborated Herrera. Talking about Jake Barber. Yes. Yeah. his story. I didn't I did not hear this in and I Jesse Michael's great podcaster. It's basically the Herrera story, right? He I mean he had a different he was had a different angle of it. He was a part of some different organization but um basically he says that he went to one of Greer's public Yeah. whistleblower conferences and he heard Herrera talk. So Jake Barber says that he went there as like a guy to uh catch whistleblowers to prosecute them, right? And then he heard Herrera talk and he's like, "Oh my god." You basically have it, but you've got the wrong interpretation of it. I think so. Like it's not a human trafficking kind of thing, which thinks he So yeah. So Jesse brought up brought that up about the human trafficking. This guy Mike Jake Robert got really upset when he called it human trafficking. No, it wasn't human trafficking. We were capturing these people. We weren't capturing them, but we were bringing them back here and holding them to use them as psychic manipulators or psychic uh pilots for these UFOs. And uh he's like they they were they were in distress. There was an earthquake and we were looking for children who were left-handed and homosexual cuz they have the highest psych psychic abilities. And it's like what the are you talking about? Hey, Leonardo da Vinci was one of those, wasn't he? Yes, he was. And um and you know, you said they were they were keeping them and like feeding them certain thing like not giving them like I don't know what they were doing. Restricting their diet somehow. I don't know if they're keeping them against their wills, but this guy is talking about some way way out there sci-fi Stranger Things type stuff. And then it's like, how far how far do we allow these people to take us? I personally have not formed a definite opinion on this one. I just haven't. Uh I mean, I'm aware of the story and we mentioned Stan Freriedman. Stan had a great expression. He called something he had a gray box. He said, "If I don't know if it's true or false, I put it in my gray box." Yeah. And there's a lot of things that go in a gray box. And that you that's one of those things where I mean I would say let's keep it open and let's find out if there's any other research that can verify it to some extent. So we have you have Herrera then you have Jake Barbara that's two points that's not equal to proof but it makes it a little more interesting and maybe we can we can move on from there. But that's the problem with a lot of the elements in this field you're dealing with. I mean, by its very nature, the UFO, let me just keep saying UFO because I'm so used to it. We say UAP, whatever. Yeah, UFOs represent I mean, we we talk about it in our society often enough, but I am absolutely convinced we don't fully appreciate the depth of what it really means. I mean, look, imagine being across the table, not from me, but from one of them, and imagine they have an IQ of 500 and they're looking right at you and they've got a telepathic ability, and maybe they're connected to a hive mind, so they know everything that you don't know, and they can peer into your mind into all the little avenues and recesses and like and they don't laugh at your jokes or we're going to run for the hills and they're and and even if they look like us, like that's intimidating. that there's no way that's not going to be intimidating to run into beings like that that operate on a completely different level that we will not we we like to think that well yeah we'll be like that one day I don't think so no we're not going to be like that I'm not and you're not maybe a thousand years from now who knows is there any story is there any crazy story that's out there right a UFO whether it be abduction or a sighting or anything that's like there's no solid evidence one way or the other that you know for a fact is true. Oh wow. Pro probably. Uh I don't I don't know. That's a great question. I wish uh I could have thought about this before. It's kind of tough kind of tough on the spot. a story that has no whether it be like a like a I mean other than the fact that you know obviously we have like things like the tic tac where right it's like a we know that's we've had people testify and there's there's the the the footage like the go fast and the fleer stuff but it's kind of like it's grainy footage whatever and it's kind of like take it for what it is it could be DARPA it could be non-human intelligence but like say there's one of these whistleblowers that come out like Michael Herrera or Jake Barber or or Bob Lazar right one of these sorts of stories that you that You know for a fact? Well, one, I mean, this isn't a UFO incident, but this was the Davis Wilson notes that I talked about a little earlier when we talked about Eric Davis. I knew for a fact when those things came out in 2019, that that document, I knew it was real. And there were a lot of people at the time who were saying it's fake. One person said it was a movie script. One person a lot of people were just saying it's complete disinformation. Yeah. And I for a while there I I was actually really really pissed off at the rest of the research community because I was for a little while the only the only person publicly to take a stand on it. Wow. Yeah. And everyone's like throwing all kinds of at me. And uh that's fine, but I'm like and there were a couple of people who privately had said to me, I know it's real, too. I was shown this in whatever year. Uh but I can't I can't go out. I can't I can't say publicly. So I understood that's fine. Um but I during that whole period uh there were some really uh some really snarky nasty people that popped up out of nowhere and then have since disappeared. It's like who are you? Who are these people? Interesting. Yeah. But anyway, I always knew I always knew that would be vindicated. I just didn't know when. But then then you get, you know, Jacqu Valet talked about it in in his forbidden science, one of his volumes, his diaries. Um Oh, really? Yes. Yes. He mentioned knowledge of it at the time when at when um the a when um the astronaut died when uh No, prior before. before that. Yeah. I think in his volume that covers uh 2000 to 2009 when Davis actually interviewed Wilson during that period, a valet knew about this and it's in there. Um, also Eric Davis himself short of saying I wrote them several times, interviews that he did in 2019, 2020 and then just just at the briefing. Alzando, this is one good thing Alzando did. He mentioned that he introduced Davis by way of those notes and he he uh so he obviously knows it's real. Like that whole crowd, they all know it's all real. Uh but there's been enough confirmation and Davis himself, if you really listen to him, even in the briefing, it's quite obvious. He makes it clear without saying he's got to be careful. These people th those notes themselves are not classified, but they talk about something that is highly classified. You know, they were private notes, so it's not like an official government document, but it is discussing something that is extremely sensitive. Let's take this opportunity. I got to take a quick bathroom break. We'll jump right back in. We're back, folks. We're back. Uh, we were talking about, what were we talking about? Steve, do you remember what we're talking about? We want to talk more about mil the military aspect of this USO stuff. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Um, what before we do that, one of my questions that I've been wanting to ask you is, um, do you I'm sure you do know about um, this base. I talked about it with Jesse when he was on here that there was a decommissioned I think it was a Navy base in the Bahamas. that was specifically in charge of tracking some of this stuff, this underwater UFO stuff. Do you remember what I'm talking about specifically? Well, there was a there's a system that was known as Sosus when it was developed, the sound undersea uh sonar uh system. Mhm. And it was originally set up in that area like near the Bahamas. So, I don't know if that's what he's referring to. No, this was a base. Um, Steve, if you pull up the podcast I did with Jesse, it's in the time stamps. I think it's its own its own dedicated time stamp. I should I should know it. Just talking about it. I could I think was involved with it, too. I put it into my second or third uh volume. Atlantic under Is that what you were talking about? The Atlantic Ach. Yeah. Ach. That's what it was. Okay. So, um, apparently what what I the way I understand it is they had some sort of maybe it was like a Whoa, holy macaroni. Bless you. Uh, underground or not underground, underwater sort of base to track and detect things. Something like this. Yeah. So, I am aware of that and I do have a little I' I've learned a few things. Jesse may know more than I do. I don't know. I have to have to hear what he has to say. Yeah. One of the things that I try to do with this study is two things. One, so one is track the cases and then the other is to try to understand the technological, military, political and other related developments that went on at the same time. So what I try to I structure this book these books um I break them into chapters and at the beginning of each chapter I try to highlight like what's developing here what's what's our technology what's our politics what's what's relevant and so the development of a lot of the Navy systems goes has gone into that section of of each book uh the chapters and so I remember I wrote about SOS and I have I have information on ACT it's very it's related it's all similar it's basically their system for probing into the world under the water. So, off the top of my head, I don't really know what else to say about it, but it's as that description there says, uh, secretive testing of underwater vehicles and weapons. They called it the underwater Area 51. Yeah. One interesting thing about it is its location. So, that's a extremely active area. One thing I did when I collected all of these cases on my little Google Earth, I put a little yellow pin for every as accurately as I could for every single USO case I could find. So that's why I can tell you Puerto Rico is a major hot spot. That's why I can tell you Florida is a major hot spot area, this whole region here. And so the fact that they've got something down there in the Bahamas, I just think it's kind of interesting because that's a very, very active area for us in general. One of the fascinating things he also told me was there is this uh there's this secretive NRO character who was tied into NASA who was a part of this base somehow. Well, there's an underwater version of the NRO um and it's Nurro um National Underwater um forget the acronym. There's a a a brilliant uh UF uh UFO podcaster on YouTube. Uh UAP Gerb. Oh, I've heard about him. Yeah, he's very smart guy. I I I've never talked with him, but if he's listening, I I'm big admire of his Jesse's had him on. Yes. Highly highly intelligent. The National Underwater Reconnaissance Office. Yeah, that's it. Yeah. Responsible for underwater reconnaissance and operates primarily in the waters of the Soviet Union. Started in 1969 and it's there's a history there. One one thing that they were they had they collected um a tremendous amount of intelligence against the Soviet Union out of the Sea of Utka there. And uh they actually were able to place a device on a a undersea cable there like a listening device to kind of tap into Soviet uh communications. And this is back in like 1970771 when they did that using the halibet. Uh I think that was the sub the submersible they used. Oh wow. I think that was the one or maybe the se I think the halibet. I can't remember. But they um were able to get very valuable intelligence for a good decade or more based on what they were doing there. They're like, um, yeah, that's a that's a whole story that we know a little bit about and we need to know much much more because there's no question uh that they have got information that we just don't know and may never know. They're they are the underwater NRO. They are incredibly secretive. M yeah, I heard that there's like probably over 20 intelligence or like threeletter agencies that we don't even know exist that are within the government or the deep state. I'm sure that we probably we'll probably never know about like I never I never would imagine I never knew that the NRO had anything to do with UFOs. The Well, they're a good candidate for it actually, but we didn't know the NRO existed until the 1990s. They they existed in total secrecy for over 30 years. Yeah. Uh the NSA, you know, jokingly referred to as no such agency, uh was completely secret for more than its first decade until the 70s it came out. Right. Well, there was a book in 1964 called The Invisible Government, uh that mentioned it. There was one book that but no, I don't really think it was truly appreciated what the NSA was and then it it came out more in the 70s and but it's still ex to this day. quite secretive, you know, but that was a secret agency. Its existence was classified for many years. And I remember I I was friends with a congressional uh aid 15 plus years ago. I don't think he's alive anymore, but he he told me like he's he was interested in this whole subject and said he was convinced that there was a very substantial uh agency involved in all this that was still completely off off the boards. No one knew about it really. So, I believe that there are I mean, look, you know, I I talked about we're having a pretend democracy a little while ago. I think that's right. So, you've what we really have what the United States is, of course, is a a massive empire that's trying to dominate has always tried to dominate the world, especially since World War II. and as a result puts institutions and agencies in place that it doesn't think the public really needs to know about even though we're supposedly supposed to have this open transparent society, right? So, I think there's all kinds of secrecy that's going on. I I would not be shocked at all that there were a bunch of three-letter uh type agencies that we don't know about. It wouldn't wouldn't surprise me. Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy stuff, man. It really is. And another thing that um Katherine Fitz was telling me about is all the money that's going to these underground bunkers and underground uh like basically like underground cities that are connected by highways all around the country. And she's saying that it's very possible that like trillions of dollars are going to the going to these things. Yeah. I've I've spoken with her about this in fact uh off the record and that's a real possibility. You know, I I um used to know there was a researcher uh by the name of Richard Souder, Dr. Richard Souder. And uh is he the guy that was killed? No, not to my I think he's still alive. Okay. Yeah. You might be thinking of um uh I know there was a guy who talked about this stuff who was like mysteriously murdered or something. Yeah. Yeah. I know his case extremely well and it'll come to me in a second. Sure. Why my my brain is spazzing out of the Souder. Yeah. So Richard Solder did a number of books in the 90s on in the early 2000s on underground and also under sea uh potential bases. Mhm. And he you know a lot of his work was very good. So he looked into the um technologies that we know exist to go deep under the ground and to go deep under the ocean floor and that this is not an impossibility. Um, we actually have the ability, all you really need is you need the ability to to dig. And if you're going to have a base permanently there, you've got to be able to extract oxygen from the water. But we've had that technology. That's what nuclear submarines are able to they're not they're not under the water with uh, you know, supplies of oxygen tanks. They have to extract oxygen out of the waters. I think it's called hydrarolysis, whatever it is. And they're they're able to do that. So there, at least theoretically, it seems that it would be possible that you could have a whole array of underground and potentially undersea bases. It's theoretical. One thing that Richard found was he ran into this um guy who did illustrations for the US Navy back in the late60s and he was asked to develop a series of illustrations uh portraying undersea bases and operations. Wow. And he he gave those illustrations to Richard who published them in a book um which back in those days I was his publisher so I know about it quite well. M uh he he's publishing it now, but it's called Hidden in Plain Sight. It's a pretty good book. Interesting. Yeah. So to your your question, what Katherine was asking about or talking about these potential of under deep underground kind of a labinthian underground connection bases. Uh it's totally possible. Is it is it you know how true is it? That's a question. And you know, speaking against that, we really would I would like to see some more actual investigative journalism on it that's that's somewhat recent that can that can support it, but I wouldn't doubt that it's that is a possibility. Yeah. Um thinking of the other guy, Schneider. Phil Schneider, of course, might be the guy you're thinking. Oh, yes. Phil Schneider. Uh, that's a whole other thing we could talk. I'd rather not get into Phil Schneider, but it's an interesting case and he does seem to have been murdered. I don't think he committed suicide, right? I think he was killed. Um, another thing, so so Katherine was explain also talking a lot about the these uh breakaway civilizations and the fact that if there is some breakaway civilization, it's most likely going to be these bankers, these like top level bankers that control all the money. I think that's got to be true. And these people were taking some of this using money to explore space. Yeah. And explore these really esoteric things. Yeah. She describes it really uh nicely. Yeah. Yeah. And she says it's like imagine there's an open window in the room and the money's just flying out. Right. Right. So, uh, yeah. She says it's like we don't have a closed system. It's open and it's that's so uh that could really be the case. I can't you know how that works financially. I think she could probably speak a lot more intelligently than I can about it. But the way she describes it seems quite quite logical. M and then you have these characters like Elon Musk who gets all these crazy contracts to launch these satellites into space and do all this work, gets tons of money from the intelligence community and the US government to do all of this work and that is probably responsible for a lot of the money that he's that he's made and kept his companies alive that publicly will basically say that all this stuff's There's no no evidence of this stuff. if they're if these aliens exist, they sure are subtle. Like, we don't see anything like this. I know. So strange to me, man. Yeah. Like that's a really u because he's made this statement many times and hey, I'm not smarter than Elon Musk. Uh that's definitely I'm certainly not and um I don't know as many things as he knows. I have no doubt about that. He knows far more. So it's hard for me to say, oh, he's full of it. But for him, he's made this statement a number of times that, you know, there's no he's not seen any evidence that there's anything extraordinary out there or he would have known about it. And it's hard for me to know how to judge that. I mean, there is a tremendous amount of actually very good space-based evidence for anomalous activity out in Earth orbit and beyond. Mhm. There's all kinds. I mean, there was a a a young a man named Jeff Challander. I knew Jeff. He's not alive anymore. He uh he spent all of his time just pulling down NASA video footage from all the NASA space missions and just looking through them. And he wasn't just some wideeyed gullible believer. He was, I think, a very uh very astute. And he just kept finding all kinds of crazy things in these NASA missions. Objects out there that just did not make a lot of sense. objects doing apparent U-turns at one point. Um, objects moving in angular motions in space. There are things that you can put out there to to explain some of them. Maybe like a booster rocket went off and uh ice crystals moved off at an angle. But there's there's a lot of these types of things that seem very bizarre and they're not all American. You have had a lot of uh statements from American and Soviet cosminauts uh quite explicit quite explicit about uh bizarre anomalies. There's a uh the Papovich couple, Marina and Pavl Papovich of the Soviet Union. Both highly regarded uh cosminauts in that country. Both spoke quite openly about uh these types of things in orbit that that they were aware of or had seen and uh quite a few Soviet missions where they talked about this and enough American missions as well that you know I don't think you can just dismiss that. So for Elon Musk to say, you know, to dismiss it all, which with a wave of the hand, as he seems to do, I I find very curious. Yeah. Have you heard of the uh the guy who allegedly works for him, who works for the NRO, who uh I think Diana Pulka wrote about him in her first book, who has all these patents and like worked with this dude Chris Bledsoe and apparently like read him into all this super secret stuff, talked about all these crazy Oh, this the highle NASA individual. I think there was two of them. There was one of them named Hal Hovven Meer who apparently like mapped the moon and then uh there was this other guy um I think his name was Tim who who uh apparently like said all kinds of stuff to Chris like told him like we brought him to Cape Canaveral which is like two and a half hours from here. Yeah. And said that when you go through the gates just play your favorite song in your head because these people are trying to read your mind and it's very interesting. Very very bizarre. Yeah. She that's a good that's an interesting book and uh I don't know what to say about this. I mean I've I've uh spoken with Chris Bledsoe myself a few times a number of times and um is that believable? Yeah, that's totally believable. Yeah. Yeah. I for some of the stuff I could believe I could believe what she wrote. I don't I can't say that I know, but I could believe it. Yeah. I've had uh I I've been reading a a lot of UFO researchers who have various takes on Chris Bledsoe and quite a few of them have come out and and made the assertion that he is like a a modern-day Paul Benowitz. Well, one thing that I can say um I actually did an extended interview with Chris uh a couple of years ago. I think it might have been it might have been the first extended interview that he did with anyone on on um social media. Mhm. Could be. When was it? 2017 2018. It was a while ago, I think. So, a couple of things. First of all, Chris is a absolutely super decent human being. His whole family. They're very good people. And his uh original sighting, the one from 20 2007, I don't think there's any question about it. There's, in fact, just recently, didn't a number of new people have come out to attest to that. Certainly, there's him, there's his son, and the other witnesses. Um, I think all have come out. I I don't think there's any reason to doubt that. And that's an extraordinary UFO stuff. Uh, there was a craft that they definitely saw in the woods in North Carolina. Yeah. Yeah. So, I have no reason to doubt that at all. and and the subsequent activities that have had that have happened on his property, which I have not been to, so I you need to be upfront about that. Mhm. Uh you know, it's hard for me to say. I wasn't I've not been there. I've I've heard different types of stories, but I I think it's fair to say that there is some odd things that are going on there. Now, is it an op or not? I I don't know. Yeah. I I I tend to um I I don't think he's making any of this stuff up. I feel like uh my my gut told me when he was explaining all this stuff to me was that like this is something that he really experienced. Um the thing that just raises my hairs is the fact that all these people from intelligence and and NASA are like clinging to him. Well, there's a couple of ways to look at it. One is that it's an op and they're they're screwing with him. Allah Benowitz. Okay. The other possibility is that they know that there's something to this. Yeah. and they want to understand it better. Yeah. Like that's why would that not be a possibility? One of the things about about Steven Greer is that you know he develops these protocols. He calls them the C5 protocols. Yeah. Okay. So people have different opinions on this but there's no question in my mind that there is a consciousness element to this phenomenon that's real. And there is no question as well that Greer did get interest from the national security state. I think partly because of this, you know, one of the things he talked about, and it's true, as far as I can see, it's absolutely true, is he met with a gentleman named John Peterson of the Arlington Institute, who was for many years on the short list of, you know, DoD secretaries and things like that. He never was one, but he's he's up there. Uh and also the then director of the CIA, James Woolsey, and their wives, all of their power play. They went to some dinner together. Yeah, they had a dinner. And this is I think in the late 90s, I think. Yeah. No, early 90s because Woolseie was director of CIA uh in uh the early 90s, you know, under Clinton. Yeah. So why would they do that? I mean, you know, in the early is there any proof that he had that meeting? Yes, there is because the argument is over what the what it constituted. Uh Guerrero always called it a briefing. Yeah. And they wrote they issued a letter. So I I'm sure I have it somewhere. It's searchable. It's got to be searchable where they just said uh this was not a briefing. This was an informal like a dinner was a you know and they were they were clearly furious that he talked about it. Wow. They were clearly very unhappy about that. So I think yeah he did meet with them and then you have to ask yourself you know I mean Greer can talk about this much more uh forthrightly than I can but he wasn't famous at that time. Like who who knew him? You know he was this guy who had just gotten into the UFO field. Yeah. Um medical doctor talkinging about crop circles in England in the early 90s. So he did a little bit of that and uh he gets this interest from these very high level people. Why? I had a gentleman on here uh a couple weeks ago who brought me a newspaper article that he had he paid for some uh subscription to some website that could pull up PDFs of like ancient news articles. and he was basically making the case that uh essentially what the news article showed was uh the description of Greer the publishing in the newspaper of Greer how he got married when he got married to his wife and all this stuff and it was like a little blurb in the newspaper how he got married at the Baja Institute in Hifa and I've never heard him talk about any of this stuff and this was like in the I think it was in the 70s or late 70s maybe and this guy was making the case and that according because that he was in Hifa, working in Hifa, got married there and all this stuff that now he's essentially MSAD. I well first of all I would never comment on some aspect of of person's life like that. I have no no understanding of it and it's it is not for me to get involved in anything like that. I if even if I had an opinion on it, I would not offer it publicly but I don't think I even have an opinion on that. Yeah. So I'm just gonna pass. Yeah. Yeah. It's just it's just interesting that people can come up with these uh these crazy theories that you know, who knows if they have legs or not. But like again, this just this is part of the territory when you're trying to navigate these things in the public and these people that come out and make these extraordinary claims and you know, ignore certain things and they they they talk very confidently about things and make extraordinary claims. but then, you know, leave certain things out that may not be uh foundational or may not support their story. You know, it's just part of the it's just I I feel like it's part of the things that you have to sort of put out there and question when you're put in the place of of trying to evaluate whether these people are legitimate or not. Well, one thing that I always have to remind myself of is uh that this whole subject uh you know, I've kind of referred I've alluded to this a few times in this conversation with you, but it's of profound significance. And so that means there are people who have a stake um on the pro side and on the on the con side that want to keep this where it is because it is it's highly disruptive. And so there's going to be intelligence community interaction with this subject. That is a fact. There is way too much at stake. Um, and those individuals will use their assets in establishment media. They will use their assets in academia when appropriate. They will use their assets wherever they can within the community itself if if need be. And there's always been very high paranoia within the UFO community. These conversations happen frequently enough. It's like, who do you think's working for? Everyone's an op. Yeah. I mean, uh, it comes up frequently and, um, or it's come up frequently enough, I suppose I can say. And a, I can I can just say to you very honestly, I do not know, right? I cannot confirm anyone. Yeah. Uh, specifically like that. I can absolutely say they're working for the uh, the government. Mhm. Or the intel community. I've had suspicions. I continue to have suspicions and I I'm not going to mention who those I think those people are. There's there's no win for me in that. Yeah, I'm not going to get into that. But well, if anyone wins, it's the intelligence agencies because because I mean according to the YouTube comments, I'm an op. And then I question I question myself. I've been called it many times. I've been called MSAD. Like seriously, do you know my uh Yeah. I don't know what to say about things like that. So I've been Well, I think it works. I think it, like I said, I think it works in the uh if there is some sort of uh general opportunity in the intelligence community to cover up secrets. The fact that everyone on social media thinks everyone is working for an intelligence agency is a benefit to them. Absolutely. It's it's a big it's a really big problem. Let's let let's talk about this for a bit if you don't mind. So I um you know I got into this whole field in the '9s when conspiracy theories were not really that much done. Yeah. You know they were a little there were people out there uh I mean Jim Mars had already written his great book um Crossfire the plot to kill Kennedy. I was good friends with Jim Mars. I I loved Jim Mars. He was a great man. Uh but anyway, like the 90s were it was you were kind of out there and we were developing as a society a um a much more like critical view. And then you know for me 911 was what put me over the top by the way. 911 put me and I think a lot of people full on in the government as actively lying about basically every single thing. like I went there and I'm still there. But the the problem is when you think that everything is an op. Mhm. So that's a bit of a problem for me too. Like uh I said earlier like I almost wrote a book on false flags and the history of it. So like there there are lots of ops like they happen. But when you reflexively, I'm going to be careful how I say this, conclude that every single thing coming at you is like someone's motivated. Yes. For some reason, and that that's a real problem because think about what that does if you were to act like that in your personal life. Like if your friend has something to say to you and you're not listening to what your friend's saying, instead you're thinking, "What's his motivation for telling me that?" Totally. That's a great way to destroy every friendship you've ever had, every relationship you've ever had, every society that's ever existed. It's a really dangerous solvent for the a certain amount of social coh cohesion we have to have. You have to have there's got to be a way to have some trust in things that come at you. But the problem that we have is we have good reason not to trust a lot. Like we have really good reason. So, but I do think what we've fallen into is I call it a kind of a post-modern trap, which is when someone makes a claim about anything, frequently from a lot of people, the first thing you'll hear is, "Oh, that person worked for whatever agency, right? They've got they have an agenda. That person believes this other thing in politics that I also don't agree with, and therefore I'm not going to subscribe to what they have to say here." And so in other words, we're doing identity politics whether we've realized it or not. We're not listening. The one thing we're not doing is is hearing their message. We're not actually listening to their information or we're not evaluating the information. We're judging the person because we think they're an op and they work for this organization here. And the fact is when you look at the UFO knowledge sphere over many years, go back to the 1950s. This is a period I've studied a lot. There were a lot of military insiders in the 1950s who were totally of the belief that we need to get information on this subject out there. And they put themselves out there. So, because they were working for the army or the navy, am I supposed to then say, "Oh, well, they've got some kind of they've got a agenda to prove." That's a bad place to be because, you know, it it uh prevents you from actually studying their their information. And the fact is that there are people from every part of the spectrum here in this field that have something to say. And it it's a real we're putting ourselves at a great disadvantage if we if we're playing identity politics with every single person out there and we're judging them. Are they on the good side or the bad side? That's that's not good because there's information coming in from a lot of different places. It seems to me. Yes. Which is why I appreciate when people like you who have a pragmatic view of all of this stuff and are able to take the information from all these cases and sort of see where they all fit together and maybe where they don't and um provide that to people in a balanced way. I think it's that's that's super valuable and rare. I never thought of when I was much younger, I didn't think of myself as a pragmatist by nature. I didn't really know that. But over the years, I've seen that and uh and I believe in that. I believe in realism when it comes to global politics or when it comes to national things. I try to be what I consider to be realistic rather than dogmatic and ideologically driven. I've got my own beliefs about all kinds of things. But uh I also realize that the world is, you know, I had a I grew up with a very liberal mother and a pretty conservative father. And so that was kind of good because I was able to appreciate two very radically different worldviews that each of my parents had and to understand where they were coming from and to respect where they were coming from which I do to this day. And that's that was good for me. And uh I think that when uh you know as as we're in the world today, I I just I take it as a given that there's always going to be people pe people out there who don't see the world the way I do. And what am I supposed to like condemn them uh and just say, "Well, you're you're morally suspect because you have a different perspective on the world than I do. That's kind of ridiculous." But yeah, we do it. We do it all the time. people on the right and the left, they all do it. And it's uh it's very unfortunate. We get all apocalyptic about things. Yeah. And we live in very dangerous times in many ways. I'm not going to deny that. Very dangerous on many levels. But uh the fact is that it is is not for me to um to write someone off just because they see the world differently than I do. Right. Well, Richard, that was three hours. You're kidding. That was fantastic. A lot of fun. I enjoyed this. Thank you. Uh tell people where they can find your new book on USOS and uh anything else you're doing. Yeah. Uh well, I have uh my book on USOS. It's sold on Amazon and it's in uh ebook. It's paperback and hard cover and this week I expect the audio book finally to be out. It's been submitted. I'm just waiting for Amazon to approve it. So that's that's nice. Um, I have a website called richidalmembers.com and um, there's a payw wall, but there's a lot of free stuff there. People can go uh, take a look at it. There's a lot of information there. Great community. I can't speak highly enough about the members of the site. Uh, and I got my own YouTube channel. It's uh, just called Richard Dolan Intelligent Disclosure. People can [Laughter] JFK and UFOs. Oh, that's something we didn't go into. Wow. That's a really uh wonderful I had a fantastic guest for that. Going back to uh what we were just saying about how everyone has uh their own belief system surrounding everything. I've noticed that everyone has their own flavor of the JFK assassination. Well, he was definitely killed in a conspiracy in my opinion. Yes. I would definitely lay the u uh most of it at the CIA and uh the the deep state. Um, I think Kennedy's assassination, I liken it to Agatha Christiey's murder on the Orient Express. And plot spoiler, everyone did it in that book. Everyone did. Everyone had a motive to kill this guy. And that's JFK. He was the his biggest problem, I feel, is that he really believed he was the president who could run things. And he ran into a a bureaucracy that saw him as a threat on multiple levels. Mhm. So you had Federal Reserve, you had Vietnam, you had UFOs are part of that. That's not a trivial part of it. Not the whole thing though. No, no. I think the uh the nuclear issue, you know, he was talking about nuclear disarmament with the with the Soviet. So what he was showing and then Cuba, that whole thing and shutting down Operation Mongoose and all of this. So JFK showed that he was he was an enemy on many fronts. He had said famously he wanted to scatter the CIA to the winds and uh he tried you know he fired Alan Dulles and Bissell and uh but he yeah they knew he was a real problem. He was a serious problem and you know what was the ultimate motivation? I think the ultimate motivation was they were like no way we're going to let this guy run the country for another month because he is he is a danger on too many levels. Yeah, that's what they thought. There's my book. I totally agree. There we go. The history of USOs, unidentified submerged objects, volume one with two and three to come. Yeah, they'll be out this year. All all of the cases I've written them all. I'm happy with how they read. I keep adding new cases, but uh basically I have to be done. And what is required is uh just breaking them into chapters and doing those little chapter introductions that I was telling you about. Amazing. So, it's uh it'll be out. Well, thanks again. I really appreciate your time. My pleasure. Thank you. We have uh some Patreon questions for our uh beautiful Patreon subscribers. So, we'll do that separately from the podcast. We'll rip through a couple of these questions if you don't mind. Yeah. Um gladly. But that's all for the podcast. So, thanks again. It was my pleasure. Checking eight, folks.