Well, I'm glad you're still here. Oh, I'm glad I'm still here. Yes, I mean, those of us who know you and who have followed you, looked at our phones when morning in August, I think. And it was Pablo Drav disappears in France, arrested. And then, you know, no one heard for you for several days. It was kind of, it was actually kind of a pivot point in the way I understand Europe speaking for myself. So if you don't mind, I don't think you've done any interview since then, like what happened that day? Like the events of the day, let's start there, August last year. August last year, I arrived to Paris, and I'm greeted in the airport by before you're doing here. I just, for tourists to pour purposes, I was just hanging around for a couple of days, and I was supposed to go to Finland after. And I wasn't supposed to stay. There was no business meeting of any kind. And I was greeted by a policeman. They asked me certain questions, asked me to follow them. Were you confused? Like, why are policemen meeting me at the airport? Definitely. I first thought there may be some additional security checks because of the Olympics, of the Paralympics, something's going on. Julie, am I girlfriend? She was worried. She was asking me, is it all right? I said, it's all right. It's France, it's France. Of course. And then they read me a list of charges, like, kind of 16 charges, all kinds of crimes. I was very confused at first because, like, I have nothing to do with crime. I've never been convicted. I have, you know, it's very company that is trying to comply with the best standards. And so, at that moment, I realized that it's not something I did. It's something other people did using the app I created, teleroom, which is used by a billion people. Yes. Probably some people know all of them are unfortunately not. Okay. Only for sure. I try my best to meet more. But so, yeah. And then I was put into a car with a small motorcade, the police cars with sirens. Which is funny because in the previous countries that they visited, I also was accompanied by motorcades because I was visiting the heads of states there. And here in France, there was certain consistency. So I was greeted in the same way. Were you like texting? I couldn't because they took my phone. And I wasn't. Like, they immediately took your phone? Yeah, I wasn't allowed to conduct anyone except for my assistant, who I asked to find me some lawyers, and which out to certain friends that I have. And try to understand what was going on. And then I spent four days in police custody, the building in south of Paris, that is, I think, run by the police customs, the customs police officers or department, whatever. And there, I had to answer a lot of questions. But you spent four days with no contact, no phone. Yes. In what kind of accommodations? Was a 7 square meter room or a 7 square feet room, no windows, concrete block. And bad this narrow, no linen, no pillow, mattress, this thing like yoga mat, this thing, maybe one centimeter, half inch. And it's constantly blinking light, which was a bit annoying. Lock door. The door was very securely locked. So you're in a cell? Yes, it was a solitary cell, so to say. There were no other people there. So they put you in solitary confinement. You could say that. Well, that sounds like that's what it is. Well, it wasn't the prison or jail. Well, if there's a locked door, no pillow, let's legally speak to me. It wasn't. Yeah, legally speaking. So legally speaking, why were you being held against your will by the French government? Did you ever, in the first four days, did they make it clear to you? So I understood that they were worried about the alleged lack of response from telegram towards the judicial requests coming from France, which turned out to be not true, because we've never received a single legally binding legal request coming from France. So I was even more confused. And I asked the French policeman, why haven't you been following the European law and serving your legal requests in the way prescribed by this law? It's defined by the digital services act. And it's there. It's you can Google the process. You can read the privacy policy of telegram. It's easily accessible on the website. So why didn't you do it? And they didn't answer, but things got they started to do it. And then they started to receive responses, helping them to identify criminal suspects, meaning we would disclose IP address and phone number of people who were suspects and criminal investigations when we received court orders signed by a judge. Right. And this was something that we hadn't placed since a year ago before that. So it's not something that the French have forced us to do. It's something that we already had in place. We had a company in Belgium processing this request. Other countries have successfully been using this process. But somehow the French have ignored it completely. And this is why I was very surprised. It's like what do you mean doing this? Why? And I think this is like standard for social media companies. A company, Facebook or X or Snapchat or any of them get a court order from a country in which they have users. And the court order says, we've recently, this person is a criminal. Can we have the IP address? I think they all comply with that. Correct? Yes. If you don't comply with it, you can be fined. You can be banned. Well, it's a question whether you want to continue providing your service in the European Union. But it's only concerns. It only concerns the identification data, meaning IP address, and in some cases, a phone number of the suspect. It has nothing to do with, for example, private messages of a person or other kinds of activity, which is much more protected, the much more private. Even if we want it to be able to disclose this information. Right. But it's not required by the law. Yes. But what you're describing is the state of play across Europe anyway for all the companies. Exactly. OK. So, but because this is like a normal thing that's already taken its process that everyone recognizes and it's been ongoing, you must be very confused as to why you're being held in this jail that they're not calling a jail. Were you confused? Were you worried? It was very hard to accept. I stepped off an airplane and a bunch of cops showed up, took my phone away and threw me in the back of a car and took me to a cell. Even if they pretended it was not a jail, but wouldn't let me out and walk the door. For four days without being able to contact my family, I'd be concerned were you concerned? That was very surprising. I was shocked. I was very deeply mad. You know, at first I thought there was some mistake. They got the wrong guy. I thought they read the list of charges and they have nothing to do with these crimes. They organized crimes, selling drugs, all those things like what do I have to do with that? Then I realized it's serious because they're not letting me out. They keep me there in this cell. OK. It's just for perspective. You've got a billion users. It's a multi-billion dollar company. You started the company, well, in the company. It's a huge company. It's one of the biggest social media companies in the world. There's a process. If they think the telegram is doing something wrong, they send letters to your general counsel or maybe get your phone number, which I'm sure they could pretty easily get French intelligence. I'm sure everybody's phone number. I just call you and tell you, I've never heard of a CEO of a multi-billion dollar company getting arrested at the airport on a grounds like this. You're very right. It never happened before. It's like completely. It's unprecedented. Outrageous. It's unprecedented. It's never happened. So it's something that I think was very unnecessary, because on top of what you just described, I'm also a French citizen. So if you're... How did you wind up? Because you're not for France originally. Yeah, I'm not for France originally, but I have certain ties to France. And I was awarded, so to say, this citizenship for... Using a specific process, which took several years, but I didn't cut any corners. Like I had to pass the French exam, tasked, like if I had to do certain things that you'd normally do. Because you wanted to be a French citizen. I wanted. I like the country. It's a great country. It's a great culture. Of course, these events are alarming. And that's why I think it makes sense to speak about them. And the most interesting part of it is that every French citizen has his personal home address in the passport. So the authorities of France, know very well how to reach out to this person. It's there or she's there. And on top of that, the council of France is located in the same building as the telegram office in Dubai. So the same building, the same building. You're running... I bent to the building. You bent on a huge building, by the way. Not really. And it's just two floors below. Two floors from the French council. We're two floors from the French council. And I was the frequent visitor to the council. And whenever any French agency authority or representative of France or the government wanted to see me, they had no issue whatsoever, a range in such meetings. And this meeting took place. I was happy just to go to floors below the office and have a conversation or invite them to our office. So it's very, very strange what happened because it could have been resolved by different means. If you think... Well, obviously they went way out of their way to humiliate you to issue... They announced that they arrested you. I mean, you were not obviously scanning Google for news stories by yourself because you couldn't... They couldn't. But the rest of us were. And they announced we've arrested Paul Durove and armed sales or drug sales or kidney porn or who knows how horrible. It's like, what? So they were trying to terrify you and humiliate you. Obviously. This is something that was also very unusual. So what my lawyers told me here in France that normally the prosecutor's office is not that public. They are not issuing press statements every day and they're not commenting on their investigations, which was not the case with me where they were very active. They were trying to... You read it. So you were locked up and you couldn't read the coverage of it. But if you got back and read it those four days when you were being held. Well, when I was in police custody, I heard from one of the policemen. He told me every newspaper in the world is covering this and it's mentioning you. And I said what's going on. He said, well, a lot of people are supportive. But I asked him, what do newspapers write about this case? He told me everything but truth. And I freaked out at that moment. Everything but truth seriously. And when I went... It was four days ended. And I was... Can I just ask, what was your family doing? And you've got children and parents and like what were... To be honest, this is the hardest part because I'm pretty stressed with Zilland. So I can take care of myself. But being there, look there, thinking about what's going on with my mom. She's very ill. She was very worried. She was very worried as I learned after I was going on with my kids. And this is something that gets to you. And you couldn't contact them. No, it is no way because you don't have access to any device. Or you can't even read anything. What do they think was going on? They were very surprised and very confused and very worried. Everybody wants to feel secure at home. It's your castle. There's nothing like going to sleep with a complete sense of safety. That's why you sleep soundly. That's why we cannot speak highly enough of simply safe. Most security systems take action only after someone breaks into your house. That's a little late. Simply safe, new active guard outdoor protection feature helps stop break-ins before they occur. And that gives you peace of mind. And it means you want to have to sleep with a baseball bat or loaded handgun on your bedside, though you might want to. Anyway, here's how it works. If something suspicious happens outside your property, cameras and live monitoring agents will detect it, they'll speak to the intruder, turn on spotlights, and can call the police if necessary. It's no surprise it's seen at name simply safe, the best home security system of 2025, over 4 million Americans trust it, because it's preemptive. Monitoring plans start around $1 per day. There are no hidden fees, 60-day money back guarantee. Visit simplysafe.com slashtucker to get 50% off a new system with a professional monitoring plan in your first month free. That's simply safe, S-I-M-P-L-I-S-A-F-E.com slashtucker. There's no safe like simply safe. So the people trying to wreck our civilization want you to be passive. They want you weak so they can control you. Weakness is their goal. No thanks. Our friends at Beam, a proud American company, understand that our country can only be great if its people are strong. That's why they've created a new creatine product to help listeners like you stay mentally sharp and physically fit. People like to mock creatine. See that and it's not like creatine at all. The people buy it because it works. Beam's creatine can help you improve your strength, your brain, health, your longevity. It's completely free of sugar and synthetic garbage that's in almost everything else that you eat. Of course you don't hear about it too much because again a population that is strong, clear-minded and physically capable is a threat to tyrants. That's why they want you to play in video games. To celebrate American strength, actual American strength, Beam is offering up to 30% off their best-selling creatine for the next 48 hours. Go to shopbeam.com slashtucker. Use the code tucker at checkout. That's shopbeam.beam.com slashtucker. Use the code tucker up to 30% off. It's built on core values. Integrity results. No BS, Beam. We strongly recommend it. Just for perspective, those who don't know your story, I won't tell the whole story. It's an amazing story. We did an interview with you maybe a year and a half ago on which you told your story. Your Russian, there's people who can probably hear in your voice. And sound like you're pretty happy and Russia's successful and Russia, you would believe Russia for political reasons. The government was trying to use your company for its own purposes. You didn't want to be used. You left your own country and moved around and went up into buy in France. Were you ever arrested by Putin? No. No. Okay. Just to put a finer point on this, I mean, I'm not defending Putin. But you were arrested by the French government in the free West. Did you ever kind of see the irony there? There was the most unexpected place to get arrested for me because before in this trip, I visited several countries. Some of these countries are considered in the West to be autocratic or authoritarian. But I had, and in Telegram, it's very, very popular in these countries. I visited before coming to Paris. And I had zero issues whatsoever. Despite the fact that Telegram does zero censorship in terms of political speech and Telegram provides 100% privacy and hospitality to its users in all these places. So you do not extract personal information from your users. Unlike how a company is. We never do that. Okay. But other companies, I mean, Facebook is, I mean, that is very rich because they extract that personal data, right? That's a business model. Yes. That's a, that's a, not attacking them. Yeah. Sorry. But that's what they do. And you don't do that. Yeah. Yes. Right. We don't have to do that. We came up with ways to monetize Telegram without having to abuse people's personal data this way. So Telegram became profitable last year and very profitable more than half a billion dollars in profit. Without having to rely on methods like this, when you have to extract personal data and then use it for targeting ads, for example. We have very successful subscription, paid subscription, service on Telegram. We have, you know, we monetize in ways that are consistent with our values. That are voluntary. I mean, your users have to sign up for the things that make you money. Yeah. Because not just stealing their data from them. Exactly. And the service is free and we just crossed one billion monthly user, threshold or milestone. Congratulations. Yeah. Thank you. So it's growing very fast. And we're very happy with what we, we're very proud with what we do. Because if you look at any mobile messaging app right now, and we're number two after you can guess which other app when the second most popular messaging app in the world. But most of the features that you use on a modern messaging app, first appear at first work rated by Telegram. And then they were borrowed. We came up with the list of like 100 such features. And those are not like small things. Those are basic things that you know in every more messaging app. Like the way you respond to messages, the way you share links, the way you share documents, the text formatting, many, many, many things like dozens of those. First appear on Telegram. And then three to eight years after they have been copied by our rivals, one of which is larger than Telegram and others are smaller. But still we are proud of not going to guess how we're in one. But we are proud that we're, we've been able to shape what the industry is like today and define how billions of people can't get. But it's just, I'm just going to write this story, which is by the way I love your Slavic deadpan approach to this. It's crazy. I mean, if Mark Zuckerberg or Elon could grab, you know, at the private part of De Gaulle Airport, you'd be like, stop to play what? The world is ending. But they grabbed you and be like, oh, he's got a rush the last day. It's fine. I'm sure it's a good reason. Wow. I hope it had nothing to do with my ethnicity because that course it did. Are you joking? That would be very alarming because you've got run out of Russia. By the way, just want to say that again, you've got run out. You'd probably still be living there if you hadn't had to leave. So it's clearly you didn't participate in whatever they're mad about in Russia. You're gone. Yeah. But it still can make you an easier target. I'm aware of that. Because people don't know my story. Right. But not everybody watched our last thing. Everybody had the where was the out? So I was, well, I know you and I obviously like you. So and I like what you're doing. I like your commitment to privacy and to the user. And I think the users privacy should play a role in your in your thinking about a business. And that's what my view and you agree. Most companies don't agree. So I'm on your side. But where were all the civil libertarians jumping to your defense? Like how can you grab someone at the airport? Well, because who knows why? Can you just do that? Put them in jail for four days. Take a phone. Like where were your defenders? Well, to be fair, some people did become and defended me. And I actually, there were more than 10 million or more than I think a very big number of people who signed a petition to free me. Yeah, so it was a very, very large movement. I would think it were like the United Nations, you know, human rights watchdogs. Like where are they? If this happened in North Korea, which, you know, I don't know, it hasn't. So but if it happened, there would be like, oh my gosh, it's Stalinism, but it happens in France. You know, like I'm sure there's a good reason. That's, you know, that's what makes the situation so complicated because we have to look at the instances such as this one, regardless of which jurisdiction I was born in with jurisdiction is conducting this investigation. It should be completely unbiased, right? So it's very concerning. And they ask you questions about Russia during your four days of attainment? I think so, but it wasn't the focus of their questioning. The most questions were about the way tailgroom operates as if it's some kind of mystery. We're a big company. We're audited by a big four. What do you think, firm? We work with the biggest financial institutions. We're a big company. We spend millions of dollars every quarter on legal compliance. So we pay to law firms to receive the best advice in order to make sure we don't violate laws anywhere and we operate in almost 200 countries. So it was very, very surprising for me to get detained in Paris and learn that tailgroom did something wrong or didn't have to be asked some requests. And then when I learned more about it, I realized that we did actually nothing wrong because the law is very clear in describing the process that should be followed in order for this request to be processed and it wasn't followed. And that's something that French prosecutors could have found out in about six minutes. Obviously. That's the irony of it. So, telegram, police contact, telegram, EU, cooperation, whatever, and it would be instantly visible online for anybody who has access to Google. For some reason, it wasn't used by... Right. And you have to think that there's like a reason before I ask you that how is the food in French prison, by the way? I think they made some exception in relation to food for me. So it was fine. I was fine. It was pretty good. I don't eat meat. I don't eat fast food. So I was good with enough fish that I could do my 200 pushups in the morning, like 200 quads. And then I repeated it because I didn't have access to a gym. So I kept my routine there. Did you join again? No, I was alone there. He was a little bit upset in your cell. That's just the whole thing is incredible. Where does it stand now? We're in France right now. You're still in France. I'm still in France. Many, many months later. Eight almost eight months later, you're still in France. Why are you still here? So there is this limitation on my travel... A traveling ability, so to say, which is called judicial control. Judicial control is when you can't leave the country freely. Because there is still investigation going on. And you're one of the suspects or the suspect. I will still be allowed to go to Dubai in a return last week from Dubai. And I will be going to Dubai later this week. But it's a very, very restricted controlled process still. And what's the idea there? Since you own a multi-billion dollar company with a billion users, that's really where would you go when planted earth, if you were going to run away? Well, that's exactly the sort of memories and understanding in my confusion here. So I'm not funny anywhere. And you know, been to Dubai came back. So it's very hard for me to understand my role in being here. Because I'm required to answer some questions in relation to telegram every like fifth month or fourth month. So the other like three or four months, I am just having to be here for reasons that are very hard for me to understand. What's their argument? I mean, I'm just confused. You know, one's actually despite the headlines that flooded the world in August when you were arrested, detained, whatever they're calling it, put in a cell. You were not involved in Kitty porn, drug sales, organized crime, I can't even remember, but like the worst crimes in the world, no one is actually claiming you were involved in those crimes, correct? Correct. Okay. They're saying that you had of your billion users. There were a few who may have been doing bad things and you're saying, I tried, but I didn't know that, not my fault, right? Correct. It'd be like saying to Donald Trump, there's 350 million people in America, you know, one third that are of users you have, and some of them are using Kitty porn or selling drugs or something. You know, we're going to strive and we're putting you a jail for it. I mean, that's like instant saying. So why are you still here? Like what is the claim against you? I'm still trying to find out to be honest. I'm still confused. So at first they said, oh, you failed to respond to our legal requests, and that's why you're complicit. But first of all, it's not true that we didn't respond to legal-abiding legal requests. And secondly, it's a very extensive interpretation of complicity, even for the French legal judicial system. What I hear from my lawyers is that it's quite unprecedented. They had a couple of really small niche apps that are like 10,000 smaller than Telegram and were targeted specifically at criminals. They were nothing like that. They didn't even have these companies that they didn't even have bank accounts. It was a different profile. They were not audited by big four organizations. But these companies have been persecuted in France before, and their founders, I understand, were accused of running a platform that is created for the purpose to facilitate crime. It's pretty much obvious that Telegram isn't hot such a company, right? So it has a billion users. Every eighth person on the planet is a user of Telegram, a regular one. And it's incomprehensible to assume that all the people are criminals. And you know, everybody knows the story of Telegram very well. It's not something that was built for criminals. However, this reasoning is far as I understand, is being used also in our case. They say that, all right, so you created this app. And this app was used by other people. They were criminals. And you didn't do enough to prevent them from doing what they were doing. Which again, is contrary to what we see on other platforms. Like you have instances where problematic content exists, despite the best efforts of social media platforms. platforms like you have instances where problematic content exists despite the best efforts of social media platforms, moderation teams and so on and so forth. It's almost impossible to avoid that. But the claim itself just conceptually doesn't make sense. I mean, if someone can miss armed robbery and burgundy or to lose or niece, can President Macron be arrested for that because it's his country, he runs the country and he didn't do enough to stop the armed robbery and to lose. Like how can that stand? Why is it an JL? Like that, that's nuts. Well, the logic also eludes me, so to say, back with the Russian understatement. No, I, it's, so look, here's the inescapable conclusion, I think, as from a bystander's perspective that they do this in public rather than just calling you. So we have a problem, we'll work it out or call your lawyers. They arrest you in public. They slander you. They try and tie you to the worst crimes man commits. And then they put you in jail. And so they're trying to sweat you to intimidate you to wear you down in order to get into the backdoor of telegrams. They can spy on people, probably really for political reasons. That's what they're really worried about is a revolt in their own country. Every government's really worried mostly about its own population revolting against his bad governance. Like that's their real fear. And they hate telegram because it offers users privacy. And that's a threat to them. And so they force you as the owner of the company to give them the keys. That's what it looks like. Well, to be clear, nobody approached me with the demand to give the so-called keys. Such keys don't exist technically. But if somebody approaches me and when he the keys, you'll be among the first to learn about it. But that hasn't happened. Well, actually, the US government pushed you. Remember the FBI was trying to... Yeah. Yeah. Okay. This is something governments want, not just if you get a ball social media company. What's interesting? In the US, you have a process that allows the government to actually force any engineer in any tech company to implement a backdoor and not tell anyone about it with using this process called the gag order and there are certain legal procedures. Not so as an employer about it. And that, yes, exactly. If you tell your own boss, you can end up a jail like gag order. This is actually there. This is something that's on Wikipedia. In France, in the Soviet Union or in the US. In the US. I'm not crazy. So your employees have a legal obligation to act as fifth column spies, saboteurs against you, your employees. Well, that's one of the reasons we didn't discuss last time why I didn't move to the US with my team. And you got mugged in San Francisco on your one trip there. Exactly. But I did a extensive legal analysis. I asked my lawyers the US lawyers, what is this thing called the gag order? And they explain it to me and how it works and how it could potentially be applied. So I decided maybe not the best place for a privacy oriented platform. But here in France, we really don't know because there are a lot of conspiracy theories about it. At the first I thought I also started to be concerned. What is this about? But then when the French police and the French judge started to send their requests in accordance to the European law to telegram and receive the identification data. I mean, the IP address of criminal suspects, they seem to become very happy. They expressed their joy in the press. They said, oh, telegram is now cooperating. All of a sudden, as if it was something new, cash to deposit when they said that, I remember that very well. That sounded to me like they were trying to discredit you and we're sending the message because they were not specific. They said they're cooperating. And that made it sound to the rest of the world like, oh, they broke Pavel, they hung him by his angles and burned him with Galois until he finally gave up and turned over the the back end to them. And now they're spying and all telegram users, you're cooperating like you wouldn't use Germany in 1975. That's what it sounded like. Yeah, that's why it's so important to clarify this because this perception is not only bad for telegram, it's even worse for the image of France because if you think about it, France is still a land where laws and legal procedures should be adhered to. And even in this case, if you want additional access to certain data, personal data, it has to be done in accordance with laws. And then every company, for example, us, we never disclosed private messaging data to any third party, including governments. And if it's in some country, they would say you have to do it. We would just continue providing services in that country, then doing it. Isn't that why you left Russia in the first place? Yes. So you've been through this, you left your own country because you refuse to give up the privacy of the user. Yeah. But here it's sketching up because last month, the Senate here in France passed a law basically banning encryption. This law was forcing all messaging app providers to implement the backdoor for the French law enforcement to fight crime. The problem here was, well, exactly because the problem here was there is no such thing as an exclusive backdoor. If you implement the backdoor, technically, other actors are able to exploit it. And it could be for an agency, it could be hackers, it could be anyone. So that law would have put millions of people or tens of millions of French citizens. In danger, there are private messages would have been exposed. The criminals, however, would have instantly switched to niche smaller apps, not mainstream apps. And if the government was tried to ban these apps, they would switch to VPNs, they would even become more efficient in hiding the traces. So the criminals would experience zero problems if that law is passed. It's the law abiding citizens who would be affected. And that's why it's so problematic. And nobody was talking about it. That's my French friends. Like, have you heard about this law? They know. They were completely unaware. And luckily, the national assembly here in France shot that bill done. So it didn't pass this time. But if you look at the new project by the EU, by the European Commission, published in early April, they again want to do exactly that to backdoor encryption, but now on the EU level. And that raises many serious questions because no country in the world banned encryption so far. Even the places that you would consider authoritarian places, for reasons that I just described, it's just a huge threat for the entire population to all users, for all users to legally force companies to implement back doors. So I think it's very important that people talk about these things. First of all, that France is not a country where freedoms are disrespected. For example, if people assume that France can now take CEOs of tech companies hostage in such a way that you describe. And then extract certain personal data from them using illegal and unlawful processes, that would be a big, big blow for the image of France. But I don't think we're there because we haven't might chip away at this concept of the rules based order, the rules based order, whichever one in NATO is always lecturing everybody else about the rules based order. There's nothing rules based on what they did to you. I'm sorry. I mean, that's just that's might makes right. That's we have guns and you don't. It's our airport, not yours. You're going to jail. I just don't see the legal justification for doing this to anybody. It was excessive in my view. But it was also a sign that, again, in my view, this investigation was not based on the power analysis of what Telgroom represents and what the goals of the company are. And again, there has been no attempt and they didn't even try to solve this in a more traditional conventional way before starting legal way. A legal and diplomatic way. What did they do with your phone? Well, they just kept my phone. I hope they scrutinize it because there they have a lot of proof that actually Telgroom is a completely legitimate and compliant organization. And we've spent huge funds on content generation and legal compliance all over the world since like 10 years ago. So they're welcome to have my phone. I chose your bonds. Yeah, so Telgroom issued bonds a few years ago. We were happy to have the assistance of JP Morgan, the world's living bank. World's biggest bank. So I just I only asked I knew that and I just wanted you to say it because just to underscore the point, this is you're not like some, you know, bello Russian college student doing this out of your room or something. It's like a business like a worldwide huge company. It's just absolutely crazy and it doesn't have his deep penetration in the United States as it does in the rest of the world. So I just want people to know this is not some sketchy deal. This is like, I can't just keep leaving. They did that. Where are you now in the process? So the process is not going too fast, but this is the tradition here in France. So I'm not I'm just visiting for a couple of days. Do you think I'll get out of here? So I haven't been granted a fast trek in my case. And, and you know, I've just seen my investigative judges. They have this role of investigative judges here in France. So my current status is I'm not on trial. It's an investigation intended to find out whether there'll be enough evidence to put this on trial. So I'm not even on trial yet. There's, you're basically in prison in France, but I, well, I'm nothing present, but can you can you leave whenever you want? I can't leave France freely. That's true. So what, how is that not imprisoned? I mean, I mean, they're great restaurants. I'm not, you know what I mean? It's not a commissary with guys that face tattoos, but you, if you can't leave, then aren't you by definition in prison? It could say so. I just don't want to create this image of a real prison in the minds of our viewers. So this is, I don't know if anyone can see the seller in. It's a nice room service and everything. I mean, no, it's France. It's like very first world in some ways, but not in its attitudes. I'm learning. So how long will that continue? And you've got children, you know, and a life and a business and friends and family and they're not in France as far as I know. So yes, they're all in Dubai and I have kids in Dubai that I am unable to not just see. I'm unable to legally take care of them by signing certain documents. I have to sign. And I've, you know, it's been very stressful also to my mom, my shoe, who's gravely, like an icon see her. I also have this company to run. We have a billion users. It's important. And I'm doing it remotely now, but it's not as efficient. So if you think about it, France is less than 1% of the telegram user base. It's something like half of 1%. And the other 99 and a half percent are coming from elsewhere, right? In the Indonesia you name it. And it's kind of counterintuitive for me that the entire organization is impacted because we have this ongoing investigation here in France, particularly given the fact that it's growing in a pace that only requires me to be here once like in several months. So I do think that the current restriction is very strange and very unnecessary. And I hope it will be lifted later this year. And if it's not, your identity is constantly under attack. And just the last year, Americans lost over $16 billion to scammers online. Anyone can fall victim to this. You're so security number, your bank account, your credit profile can be exposed and you won't even know it. And the second they are exposed, thieves can take out loans to your name, open credit cards, wreck your life financially. Identity guard can save you. Identity guard monitors everything from your credit card to your bank accounts, just so security number, looking for early signs of fraud before damage is done. If something weird happens, you get an instant alert. If someone does steal your identity, Identity guard's expert team works directly with banks, credit card companies and lenders to shut it down quickly. And the scam. Having your identity stolen is a nightmare. Someone in this country becomes a victim of identity theft every six seconds. Identity guard protects you. 30 day free trial, looking exclusive discount at identityguard.com slash Tucker protect yourself before it's too late. Identity guard dot com slash Tucker. You're probably pretty sick and Nike. It's hard to blame you for feeling that way. Any company that worships Colin Kaepernick, any company that shills for the lunacy of the left social agenda is clearly not on your side. In fact, they're your enemy. You need an alternative. XX XY athletics is the far better choice. It's the only athletic brand committed to fighting for free speech, women sports and the truth. Honesty, the truth. They're not going to lie to you. For example, to show that 80% of Americans oppose letting men play in women sports. That's not a radical view. It's a moderate sensible view rooted in biology. The woke corporations like Nike make you feel like a lunatic for saying obvious things like man or men and women or women. That is tyranny. How can you fight back by abandoning the company's promoting it and by embracing companies like XX XY athletics. It's an American company. It's not opposed to the United States or to telling the truth. Head to the truth fits.com to learn a lot more and use the code Tucker 25 for 25% off. Well, it's safe because first of all, this investigation can't last forever. It can probably last for another several months or a year and then it will have to either go on trial or be concluded. It could be criminally charged for this. Everything is possible. You can't rule out. Yesterday, the airport, they do anything. That's what bothered me when I was in police custody for this four days. First thing, something like this should have never happened because I assume there were certain thorough procedures to verify a lot of alleged facts before taking the decision such as this. You can't start something like this based on an immediate article that telegram allegedly is non-cloperative or the telegram supposedly has worse content moderation than other platforms. Both these facts turned out to be completely false. You have to be really thorough and examine things before making this decision because this decision such as this are not only harmful for my relatives or for my company or for me personally. Decisions such as this, I think, impact France as a whole. I'm French. I'm a French citizen. So I worry about that as well. I really think that out of all social media platforms, telegram was probably the most friendly potential partner for France. Every time anyone from the French government for the French authorities switched out to me, I did my best to help. This for me looked almost like friendly fire. They're trying to attack their own ally in a way. And I was so surprised that this would happen because the collateral damage, not just for me and my company but for the image of France, is quite significant. Then I talked to many of my friends, the CEO of big tech companies and they were very concerned and asked me, can I still come to France? Is it is it still safe to be in France? People were worried and the CEO of the smaller companies, they don't have a billion users. I even more worried. They say, look, they did this to you and you're very well known and the company of your profile should be treated in a certain different way. I'm running a small startup of mine would say, I'm scared to come. And this trend continues. So I heard, but there's the sad thing. Nobody's afraid to go to Uzbekistan actually. I'm not endorsing Uzbekistan. I've never been there, but I never been there. But I'm too afraid to go to Uzbekistan. I was there a loss somewhere. He was great. But that's the point. These countries that you grew up thinking are primitive or don't have functioning legal systems or you know, whose laws are released a function of the whim of the monarch or whatever, they turn out to be kind of fine with what you do or what I do or what any normal person who believes in human rights does. But it's like France or Great Britain. Didn't you get citizenship here thinking this was a safe haven as someone who was in some sense kind of a refugee from his own country? A refugee of principle, like I don't want to share this with the government I'm leaving. Didn't you choose this country for citizenship because you thought that it was a place that was committed to human rights? Well, the slogan of France is liberty, liberty, and equality. Equality. So it's something that I strongly believe in. And it's certainly something that France stands for in my opinion. And for pretty much everybody who was born in the Soviet Union, like I was, Western Europe is considered to be this place where freedoms and human rights are respected. And that's why it was such a shock for me back there in the police custody. Interestingly, the interpreter that we had during this four days in police custody also emigrated from the Soviet Union. She was translating English to French and back. And after being present there for two days, she said during a break with all the policemen and clerks and everybody present there. And she said, I left the Soviet Union hoping I would be in a country with freedoms. And it seems now that the Soviet Union has caught up with me. So I was very surprised to hear her say that because for me, France is not there yet. France is still the country that respects human rights and freedoms. However, I understood that later on the stood why she was so sensitive to this because she actually experienced what life is like in an environment where you don't have freedom of speech and you don't have a free market economy. And that's why every perceived change for in this direction where freedoms are less respected is taken very, is making them very, very concerned people from the Soviet Union. And I myself, I remember my life, I was a small kid in the Soviet Union, but I remember having all these three TV channels and all these three TV channels show the same TV program about the Communist Party. I remember having two kinds of ice cream in the shops across the city and across the country and no more. And then when I was brought to Italy as a five year old kid and I could see, okay, actually I could have 100 TV channels and some of them even show Disney cartoons and Japanese anime. That's great. I could go to a shop downstairs and they have 200 different kinds of ice cream. That's much better that I experienced in the Soviet Union and I thought maybe these things afterwards I realized that this system is called the free market economy and we expect to freedom of speech and basic human rights. They're actually very good concepts because they make your life abundant. But the problem is I remember this life in the absence of these things. Other people from the Soviet Union, probably from Cuba, from other countries like that, experienced that. But people who were born and grew up here, for example in France, have not necessarily had this experience. They take freedoms for granted. They think that things are going to be fine because we're free country and what can possibly go wrong. Unfortunately, the history knows many examples when free societies gradually degrade it into societies without freedoms. One good example was last month with this anti-incryption law I told you before about because people were completely ignorant here in France that public was completely ignorant. So no encryption means no privacy. It means everybody's vulnerable. Everybody's messages can leak and it's mind-boggling. And of course every time something like this is proposed, very logically sounding justifications I used to protect the children. To protect the children, to fight crime, to another of which they bothered doing, by the way, even if we were girls about children, like they don't stop crime. Or in the Soviet Union they would say like in Maoist China, in other places they would say, oh, our geopolitical rival is trying to stir chaos in our country. So we have to limit this. It's Qatar doing it. It's Russia. It's Qatar. It's so yeah. I don't know. But all it is always some Trotskyite records, it's some unseen force from a foreign land trying to wreck our project so we need to oppress you to keep you safe. Yes. But it's not easy because now in the European Union you have all this laws that basically say you have to remove anything. It's actually part of the digital services act. You have to remove anything one of the European countries demands you remove for the entire of the entire European Union. So if you have, for example, Romania or Estonia or any other of this very highly respected demanding that you remove like most of the government channels for whatever reason, you have to remove them. Then you can appeal. Well, it will take you probably several years. But you have to remove them within like a very short timeframe. Otherwise you'll be facing fines, bans and so on. How is it not to worse up? How is it not so yet? If you criticize the people in charge, we shut you down. That's what they're saying. Interesting you would say that it wasn't 2009. In 2008 actually, I made my first trip to Latvia on a train from St. Petersburg and something was wrong with my visas so I had to get off and the border town in Latvia. But I had this long discussion with a border police officer. Well, I seem to like border policemen. So border police officer in Latvia. And I started to discuss his life in Latvia after Latvia was accepted in the EU. And he told me this interesting thing. He said, you know, we hated being in the Soviet Union. But now that we are in the EU, we realize we are in a very similar organization. Of course. We're in the Soviet Union again. Unelected foreigners are still making the key decisions. So you don't get to talk. So it's very funny you would compare this to systems. Of course they are very different. But still fundamentally, if you're not allowed to criticize the people in charge, you live in a tyranny. I mean, what's the other definition of it? I have to be able to say to the person making the decisions. I don't like that decision and here's why I have to be able to say it in public. And if I've always felt the problem that you have as the person who owns and runs Telegram is that you make it easy for people to come together online. You have the channels. And that is it. I don't know if you thought this through and you're an engineer when you built it. But that is potentially a massive threat to governments. Because it's not simply communicating one on one. There, you know, people can create their own channels, just a TV channel and reach a like-minded people and they could potentially organize. Organize. That's true. But one thing that makes Telegram different, we don't promote this channel. So everything that you have on Telegram is something that you have to deliberately search for and subscribe for. So unlike some other apps that constantly recommend you content and content sources, we don't do that. You open Telegram, it's just an empty list of chats if you don't have any friend there. And if you're not subscribed to any channel, you have to deliberately find one. So I think we're completely neutral platform. We allow everybody to express their voice within the rules of the common sense. And then everybody can decide which point of view makes more sense to them. And see if, for example, the government is right or their position is right. Right. Let's call freedom. That's called freedom. Fortunately, it's something that surprisingly faces a lot of backlash. I mean, I ask you a question about encryption. So the advances in computing power, we're only in quantum computing. Right. So they're just so exponential that it's hard even to understand for the non engineer brain like mine, but they're they're profound. The speed at which processes are now occurring. Does that eliminate what is the technology technology? Does that eliminate encryption? Encryption will have to change. Correct. The encryption has to change and there has been made progress in encryption, which is like quantum secure. So it's a constant evolution. So the tools to decrypt become stronger and then the tools to encrypt become stronger. That makes sense. Are you confident that encryption that secure encryption will still exist as a technological matter with the rise of the superfast quantum computing? It's very hard to be confident in anything because first of all, we have to rely on the computing power of our devices to decrypt things. Of course, they're very sophisticated algorithms in place that on the computing power of our devices to decrypt things. Of course, they're very sophisticated algorithms in place that make it so that you don't have to have the same level of computing power on your device in a data center. But you have to bring a data center with you. Yeah, exactly. So it's not exactly like those. Those are nuclear power plans by 100 acres. You don't have to. OK. But it continues. So particularly the state actors have almost infinite computing power, 30 disposal. And they have certain technologies at their disposal that may not be building everybody about. So they might not be telling people about it. So it's very possible that what you're saying will become reality or is it already reality, who knows? So that kind of is one of the, and I know you have, well, you're legally boundist here in France. So you're under some kind of state control. So and I know your life is complicated because it's, I don't want to push you to say things are to get you in trouble. But it does feel like a determined the government can spy in anybody who wants to. That's why it feels to me. Do you think that's true? Well, I think the biggest risk for personal privacy is the ability of any state actor to penetrate the device of the person mobile device, for example, because they're so-called zero-dable neurobiltis on iOS or Android phones, for example, that the governments sometimes know about and the secret agents is know about and they can exploit them. But everybody else doesn't know and they can't defend from them themselves from them. So if you became a target of a government, it's really likely that they would install this Trojan, so-called Trojan called Pegasus. Yes, you device. And that was one of these people eight years ago that had Pegasus installed on their phones, according to the lead reports. Been there. Is there any way, and I think a lot of people are there without knowing it, and I know that, is there any way to know if your phone has been compromised, if what you're looking at and typing is being read by somebody else? Is there any way to know for certain? For certain, probably no. But there are ways to check that and see if known vulnerabilities has been exploited on your phone. And I know there are some organizations that can help you with that. Where's your phone? Did you leave it out? I don't use the phone. I haven't used the phone for a year almost. I find it. Oh, France took it. Oh, France took it. But even before it took it, I wasn't using my phone. I didn't have a SIM card in the phone. I just use it to test Telegram, the app, because we have constant product updates. I have to test it, at least twice a week. But I don't. I'm not a user of a phone. So I just want to say again you're an engineer, too. I mean, you're not like a marketing guy. You're like a build the app guy. So you understand the technology? Yes. Because you built it. Yes. So you're coming from a highly informed perspective when you make technology choices. Is that fair? You could say so. Yeah. One of the most informed probably in the world, and you don't have a phone. What is that? Like, why don't you have a phone? Well, I don't use phone regularly, right? It's probably old if phone. But I don't use phone. I don't care a phone with me, because I find it extremely distracting. I find it also potentially harming my privacy. And I also just I don't think it's a necessary device for me to have. When I want to focus on something, I would rather use my laptop or my iPad and put together some notes or some indirectment my team. So I wouldn't want to just open my phone and disappear there consuming short form content. And that's why I don't use a phone. I'm trying to extract this from you for one simple reason, which is I think that when you come across someone who knows and amends some out about technology, really understands the technology, it's interesting to know his perspective on technology. With everything you know, you don't use a phone. So I just think people can draw their own conclusions from that. But. So what do you saw Ross Albrecht? Albrecht's got the guy who was part of it. Yes. Yeah. So grown. Mm-hmm. So he ran so grown and I'm hardly an expert on this. I was very pleased when he got pardoned. But it seemed like no one accused him of selling drugs, by the way. You would never know that for me in the New York Times, but he was not like dealing drugs on playgrounds or anything like that. He had a site that made commerce possible outside the control of government. And they're apparently were bad people doing bad things. I don't know. It was a lot of good people doing good things on it. But it was none of it was controlled by the government. And he got life in prison for that. That's my takeaway. And so maybe there will, my sort of conclusion from this is, as long as people like you create technology that makes it harder for government to control people, and you will be a target of government action. I think that's, eh, well, first of all, I wouldn't necessarily compare it to a girl with sucrose. And I'm not. And I do, but the idea that the idea that they need to control everything that is happening online, and if they can't, they're going to punish you. That does seem like a real fact. I think everybody's trying to reach their goals and be more efficient in what they do. For example, you ask any minister of interior, any head of police, and they'll tell you, oh, encryption is a big problem. If it weren't for encryption, we would solve all crime. They don't see it two steps or three steps ahead. Yes. And it's not necessarily some huge conspiracy where the evil governments wants to take more and more control. Although that may be the case, I'm not knowledgeable on that subject. It seems to me more like everybody's trying to solve the problems that they see using the tools that they have at their disposal, even if it negatively impacts other areas of our lives. You're a very generous man. I must say. Last question. Thank you for doing this. How long are you going to be in France? And once you leave France, will you be coming back to France? I don't know yet when these restrictions will be lifted. I hope later this year will be able to travel to my home country, which is Dubai freely. I will probably come back to France because it's a great place to spend time in. Of course, I have spent a lot of time in France now. I have eight months. So I have a full immersion program. How's your French? It's actually good. I was very good when I passed my French exam to receive the passport. I got 97 points out of 100. But I didn't practice my French much. Most of my friends are Americans, but even human parents. My French friends speak perfect English. So I got a chance to practice. But now you've had that chance? No, because they speak English with me. It changed. Like before 15 years ago, 20 years ago, it was difficult not to speak French in France. Now, for better or worse, you can get by using English. I'm trying to use my French, but I don't sound as in... I sound even less intelligent in French than in English. So people switch back to English with me. But you're anticipate having to stay for the next 20 years or anything here. I would be very surprised if that happened because I'm traveling to Dubai and coming back. It's just obvious that I'm not a somebody who would try to escape forever. And this investigation has to be concluded in one way or the other. Of course, then if it goes to trial, if that happens, it can take another several years. But then again, it would be completely crazy, I would say, if I would have to move to France and leave here permanently for the whole duration of this process. I would say that most likely I expect that I would be able to travel again later this year. Well, certainly rooting for you. Probably think of it very much. Thank you, sir. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show. On one level, that's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking. With everything that's going on in the world right now, all the change taking place in our economy, and our politics with the wars when the customer fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's more. What can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google. Or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.