Ladies and gentlemen one of the best boxes on planet earth and his trainer Bo Mack and Terrence Crawford Gentlemen, thank you very much for coming here. Thank you. We're live now. Appreciate it. Appreciate it. Hey man I'm a big fan of yours. We've talked about you many times on this podcast I'm a huge fan of the way you switch stances You know you switch switch stances as smooth as anybody ever Like like you got to go back to Marvin Haggard to find a champ that switched stances like as fluidly as you It's pretty pretty impressive stuff man. Have you always been doing that? A lot of practice Yeah, since I was little I remember getting in trouble because I used to always switch him my coaches They say you need to worry about fighting The one style first and perfecting that before you try to try to Switch and do a different style But I'll always switch so they got to the point where there was this like all right Well, you gonna fight like that. We're gonna train like that. Wow, so you forced it through right Wow Now when you first started out was there anybody that influenced you to switch like that Or was it just something you felt naturally? It was just naturally It was just like all right this not working so I gotta do something else just make it more tricky right Yeah, well that's that's part of what's interesting about watching you fights What watching you fight is that you could see you trying to figure out what's up? Like first rounds with when you fight is one of my favorite things to watch because I see you measuring dudes I see things happening and you switch in stances and then when you start finding the timing It's like timing is one of the more Fascinating things to watch about boxing because a guy who has perfect timing and perfect But like when you see a guy make a read and then execute and it's perfect. It's one of the most beautiful things in all sports Right, right. It's like you You know you're watching they ever move and then you just dissecting them slowly How do you think do you think about it like when you when you start around? a first round of a fight is it different for every fighter or do you always want to do that? Do you always want to like put them into the computer? No, it's different it's different like sometimes I just Want to go out there and just be like alright I'm gonna see what this dude guys see if you can tell you just go right to him Yeah, and then sometimes I just black art. I'm gonna take my time and you know figure him out See how fast he is see you know what things he liked to do on whether he don't like to do or See if I move this way his reaction just certain things it's you know We you came to the UFC this weekend and you know obviously I love MMA But one of the things that I love about boxing is when you take them all all the elements You take away wrestling and kicking and all that stuff you get the highest level of it Exchanges and punches and you get to see with guys like you guys like canal or florida the top level boxes You get to see what's possible with guys that are training with the best scientific methods and with all the knowledge of all the past fighters I mean when you were growing up who what was the the fighter that influenced you the most well? Hands down Floyd Mayweather and Roy Jones Jr You know, I used to love watching Roy Jones Jr I'm pretty sure everybody everybody was a fan of Roy But set aside Roy always watched the Floyd Mayweather and perennial Whitaker Yeah, I was too young for sugar Ray Leonard and Damn, so I'm old enough for that. I was there for the sugar Ray Leonard days I was there for sugar Ray Tommy Hearns that the sugar Ray Duran I was there for all that stuff, but I I watched everything When I was when I was young my coach Mitch minor he used to always Take me to his house and watch boxing tapes That was to keep me off off the streets and keep me out of trouble until I went to the gym Is he still around lai pass? Damn, he'd probably look at that. What did that work out? You know, we talk about an investment in time that they worked out tremendously. Yeah The it's always in our culture. There's a special place for the highest level of box It's like a special place of admiration and I just feel like with guys like Loma Chanko with guys like you with Canelo and triple G. This is a great time for boxing. It's fun to watch man There's so many Earl Spence Jr. There's so many elite boxers right now. It's like a really exciting time for sure Do you recognize your place in history? Do you recognize that like you're a special dude? Of course, of course Like I always tell people when they Met your me and Earl Spence, you know, of course. I want to fight out tell everybody I'll always say with or without him. I'm going to the Hall of Fame When you look at all the things that I've And accomplished in the sport of boxing People that's in the Hall of Fame didn't even accomplish that You know, so I was I just tell people I don't need him. He really need me Well, we need it Box right don't you agree? You're boxing do need that boxing needs it. I mean, it's one of the beautiful things about when a canal on a triple G do get together You see these guys in the respective weight classes that are in their prime. It's fun, you know like that's what everybody wants to see That's the fight It just stopped a whole lot of barbershop conversation. Yes You need to stop a whole lot of comedy club conversations barbershop garage everywhere Yeah, that's the that's the fight to make in your weight class right now, right for sure What's hold what's the hold up you got to ask them? Oh, it's them Everybody has to hold out a little bit right to get the best deal. That's cool. You know It's all about business, but at the same time My side of The deal is ready whenever and you can see all the interviews out there, man You can see where it was tears for myself or Bob or anybody that's Affiliate with team Crawford We all say we want to fight, you know, yeah, we had a fight tomorrow, you know if we wanted to so Well, we know it's very lissy it won't happen So when would you think that he's waiting for the right time marketing wise or do you think he's ready for the right time? Where his skills he feels like are able to challenge you like what do you think is the actual hold up? I? Think is has something to do with Top rank and PBC. Oh, okay, so it's a promoter issue. So it's a financial Scramble. I want to say financial because the money will be there if the fight was ever made. I just think is You know Eagles. Yeah, I think you guys think So do you think hopefully this is just something that's gonna take a little while, but it will eventually come to play? Of course, I think it happened you know, but I think You know Me being with time rank is standing a way of a lot of things happening. Mm-hmm That makes sense that makes sense It's like it's interesting that promoters of boxing promoters work together well at all Right, you know like you think about it like if the UFC had to work with Bellator and put together some world championship fight Every basically there's so many times we got champion versus champion They have two different promoters and they have to decide to get together and make this happen Well, who want to get the most of the plot? That's probably what it is. Yes, or when that work is going to be on Yeah, but it's gonna be a boxer ESPN and who's gonna promote it and It's also like when someone like Floyd Mayweather has done what he's done and sold the kind of paper views that he sold and then you know and achieved this sort of level of financial fame as well as like people he's famous not just for being the best boxer But famous for being Insanely rich like that's part of the fame because he promote it. Yes Because he promoted because he figured it out and a lot of other people are gonna probably try to do the same thing as well That's not my style too busy, right? Too busy, yeah, man. I mean you got to just stay busy being Terrence Crawford. You want to be promoting That seems like a lot of a pain in the ass man. I just I'm blown in I do want to promote and run my mouth and fit what about after you're done when you're career is over when you retire Do you think you do some promoting then or training? What'd you do? No, I just be In my gym back at home My coach got us a gym and just put my time and effort into the kids in the gym and my five kids that I had Beautiful. Yeah, that's a that's a solid plant. You know you'll need to get involved that promote and chat No, he he do give you deal sometimes and work with the fighters Do you yeah? Yeah, I got that funny because it's funny to see work with him because After about two rounds he was I came to this shit Listen to me No, man. It's like you tell him I'm over and over and do one little simple thing and like just say you tell him keep your right hand up Right, and they keep one like this You're like you talking about brand new people like yeah Like even even even boxers that being boxing for years that they Really don't have the fundamentals down to a tee and you like do you been boxing too long for you to still be making the same A state and it's like only could say certain things for so it should learn For so learn and then it's just like all right. I ain't saying it all right Well, yeah, your opinion is as valuable as anybody alive Do you want the best fucking boxers ever if you you're a beginning boxer and Terrence Crawford teaching you something? You're not listening to probably nervous as shit Probably sure for sure that's crazy that you be working with beginners That must be wild for them. I work with all of them. That's awesome. That's kind of freak them out though Especially the ones that's professional and they being a gym and I be yelling at them They be on the miss with bow Mack. I'll come over there and critique on the Navy like shit here come but They look at him like am I doing it right am I doing it right? You know, so I just want everybody to win. I'll just keep them sharp Well when someone has achieved that level the level that you have you know Like anybody around you that gets a chance to watch your train and be a part of that That's that's gigantic to see something like that in the gym when you're a great just to see like a This world champion. I mean But this having him around, you know in the gym when he's not even supposed to be training or just being around in other fighters around is it's phenomenal because you see this little extra pussy in the guys sure Yeah, or like he'll come and run with him and I could see those smaller guys. You want to try to get ahead of him You know, so what it's cool man. It's cool. It's really cool. Yeah, that's Do you think about that how much you're inspiring guys? Of course all the time That's why I come to the gym when bow Mack be like man. Just take a rest just relax I come to the gym and work out when you know, I don't have nothing coming up Just so I can show them like even though I'm the champion of the world I still work aged their heart to make sure I stay champion because it's harder To keep the championship title then getting there. It's one of the more beautiful things about boxing There's no shortcuts none for the best ever you have to train or have to train hard as fuck You just get a deal when you don't want to do it. There's no doubt about it You got to do everything you're supposed to do. There's no if answer butts If you don't fuck with your head, and that's one thing I took from Floyd Mayweather You will always see him yeah working out. I don't care if he was at a bar You'll see him running from the bar. He got his little workout clothes and his little TMT Vayne and he just ran home. Yeah, you'll see him three o'clock in the morning man Let's go work out, you know, and that's what I admire the most of his work at this work Ethics off the chart. This is the only way you'd be that good. There's no other way I mean yeah, he understands boxing at a level that I mean grew up with it Having his dad and his uncle and all that the family was so many great boxers around him all the time But he you don't get that good without insane work ethic. There's no shortcuts. No, not at all I I have never seen nobody like put as much work in as Floyd so that's why you know for me I'm like thinking to myself I got to work twice as hard on You know if I want to get Above him because I never want to be like anybody always want to be myself But I want to surpass the people that was in front of me. Was it? I Opening when you got to watch him train of course of course You know when I was younger it Let's me know that I wasn't working as hard. Yeah, so now when When fighters come to my camp or I bring in some sparring partners or some friends that's professional that just want to you know Come to camp and just experience just been in camp with a world champion They all said the same thing Man, I thought I was working hard till I came up here. Man. You work. You work too hard and it ain't for some people because some people They just be like I can't do it today like Nah, I'm gonna let y'all do them too. I'm gonna go to the gym, but I ain't gonna do the other stuff I just be like, man, come on man. They're like, man. I body like man See that's what's gonna determine when in the losing you complaining about your body when you can rest later You know, right what other stuff you're trying to get them to do I know you do a lot of stare running right I do a lot of everything I do Yoga I do a straight relationship. I do Swimming high you Yoga. I love that. Hey Joe. I used to do it too. I Everybody can do it is just it's just a mixture of you know Just all around body working out. What do you find that you get out of yoga? Man yoga is harder than you think you know you in there you got to control your breathing You know Just holding your hands in certain positions is tiring So the little muscles that you really not using you know in the day-to-day Activities you using a yoga and it's just burning and you just like man just hold your hands up like this and going like this You be like you been there shaking like me It's kind of burning and you see the girls and you like trying to do it and it just it helps you with your balance as well Yeah, it helps with a bunch of things. It's just interesting that more fighters don't adopt it You know, I think anything that makes your body more flexible and increases your range of motion And then gives you strength and all the it feels like when I do yoga like all the connecting stuff Like the shoulders and hips and knees all that gets like this extra stability workout that you don't really get from a lot of other things I feel like it connects everything together good in it and it helps you prevent injuries. Yeah. Yeah Now Speaking of that like what are you doing in terms of recovery? Do you do ice baths or sauna massage like kind of shit? Massage Yeah, I don't like the cold so I know like I don't really take absence all bass Yeah, I'm a size is that's a grown-up in the brass get thing though, right? What's that cold? It's cold in the rascal, but I'm used to that cold, but I just can't fix myself to get in the ice tub Mmm, I never was that type. It's hard. Yeah Every life you picked your poison. Yeah, I stick my feet in there be like I ain't getting in there. Yeah It's rough. They'd be like come on. It's gonna help you are is gonna help me next time Have you ever fucked the cryotherapy ever tried? Yeah, yeah, I'd you like that. I did that one time. That's easier Yeah, it was cool coming through. Yeah, it's dry and it's only three minutes. Yeah, so but that that ice bath Yeah, I do the car cryo The ice bath You want I'd be sore. I don't know what the science says. What's better? I've heard both things I've heard that the ice bath better because it's prolonged because it's like 15 minutes and I've heard the cryos better because You hit your body with such a high degree of cold that freaks out and produces these cold shock proteins better But either one you do those You do massage you do yoga. Well kind of I know you do strength and conditioning stuff I've got watch your Instagram. You got a great Instagram. Right and your kids are wrestlers, right? Yeah, that's awesome Yeah, do you think your kids ever fight MMA? No, actually, I'm on I'm trying to Cover them to baseball really party in the next year You know because it ain't ain't that much money and wrestling it's true. You know when you look at the MMA fighters They ain't making a lot of money to get beat up like they getting beat up like look at Pedest he broke his feet right? You know yeah, it looked like he broke one of his ankles maybe and I really heard it I'm pretty sure he didn't make over 300,000 for that shot that fight. I'd like to know see if you find out how much the Anthony Pettis made for that fight he broke his foot for sure. Yeah, he was walking around or being pushed around the wheelchair today Yeah, it's rough. You see people getting knee kicked in the face teeth. Do you look at it as being more brutal than boxing? Yeah, yeah, you take you take more risk and you see It's more ahead injuries, but you have seen more risk for yeah for sure for injuries, right? Broken bones and ankles and knees and shut. Yeah, and I just didn't get any Where for all that? Boxing ain't worth a lot of things too because you see him people dying or any Yeah Yeah, and anywhere for life at the end of the day when you decide to hang it up. How will you know when? You know well me personally, I won't think I'll ever know when but I just got a date in the age like I You know middle 30s. Well, how old you know? I'll be 32 next month. So you close close So you have it in your head just go on top Like Marvin Haggle was one of the only ones ever do it he went on top another switch hitter Right Marvin Haggle was the only one at all the greats who lost that fight controversial loss to sugary lanterns like fuck this I'm done Walk away Never never came back. Well, his last fight was really good. Yep. Yep. That was it controversial loss to Leonard became a movie star in Italy He ever seen his movies in Italy. No, I just want to watch some clips What is this? Warren Haggle fucking people up. He's like a movie star He does like these crazy Italian movies. What is this? This is how much he made for 155,000. Yeah, wow another found in 55 if you won So it did it made a flat 250 for the win Yeah, they used to before the Reebok deal they used to make much more way more Sponsors. Yeah, cuz I got a buddy or saw baked it You know, I know that guy's really good very talented brass. Oh is he okay cool He's fun bisonia, but he lives in Lincoln, Nebraska. Okay, you know Real real good friends real good friends and talented kid. Yeah, and he's just always say alright Well, we get paid for this if we win this for showing up this if we get best knock out of This is this is This is why we had good action hero And this is like not far after the fight with indio too cuz there was a lot of a lot of shit that was unresolved after indio one He was uh, I've never seen it. Oh, these are the spaghetti westerns like but for you know, whatever you're this way Harvard haggard shoot everybody Yeah, yeah apparently speaks Italian, and you know, he's a star over there. Wow. Yeah Look at these Body shot, but he just decided like I don't want a box anymore. I'm done That's good for him though. Yeah, you know, I mean that I get punched in the head No more he speaks perfect when you hear him speak today They do you know, you know, I usually doesn't never never I love to yeah, I'd like to meet that guy I was here's my hero when I was kid Remember there was a video of him who's training from a stop of hamshone He's running down Cape Cod in the winter with a with a hoodie on just screaming war War He's all the cold coming out of his mouth the steam and he's running. I was like oh my god Because I was you know doing martial arts back then and I was watching him going like that is That's the ultimate champion That's a champion to put himself in a terrible play put himself down on the cape in the winter time to do all his training in the cold Runs in the cold and it does it runs in combat boots, too He ran in combat boots He would just be it was hard as fuck and he just had crazy work ethic crazy work ethic And I remember whenever I would think about being think about being lazy. I'll think of him running down the beach going war Just to just shadow punch in in the beach roar It's crazy that you say that because I remember was little we used to always run in the cold I mean, I mean, you know cold where the snot is freezing up. Yeah, you tear in up But as you get older you'd be like me I run up the treadmill already know You already know you know how to fight you know how to persevere You already know your champion. You already know you're at the top of the game You don't have to prove that to yourself anymore. You know how tough you are. No, no It'll be times that it'd be times that I just be like all right When we need that at hardcore work let's go Everybody be like what we ain't going to why no one time We ran right after Thanksgiving No, no right after I don't get out there I don't get out there Everybody like what so so he made he made Thanksgiving dinner and we in training camp So you know we all got lose weight and stuff and pole made all this fool man We all grubbing this stuff and then so I'm eating not to I get on eating. I'm like man I'm stuffed. I'm like man. I can't wake up this heavy. I was like man Everybody let's get it ready to go and run and everybody looking at me laying down like man. It's cold you trip you for And so we running with these little flash like Like the little man like I'm gonna go fishing and stuff So we all running air by hunk it do do do do Wow night it was it was pretty chill wow Yeah, but that kind of shit like what Floyd Mayweather does that's that two o'clock in the morning workout routine every now Like it's good to just throw monkey wrenches into your sense of what you should be doing and when be ready to do it all ways Yeah, that's why the cold weather running is big Cold weather running is those people that live in cold climates that run in the winter man That's a that's a hearty breed of human. That's not a regular person that decides like nobody's got a gun to your head It's not your job you decide to put your fucking running shoes on and lace up and go out there when it's zero It's kind of like when before I fall American and I was down there shadow boxing and in the snow and that blizzard. Oh I put it on I put it on on my Instagram everybody was like oh he trained him for the spence like I Like 10 inches that 10 inches that day It was blizzard and we actually got knocked off a couple of days to leave leaving for training camp Yeah, wow because it was almost fucking snow do but there's something about that like even you talking about it You know it's kind of wild throughout their boxing in the snow shadow boxing in the middle of a blizzard Something wild about that. It's crazy though because when it's snowing it's not that cold Right, it's true isn't it? Yeah, like it's a little bit some word I was just sitting in the house and it was just like man. Go outside and do something So I went outside ran a little bit and then I come home and I was like come here It's like what like come on recording Shadow boxing this stuff at that ring so it's cool So when when I see you doing those little stair runs you do that quite a bit, right? Right every time what do you do that at? Don't probably want to tell anybody where you go. I know they know they go to the spring. Oh, okay That's a famous spot right man. It's a little spring. How many steps is that that whole thing? It's a mile and a half a mile up a hill. How long does it take you to get up there? Probably like 35 minutes That's all for fucking horrible run You know running we walk it but some people running oh you walk it Yeah, that's insane and people that be running insane Because of the air getting thinner and thinner as you go and then the steps You got some steps that's like this that's small and then you got some steps where you got a really reach oh Like so if you're running you slip yeah, that's a fucked up For real yeah, like when you when you up at the top feel like you in the clouds sometimes like looking down like the cars is Straight shot would you do your training camp up there you call it a spring just for the altitude Yeah, actually got a house up there. Oh really you just go back and Do a free camp what made you decide to do your camps out there just to get away from home You know clear my head get away from all the negativity and I've been doing this since 2013 13 2013 2013 so do you have a gym set up at the house? Oh, that's nice I saw like can now a little had something like that down in San Diego There was a thing when he was training for one of his fights They just ran in the house turn the garage into a boxing ring See do that kind of thing you had all set up out there. Yeah, a lot of guys do that a big bear too, right? Yeah It's similar today Yeah, having that high altitude is that what you prefer like look for your wind Yeah, that that helped my win but at the same time everything is is already set up like Everything from the yo good to the swimming to the gym to everything It's like a second home to me. So it's not like I gotta go looking the fine Why I'm gonna do this where I'm gonna do this? It's like everything is everything and you know my family come up there and visiting me and We get the job done. It's all locked in right now when you go up there who sets your schedule as far as what your daily routine is I You said everything yoga all everything well. It's it's it's two more coaches that that helps me Sal D. Egg is in red spikes so we all get together. We make a Make a calendar like a month in advance Now when you do things like when you add in yoga and swimming how do you know when to put those in? Well Everything was always it started off with a trial in the air Meek in 2013 grab that microphone pulled up close to it. There we go like I said It's around it moves all over the place. All right. It's like I said, it's done with a trial in the air 2013, you know, we tried this and we tried that and we started doing this and we started doing that And then you know just just look at the fighter and just see if it is if it's working for him You know, and if it's working for him You want to stick with it and then you start adding little small things into it like the yoga and the swim in the run and You know the incline So After so many amount of years. I think since 13 I mean, he just worked like clockwork now Now do you monitor in your heart rate or how do you know like do you do any of that stuff? Why you trying nothing just go by feel yeah, yeah There's a two schools of thought right the schools of thought is like the old ways the best way like just do hard shit Chop wood Yeah, you know run do the standard stuff and there's other people that watch the macros and you know You know you're smiling you know I don't win we don't do none of that yeah I think we trained more less like the old-school way, but we do got like some of the new stuff in like the strength of kiddies and we got to shoot the kiddies guy Jamie belt he's Excellent and he kind of adds a little stuff New modern A stuff in it in a into the workouts Like sometimes I'll be one of the more and he but like no, I was that was enough for you Like you might not think you did enough, but trust me you'll feel it tomorrow Tomorrow you like Really is sore There's sometimes like I'll add in some stuff and just I'll just you know try to make things different You look at me saying not but we're not doing that You're already be like dead and he's like Trying to add extra stuff or he'd be like one more round all right Come on one more round and then you'll do that one more round and they'd be like all right We got one more round y'all people like man you be like man I just pushed everything out of that last round because you said that was the last round well come on baby Come on. I'm not about to argue with you. So you So it's like all right with a fighter. It's like there's a this gotta be a bouncing point, right? Like you don't want them to do too much right? So like when that guy told you like that's enough for today And you like want to keep going that's the natural inclination is to work harder Yeah, it's that weird balance point We got to figure out when you're over-training Right, so if you're not monitoring your heart rate or anything like that You just basically if you have a flat day you feel flat That weird balance point we got to figure out when you're over training. Right. So if you're not monitoring your heart rate or anything like that, you just basically, if you have a flat day, you feel flat, just chill out. Yeah. Yeah. So just fall out. Sometimes, sometimes, but always ask me before we go work out, how you feeling? How you feeling? But like I'm good, but I'm good. Or sometimes I'll be like, man, I'm tired. He'll be like, all right, we're just going to coast today. Like if it's sparring day, he'll be like, all right, we don't be trying to do too much. We just going to spar, hit the miss, get out. We ain't going to do no bad when you're going to do not next. And then after I do the bag and sparring, I mean, not the bag, but the miss and spar, I might be feeling good. And I'd be like, man, let's do something. Like, no, you say you weren't feeling good at first, listen. Come on. Let's go. That's the hardest part, right? Yeah. To pull it back. To know when to pull it back. Right. Because he knows me. He been with me since the beginning. So he knows just by looking at me, you know, what type of day I'm having, like either in a jam or outside that jam. That's got to be important, isn't it? Like knowing him from the time when he was younger and just starting out today? It's definitely his way. It plays a big part in the relationship far as like, the inside the ring and outside the ring. Because, you know, as a trainer, you know, you'll never want to fight it over train. You'll never want him to under train. So, but I'll never have to worry about him under training because he's always in a gym. You know what I'm saying? So, it's like, like you said, some days. And then we're going to pull back this week. All right, man. He's been training for already for eight weeks. You know? So, and we still got one or two more weeks to go before we hit the down date. The actual peak point. All right, we'll pull back. And then sometimes you get hard headed and say, now, come on, let me do a little bit more. All right, do a little bit more, but don't do too much. You know, you got to be a little bit more. But don't do too much. You know, you got to put your all in to it. You know, just move around a little bit. You got to do basically all fighters like that. Especially fighters, good fighters. Because most good fighters like Terrence and other fighters is Jamel, Harry, Steve Nelson. You got to, you got to pull them guys back. You always got to pull them back because they always want to go, go, go, go, go, go. Because I always got this winning that, I got to fucking win. I got to fucking win. I understand that. I want you to fucking win too, but I want you to break your body down. I want you to do your boxing inside the gym. You got to have something left when you go to the fight. That's a lesson that's very hard for young guys to learn around. Oh yeah. But it's so critical to know where your body is. At this stage of your career, I would imagine you just kind of feel it. You know exactly. And when you're in training camp and you're gearing up for fight, is that how it feels like you know where you're at? Oh, this is where I'm supposed to be. I feel this right here. Oh, you're just normal. Because every fight, every single fight before the fight, you know, bomack always waiting to hear me be like, oh man, I'm ready. I'm ready. Like sometimes it be a week before the fight. Sometimes it be two weeks before the fight. But when you hear it, that's what I've been waiting on. Now I'm comfortable. Because like sometimes he just be like, you're looking at him. I be working and stuff and then he don't say nothing. But then when I come to him like, yeah, I'm ready. He'd be like, you said you're ready. You said you're ready. You did that from the fight. You said, right. Fuck that shit man. He'll be just my fucker's ass. Well because you guys know each other so well and you work together so long. Like you must like say, okay, here we are. Where we're supposed to be. Right. Right. You've been there. Falls right in the place. My biggest thing that I always told about every since I was an amateur because I remember losing a couple of fights because I didn't train as hard and I got tired. You know, and I couldn't really do too much. And I always told boy I said, but if I'm in the best of my best shape that I possibly can be in, nobody being. Nobody. Then boy. I know. That's why you need to quit bullshit. So that's a real friend. That's a real trainer and a real friend. Yeah. So it just got to the point where I just start like training real real hard and I was just like training not the kid. How old were you in this happen? I was a teenager. I was just start training not to get tired. If I can go in there and fight and not get tired, I'm a win. That's what I always say. So the switch flipped. You figured it out. I was losing the people that I shouldn't have lost to just head down just swinging them all while, but they wasn't in shape. And I was trying to be all cute and slick and get tired. Now it's a matter of life and death. Me whole and they pushing me. I'm falling all over the place as a as a little kid. And I was just like, I never get that tired ever again in the fight. That is such an important lesson for young fighters to hear. Such an important lesson that it's there's no shortcut. When you look at a guy like Terrence Crawford, you say, well, that guy must be insanely talented. I mean, his timing, his reads on people, the ability to switch stances and say, well, no, yeah, how'd that come about? That talent came about through relentless hard work. That's what makes that talent emerge. I'm sure you have an amazing inclination for boxing every elite of the elite fighter does. But you don't get to be there without any hard work. It doesn't exist. There's no way. There's no way. It's so important for young fighters to hear. That's a lot of guys that don't see is that hard work in the gym. You know what I'm saying? Hard work out. Well, then you look at any time fighter and you look at all the sacrifices they make just to be where they at. And you would have people taking shots at them and stuff. And they'd be like, man, you don't know what I didn't put my body do to be here today. Or you didn't know what I went through. And it's just like total disrespect for somebody that having even stepped foot in the ring to be trying to critique you when they ain't even stepped foot to get punched in the face before. They can never really understand, though, right? No one could ever really understand what it takes to be an elite boxer. When you're whole, the future of your family, the future of yourself, your financial success, and all the people around you, is dependent on you navigating the most shark-filled waters in professional sports. A bunch of train killers with their hands. Everybody's real good at knocking other people out with their hands. And you're successfully navigating those waters. Like, no one really understands that other than you. You and all the other people like the real, me people on the outside that are close to you kind of get it a little bit. You are the only one who's ever going to be able to understand that. So all these people are talking shit. Like they might as well be speaking a language. They don't even know what the meaning is. This nonsense. They're saying nonsense. And it's just like, you got a bull's eye on your head and your back. Because you reverse. First, you had your eye on somebody. And you was like, man, I got to beat this dude. After this dude, I got to beat this dude. So you was eyeing that person that was in your shoes. That was once champion of the world. Like, I was eyeing Ricky Burns when I was coming up. And after I beat him, now everybody's eyeing me because I'm champion now. So it's no more Ricky Burns. It's Terence Crawford. We got to get Terence Crawford. He's the champ. So now it's like, damn. Everybody wants you to hit it. So now you got to train you a harder to keep the title. Do you remember if you guys show up at your gym talk shit? Like Shannon Brake style? No. No. We know. Nobody coming over the hall, man. Let's go champ. Shannon Brake's where if you his weight class, he would show up at Omaha. No. Let's go champ. He said it. He said it. He said it braids a leader. He will leave Omaha to say weight came in. He didn't mean I got beat up by somebody. You ever see what he did? The Vladimir Klitschko. When they cut each other and then. No, when they were, well, there's a couple times. One at a restaurant. Poor water on his head. But he cut it. Cut him out. That's right from the broken guy. Yeah, that's right. But the other time he was on a wakeboard or on a paddleboard. And Shannon came by to boat knocked him off the fucking paddle. The way he fell. That's how I think that was stage. It was stage. I think it was stage. Seems like it was stage. It was like, man, how you know where this man at every single time he goes to point. That's a good point. And then you just so happen to have some good cameras getting the footage. It's true. It was in good cameras. But Shannon wisely would travel with good cameras and then just start making these scenes. He never fought him. Yeah, he didn't ever fight him. I think you fought him when he was younger. Something knocked him out or something like that. Vitaly. Vitaly knocked him out. Yeah. He fought, he fought the older brother, Vitaly. He was a monster. Yeah. That's what he fought, right? I believe Vitaly. Vitaly. Vitaly. Vitaly. That's why you say, Vitaly. That guy had an iron jaw. The brother. Nobody could knock out the brother. It was crazy. That guy would just take bombs. Remember when he fought Lennox Lewis? Yeah, Vitaly. Yeah. It took bombs. I mean, that guy was so goddamn durable. I don't want that fight if he wouldn't have got that cut. Giant cut. Yeah. He was winning. What a weird style too, right? He had one of the most awkward, like so strange watching him throw punches, but it was effective. And he reminded me of, uh, Drago off Rocky. A little bit. That guy's a dot, like he's got a PhD. My thing speaks like five languages. What do they call him? Dr. Iron Fist was his name. What a character. Interesting too, like the heavyweight division has now become the focal point of boxing again. It's very exciting. That's a good role. Yeah, for a long time, Vladimir Klitschko was the heavyweight champion of the world. And for whatever reason, nobody gave a fuck. It was weird because it was dominating for all those years. He was jabbing clutch, jabbing clutch. I think it was because we didn't have the American champion, you know, for sure. So everybody was like, oh, forget it. They're probably something to do with it. But if he was fighting, it's, like if he was fighting the way, the Dante Wilder does, who cares if he's from the moon? Right. You know, he's starting people like that. Like we want to see that guy fight. Like you don't care if that guy's from fucking Brazil or wherever he's from. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. It's good night. God damn. It's one of those punches where people just go, you see people in the audience go, Oh, God, he hits hard. Even when he don't fully extend, it'd be like, the crazy thing is when he fought Tyson Fury, he was 209. 209. That's nothing. And he punches so fucking hard. It's crazy. That too is an anomaly. The fact that he won a bronze medal in the Olympics three years after taking a box, saying, right. It's insane. It's just insane. Yeah. Because there are a lot of people, they asked me because we was in the same, you know, trials in 2007. And it was like, do you ever remember the entay water and the amateurs? I said, man, he came out of nowhere, cracking people. I said, he never went on none of the, the, the, uh, the doors or nothing. He just came out of nowhere. Yeah. He's all at the top guys in the heavyweight division. Crazy. That's a, that's a, he's a unicorn, you know. When you look at his record, what is it like? 39 knockouts out of 41 fights. Is it something like that? 40 knockouts. 40 knockouts and 41 fights. Oh, it's four years. Okay. 39. Yeah, it's two, only two fights. What was it? The first one was it Brazil, don't know, no, Brazil, he just knocked out who was, who, who went to distance, uh, stavern, stavern went to distance in their first fights. The very name. Yeah. And then he flat landed him in the second fight. That crazy one. Just hits two. He hits two, righteousness. Yeah. He hits two, right? That's why in man, people go flying. He got the last, he got the right last name. Wow. It didn't know. Wow. It was the game, wow he started. How about that interview? To this day. He hit him, they came into interviews, was like, shit, what did I do? What the fuck did I do? And then he uses hashtag till this day. He uses that all the time on his Instagram. So that guy's got shell shocked. He gets PTSD every time. I was like, no! I was funny, no, because we all be saying that now. People are like, today I ain't going back to that store. So everybody just, he took that phrase over. That was a phrase that he just owned. He took it over. That's his name. That's his name. That's his name. One interview. Till this day, one interview. One interview before a fight, we was getting geared up. But he's like, oh my god, he's so fine. He's talking terrifying. When you know how hard that guy hits and he's mad at you, he's like, he's just like, look, about to knock me out. Even if you were to be sure 100% he would never do that. It's like, you'll be here in the room at a lion. Like, oh no. And he's a grassy. He's Mr. lion. Oh, you sure this thing's trained? Yeah. You sure it's not going to eat me? He's so, he's there. He's so funny. He's so funny. Dude, that must have been terrifying. I mean, please, Blaine. He's fully geared up and ready for war before this fight. That is hilarious. That is hilarious. So this whole division now, if you look at the heavyweight division between Andy Ruiz just beats Anthony Joshua and then they're going to try to figure out, they were going to try to do that in Saudi Arabia, but apparently Andy's like, we're fighting America. He should have took it. That's in Saudi Arabia. A big money fight. I'm sure. Well, they're still going to do it. They just arguing over where Saudi Arabia is. Is it off the table now? I don't know. This, I don't know. Who knows, man. I mean, you guys know better than me. It's a lot of gamesmanship. Right. Right. Right. We were talking about before ego and stuff. Same kind of deal. I'm sure as the Arrow spends junior fight, same kind of deal. They're jockeying to see who could get the Andy's worried about him. I'm turning it on. Yeah. He's worried about taking some Mexican supplements while he's over. He's worried about the country that they won't test him. So he should have Vlata or protesting that is going to go over there and test the fight. Yeah. That's one of the reasons why people are going to love a dude like Andy Ruiz as a champion. He looks like a regular folk. Right. He's got a lot of extra body fat. He's a bad motherfucker. But you know, Anthony Joshua looks like he was made in the lab. He's got a perfect physique. Man. It's crazy how big I do it, guys. He's huge. Because, man, he wasn't that big at first, but now he's slimming down. But I think he put on a lot of weight to carry with Vlata mere. Is that what he put all the way down? Yeah. What kind of testing they do for that fight? They test you for everything. But do they test you for everything at the wands? No. See me. I'm with the Vlata. You're in the full testing pool. They show up six o'clock in the morning the whole deal. They can test out. They can test me right now if they wanted to. See him, I'd be waiting outside right now. It's cool because I'm good. But when he fought Vlata mere and he got all big, would they do any kind of wands? I don't know what type of contract or what they signed for on a contract on a fight contract, but I know me. When I'm in training camp, they come whenever they come six o'clock in the morning and turn around and come six o'clock at night if they want to. That's a point of diminishing returns when you get too much muscle, right? It can make you stronger, but that's going to need a lot of oxygen too. If your body's not used to it, if this is over the course of a year or two, also when you got this extra muscle, is it you, are you a fan of guys lifting a lot of weights and looking up there? No, lightweight. Yeah. This is the state strong. Yeah. Well, I have a vendor Holyfield where schedule in the vendor Holyfield. I'm excited. It was huge, a vendor Holyfield fan, but he was one of the rare guys that put on the mass and moved up from cruiser weight to heavyweight and fucking still never got tired. I mean, if Andrew never got tired because he put the work crazy work ethic and he was a guy that got thick and muscular but didn't slow him down. It enhanced him, you know, especially when you get into like the Tyson fights, like that muscle didn't hold impact at all. He was fucking jacked. He was he was he compared to the cruiser. Did you wait a vendor Holyfield? Do you look at heavyweight of a home like the Riddick Bow fights? Yeah, he did. He did. He's going to love a lot. Fuck you. It's just cut though. Yes, chiseled. Yeah. That's what Joshua should do to cut down a little bit. Chiseled up against a get mobile. Do you think that this was something that he got Mount Atlantic Lewis for saying that he needs to change camps? Do you think that makes sense? Maybe just he should sit down with his team and figure out what they went wrong at. I don't think about them. I don't think it should change. everything. The word was that he had gotten knocked out in training. That was your journey. You heard that as well? By Joey. Well, if Tans Crawford heard it, Chis gotta be real. That's what I'm saying. I'm just going. I'm going to say it now. I will say it feels real or fake. I'm just saying I heard it. Yeah, but you know most people heard the rumors going around and everybody here is not even true. That could happen right like Richard Gear with that Jerbo buzz ass remember that one? Do you remember that? You ever heard that? You've never heard that? You said a Jerbo up. You heard it right? Tell me the rumor. I just heard the rumor out in the last few minutes. Where kids there was a rumor that Richard Gear had to go to the hospital get a Jerbo taken out of his ass. Now I grew up in the East Coast. My friend Eddie grew up in California. He heard the same story. I was like this is the same goddamn rumor. Like how this rumor got across the country with the same age? No internet. The rumor made it all the way across the country when we were in high school. So was it true or not? Probably not. I think you get a Jerbo out yourself. You don't need to go to the hospital. You know that's not worth the embarrassment. You take some time and go to store and buy some tweezers. You don't need to go to the hospital. Just get a mirror and some tweezers. We could handle this. We don't need to let everybody know our business. The other one was Rod Stewart. Rod Stewart there was a rumor we were in high school. It was pretty high school. The Rod Stewart had swallowed a bunch of jizz and had to go to the hospital and get a stomach pump. There's probably some guy who Rod Stewart fucked his girlfriend. He's a Rod Stewart. Yeah. The bad guy. Yeah. And I probably is true. I don't think so because I think when I hosted Fear Factor, we made people drink calm. They had to drink donkey calm. You could drink it. You could drink a lot of it and you're fine. I don't think you have to go to the hospital. I don't think that I see it so much. My experience on Fear Factor taught me that I don't believe that Rod Stewart Cooper had that real problem. Hey, so did you ever do anything? I ate some shit. They wouldn't let me try any of the stunts because insurance purposes or, you know, they had claws. The insurance doesn't let the hose just tried out for fun. Like I wanted to drive some of the cars off buildings and shit. But they wouldn't let me do. We had one where they hit a ramp off the top of a building. They hit a ramp and the ramp flipped the cars through the air and they flew and then landed on these cardboard boxes. They stacked these cardboard boxes up like several stories high. And that's how they would get these cars to land softly. They would call it boom. Hit the cardboard box and just slowly sink down. And then they would use a crane, flip the car over and then they could use that car again. It didn't even get damaged. Wow. So these people would fly this fucking car up. It looks like the craziest amusement park ride ever. And you're right. Come on, fuck yeah. I want to see you get it man. Come on, let me do that one. It looks easy. I'm going to go do it for the promo. Like I'm in. Are you cool with jumping out the plane? Yeah, we didn't do any of that. We did have people bungee cord jump off of a fucking helicopter. That was crazy. We had people with a cord that was attached to a helicopter and then they were hooked up to a tree and they had to unlock themselves to the tree. They had a ring of keys. They had to find the right key in a certain amount of time. And then when they did it, they unlocked and between they went flying through the air because they were attached to a bungee cord. And the bungee cord was underneath the helicopter and it would go fucking launching them out into the middle of this crazy canyon. I was like, oh my God. Someone's going to die. This isn't worth it. This job's not worth it. There was a couple of times where I thought someone was going to die. That's crazy. Stupid. Ridiculous. I'm glad we got through it when nobody getting hurt. Who all came up with the stunts? There was a bunch of people. They had a whole team. There's teams that came up with the eating stunts. They were the B team stunt guys and then the A team stunt guys was the first stunt and there was the C, which was like the big championship finale thing. It's ridiculous show. That's time. Nice to watch that show all the time. I can't believe it's real. I watched it to this day. I was like, is that really me? What is that? So long ago. I remember I used to watch Jackass. Jackass is amazing. Those guys are alive. Steve, I was so happy. You're fine. Because I'm making a fourth movie. Oh no. Hey, there you go. They're rolling that dice. They're rolling that dice. Someone's going to die. Damn. That's crazy. The only thing pimps today. Johnny Knoxville was a movie star for a while. Right? Is he still doing big movies? Yeah. He was doing big movies and then he was still willing to let a bull hit him. He put a blindfold on, stood in front of a bull and the bull just fucking launched him through the air. Blindfolded. That's the dumbest thing. That's the dumbest thing. It's like the whole bus guys got fucked up. I mean, they're taking some beatings. Yeah, so we do have that. Yeah. Yeah. What you do is control who gets fucked up. Right. That's what I like about boxing. When I watch boxing express at the highest levels, like one guy is controlling who gets fucked up. You know? Yeah. Whether they're guy liking or not. Whether other guy likes it or not. What was the Mexican gentleman that you fought recently that was talking about shit and stopped him? Been a vid. Been a vid. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. That seemed like a particularly satisfying one for you. Yeah. Cause it was a lot of shit talking. Leading up the vibe. For years. There's certain times we watch guys talk shit like a son. Son. Son. This is not a good idea. But it just came out of nowhere. I never said nothing to that dude. Never did nothing to that dude. And he just out the blue just for years. Like I'm ducking, I'm like dude, you went up and wait. I'm at one 40. When I was at one 35, he was talking about five. He was at one 40. I got up to one 40. He wanted a little fight and then he moved up and waiting. I'm like dude, like you're nobody for me to be worried about. So then it got to the point where he was like, oh, well, they made me offer to fight you and you ducked me. And so he started telling everybody I ducked them. I've been ducking them since one 40. So in a press conference, I said, did you ever offer me or him a fight to fight each other? And I was like, no, so we're gonna come up with that. I would don't matter. We fight right now. So it's all right. It was a good fight. It was a good fight. It was a good fight to showcase you, you know, particularly the knockout. And I was a beautiful combination man. When you clipped him. And then he gets up and then you put him away. When you watch a fight like that, well, you have a guy with talk shit and then you want to fucking him up. Is it ever more satisfying? Oh, yeah. Because you seem to enjoy it. It's like the best fighters enjoy putting a beating on someone. Of course. Going into the fight, I had to calm my emotions down because of the anger. Right. Because I really want to hurt that dude. You know, so going into the fight, I got to keep reminding myself, stay calm, relax, don't go in there and do nothing stupid because this is what he wants you to do. And you've been here before. You know, this is nothing. You know, have people talk crazy to you, but not to the level that he did, but you didn't have people talk crazy to me. So that's why when I first got in there, I was paying patience to my time and just fell in them out. You know, because he's long, he's tall, he's long. He got some speed on him, but he's a naturally counter puncher. So it was like I wasn't going to go in there and be careless and get counter because I already knew what he wanted to do. So when you when you see a guy like that and you're fighting him, what is the strategy? Like this is a different strategy than a normal fighter because of the length and the counter punch ability. So you have to adjust. So what is what was your plan going in there? Well, see me, I got long orders to be in the division and my height. So I was just like, alright, just pick them apart. You know, and then once you go into your combinations, make sure you throw more than once because you're going to counter that first one properly. And when you watch the fight, you feel like that's exactly what you're planning preparing for. Right. And you see Ariel Spence, excuse me. We see Ariel Spence Jr. Does he represent to you like one of the best of the up and coming guys that are possibly on your radar at least? I really can't say that. You know, because, Ariel, this is the first real big test that he's up against. You know, his last fight was with Mikey Garcia. That was a good fight. I mean, that was a good test. Mikey's a smaller guy. True. You know, Mikey came from what, 126? You know, he's what? 56. When you see the two of them at the weigh ins, you really can see the difference. Right. And the size of Ariel, I mean, Ariel's ripped, you know. So that's why I say you really can't tell what Mikey Garcia, don't get me around. Mikey's a hell of a fighter, you know, but that's his first fight in the division. He's a smaller guy, short, his arms is shorter, arrow taller, longer, bigger, you know, so faster. So he really couldn't, I really couldn't see what I was trying to see. So Mikey went up just because it was a big fight, right? Is he going to stay there? Do you think or is he? Yes, I believe he's going to fight in any Garcia. Oh, interesting. Interesting. There's so many different outlets for boxing now, you know, in this PVC, there's Fox, there's, you know, ESPN is putting on high caliber fights now too. It's very interesting. But HBO's out of the game. It's not feel weird. It does have been that that was the go-to channel to watch boxing when I was coming up. Only people you had on Showtime was Mike Tyson. And it was the best commentary crew too. Jim Lampley, Max Kellerman, Roy Jones, Jr. Sometimes George Foreman, you know, Larry Merchant. I mean, what's he was doing? Yeah, man, a manual steward. And Harold Letterman would come in between rounds to give me his score was fucking great. I missed that. Yeah. Don't you miss that? I mean, Harold Letterman rest in peace. He passed away recently. Um, didn't he? Yeah, yeah, he did. But I missed that, man. Jim Lampley was fucking great. And Max Kellerman was great. It's like, you don't have that. There's not a commentary team like that right now in boxing. Is there my wrong? Not to the, to the level of. Why don't they have those guys go over to one of these streaming services like the zone or ESPN or something. It just seems like that's the team, right? Yeah, Andre Ward, Andre Ward's fantastic. Oh, yeah. He's coming on here too. Yeah, I'm sure we're going to have him on. I'm going to apparently come along pretty good too. Yeah. Very good. Yeah, I mean, he's taking, he's taking, he's taking, he's taking, he's taking that role of uh, Teddy Atlas. Yeah. He's like, he got all that energy. Yes. Well, Teddy's fucking, what a character. No. No. Hey, Teddy, he's amazing. He get it is, he can't believe it. We're finally, yeah. We want to the fire! Teddy, he'll let you come on. I'm really getting out there to fight. You scream now. I'm just kidding. Fucking scared. It's funny. I, he'll say on, on here, these judges need to be fired. Yeah, he'll give a fight. What fight is they looking at? He doesn't give a fuck. That's so hilarious at bad decisions. And he's right. Sometimes, you know, he's wrong about that Jeff Warren fight. The Jeff Warren pack, yeah, fight. I watch him when he freaked out. I was like, I was like, I was like, and pack it out. Whooping them. You know what I mean? Why they, why they cheat them? You know, because I wanted to fight pack out because I was the next in line. Of course. Of course. Of course I'm rooting for pack out on when that's a bigger fight. But after watching the fight again, I was like, they not saying nothing about Autumn Schott's Jeff Warren was hitting pack out with it. And he was just brutally bullying them, roughing them up. They could say, oh, he was man, dirty, sometimes he had blood, but it's a fight. That's going to happen. You know, but he was real life man to land pack out, like pushing them all around. And you see, keep therming couldn't even do that. Yeah. You know, and seeing him beat, keep therming at 40 years old. Like, God damn, this guy's great. I mean, just look at his career with eight different weight classes, world titles and eight different weight classes. Forty years old beats Keith Thurman who's in his pond. Crazy. rear eight different weight classes, world title eight eight different weight classes. 40 years old beats Keith Thurman who's in his pond. Right. Crazy. I mean, what a man. I mean, what a world champion. And he sure time break the hands of time will not one. It's fucking crazy. And he fought in spurt. Both of them were spurt. Fun and spurt. And I thought Keith was going to pick up on it. But pack out was only fighting fighting the end of the round. Like Keith would come on a strong at the beginning of the round. And it would be like, all right, Keith winning winning this round. And then pack out just for like, trick, pop pop pop pop pop and then Keith would be like, yeah, like, oh man, I didn't even see the fight. But when he dropped him with that right hook early in the first, you're like, oh, like a right shad. Yeah. No, it was like a he jumped in with the left and then followed by like a straight right. It's crazy. Yeah. It was crazy. It's like, wow. And that's his shoulder. Yep. That's his plan. Yep. They was showing him hitting other fighters with it the same thing. Whoa, whoa, whoa. He has such a unique style. The leaping in. We'll fight. We'll do the day. If he came in with that shit on you. Oh man. No, but I give I take my hat off to pack you out. Like, do you think it's possible that you could get a crack in him now? Because now there he's, you know, he's in a hunt right now. I wouldn't say, I wouldn't say so because I was in a mentioned and talk to fight pack. I don't sense 2014 and we was in the same promotional company and they couldn't make it happen. Do you think it's because he's not interested in that? I don't think he was interested in it because his coach mentioned numerous times he didn't want him to fight me and he wanted him to stay away from me. So I don't think that was interesting. Yeah. Well, I could see that at this stage of his career. But, you know, Keith Thurman is a fucking murderous puncher. Right. Which was one of the reasons why it's more impressive that he beat him. And so who are they talking about pack you out matching up with next? He chasing the Mayweather. Of course. So why not? Right. Floyd come on. I know you love money. He was saying that he thinks Floyd's out of money already because he says, Floyd spend so much money. He's probably already out of it. Well, he's paying money too. I think he's packed out. We're money in there. Floyd and everybody. Oh, that's right. Cause he's got like 50 people that he just like has supported. Yeah. I mean, he's a, he's an interesting guy man. Cause he's so friendly. Right. You know, like Pat, even like when people are trash talking, he's like, smiling and then gets in that ring. And Keith, you're asked later. Different fucking dude. Right. Once he steps to that roast, like this is a whole different set of rules. He's flying with like, yeah, keep derming talking about. You're going to crucify him. And he just don't say that. Yeah. And got crucified. Yeah. He's, I wish you did this too. Good luck in that fight. Like, like, he's a killer pool player. Do you know that about Paco? No, like, world class. Like he could play pool professionally. Me too. Really? Yeah. You could play? Oh, we got to play that. Yeah. I heard you get that. That's a little personal. I'm pretty good. You good? Yeah. Okay. What do you play? Whatever you want to play? You play like nine ball, 10 ball, whatever. Okay. We'll play. Cool. Hey. So if I leave five balls on the table, you owe me. If you find your balls on five balls on my body, we'll be playing eight ball. There you can be. That's nonsense. That's a nonsense game. Hey, that's a silly game. You try to get me, leave my balls on the table. No, no, no, no, I'm saying. Right. If like you can, you're balls. If I win, okay, and you still got five balls on your table. Five or five of your balls. If you, you got seven balls, if you can't. Okay. So the only way that I went, what's the explain what you're saying? Okay. So you got seven balls to start. If I beat you and you still got five of your balls on the table, okay, then you owe. Oh, what? So if you mean if you break them run out and I don't get a shot, no, that's seven ball. Then if you get all the balls, seven ball, if I have five balls left, then you win. Yeah. What is that? What kind of weird game is that? Yeah, I'm not getting it. So if I win and you still got five balls on the table, okay, then what happens? You owe. I know what, but if you play, but if we play, if we play baseball or 10 ball, you can't win. If there's five balls, no, no, no, nine ball and 10 ball, that's different. But that's what we were saying. Yeah. So you're saying like, play eight ball, but I don't like playing that because that's tricky. Yeah, tricky. Yeah, play. That's the strategy I played. That's the strategy. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. You got to learn how to get out. Yeah. I hit all of them and missed the last one. We could play eight ball though. That's okay. I like eight ball. It's okay. But it's a simpler game. And you pop me for the last time. Yeah. Yeah. Leave you hanging. Yeah. You fuck up. Leave that 10 ball wobbling in the hole. Yeah. Like he didn't did all this for nothing. I've done that before. It's very heartbreaking. It's very heartbreaking. That's the worst way to get it. It's a game. It's where it's like all that for nothing. And the guys thank you for cleaning it up. Yeah. Yeah. That's a game that no one wants to lose to a girl. Like it's hilarious watching dudes play pool against women when women are good. They panic. They start getting nervous. Like there's something about losing to a girl. It's almost like getting your ass kicked by a girl. Something cold. I didn't see some girls at the pool hall. Oh, yeah. Taking a lot of money. Oh, for sure. Yeah. There's there's like elite women players. You know what I do to the lemon eight that what I just like now. I'm really traveling. Especially when you watching them and then they try to I got next. I'm like, yeah, y'all can play because it ain't it ain't for me to be getting watched out by no feedback. Well, and any professional I've played a lot of professionals like because it's one of the weird sports that you can enter into a tournament and you could be a guy who, you know, has a full-time job and you might wind up matching up with like F. R. A. S. It's like the greatest player of all time. You might meet him in the first round of a tournament. Both. I have just pay your fee and then you pay your entry fee. You join in just like everybody else and you're playing like a world champ. Like the Tans Crawford of pool. Yeah. I'm like, whoa. And you can just be some regular dude playing F. R. A. S. But it's cool to you can be like, man, I lost it. Yeah, they're greatest. Lost the one of the greatest of all time. Yeah, I played a bunch of like great play. I played Mike Siegel before. I got to play a bunch of like great players. Get my ass K. pile. Right. You'll put first on a pool player. No, no, I'm quite a bit like below. Like if you had like a manly pack out, he could play professional. He would beat me. I'm like one notch below that. I'm probably like a notch below that. Two notch below that. But Manny like plays in tournaments. He gambles. They call them unfortunately. They call them the cow because they're always milking them. Cause he's real high level pool players man. I mean, he's getting Manny's too busy with running the country. He's a fucking senator on top of that. He's one of the best boxers in the world. And on top of that, he's got a family. He doesn't have time to be at the pool hall 10 of us a day. All those psychopaths that are like world champions. They play pool eight, 10 hours a day. They play all day long, all day long. You go there. You'll find them. That's where they're at. He's there. You got there. You have five. They're there every fucking day. Everybody that I know that's like a elite world class pool player, like me, can immin in and you know, these kind of guys you go there, they're out there goddamn pool all every day. No money in that shit though. You think there's no money in UFC? There's no money in that shit. There's a lot of money in poker. There is. I got you. How to play. I know, right? Capoker. It seemed like my friend Anthony Giordano, he directs those, he used to direct those poker shows. He said what changed it is when you had the TV shows, when you could see the person's hand. So if we were all playing, the folks at home could see what I have. They could see what you have. But we didn't know what we have. So they're all in on it. So the fuck, how is he going to play that? How is he going to play that? So it made it way more interesting than just watching. Because if you were watching three guys play poker, you would have no idea whose hands are what? But when you're at home and you watch on TV, you get to see the hand. And I still don't know how to play. Yeah. I don't know how to play either. But I just be seeing people with their poker face all in. Don't have nothing. And then this do with good hands, you just put like, those hands, good just be like, that face right. Oh, man. There's something cool about that. Right. Like a bullshitty. It's bullshitting, you know, something about that. Like the hustle. There's a thing about poker that doesn't exist in anything else. The psychological hustle. It's what I call the poker face. Yep. That's a lady Gaga song, bro. Pup, pup, pup, pup. Or somebody that's just looking all like looking all sad. Like, yeah, I got a bad hand. Knowing you got a good hand. Yep. It's tricky. Then he's, hey, you all in. Okay. Posse. I'm a gambler when they're around each other all the time. And then just fucking, that's all they do is gamble and read signs and check each other out. They're probably able to get a highly tuned sense of someone bullshitting. Right. Highly to. Oh, there's something going on behind his eyes. But that's why they were in them glasses. Yeah. You know what I've always like love watching, but I'm scared to get good at his chest. Just seems like it would eat your fucking time. See, yes. Do you play? Yeah. I taught him I would play. He taught me not beat him the same time. Oh, look at you, he's like, stop. Hey, beat him the same at the same day he taught you. Yeah. He just taught me how to move the pieces and I'll be. Oh, Jesus. Wow. That's interesting. So we're international, right? So I'm one with Kafe right now. Let this do the I. I let this do the B. This is a nationally ranked. No, I'm saying we on international show, right? So the whole world is watching. Yeah, I like this do be letting beat you. Why do you like this? Because it's his confidence. His confidence gets confidence. But hey, but this is how do you do it. There's some fights. Well, I want him to play test. So I can use his mind, right? So okay, all right, all right. The whole camp is using his mind. You use his mind. So I'm like, okay, all right. So just come out there and have great performance. So I'm like, okay, all right. That's another strategy. Try to get him to do better, right? But there's some mornings. I'm talking about this last morning we had. You don't let me beat him. I just beat him anytime I really want to win. I win. Come downstairs, right? So he comes downstairs and his boxes and shit. This old tanned scoffered look. Look at their right. Like, hey, good morning. Good morning. Let's play. All right. I'm kicking his ass, right? Getting mad. He get mad. You can see it in his face, right? So he started making these different movements. No man, you can't do that. No man. It's like, hey, that's a kid. No, you can't do that, bud. You know, you can't do that. After a while, you just got to kind of fear for your life a little bit. because he's like, baw, you know what I mean? No, man. I like, hey, I like big fit. They would just do the chess. It's funny. It's funny when he's losing. He beat me. He beat me that day. They didn't want to play me again. I was whole. I was seeing in your face right now. Oh, yeah. Counting it. You can see me reliving it because he just called me off guard. It's just like, you know what I mean? Like, I'm coming downstairs and eat some breakfast. And he's coming back. That's play. He got it ready and everything. So we're going, I'm like, damn, man, I can't see that. Like, so he went, he went and play me. But the next times he played me, I watched him killed him. So bad to where he, he don't even want to play me no more. It's funny. That's one thing that champions have. All champions, they hate losing any game. And Jordan, they said if you beat him playing pool, he'll fucking hate you. Cause what didn't want to talk to you. Didn't want to until he could beat you again. Till he got you again. See my thing is we have a lot of people that want to play the game. Right. So I don't, I don't play the game like I used to, I used to play and I used to beat them all. But once my nephew got good, I stopped playing. I'm like, man, your game here. Like, I ain't got time to best just sit on the game. Right. You know, like video games like Xbox. Yeah. Like, two games. You can't fucking those kids. Those kids that don't have responsibilities, they don't have children. They don't, they don't have nothing but time. They get too good at those guys. They don't have to do good. And you lose your life trying to chase them. So now, so now it gets to the point where I just watched them play. So, so we had this dude named Chis and I was like, Oh man. So, so Chis, we got a Shakur and we got a Chucky. They all like to play and we got Kenny. So, so Kenny was playing Chucky, Chucky and Champs was always going at it with each other. And Kenny was being Chucky and he was just rubbing in his face. And it was just like, you can see how mad he was. Like, and this dude, Chucky, he's the one that always be like joking around and stuff. It's all fun and games. And like, you could just see. You're like, why is we even talking if you're not playing? It gets so bad in the house, man. You gotta put the game up. You guys have like moments where you don't want them to play games and things like that. Like during camp. You just want them just dressed? No, no. That's really actually cool. That's really cool. Yeah. But video games are a little, they get intense. That's why he took the game. Like, I took the game. And so, it gets so intense. People want to fight each other. People get it. I'll get you big. What do they get mad? I was like, Oh, you mad. I do that. You like man, you stand up, man. That's why we spawn when we get to the gym, huh? How about that? It'd be furious. Be funny as shit, man. It can call us problems too. Oh, sure. Well, a bunch of competitive dudes all training together. And then you play something competitive that makes you angry if you lose. Yeah. Recipe for disaster. Right. Hey, they don't care. They don't care. They don't care in our family. They just like, whatever. I still want to play. It's like a big daycare. That's basically what it is. Big guy did me. I'm the oldest guy to start cussing at him. You can't eat. Don't you come out to rule. Get up here, do these dishes. Oh, man. It seems like you guys are having a good time. Oh, man. That's all you it's fine. Campus campus fine. It's hard work and it's hard, but at the same time, you know, we work as work. And then we try to come home and, you know, clear our head and not just be so mentally drained over thinking about the fight. Right. Right. So we wanted to be fun at the end of the day. Do you have like a mental coach or is there anybody you've ever worked with that's like, like, where you've tried to do visualization work or formulated game planners, it just go out there and get it done. Just get it done. No need. No need. Like my mental is so strong. Like from what I've overcome and been doing my whole entire life, it's like nothing is going to break me. That's my mental. Like if that couldn't break me, you're not going to break me. Meaning in terms of like a childhood growing up, you know, like everything that I went to, irreplaceable. People that have gone through like Mike Tyson, like many great fighters have gone through hardship when they're younger. That the ability to endure. It's not, I wouldn't say when I was younger and still going to, still going through it. I still go through a lot, a lot. How so? Like it seemed like before all my big fights, somebody died in my family. You know, like my grandpa just died the day before yesterday. Sorry to hear that. But I'm here. You know what I mean? I'm about to go and train and count and prepare for my next fight. You know, so it was just like things always happening. But at the same time, I got a job to do. And I'm still be focused and nothing is going to distract me. Now, will you go into training camp with a date in mind or we just, but do they, but you haven't, nothing's been signed yet, right? Nothing's been signed yet. So do you just sort of go in and get the wheels moving and then just get ready to ramp up? Like how do you determine when you ramp up your training camp? If you're like, say if you're getting back into training camp now, but you don't know when the fight's going to be scheduled. So how do you, how do you approach it in the beginning? No, I don't, I don't, I want to necessarily, necessarily say I'm getting in training camp right now because I'm not, like my training camp is six to seven weeks. So you get ready to get into training camp? No, I wouldn't even say that. I'm just saying in general. Okay, but you're not getting ready right now. I stayed working on, I stayed working on. Of course. Yeah. Now when you're not in the gym, well, when you're in the gym, but you're not training for a fight, are you still doing all the strength conditioning stuff and everything is going here and there? Yeah, not today. Same intensity, but just to keep moving. Right. And so you do that just to make sure that you preserve your body and don't get injured and things along the way. So when you think of it in terms of camp, like that is the roughest experience you're going through, right? You're going through how many nine weeks that would you say you before? Seven, seven weeks. So that those seven weeks are when you're pushing it to the limit and then everything else is more like maintaining. For me, we like stair steppers. We got a pre camp and then once we're in camp, it's like this. Don't, don't, don't, don't, don't, don't. And you know where those steps are? Right. So when we get to the, to the end of camp, we already have the highest, highest debt. So that way when we go to the fight, we already have to do it. And so this is planned out in the amount of rounds you do, the amount of revenue. Every week is something added on every week. If it's four round six round eight rounds 10, 12, your minutes, we do minutes. You know what's amazing about this conversation is if you were a young, up and coming boxer in 1982 or something like that and you want to know how Marvin Hagrid did it, there's no podcast. Right. There's no like Marvin Hagrid breaking down how he does his training camp and talking all about it. But today, kids can watch you and they can see what you're doing. I guarantee just listening to you talk about realizing how hard Floyd worked and you working out, you wanted to work out even harder and all the crazy shit you're doing. Like people right now, lacing up the shoes right now and fire it up running out the door thinking I got to work like Terrence. I have to. You know, that is one of the coolest things that has to be about being a world champion is that you are the guy now. You know, when you were a kid, I'm sure you had like those ring magazine posters and shit. Like you're that guy now. Right. This got to be crazy. Some kid right now who's like six years old, who's just getting into golden gloves and he's looking up at his bedroom wall. So we're going to go. 18. Yeah, when you're a senior, seven gloves and when you're a jury, silver gloves doesn't sound good. Box, amateur box. Kids getting in the amateur boxing, they have the heroes. You're one of them. I mean, that's got to be a cool feeling. Oh, yeah. Man, I love it. When I go to them, little, little smokers or them, little national tournaments and see all the little kids run up to me. Terrence, grab it. Like what up? I go grab it. That's awesome. Grab them by the head messing around with them. You were at the rest of the tournaments. People like yo, you Terrence Crawford. I'll be like, yeah, what's up? What's your name? And they'd be like, dude, like man, you, you real cool. Like I'll be like, man, what's up? That's amazing. So they all gravitate to me. Was there someone that you meant when you first met them when you're like, I can't even believe that I'm sitting there with a van der holyfield or someone like that? Someone real famous where you couldn't believe you were actually being around them. You don't have to say Roy Jones. Roy Jones. Because I never was like a big fan boy. I would always be like, man, they just humans like me. But when I seen Roy for the first time, I was like, oh, that's Roy Jones Jr. Like I met Floyd Mayweather. But this Roy Jones Jr. like, yeah, it was just crazy. He was real cool. And you know, I was just like damn, I didn't want to be like all like shy as to how I like damn. Like I met Sugar Ray Leonard when I was an amateur and it didn't feel the same. It was just like, man, that's sugar Ray. Because there's a different era. Because it was, you didn't watch him fight. Watching Roy Jones, man, when I was a kid, when he was in his prime, he would lead with a left hook. It was like more than a jab. He would just whip that left hook at dudes and they didn't know what the fuck to do with that. That speed was preposterous. So fast. Woo, Roy was doing stuff to people that made you just go, wow, like he's not even doing the same thing they're doing. He's like, he's on another dimension. He's a different record speed. You know, he was so fast. Like Max Calerman had this incredible rant once about just realizing how good Roy Jones was in his prime. This wasn't like he wasn't around great fighters, but they couldn't do shit to him. He was around world champions, but he was lighting them on fire. It was crazy. And you know, all good things come to an end. It only lasted for, you know, X amount of years. I mean, what was the best years of his championship reign, but he was untouchable. Untouchable. Untouchable. When knocked out Virgil Hill with that body shot, wow. He'd be like, God damn. One punch. And when he put his hands behind his back and still knocked out James time. I mean, he could, when he dropped his hands like this and James Tony does it too. He'd leave sitting drops on with the left hook. And that one duty knocked out with his hands behind his back. Who was that dude? Oh, I forgot what he was on the ropes. Yeah, put his hands behind his back. The dude moves forward and drops him and knocks him out. It's like this is a movie scene. This isn't real life. No one does that in real life. Roy Jones was having fun with people. Yeah, he was. He was having fun with his entertainment. He was incredible how fast he was. But like I didn't, man, I didn't met people like Roy, he's a fan of me. He's amazing. And it's like, dude. I'd be like, so starstruck, it's like man, I'm a fan of you. And he's a fan of you. You a fan of me. Like today, today, I was so happy. I was on Instagram and I was like, I went past L.L. Cool J. Cause we was listening to some old school music. And I like, damn, L.L. Got an Instagram. So I clicked on him and he's following me. I said, bro, look, L. Cool J. following me on Instagram. So this is crazy. Just the think of all the people that you grew up admiring and like you a fan of. And for you to see them fan of you, it's like damn like I ever seen. I met I ever seen. Wow. And he came up to me and he was more happy to see me than I was in him. I just covered all of me. And I was like, I was a senior looking at him like this hour I ever seen. So it's crazy. Like seeing all those celebrities and all the time greats. That's big fans of mine. And it's like, fuck. Does it wear off? But do you still freak out? I still freak out sometimes. I still freak out sometimes. Like it just depends on the person like fuck like damn. Right. Like snoop or something like that. Like snoop too. I don't know. I'm not snoop. I'm like fuck. Like that's when you know that you made it to a certain level. You know, you know, professional sports that everybody watching you. Yeah. Well, you know, that's one more thing that's beautiful about you meeting those little kids is that they can realize like, oh, Terrence Crawford's a man. He's a man. I mean, he's a superstar. He's a champion and I see him on TV, but he's a man. He's right here. He got me in the headlock. Oh, shit, we're playing together. He's a nice guy. Oh, he's a person. Because you see someone that's achieved a certain level of status and championship rain and you know, see him on TV, knocking people out. That doesn't even seem like a real person when you're a kid. I think that can't be a real person. And then you're there. And then you're shaking his head. He's like, what the fuck? This is crazy. It's the change that kids world. Yeah. The idea of what the future is, idea what a person is. A person is Terrence Crawford's a person. Right. I'm a person too. I just got to work hard. And it's crazy because like a lot of people, they have seen me and they'd be like, where are your bodyguards at? We're on to rush. Like they be having questions that ask. And I just be like, no, man, I'm a regular person. They be like, man, why you don't be on TV like Floyd Mayweather? Like, man, they ain't for me, man. I'm chill. They be like, oh, well, where are your cars? Like they've been actually all kinds of crazy stuff. And I just be like, no, man, it's good. You still live where you grew up? Right. Wow. That's crazy. And everybody's cool. Everybody gets jealous. The fact that you're trying to listen to that? Well, all is going to have that. No matter where you go, you always going to have the jealousy and people that envy you. People want loans. Yeah. That's a good answer. Yeah. See, it's a good answer. You just got to move different. Yeah. You just got to move different. You just got to move different. What kind of cars you're up? Drive old schools. Old schools. Like what kind? I got some Monte Carlo. Oh, that's right. I saw you and looked like a grand national. Yeah. Give a grand national? No, it's a Monte Carlo. That's a Monte Carlo. Oh, is this a sick day? It's a Monte Carlo? No, it's a good day. It's all original. I just put the rams on it. Oh. The soot that one is the several one, the 87. Oh, is that another Monte Carlo? Yeah. Oh, you're a Monte Carlo guy. Yeah. I love Monte Carlo's back in the day. Like the 70s, like 70 Monte Carlos. Oh, those are so pretty. A nine, like the 80s. Do you like the 80s? 87. That's probably because you're younger than me. Super sport. Me. I get from muscle cars. I get as high as 71 with a barracuda, and then I drop off. Yeah. Everything else like I need 65 to 70. 71 is only barracuda in Challenger. That's it. Everything else fell apart by 71. What about the old mobile? They made some cool shit. They made some cool shit. But it's just not as good as like the 60s, 60s in the 1970 cars. Like 70 chivel. Yeah. I was like, I say the Chevy. Chevy. Come on. Chevy. Chevy. Oh, yeah. The drop, the problem with drop top is they're all wiggly. You know, the lictus of a lot of body flex to it. Well, you don't get the rigidity that you feel like the solid hard top muscle car. Right. You know, what I love those old cars, man. They have something to them. Right. They cost the shit ton of money. They do. That's it. You get, if you get one as all original and everything, the paint still like, man, you bought this car to put in the garage for 30 years. Did I saw Sarah Kuda that was for sale for over a million dollars, a million dollars for a car that was like 30, 30,000 not even. Right. Didn't we talk about this? Wasn't like five grand one as brand new, something crazy like that? Yeah. Now it's a million dollars. I got it. I didn't say little. I don't know. One of those knuckleheads that likes everything perfect and original, there's certain dudes like with original numbers matching. Look, the V E I N number matches the tires. There's the original tires from 1960. Got a lot of paperwork. You better go slow around a corner with those shitty tires. Everything original means everything shitty. You know, shitty drum breaks and shitty suspension. And I like these guys. I used to always get up and watch them car actions. Oh, yeah, the meetum stuff kind of shit. Yeah, I love those. Just to look at the cars. God, if you have a ton of money and you're there, that shit could be real bad. Yeah. Like if you're one of those dudes, it's like a collector and you see all those cars moving by. Like, oh, that one too. Yeah. 55 off it's very shabby. All right. Oh, my goodness. Yeah, this, this some, I mean, I'm just a big fan of those shapes. Those shapes with 1960 shapes. This is something about the car. They just nailed it. They just knew how to make a car look beautiful back then. And it was, and they was built sturdy. Yeah. You bump a car. You take old tent, pump or falling off back then. You can run a car over and you still, you go. But he didn't go and bought your way. Yeah, it's a different, but also the now car, car's handle good. They have airbags. Yeah. Was this some good, some good shit about today's cars too. Right. And I myself. Yeah. Yeah. You ever do want to. You ever do want to have been in the Tesla? We just talked about that. They're freakouts, man. They'll freak you out. But you driving that thing. Oh, my God. Have you? They fast as shit. It's ridiculous, right? Did you ever drive one? Yeah. Dude, the crazy thing about the Tesla is, is it's like a race car. It's like, you'd be waiting for it to be like, do do do do do do do do do. But it don't never change gears. It's just straight. You can all say that's 150 miles an hour. Like that. It's so fast. It doesn't even make sense. It's like a race car. Phew. It's like a time machine. It's like a compresses time. Like there's a certain amount of time in a normal car. You feel like you have to go. There's a certain amount of time that has to take place for it and get in front of that guy and then get over here and then get to the on-round. With a Tesla, you just go, shoo. You there. It's like time presses. Yeah. Zero to 60 and 2.4 seconds. Damn. You never. I got and then get over here and then get to the on ramp with a test. You just go, you there. It's like time presses. Yeah. Zero to 60 and 2.4 seconds. Damn. You never even felt anything like it. So God damn roller coaster ride. So you're pitting your seat. It's just going. Yeah. You're like, fuck. And they're making a faster one. They're going one's going to be 1.9. The roadster that really slick looking little tiny one. They're ridiculous. That's the future. Yeah, I got a demon. Dodge demon. Oh, those are nice. That's a fun. It was like 800 horsepower. I think 909. Something crazy. After anything over seven. They may be signed my rights away. Really? You got signed all these papers talking about if you die or get seriously injured and can't nobody else come back and sue on all. I was a crazy shit. Why? So fast. They letting you know like, you know, you can get real life fucked up. Do they make those in a stick shift or is it just not a manic? I don't know. I got that on that. It's a crazy amount of power. But I think I think nowadays you got the power shifters. Yeah, power shifters. That's cute. Well, you can put a manual. But the thing shifting with your left foot in the clutch and shifting gears that you're right, that's like part of the whole muscle car thing. Oh, right? Yeah. Part of the old school thing. You don't want to old school automatic. Look. It seems silly. You know? You just think in the school. Yeah. That's true. It's way faster. Oh, it's way faster. Car's today, way faster period. And they're all going to be electric in 10 years. They're just so much better. They're so much faster. Right. If it's always like you figure out how to make it charge quick, that's the thing the gas has. You just pull into the gas station 10 minutes later. You got a full tank. Right. So your car charges up? Yeah. Battery. How much is it take? Let's take a good solid six or seven hours if it's dead. If it's almost dead, it'll take like six or seven hours at a super, super charger too. Normally it might take 12, like with a regular outlet. Yeah. It takes a long time. Yeah. So if you pull into like one of those super chargers, I think they can get you up to like 80% in like an hour to first charge the first 80% quick, pretty quick. So you could do that. It's like a pamper gas. Yeah. Yeah. You pay for it. Yeah. Use a credit card. They got that one more. Yeah. I see them there, but the airport's free. You can plug in at the airport and it's free. It's a weird experience, man, because I love the sound of engines, but that car makes them all look stupid. Yeah. They all seem dumb. It does, right? Yeah. You don't hear that. But it's on the, yeah, I got to have that muscle muscle. It's fun. Yeah. I'm wondering what you can in that. You can't burn out in it. Nah, there's no burning out. It just goes. Shh. It makes it noise like this. Weh, it doesn't make any noise. It doesn't like, bah, bah, bah. There's none of that. Weh, just takes off. Yeah. Doesn't even seem real. I like them. The inside is crazy with the big screen touch green and yeah, no, the pretty dope. You just look like you're in the future. It feels like you're in the future. What do you spend your money on? Do you have a thing that you indulge in? No, that's, I don't really have no spinning habits. That's just, that's amazing. That's amazing. Fishing. Yeah, we were talking before the show about bow fishing. You like bow fishing? I love it. I love it. I got took on bow fishing one time and I've been hooked. I've been spending money on it. We actually walked in this pond about waiters. I got waiters and everything. So I'm out there in a water, in a little mud and stuff hitting a little guards and anything I can find. Do you eat guards? You smoke them? No, we don't. You can't eat them? We mainly try to get the grass guard because they're invasive. Yeah. They try to kill as many of those as they can, right? So it's crazy though because the Asian cart, we on my boat, we in the river and this was the other night. We going through this little spot in the river. They started jumping in the boat. Yeah, that's not weird. Have you ever seen that? Yeah, I've seen it on these TV shows. Fucking crazy. They like this big, no mud. They was like jumping cart, they were like Asian cart. They were like six, seven pounds. They fly to the end and hit you in the face. Asian cart is different than grass cart. We were shooting grass cart in the pond. But in the river, the Asian cart that I was jumping in my boat was every bit of 30 pounds. They're hitting people in the head. They're killing them. Flat line number. So didn't they bring those things, those carps over to either something in something? Look at these, look at these people flying. Boom! That shit got hit in the back of the head. That's how they did. Look at these guys are trying to shoot them while they're flying. That is so ridiculous. What a red next floor. What a red next floor. What a red next floor. Oh, my girlfriend. Look at this. Look at this. What kind of fucking fish just throws itself out of boat? It's so crazy. Oh, it's in the sound of the internet. Yeah. Get them started something like that. It's crazy. Like this will give you a target panic, man. You're not going to get good at shooting the bone arrow. I'm going to hit in the head while you're pulling back your bow. Look at these guys just trying to shoot. No one's even pulling the trigger. Oh, man. That's funny. Look at that. Yeah. These keeps getting hit. Don't. What a weird fish. That dude has got clamps. The bar was he laughing, though. It got spanked. And he ducked the second one. Look at the bow. Oh, that got nailed. Yeah, I'd have a bat. I'd be fishing with the bat. That's how they'd be bull. I'm telling you. They're saying Marisaur. Adam Mullis get big to the part. What was that? They're going to remember. River. So they're trying to kill as many of those as they can. They're trying to kill as many of those of the can. Those things have overpopulated legs. They're taking over. I don't know why they brought them in, though, originally. More so of the legs is grass cart. Not Asian cart. Yeah. And some rivers. That's those big, red looking ones. Those get huge. Like, yeah. So it's crazy. You have a lot. And in America, we think of them as shit. Like trashfish. But in England, they're prized. Like in England, they have carp fishing contests. Yeah. And they have certain carp that they catch. And they weigh in. And then they release them. And they catch them again, like a year later. Like they know the carp. And like, they were in world records. Like they, oh, he caught Mr. Fishy again. Mr. Fishy is now, you know, 85 fucking pounds. And they keep catching them year after year until these things die. And when they die, they make like a big deal. We lost this carp. Like they take carp fishing. Super serious, which is so strange. Because over here in America, we think of them as trash. They eat everything. Yeah. When we see the Asians fishing and whatever they catch, they keep. Yeah. So it's like the guard, the Asian cart, they eat them up. Apparently, guard tastes good if you smoke it. That's what I've heard. I've heard you smoke on. Not fucking on this. The dinosaur. It feels a weird thing to eat. So eating a snack or something. I didn't shop one just to look at the meat. And it's all hard. Like autumn poems. How you going to clean that thing? Yeah. I saw a guy doing on TV. I forgot what was one of those wild game cooking shows. He smoked the guard. I could see a alligator guard. Like when you go down like Texas or something. Those are the different kind of guard. Like alligator guard and the mugs get peed. Maybe that's what it is. You know, but the guard that we got, little skinny little pencil world things. Also they're tiny. Yeah, they like that big. They want to be the thing. Get those Texas ones are freakish. Yeah. They don't even look real. Yeah. Well, listen, man, I'm not going to take up any more of your time. I just want to tell you I'm a big fan. It was an honor having you in here. I really appreciate watching you fight. One of my favorite, I think when I talk to people about combat sports, one of the things that I always talk about is like the difference between the skill level of an elite boxer. When you see what that's all they do versus like an MMA. You see openings in MMA that you would never see. Like in boxing. So I'm just happy you're out there, man. I appreciate it. And let us know when you fight is. We'll let everybody know. And just alert the world. I'm excited. Thank you, sir. Thank you, man. Bye, everybody. Make sure we get a picture. Yeah.