Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night, all day. Hello, Eddie. Hey, Joe. Nice to meet you, man. Thank you very much for coming here. And thank you for bringing me a signed copy of your book, Mental Immunity Infectious Ideas Mind Parasites in the search for a better way to think. Boy, could we all use this? Forted by the great powerful Steven Pinker. Yeah, that's a lucky guy to get that. That's very nice. That's very nice. Boy, but we could all use that. Right? It feels like the last year has been incredibly taxing. Sounds like you get the basic premise. Mind Parasites are spreading over the internet, like crazy. Yeah. And we need protection against them. We need resistance. What do you define mind parasites? Like we were actually talking before the podcast started. And we were talking about a few things. And I was like, we got to stop. We got to stop talking. Because I don't want to waste any of this. Yeah. One of them we're talking about was UFOs. And now until recently over the last few years, I would have put that in the mind parasite category. Yes. I just said most of that's nonsense. A new information has changed here. You're view on it. Yeah. Yeah, it has. There's a big 60 minutes piece last night that aired. And talking to Christopher Mellon, who used to work for the Defense Department, talking to Commander David Freaver, who is the guy who piloted that jet that I was telling you about, that encountered that craft off of the coast of San Diego in 2004. There's been quite a few of these pretty spectacular videos that have come out that were released by the, well, I don't know. Some of them were leaked and then confirmed by the Pentagon. Well, that's the kind of evidence that should change your attitude for skeptical to, you know, hey, maybe there's something here, right? I mean, I think, I mean, you've already indicated that you get the basic premise, one of the basic premises of the book, right? False hoods are mind parasites. And more generally, bad ideas, all kinds of bad ideas, are mind parasites. And I can tell you why, if you like, but it's please. But it takes kind of a shift in the way you look things to get it. OK. But once you get this idea, it can change your entire worldview. So think about what makes a parasite a parasite. It requires a host. It infiltrates, let's say a regular parasite, right? And it fills, it fills your body, creates copies of itself, induces something like an infection spreading sneeze so it can get to other bodies. And it's often harmful of the very thing that hosts it. Now, go down the list with bad ideas. A bad idea requires a host, a host of mind, right? It can infiltrate a mind. It can get that mind to spread it to other minds. And it can actually harm the person that carries it. So basically, bad ideas check all the boxes for parasites. And there's kind of a worldview shift going on, even within science, that basically says, you know what? This has always seemed like a kind of a crazy analogy. But there's actually more here than meets the eye. Mind parasites might just be real. Yeah, I mean, it makes sense. And isn't that kind of what voodoo is? Like what voodoo is, you tell a person that they're cursed. You hex them. And then they believe it. And it changes the way they think in their terrified. Oh, kind of like a negative placebo. Yes. Or a no-sebo. A no-sebo. A no-sebo. I think that's the official term. Yeah, right. And which is no-sebo is very real. It's an powerful too, right? There was a guy that got administered. He was a part of a test for SSRI's. And he went to the hospital and said he mistakenly took the whole bottle of these pills. And he dropped the pill bottle on the floor. His heart was racing. Blood pressures through the roof. They're like, oh my god, this guy dimes. Pale. And they checked the bottle of pills, found the physician on the bottle, contacted the physician. And he told them who was a part of the study. The physician came down to the hospital and formed him that he was actually in the placebo group. Within five minutes, his heart rate came down to normal. His blood pressure came down to normal. And he relaxed and he was subsequently released from the hospital. He thought he was dying. That's the power of the mind. It's crazy, right? That's the voodoo. Yeah. Have you had ruck or a pregnant on this? No, I have not. New book out called Human Kind. And he basically argues that no-sebo's harness or basically trigger the power of negative expectation. I'm right at this point. I'm right at this point. What is his book called? Human Kind? Human Kind? A hopeful history. Human Kind, a hopeful history. And his name is Rutger Breggman. He's a Dutch journalist who's written a couple of best sellers now. It's a great book. Oh, here, I'll just take a picture of that. Yeah, there he is. Thanks, Jimmy. Here, the man. Bam. OK. Where's that fell at? Is it Holland Amsterdam, maybe? Oh. Tough to get those people from all the way overseas over here now. Imagine he'd make the trip for you. Wow. I hope he can. I mean, what are the rules now? Is everything relaxed in terms of international travel? You know? Be to me. I have not been following him. So his premise is the larger thesis of his overall book is that human beings are a whole lot kinder than we tend to think. I think to think that's fucking us up is social media. I think people are way kinder in person. That's certainly a big part of the story. And then the part of the story I tell in my book is that we've been actually neglecting and abusing mental immune systems for decades. And this makes us unduly suspicious and angry and of each other, which is causing a huge decline in trust and creating all these negative expectations that become a self-fulfilling process. Mental immune systems. So abusing mental immune systems. I guess we should start off with what made you write this book, what was the motivation for doing this? Yeah. So I'm a philosopher by training. And philosophers have always been kind of really eager to invest, to test ideas and try to weed out the bad ones. That's kind of what we philosophers do. And a lot of times that doesn't make us particularly popular. But I argue in the book that the philosophical method of belief testing called, say, the Socratic method, famous process pioneered by Greek philosopher thousands of years ago. Basically, if you test ideas with questions and then toss out the ones that don't withstand scrutiny, that's a way to strengthen your mind's resistance to bad ideas. So here's the kind of the skinny on this. And I think that the people who get this concept are going to be the thought leaders of the next few decades. We know our bodies have immune systems. And their job is to hunt down parasites and pathogens and eliminate them. And some of those antibodies actually consume pathogens in our body. Now, the new information, which is just now coming together in philosophy and in the sciences, is that our minds have immune systems just like our bodies do. Only a mental immune system's job is to hunt down and remove mind parasites or bad ideas. Never seen speechless before. No, I'm not speechless. So I just didn't know if you were done with your sentence. I understand that the mind parasites can ruin your mind and that the concept of mental immunity, of some sort of mental immune system. But what kind of mental immune system are you talking about? Are you talking about meditation? Are you talking about a specific way of addressing issues and problems and how do you factor in things like emotions? Yeah. So let me start simple with a little thought experiment, maybe play along with me here. So this is kind of a story. So imagine we are sitting around a bonfire, tossing back a few beers. OK. And I say, hey Joe, reach into the fire. They're grabbing one of those hot coals and handed to me. What do you say? I say, I'm not really interested in doing that, Andy. OK, good. And what went on in your head that made you say that? It seems like I'd get injured doing that. Yeah. So you ran a little simulation in your mind and you concluded that that would be harmful. Yes. Right. That was your mind's immune system at work. That simulation run? So basically, I was serving up an idea, a suggestion. Hey, Joe, do this for me. You ran a little simulation in your mind. You identified that idea as a bad one. Your mind's immune system was strong enough and well functioning enough to spot this bad idea. And you came out, fuck you, Andy, reach into the fire and catch you. I didn't get you. Cool. That hard, Andy. That's true. I'm just trying to speak your language. Is that my language? OK. I might say that if we were in front of the fire, honestly. I'm going to go, OK, man. Fuck you. But yeah, so I see what you're saying. But it seems a little bit more complicated when you're addressing ideas. Because one of the problems with these ideas is some of them were very attractive. Yes. Like I was watching the dumbest video yesterday where people are thinking that when they're getting the COVID vaccine, that they're getting microchipped, and they're approving it with magnets. They were sticking magnets on themselves. And the magnets were clinging to the area where they got the COVID shot. And they were from this they were concluding. That you're getting microchipped. And then somehow another this magnet was being held in place. So I think you would call you would think of that as a mind parasite. I don't know what that is. I mean, I think it's either a hoax or- How about a conspiracy theory? Can we go that? Yeah, sure. So let me tell you a second story. So our first example there was a of your mental immune system functioning properly to spot a bad idea and say, nope, you're not welcome here. Right. Now let's take an example of a mental immune system misfiring. OK. All right. So this is a story about Fred the Flat Earth. So Fred dies. He goes to heaven. St. Peter meets, met the Pearly Gates. He says, come on in Fred, you're our lucky customer number 100. You get a chance to chat with God. So Fred marches right in to God's inner sanctum. And says, so God, I've been a conspiracy theorist my whole life, a flat earth in my whole life. I've got to know, is the world flat or is it round? God shakes his head, does a face palm. And says, I'm sorry to say Fred, but the world is very round. Fred's face, register shock, and then recognition. And he said, this conspiracy theory goes higher than I thought. Ah. That's probably exactly what they would do too. Well, and especially Flat Earth Earth. And what does this joke tell us about the conspiracy mentality? And you say that's exactly what it would do. Because I think you understand something about conspiracy thinking, which is that a conspiracy theory infected mind becomes so good at generating antibodies to fight back against even good information that those antibodies will attack the good information. So here's God telling you the truth. And Fred's mental antibodies just rush in and dismiss it as part of a even deeper conspiracy. So questions, doubts, suspicions, those are the minds, the antibodies. And they can go nuts. They can go on hyperactive. In the same way that the body is immune system can go haywire and attack your body itself. Your mind's immune system can go haywire. And your questions and your doubts and your suspicions can attack your mind. I think one of the problems with conspiracy theories and people that believe foolish things is that they don't really seek the truth. They seek something that confirms what they want to be true. And they ignore things to the contrary. And there's even a, or psychologists have a word for this called confirmation bias. Right, I'm sure you've heard of it. Yeah, it feels good to be validated. And so a lot of times we come to a belief that makes us comfortable, that feels good to us. And then we just seek out information that confirms it. We actually dismiss or ignore or diminish anything that might conflict with it. But the problem is that'll send you down a rabbit hole. Oh, yeah. Have you been? Down a rabbit hole? Yeah. Have you ever done one of them YouTube rabbit holes? I have not done a YouTube rabbit hole. Or just a Google rabbit hole where you're just searching out some wacky stuff. Hollow Earth theory, you've heard of Hollow Earth theory? I think I've caught wind of it. I'm a movie King Kong versus Godzilla. Oh, I'll have to go back and check it out. I have never been down a conspiracy rabbit hole that I know of. Really? But I've been down philosophical rabbit holes. OK. Well, those are, there's some, I've been down some astrophysics rabbit holes and astronomy rabbit holes. And yeah, there's some interesting rabbit holes to go down. But the thing about the conspiracy theory rabbit hole is you get to shittier and shittier designed websites. Like, before you go, you get to those geo-cities websites. And remember those? Like spinning gifts of Earth and stuff like that. And you reach us when they get shittier enough, you start to realize, wait a minute here. Yeah. Maybe this isn't true after all. I had a friend try to tell me he believes astrology is real. Not just believes astrology is real, but he believes that. Like he doesn't travel unless he checks the, is astrologist and the cancels trips. He's just, it's so sad. That it really is, right? So I was telling him I'm like, listen, man, this is nonsense. Like would you, the idea that there's an alignment of the stars that can be accurately assessed and that'll determine whether or not this would be a successful trip or a dangerous trip is so fucking stupid. Yeah. And wouldn't you be way better off and much more successful if you knew this information and you were actually applying it to your life? Aren't you disappointed in the results so far? And did that break through for him? He did not. He actually, this is where my brother's up because he sent me a website of this guy who he goes to. That's an astrologist. Astrologist. And it was the dumbest fucking website. Oh, that is sad. And in the website, it was actually talking about how this guy like had some other career and it didn't work out well for him. And then he found astrology and real like this is calling him. Oh, you might try this on your friend. I'm not trying shit. But go ahead. There was a time in the history of the West when astrology made a certain amount of sense. So back when philosophers and theologians thought the earth was at the center of the center of the universe and that all of the stars and the planets revolved around it, the stars were thought and the planets were thought to live in crystal and spheres that rubbed against one another. So the idea that the position of the stars could through the rubbing of adjacent spheres work its way down and affect things here on earth. Kind of made a certain amount of sense because there was a causal story like in the position of the stars and the fate, the fate down here on earth. But then of course Copernicus came along, turned the solar system inside out. We learned that space is not full of crystal and spheres but empty space and ever since astrology has just been silly. Which mind poolness just a little bit closer to your face like I've got there. Yeah, you're very soft book. Sorry. No, don't apologize, please. I think astrology is interesting. I should clarify. It's interesting in that there are these constellations and it's interesting is that people have been studying these and they've been looking at Orion and cancer and all these different, you know, looking at all these different things and these images that they see in the sky and that they've been, you know, people look for patterns. They've always looked for patterns and things. And we know this about our brains. Yeah. So they're pattern recognition engines that generate many false positives. Right. That's good way to put it. It's not that it's not an interesting practice. What I'm saying is I don't believe that there's anyone that can determine what's going to or not going to happen in your life. Right. I think you determine what happens in your life by many factors. Fate, just sheer luck, bad fortune, willpower, fortitude, discipline, focus. Yeah. There's a lot of things that can determine your future. But it's... Well, and... And one of the complications of Australia technology is that everybody born on the same day should have the same fate. Yeah. And that's just clearly false. I don't think they think about it that way, honestly. I think it's like every minute of every day is a different fate. Like, and the only thing they think we're not doing, they're... I'm air quoting their discipline justice. Because I think if you talk to an astrologist that really studies like the ancient astrology, I mean, they literally have it down to, you're like, what hour of what day and where the sun and the moon and everything is at the moment you've popped out of your mom? Yeah. There's a lot going on there. But the point is that this guy that I knew had a parasite and he was infected to the point where he was... He was unwilling to travel unless he consulted his astrologer and he was even canceling certain trips if the astrologer shook his head and said the magic says no. Well, and that's got to harm your life prospects when you... So when you base your core beliefs on things that are not reality-based, on things that are... Are based on wishful thinking. So a lot of people get into astrology because they want to believe that there are fades out there that are going to look after them or whatever. And if you indulge in wishful thinking that way, the evidence now shows you actually compromise your mind's immune system. So when you believe things because you want to, you want them to be true, your mind's immune system gets weaker. And there's not actually now empirical research that indicates this. So a few, for example, except that clinging to your... Your articles of faith, no matter what, is a virtue. You're less likely to change your mind when evidence comes alone. Right. And when that happens, you become more susceptible to conspiracy thinking, more susceptible to divisive political ideologies, more susceptible to science denial. Your mind's resistance to bad ideas starts to decay. You can actually damage your mind's immune system by indulging in wishful thinking. That makes sense. Do you highlight specific strategies in your book for looking at things accurately and looking at things objectively? Yeah, so science is clearly a shining example of what's possible in the way of idea testing and the way of validating things with evidence. So scientists are specially good at testing things in laboratories or with experiments. Now philosophers have always gone in for a kind of a related but slightly different kind of idea testing. Philosophers don't have laboratories, except the ones between their ears. And basically, we test ideas against each other and we test ideas with questions. And we test ideas against our intuitions about right and wrong and try to figure out what makes sense. That's a complementary kind of idea testing that scientists go in for. And it's one that has done a huge amount to educate and lighten us over the centuries. And so what I try to do in the book is take things from this cutting edge science I call cognitive immunology. It's the science of mental immunity. You combine that with ancient wisdom about how to pursue wisdom, how to find wisdom. And you actually get some really powerful ways to strengthen mental immune systems. And like what ways, what do you use personally? Do you need it or have you been sort of indoctrinated or adopted thinking to the point where you don't need any systems that you follow? Well, I try not to think that I have all the answers and that I've got it all figured out. Look at humility. We know this. Humility is really important for a well-functioning mental immune system. For everything, right? Well, yeah, yeah, sure. Let's go with that. My research and specializes in trying to understand how the mind develops resistance to bad ideas. And once you think you have all the answers, you stop learning and your thinking starts to go, hey, why are you? So you gotta maintain that humility or you're just compromising your own mind. Humility. Specifically, humility is important. Fair mindedness. Like so, so with, so a lot of people do this. They, they, they ridicule or deride other people's ideas for failing to meet basic standards, but then they don't apply those, those same standards to their own views. Right, let me give you an example of this. Sure. Well, I think a whole lot of political rhetoric has this character, right? Slam the other side, ridicule it as, as sloppy thinking or as ideologically driven, but never examine to see whether your own views. That's a perfect example of it, right? And politics is probably the very best example of how people do this. They get super tribal. They only look at the other side as being bad and their side. They find justifications for every questionable behavior, every weird scandal, every, you know, everything that doesn't fit the narrative. Yeah. And I'd say that politics is probably the best example, but religion and ethics and sometimes economics or others. So wherever values come into play, people get very attached to their ideas. We all want to think that we're right and true and virtuous. So whatever ideas we've already internalized as beliefs, they have to be the virtuous beliefs and any new incoming information that challenges them from the other side of the political aisle or from another religion or from those damn atheists over there. That's the enemy. And in your mind's immune system attacks that information and you never gain the fair mindedness needed to learn. Have you ever had a sit down in a long form discussion with someone who does believe some wacky stuff? So I actually facilitate difficult conversations with people across the political spectrum, across the religious spectrum every week at my university. So that's my day job. And you facilitate this, how so you invite them in? Well, there's a core group of students at Carnegie Mellon, where I've worked for many years that meets regularly to discuss issues that we just pick as they might have to do with contemporary political phenomena, might have to do with religion or culture wars or controversial economic theories. And we just, we invite people in from the local church. We invite people in from the Christian fellowship and we dialogue. We actually practice the art of having fair, open minded dialogue in an attempt to learn from one another. So we don't always hit the sweet spot, but we try and we think that practicing the art of difficult conversation and testing ideas in a mutually respectful way is the key to overcoming these divisions that are. It's helped me tremendously to talk to people that have different ideas than I do over the years. I've been doing this podcast. I think early on I was way more argumentative, it's one very good at it. Wasn't very open minded. And as time went on, partially from listening to myself, like sometimes you listen yourself and you go, oh, that sounds shitty. Oh, I know that's clunky. Yeah, it's the worst. And I realized along the way that I wasn't doing a good job of listening that I was, you know, in the beginning especially, I don't have any training in this. I've just sort of done this along the way. I've kind of gotten better along the way. And along the way, one of the things that was sort of a residual side effect that wasn't anticipated was it's made me way more aware of kind of all aspects of the way I think. It's been an amazing education that accidentally. And I really admire this about the way you conduct your podcast. You are a fantastic listener. How world needs listening? Well, thank you. Like crazy and you're a role model. A lot of things. A lot of things. A lot of things. I worked really hard at it. Well, think about this, right? So there are four main ways, four main skill sets involved in communicating with fellow human beings, reading, writing, speaking, and listening. Which of those ones is not taught in school? Well, listening is definitely not taught. Which one do we use the most? That one, listen. The one we need the most and need to be best at is the one we don't teach. Yeah. I've always said that ways of thinking should be a primary focus of education. That just, there's specific ways of addressing ideas and problems. And oftentimes, you get ways of addressing problems that comes to mathematics or maybe if you were talking about specific philosophers, you talk about how they address certain things and you can get something out of that. Give people a way of identifying issues, looking at them, and then reassess them, perhaps looking at them from an objective outsider's perspective. Like how would someone who's not you look at this? How would you look at this problem? If you didn't have an investment in it with your ego and the time that you spent arguing, because that's one of the hardest things when you know you're wrong. And then you have to like stop and like, oh wait a minute, I'm wrong. Right, right. Go ahead. I was gonna say it's one of the things that I try to tell people that I've learned myself. And this is really important, I think, is that you're not your ideas. You're you. Oh, that's beautiful. Yeah, I love it. And when an idea comes along and you adopt it, you don't have to, it's not like a dog. You don't have to keep it because you love it. Yeah. Like if you adopt an idea and you go, oh, this idea's tear, oh no, I'm wrong. You have to say it. Because if you don't say it, you're never gonna trust yourself. If you don't admit fault, if you don't admit that you're incorrect, then you'll never trust your own mind when it comes to different ideas that pop up because you're not willing to accept reality. You're so invested in your ego being nurtured that you're not willing to accept the fact that you made a mistake. So you are a core set of values. And one of those is honesty. You have to have honesty. Beautiful. It's a big one. And honesty, not just with other people, but honesty with yourself. So when you look at something and you have this little problem, you gotta go, okay, well, what is this problem? So I actually think you're onto something really deep here, Joe. So when you practice meditation, you try to sit there quietly and then I'm empty your mind. But then ideas keep jumping into your mind and, oh, shoot, I gotta add this to the grocery list or whatever, right? And what you do with practice is you learn that the ideas that are flooding into your mind, they're not you. You actually develop a distance between you and your ideas and it gives you a kind of peace of mind and it gives you a kind of autonomy from just sort of your knee-jerk mental habits. So meditation has a long history of helping people develop a kind of freedom from the ideas that just flood into their mind without thinking, right? I think the exact same thing can be applied to, well, I'd like to put it this way, don't treat your beliefs, don't identify with your beliefs. Because if you do, you'll start to see challenging or interesting new information as a threat. And you'll shut it, then your mind's immune system will kick in and attack it. Instead, you can actually think of your beliefs as like house guests that are maybe welcome to stick around for a while, but might wear out their welcome. So keep your beliefs as long as they're working for you. But always check to make sure that they're not. That are maybe welcome to stick around for a while, but might wear out there. Welcome. Mm. Right? So keep your beliefs as long as they're you know working for you, but always check to make sure that they're not Serving you poorly because when they do Maybe time to say Sayanar. Yeah, in my past of The more embarrassing moments. There's one of they come personally invested in ideas and we'll argue with them Are you for them with emotion and use tactics and talk over people shout people down like that kind of stuff It's one of the more embarrassing things when I think about my own belief system when I was younger as in particular that I would just I would want to win right? Oh, can I build on that? Yeah, that's beautiful This is one of the things I conclude concluded from having studied the mind's immune system When you start using reasons as weapons you're actually subverting your mind's immune system So when culture wars breakout people start grabbing under reasons and using them to club people on the other side What are they using the shields to protect them from the attacks on the other side? But it turns out that you It becomes you lose the ability to be fair-minded when you start treating reasons that way and the alternative is to Always check that you're using reasons to guide people's attention to genuinely relevant considerations Honestly relevant considerations if you're doing that your mind's immune system is functioning properly But if you're just wielding reasons as weapons to win You're fucking with yourself as well as with the other guy Wielding reasons as weapons to win. That's beautiful. I like that. Don't do it. Yeah You want to you want to heal your mind's immune system? Pay attention to whether you're using reasons that way and and if you find you are cut it out Yeah, and I really think that it does you have to recognize it as an actual strength to be able to abandon your ideas It's a strength. It's not a weakness. It's not weak that you are incorrect. Beautiful. They're just ideas and and one of the key ideas in my book is just that If when we're willing to yield to better reasons That that's the mark of wisdom. Mm-hmm always be ready to yield to better reasons So you might have a bunch of reasons why you believe some things and maybe the reasons on the other side are aren't enough to dislodge them Pay attention to them anyway because they eventually might accumulate to the point That would tip the scales and if you're not ready and open to that happening You're gonna remain stuck where you are and unable to grow. I think there's also a problem with some of these ideas and especially when you take into account confirmation bias that A lot of conspiracies are not binary. It's not like there's no conspiracies. This is part of the problem like Enron classic example a legitimate Real conspiracy yeah that was facilitated by Multiple individuals for extreme amounts of profit and was a real thing people do conspire. Yeah, they do it happens It's a real act. It's not like it's impossible Exactly, and it's and the the term conspiracy theory is almost poorly chosen when was that developed? There's a there's a history to the term conspiracy theory that started getting developed to dismiss I forget what the there was a story that was in the news that they were trying Jamie, I'm sure it'll pull it up, but it became a narrative It became oh, they're a conspiracy theorist. It's like the JFK. It's made of in that like a might have been that I think you're correct When that's one that like whoof you go down the rabbit hole in the JFK assassination. You're done that. I have been down Yeah, yeah, I hadn't remembered that before, but yeah, yeah read the which are clean Mark Lane the rush to judgment Okay, that had me thinking Absolutely, yeah, it had to be a conspiracy I'm still not sure I'm over that one. Yeah, I'm not over that one the big one for me is the bullet itself That magic bullet is nonsense. Yeah, I mean it is fucking nonsense You talk to any person who's a person who shot things into things bullets don't come out like that They just don't especially not when shattering bone and the fact they found it conveniently on Connolly's Gurney and the fact that the reason why they had to have that bullet was because they had to account for a guy I got hit by a ricochet under the underpass Do you know that story makes no sense at all? I've seen the movie that the movie in the movie is red the book Oliver stones Interesting cat I had him in here and talked to him boy. He's smart He's a fascinating dude. Yeah, really fascinating But that his version of that movie he like you know, he had a theatrically take something that legitimately should have probably been a netflix mini series Yeah, you know of like 10 or 11 episodes. I'll try to jam it into one movie with Kevin Costner, you know, and it's right not easy and I think you know you have some Mechanisms that you utilize to do well. So people do sometimes conspire And we need to be able to investigate that and find the truth and the idea that there's a giant conspiracy behind all of these Random-seeming things in our lives right is incredibly seductive and it can hijack Your mind in a way that Makes you interpret every new piece of information is just confirming the conspiracy like with red the flat earth right right before so it's a Dangerous thing to indulge broad sweeping conspiracy theories. I mean, yeah, you went on nonsense QAnon sense point of turn Yeah, I was What is this James early is 1870s? Oh? Oh the but the term conspiracy theorist It does it says it was also mentioned in like 1909 but The Wikipedia does say that it was picked up in the war in commission to try to discredit Computer toorial believers Okay, so really was the JFK assassination which was the Warren commission was the People and by the way, there's a great book on the Warren Commission this book by David Lifton It's called best evidence and he was an accountant and he went over the war He's like he went over You know the Warren Commission's massive this massive mouse stuff's read and he found all these inconsistencies in the Warren Commission That he found to be Incredibly telling and then he started doing an investigation of his own into the assassination He found out all kinds of wacky shit. Yeah, it's just It's one of those ones where you'll never Get the answer and you'll always be like searching for more data and more information and it is a rabbit hole and And then this I'm probably not going to endear myself to any of my liberal friends by saying that I still think that I do not think the JFK assassination was a loan loan Why would your liberal friends have an issue with that? Do you think liberal people are more inclined to dismiss conspiracy theories? At the moment I think there's a lot of war fear about conspiracy theories on the left But why when the military industrial complex is something that the left is very concerned about You've been good point. I think maybe the Conspiracies that worry liberals the most nowadays two and a half yeah the science No, that climate change is a hoax right These are the ones that are just present at the front of our minds. Did you see that there's the one famous guy who stormed the Capitol building who He had a buffalo helmet on and there's a shirt and there's a video of him See if you can find this video of that guy talking about QAnon because someone interviewed him outside the Capitol building where with his fucking crazy Make-up on in the mask and all that jazz. Yeah, and this guy It's like someone spouting out sports stats You know like someone who could tell you about sandy co-facts and you know how you know Regi Jackson did this and you know Muhammad Ali did that and you know how guys like really good at sports stats Yeah, and there's a great so what's really important Oh no worse there's a pleasure that they get in being able to sound intelligent I know that pleasure. I've done that myself. Listen to this guy that listen to this guy I don't know. This is the perfect perfect. Yeah, Q set me. He's got a sign says Q say and as well as in the banking cartels So all over the globe Countries are occupied by central banking institutions that loan the government money at interest and this enables them to own all the other Socio economic and geopolitical gears in the country Okay, and then what they do is they use their billions or trillions of dollars to create a bunch of deep underground bases where they have all this like Highly top secret technology going on Okay, and they are like figuring out how to do things like create infinite energy or do things like anti gravity Technology or inertia propulsion they're learning how to do things like cloning and all sorts of crazy stuff. We've been pretty enough Yeah, perfect perfect. He's empty see how he's doing that like that guy's a listen to me And with all due respect to that guy. He's a fucking loser And I don't mean that and I'm not trying to be mean if I was me if he was me I would say damn it. I'm a fucking loser and what I mean by the guy was living with his mom He's like a 30-year-old guy. Yeah, right? Didn't really have a lot of job prospects. Yeah, shit wasn't going that well He's got bad tattoos. Yeah, talk minor actually good. Yeah, bad tattoos He's got a fucking American flag paid on his face. He's wearing a buffalo helmet on He's got no shirt and he's talking about underground bases where they're creating infinite energy I couldn't agree with you more But let me give you a scientific way of saying the same thing. Okay. Um that guy's mind His mental immune system has been compromised right deeply Deeply freaking and look you can tell from even that small clip. He's not dumb He's clever right. He knows a lot of misinformation right he's able to wield it in interesting ways that make him feel like like sports stats Yeah, yeah, he's rattling off Inframated in the way saying it he's getting pleasure out of forming these sentences and informing this guy about how much he knows And here's the thing right think about how this applies to our political situation right now You got people on the left who basically say they'll people on the right are dumbfucks And you got people on the right saying those people on the left are dumbfucks In fact is there's we got smart smart well informed people on both sides I believe dumb things that believe dumb things because our mental immune systems have been compromised by a culture That has been weakening them right for decades. Yeah, that's a good way of looking at it And we can understand how these mental immune systems work We can the science is teaching us how to make them work better so that we can actually create a new generation of people who Who are much more resistant to cognitive contagion? How do we do that? Right kind of education by by by by by by by mental immunity Available now. Did you do the audio? Is there an audio version of this? There is an audio version But I we got a real pro to do the audio. You don't want to do it. I don't think I have It's uh, we do maybe you'd be my voice nope. Nope. I'm not gonna do it. No Yeah So so I mean a lot of people wanted to just you know what should I do differently? What are the practical implications of this? Yeah, and I've already hit on a couple of them Always check to make sure that you're using reasons to guide attention constructively not as a weapon That's one right Avoid willful belief when you're believing things because you want to believe them. That's gonna mess with you. Yes your mind's immune system um Here's one That's not well understood so for a 2,000 years philosophers have been fascinated by the idea that what makes a reasonable idea reasonable are the reasons that support it sounds kind of plausible right? Yeah, I mean that that's well That's the mental it makes a reasonable idea reasonable is the reasons that support it or the evidence that supports it okay So so that's a plausible understanding of what makes beliefs ideas reasonable right right and philosophers have taken it very very seriously for a very long time There are a couple problems with that idea though one of them is that it exacerbates confirmation bias So if if you're if you have an idea and you kind of like it and you want to know g is this reasonable I should do my due diligence on this well check to see if I can find some reasons for it So you look and of course you find them because you can find reasons for finding anything Right and then you say okay, I believe it right so the picture of reasonable believing that has been pre-installed in all of us by Western civilization Actually Makes us more prone to confirmation bias really Really And but we can trade that in for a better picture of reasonable belief that even Creases our immunity. Why does our picture of reasonable belief make us more susceptible to confirmation bias? well so so imagine You have the mental habit of just checking to see if you can find underlying reasons. Okay, so so a question arises Is this a good idea or a bad idea? Right and and you don't want to buy into it unless it's a good idea and the measure it if assume that you Except that the true measure of an idea's goodness is whether there are supporting reasons So you go out looking for those supporting reasons you find a couple Okay, it's a good idea and then you believe it and then all of a sudden you've you're infected with the mind parasite well one of the things you see people doing online It's a funny thing they they try to find sources and then they like if people are battling on Twitter about an idea You'll see they'll pull up an article that supports that idea and someone will go Daily mail Really is that what you pulled up and then they'll pull up the Washington Post. Oh my god. You believe that liberal rag Let's start going back and for oh fucking CNN really you know, they'll do that kind of thing exactly Yeah, but you can find in on the internet. You can find any information to support anything almost right. Yeah, and and and so the real test isn't can you find reason? For it the real question is can you Can you turn away all the reasons against it? Mm-hmm right act like a defense attorney Yeah, the cross-examine Yeah, claim and make sure that you can that the claim can withstand or the belief of the idea of claim Make sure it can withstand questioning and good questioning good question Scrutiny scrutiny scrutiny right so yeah, so this takes us back to an ancient concept of Enobleness that predates Plato one of my philosophical heroes Socrates basically Um, question things and if they didn't withstand questioning We didn't withstand scrutiny you can say that can't be right Chuck it mmm, and he was right We need to bring back the socratic picture of reasonable belief because it's one of the most powerful mind in Acculance ever invented We've forgotten how to use it in our time But we can take this new science cog into big mythology We can enhance the socratic method and achieve levels of immunity Against cognitive contagion that our species has never had Isn't one of the impediments to cognitive immunity just Ideology in and of itself like as you were saying earlier that your friends on the left we get upset at you saying that you Tend to lean towards a conspiracy theory from the killing of JFK like well, why Why like why would it be the friends on the left and why would you even consider the friends on the left? Well because you and I are in a group or in a group called liberals. Yes. Yeah. Yes So we know this about Thinking which is that we're highly tribal random animal. Yeah, and we we will gravitate towards ideas that Keep us in good standing with the people close to us and we'll turn with hate and derision on ideas that threaten our little communities support And this tends to fuck with our thinking in all kinds of ways and yeah, so you actually have to work to overcome tribalism to become a clear and fair-minded thinker Yes, it's very important and what's interesting is like even if you have like I belong to a group called liberal because I ascribe to a series of beliefs that are in that group like You know women's rights gay rights civil rights I believe in climate change. I believe in I believe I have a lot of like things that they might not even be good ideas Right like I don't know if universal basic incomes a good idea But I tend to support it because I would like people to not have to think about money as much as they do And I don't know if that's really possible when I talked to Bernie Sanders He said it was and he's got this idea that nobody On the right seems to think is a good idea. Yeah, and maybe even a lot of people on the left think it's a bad idea So I have a lot of ideas that Fall in line with liberal thinking so I'm technically a liberal and where do I know that I are alike that way? Yeah But I also have guns. I'm a cage fighting commentator There's a lot of like things that people go no, you're not one of us Yeah, I'm like well, okay, I hunt, you know, and there's I believe in hard work I believe in discipline And I think that you have to hold people accountable for hard work and discipline. It's very important There's a lot of people that want an easy way out. They don't want accountability. They don't want They don't want to be personally personally responsible for their own future in terms of like just going out there in hustling And they don't want to instill that sort of personal responsibility of the people I love it. They want to Maintain or at least cultivate a victim mentality which I think is incredibly detrimental to everyone And I think it's detrimental to the the people that you're talking to Steter mental to the people that adopt it It's like yeah, you are responsible for so much more of your own destiny And there's so many success stories of people that have pulled themselves up from the the terrible position that they find themselves in Some stage in life and then become a happy healthy productive member of our society And I don't think I don't think that victim mentality is good for anybody So in that sense sometimes I get labeled as a right-wanger because oh, you're conservative and you look at things that way Well, maybe I am conservative in some regards. Yeah, and I'm happy to say that about myself as well, right? In fact, so So much of what you say resonates with me Couple things number one is you said many of your views correspond put you in the liberal. Yeah, most of them most of them And if you choose to then identify as a liberal You've hitching your identity to a set of ideas. Yeah, and then challenges to those liberal ideas start to trigger an auto immune mental auto immune reaction so you're mmm. I mean I also Identify for the most part as a liberal, but I try to hold that identity really loosely so that I don't overreact to Criticisms of liberalism So anytime you hit your identity to any but set of beliefs you're Setting yourself up for possible mental immune disorders, right? So you need to be really careful about so I actually think recommend that instead of hitching your identity to beliefs hit your identity to honest inquiry Honest inquiries a better idea. Yeah, that sounds like a lot more and if I understand query shows us that liberalism is wrong about xy and z Yeah, and to heck with xy and z they're probably some of these concepts haven't really been applied or tested You know, I mean Some have like there's a lot of people that believe in socialism, right? And a lot of people believe in even Marxism. Yeah, but if you look at the history of that It's a fucking bloody disaster. Yes, pretty terrible, but you know, they think they're communism. I yeah I'm not sure the track record on socialism is not so good, but people are like it hasn't been done correctly And you're like, okay, well maybe maybe it has them because democracy had never been done correctly until 1776 Right, so maybe there's an argument there maybe as we evolve We could figure out a way to do it and take into account The fact that people need incentives because this is one of the things about people people do need motivations and incentives for them to innovate and for them to work And when they feel like there is an equality of outcome No matter what effort you put in then you're not going to get into quality of effort. Good. I like that Yeah, because there isn't an equality of effort That's one of the things that people don't take into account when they look at people that are extremely successful, right? Like if you look at some crazy business person who's just like working 20 hours a day and they have this they've a mass is empire and people go Well, that's not fair that person has an exorbitant amount of wealth and they they have a disproportionate amount of Financial success and this is all this isn't wrong. It shows you the system is wrong Right, but you have to take into account this guy has probably been grinding for 35 years He's a psychopath. He's probably on Adderall every day and you know and this is his life is Accumulating numbers and running up the score and that's how he gets his juice. I that's how he gets excited I understand you're pretty hard working too. I'm not that way though. I'm not a business person, you know I make money sort of accidentally, okay, you know That's it the things that I'm doing whether it's stand up or this podcast or doing you have see commentary I really genuinely enjoy those things so beautiful So I'm doing it because I enjoy it and also because I make money doing it. All right There's a lot of people that just think about the money. They're just about the fucking deal. I gotta make this fucking deal Yeah, I can't I don't understand. I don't understand them either, but even illegal I went into philosophy for the money. Will you believe that? Did you? No, of course not You might as well there's a way right? Will be the way Name name me a philosopher who's gotten rich Doing philosophy. I probably a cult leader. Probably not really a philosopher Almost a real nice an anti philosopher. Yeah, there's a lot of those though, right? Isn't that what happens when people start paying attention to you too much There's an inclination towards believing in your own Extra extra power over folks and as a reason for this I've got a calling I suppose this this show might put me on a slippery slope then a little bit if people start paying attention to what I say a little Bit they'll start to notice all the all the nonsense. Yeah, you're a soft-booking guy. You'll be fine Handling yourself I could I can I bring you back to this accountability thing, please so I'm a liberal who all such values accountability And that most of the liberals I know Also care a lot about accountability Turns out there's an idea at loose in our culture that undermines cognitive accountability and it's this idea that almost all of us have been brought up with which is Everyone is entitled to their opinion. Mmm. So I could actually call this idea a mental immune disruptor and here's why so Imagine growing up. You so what happens when a kid grows up in a entitled? Come spoil Right, so in the titled kids start to just assume they're entitled everything right you grow up in a culture This is your entitled to whatever to think whatever you damn, please you become Kind of you develop in an attitude of entitlement towards belief and Then when somebody comes along it says yeah, but that's really not a responsible way to think about things check out all this evidence They go I'm entitled to my belief go away Hmm, right. Yeah, this idea has wide currency in our culture And it shut in a search to shut down thinking and it's one of the things that is weak environmental immune systems because yes our cognitive rights matter And know the and government shouldn't be telling us what we're entitled to to believe To the extent that we're entitled to our opinion is a claim about our political rights fine But when we misinterpreted as a claim about what we're morally entitled to to believe and think and say then you've crossed a line because I'm not morally entitled to misogynistic delusions and white conspiracists fantasies and Any other of you mmm. Does that make sense? Yes, it does so we need to get rid of this idea that we're all entitled to believe Whatever we damn, please right we have rights in the way of thinking But we also have responsibilities and we got to bring them back into balance because right now we live in a culture that tells us we can all indulge in crazy-ass thinking if we want and and we're not being called back towards our cognitive response I think you're making some very good points, but the problem is those points There's a justification for Denying people the opportunity to express bad ideas and that's where things get slippery Stop the lease. You don't want to invite invite thought police because even though you're right about a lot of the things particularly white supremacy and a lot of these other like two and on type things a lot of Very soft-minded Ideas that get bounced around out there and people want to shut those ideas down we want to silence people right? um and Then social media platforms have this incredible ability to do that. They just step in and go This is wrong. We're gonna stop it and silence it and shut it down the problem is once you give people the r- well they have the ability to silence Opposing views. They've decided they're the arbiter of truth When it comes to Arguable philosophies when it becomes when it comes to political positions Yes, when it comes to religious beliefs when it comes to Morals and ethics people don't always agree And you have to see who's right and the only way to see who's right Is to allow people to talk it through but a lot of our problem is that we have an election cycle So if someone's gonna talk it through but with November's two weeks away Like Jesus Christ, we can't allow these fucking people to talk it through hide the hunter-biden stories Right now hide them. They don't fuck up the narrative It's gonna be like Hillary Clinton with the emails. We're gonna ruin this Jesus Christ. This is this is bad Sensorate. Yeah, and that's what they did Yeah, so so there's a danger that by promoting cognitive immunology as I do that I'm inviting censorship and Thought police and some people worry. I think with with some reason. Yeah, then I might be pushing us towards a slippery slope here Right, right. I'm I'm not an advocate of thought police and I devote a chapter in the book to saying how do we How do we regulate our own thinking Without you know either policing our own thoughts or trying to police each other's thoughts while allowing debate And while allowing debate in fact the debate is the correct way to test ideas and to weed out the bad ones Right the best way to counter bad speech is good speech Yes, and I think this problem is genuinely difficult when we have a media environment that lets say hate speech Um Propagate like a virus online. Let's it well So right now anybody who wants to can post a slick website that promotes any idea whatever mm-hmm and some peddlers of disinformation are using this to take advantage of immune compromised minds conspiracy their cue is basically exploiting people's mental immune weaknesses and How do you know how that started out? Cue claims to be a government insider. He's been doing drops. It didn't start out as a goof Wasn't it like an eight-channel A4-channel 8-channel I did hear about h. I think that was the original though. No, no, that it was a goof But it was someone was posting on there because that was the best they could post without getting it. Oh, so you might not have been a good post anonymously That was the main reason yeah The thing is like someone could just start a crazy conspiracy like that for fun And then a lot of other people like our friend with the buffalo helmet on to start believing and in the Quoting it and a lot of people who aren't involved can get harmed. Yeah, that happens, right? So conspiracy theories and crazy ideologies have proliferated through human populations for thousands of years and they cause wars they cause political dysfunction They cause people to hate and they've caused genocides and as Mark Twain told us you know a falsehood can get around He said a lie can get halfway around the world before the truth can even get its boots on Brrr What he's saying there is that this dialogue this conversational attempt to To mitigate The spread of falsehoods isn't always fast enough What he's saying there is that this dialogue, this conversational attempt to mitigate the spread of falsehoods, isn't always fast enough to prevent the harm. Right. Which makes the solution new and I both favor, let's talk it out. A good one, but not always the one that acts fast enough. The problem is though the alternative is censorship and censorship is power to have that power. And then who is doing the censorship? Then you have another real problem because you have like Twitter, you have their trust and safety counsel. So you have a bunch of people, a lot of them fresh out of universities that really don't have a lot of life experience and maybe have some very rigid ideologies of their own. And they want to enforce those and they come up with reasons to censor people, reasons to delete posts, reasons to silence and suspend people temporarily for things that they deem to be inaccurate. In fact, a Harvard epidemiologist was recently suspended from Twitter because he said that these masks did not provide the kind of protection that people thought they did with COVID-19 and that so many people were getting too close and they were not socially distancing because they felt like these masks gave them more protection than they really did. And they were catching COVID-19 because of that. So this man is not a masked liar. He's an epidemiologist. Yeah, he knows his shit. Twitter suspended him for saying this. And that clearly seems wrong. Exactly. It is clearly wrong because we all know that there's a lot of these masks where you've got these gaps on the side. Now if you're breathing air and COVID particles, I do absolutely believe that masks provide protection. How much protection I don't think has been established and the mask is very wildly. Like some people just have been danison, which I think do very little. Some people have N95 masks that are very form fitted to their faces. I think those do much more. And clearly if you look at the flu season this year, it's way less than ever before. Cold, way less than ever before. It shows that masks do reduce transmission. Something's going on, whether it's that or the fact that people are staying away from each other a little bit more than they have in the past. But what this Harvard epidemiologist was saying was that he believes that they don't work enough to allow people to be around infected people. And that this idea that you and I could talk really close to each other if one of us was infected because we're both wearing masks, he's like, that's not true. But they censored him for doing that. They suspended him for Twitter. So that is a powerful example to force me to think more deeply about this. I mean, I like that because what I was trying to say a minute ago is that, yes, for the most part, dialogue, mutually respectful dialogue is the way to weed out bad ideas. And information can now spread across the internet at lightning speed and huge harms can happen before dialogue has a chance to do its win-o-wing work. Yeah. Right. That's a good point. So how do we stop that? Well, I seem to be saying that there needs to be some sense, I mean, I don't want to say it this way, but I think a minute ago, maybe you were hearing, there needs to be additional regulatory mechanisms in place beyond mere mutually respectful dialogue to keep harmful mind parasites from spreading across the internet. The key people from just straight up lying. Right. But imagine that the CDC actually used that exact same reasoning to crack down on this Harvard epidemiologist. Right. And that clearly has an unjust outcome in this case. Right. I don't know the details of the case, but I'm taking it. Yeah, I'm not sure if I know the details either. I just know that I was reading a story about overreach. And they were saying that this man is obviously very qualified to talk about this very specific issue. So I'm happy to accept that as an example of overreach. And I wonder if there isn't also underreach. Okay. So you're in charge of Facebook. Okay. And you've just learned that the Trump campaign has weaponized Facebook to hijack an election. How do they do that? Well, through Cambridge Analytica and thousands of Russian Facebook sites that have been spreading misinformation. This information. Internet research agency in Russia, that kind of deal. Right. But I know some of the news stories on this. We're coming down down the home stretch towards the election. And you're Mark Zuckerberg and you're realizing that somebody is weaponizing your platform to steal an election or win an election. What do you do? I think that if you can find out that there are like, are you familiar with Renee Dorester's work? Renee Dorester, she did an analysis, a deep dive on the Internet research agency and all the various fake sites that they have. Fake pages, fake Instagram, fake Facebook, and all the different ways that they've manipulated discourse in this country. And it's really fascinating. They've created hundreds of thousands of memes. She said some of them were very funny and they also organized events. And they organized events right next to other events that they organized that had opposing viewpoints. Yes. Like they had some pro Muslim event that was across the street from a Texas separatism event. In an attempt to create clashes on the Civil unrest. Exactly. And then they would infiltrate other pages and pretend to be someone who speaks for black lives matter or pretend to be someone who speaks for white nationalists and they would battle it out. So think about this, right? So imagine we took a free speech fundamentalism view towards the kind of problem that you're talking to here. We're just going to say, oh well, if the Russians want to create civil unrest by organizing these competing and chaos is spreading through the streets. Right. Do we mitigate? Do we start to moderate our free speech fundamentalism? Well, let me ask, let me put it to you. Do you think we need to moderate free speech fundamentalism? It's a very good question because then the question comes up is is anonymous posting an issue? Because the only reason why this works is because it's anonymous posting. If I find out that Jamie Vernon and Jamie's fingerprint is on it and he used his face ID to make that post and his name is, you know, young Jamie Vernon on whatever social media platform that he utilizes and we can hold him accountable. Well we know it's him. We know it's not some Russian bot. We know it's not some person in China that's pretending to be a white nationalist. It's an actual person. Here's the guy, here's where he lives. It's one of the things that differentiate Facebook from other platforms, right? Because you actually use your name supposedly. But it's not 100%. It's not real. It's not impossible to fake that you have an account. That's right. Lots of fake accounts. Let's say if I was mad at you and I wanted to write a book about all the where you stole all your information for this book and you're a bad person. You've done all these evil things. Someone could do that. They'd just make a bunch of fake pages and if they were really psycho and they had a lot of time and they were dedicated, they could make a bunch of fake things about you. So how do we handle that? Right. So I think the problem you're describing is one where people have influence without accountability. So anonymous Twitter accounts, anonymous Facebook accounts can be used to spread disinformation and when you try to trace them back and hold the peddlers of the disinformation accountable, they just don't exist. Right. Or they're being, they're affront for some person who's actually trying to sow chaos. So I mean we know this about power without accountability corrupts. And the internet is now handing out lots of power to people and we don't have not figured out how to hold people accountable for the power of the soap box basically. And what we're talking about Cambridge Analytica and we're talking about the internet research agency, we're not even talking about people. We're talking about employees of groups that are designed, I mean they're set up to propagate propaganda. I mean that's what they're doing. It's not even a person who's like spreading lies. That's right. It's an actual organized entity that is specifically targeting a desired result. How do you handle that? Exactly. Well, I don't think we can allow organizations like that to flourish unchecked. I think we're finding right now at our moment in history that we can't simply be free speech fundamentalists and just say it'll all work out in the end if we do. Right. But here's the real problem, right? Is that there's a profit incentive for allowing these people to propagate this shit because there's so many clicks involved. That's the thing is the algorithms, whether it's Facebook or a lot of these other social media platforms, the algorithms favor anything that's going to cause conflict, because conflict inspires discourse and then people are engaging. The engagement is very high on these algorithms. But it's interesting too that my friend Ari, he had a study, a test rather than he had a theory. And his theory was that everyone's saying that these algorithms encourage conflict. And he was like, is that or is that just what people do? And so what he tried to do is he only looked up puppies on YouTube. And that's all YouTube would recommend him was puppies. He's like, look, it's not that you're looking for it. It's not that like YouTube's algorithm is fucking you up. Or fucking you up. Because you're just constantly looking for conflict. I'll give you go to my YouTube. My YouTube is professional pool, like, moy Thai fights, muscle causes, the dumbest YouTube ever. You're not going to learn shit from my YouTube. Because I use YouTube for mostly for entertainment. Occasionally it'll be like the dark horse podcast, like some, you know, Heather Heing and Brett Weinstein will be like really entertaining and inch, it lacks freedom and very intense intellectual discussion. There's been, there's some of that in there too, but most of my feed is nonsense. Because that's what I like. And go for entertainment. And what kitten videos spread like crazy even though they're not doing anybody any good. Which means that our minds are easily hijacked by stuff that's not good for them. Yeah, but is that not good for you? Those kitten videos they're pleasing. Like people enjoy them. They watch like kittens play with curtains and shit and they go, that's hilarious. Well, so I wouldn't call that a harmful, right, if we harmful, but they've been going down the queue and on rabbit hole, that is harmful. Yes, that is harmful. But if you're a knucklehead and that's what you're interested in, that the problem is that that's what you're interested in. The problem is not necessarily the, I think the idea that the algorithm is poisoning people is like the idea that sugary foods are poisoning people. You sure they are. It's the same thing. But the real problem is that you're eating those fucking things. The real problem is not that like, ho, ho is exist. The real problem is that's what you gravitate towards instead of an apple. So this makes perfect sense in light of, so philosophers have noticed for a long time that our cravings can often lead us to do self-destructive things. Right. Lust can lead you to cheat on a spouse and destroy your marriage, right? Yes. Your craving for fatty foods can lead you to have heart disease. Yes. So our minds actually crave all kinds of things that aren't good for it, at least in the quantities that we crave them. And so going all the way back to ancient Greece philosophers have said, you've got to train, you've got to modulate your desire with reason. And Socrates Plato, my ancient philosophical heroes, they're all basically saying, if you let your desires control you, if you let the ideas that just swarm into your head unbidden to control you, you will be a slave to them, your whole life. But if you actually develop your capacity to reason, to test ideas in dialogue, and by the way you can have the dialogue within your own head, kind of like, or you can have your dialogue with others. But either way, that kind of dialogue teaches you how to develop a kind of freedom from these forces inside of your own mind that can enslave you. Does that make sense? It does. It does. But I think for many people, they don't know how to start. Like how, like maybe you're maybe you're listening to this right now. And maybe you have had moments in your life where you've just been hijacked by stupid ideas and you don't know what exactly what to do. Like, I have a friend I've talked about her before on the podcast, it's used to be a Mormon and all of her life. And then one day she snapped out of it and they left the church and the whole deal. And she had a very interesting point. She said, she finds herself to be very susceptible to like bullshit because she believed in things without questioning them her whole life until she was like in her 40s. So like all of a sudden, she finds herself now trying to navigate the waters of reality without a like a rock solid belief system that she can fall back on. It was, yeah, it was a big wow because she's a very smart person. And she lived a kind of a dull-minded life when she was just believing whole, you know, part and parcel, whatever the Mormon ideology was, like she was locked in. That's what she, you know, she's definitely going to get a planet when she dies and everything is going to be awesome and where these magic underwear and Jesus is looking out for me. We're all good. I mean, that was her thought process and now she's not like that at all. So she had to like sort of recognize that she had some real flaws in the way she looks at reality itself. She's susceptible. That story is so much like the story. So I once got a call as a philosophy professor, a woman called me and she basically said I was brought up in a deeply fundamentalist Christian sect and I was taught about hell and I've lived my entire life just scared as shit that I'm going to be sent to hell. And then, but my college professors, they're actually encouraging me to think for myself, but whenever I actually start to think critically about God's existence, I'm seized by this kind of panic. And she said, even though I know hell is an illusion, I know that hell is just an idea that was created to control behavior of children. And she said, even though I've outgrown those ideas, I still can't stop this on the panic. This poor woman, her mental immune system had been crippled by her upbringing. Right? Something in the way she was brought up, her fundamentalist training had actually made it so that she was seized by irrational fear when she tried to think for herself. That's wild. It's like you can't stray from the path or demons are waiting for you. Exactly. And when you grow up with that thought that that's what's on the other side is just demons and hell and Satan, Satan's tempting you. I mean, good luck becoming an independent thinker with that kind. I mean, this makes you raise some really tough questions. You know, should everyone be allowed to raise their children into any religion they want no matter how crazy? I mean, it's not a crazy question to ask. I mean, it might sound like I'm itching to become a thought police here. I'm not. The problem with what you're saying is all of it's crazy. All of it. All of religions crazy. You won't get any argument for me. You'll find crazy if you look and it's the same problem with censorship itself because if you decide you're going to censor the really fucking nutty ideas, then what about the kind of nutty ideas? What about, oh, astrology's bullshit. Let's censor the astrology page. Oh, chiropractors. Do you know the history of chiropractors? Well, that's bullshit too. And then you start going down the line. The psychics, no one's fucking psychic, you fraud. And then next thing you know, you're censoring everything. Well fair enough, but remember, I'm not calling for censorship. What are you doing? I'm calling for the rig for building a culture where idea testing is so normalized that we don't need to censor anyone to become, to have herd immunity to crazy cognitive, to mind virus. The problem is some people religion is a fundamental principle that allows them to live their lives with like structure. They have like, it's a scaffolding for their morals and their ethics and it's helped them tremendously. And you remove that structure. And I know a lot of people like that who are really good people that happen to be Christian and they follow the best aspects of the Christian religion. They really do. And so to tell them that, oh, you need to think critically and you know, do you really think someone came back from the dead? No. Do you really think somebody walked on water? Do you really think someone turned water into water? Is that real to you? Because if it is real to you, we've got a real problem here. Because that doesn't make any sense. Not with anything we know. So at one point in time, there was a magic person. So there's never been a magic person since, but at one point in time there was a magic person. You have to be the son of God and he had all this information and he tried to tell us and we, you know, someone, not us, someone hung them up on a cross and killed them. And he came back three days later. You're like, hey, hey, hey, slow down. But if you say that doesn't pass critical thinking, you're not allowed to think that. We can't have that in our platform that you got a real problem on your hands because that's a large percentage of the people. And they use that even though they don't necessarily believe it hook line and sinker. They use that to live better lives. Well, everyone on earth understands that some religions are toxic and dangerous. What's the good ones? Let's go there. Let me answer this other one. We'll get there the second. So even the most about Christian will claim that some forms of Islam are dangerous and toxic. Some will. Yeah. And maybe some. But it's not hard to find examples of religions that are problematic, not just for their followers, but for others as well. And so we need to approach this problem together. What are we going to do about it? I think we can actually, so you can try to solve the problem of toxic religious beliefs at the source end, at the supply end or the demand end. You can try to censor the religious information or the information that comes from a toxic religion, say, or you can try to build immunity to bad ideas and let the chips follow where they may. I'm advocating the second approach, not the first. So this is where there's a very important difference between censorship based approaches to dealing with our disinformation problem. And it's supply side disinformation regulation with demand side information regulation. Do you see what I'm saying? I do see what you're saying. That's why my book is, I think, fundamental to our how the only enlightened way we can possibly address this disinformation problem is at the demand end by increasing resistance to bad ideas so that people freely without coercion reject them. But this would require mass adoption of your book. I mean, your book would literally have to be like the new Bible. Well, that's why you're helping me bring about a new age. But you know what I'm saying? It's like what you're saying makes a lot of sense. But some people would say that's not good enough. QAnon is on the rise. We need to start censoring these pages right now. We need to block these people. And that's what I think Facebook's approach was. That's what YouTube's approach is. Yeah. I mean, I don't know the best approach to stopping QAnon. You would be such a genius if you did. I mean, right? I don't have any quick and easy answers. I don't have a silver bullet answer, but I will tell you this. There's a new science emerging in our day and age that's teaching us how mental and immune systems work. It's teaching us why they fail and how we can make them work better. And we can make them work better by strengthening them in ways that philosophers are long taught and that the new sciences of psychology are saying actually help us become more independent and more autonomous thinkers. Which is I think a different approach to dealing with our disinformation problem than sensor the sources. But again, it comes to this point where the only way this is going to work is you get a lot of people to adopt it. So first and foremost, we get the willing, the willing to help develop mental immunity. So each of us has to develop our own mental immunity first and foremost. And then we can begin to help our families and friends. So how you're supposed to put the oxygen mask on your own yourself first and then help your kid. Same thing with mental immunity. You develop your own minds, resistance to bad ideas. You learn the habits of mind that will largely inoculate you against many kinds of line parasites. And then you gently in an non combative way introduce the people you love to the process of loving idea testing, of collaborative idea testing. And they kind of have to see it in you as an example. You have to express these principles and live them. And live them so that they see you and they go, oh, Mike used to kind of be full of shit. But over the last few years, he's really gotten it together. Have you done it, Mike? This is what I did. I've recognized that it was full of shit. I recognized that I was thinking in a very piss poor way and I wasn't using facts and logic and critical things. And Mike go on, Mike go on to say, you know what? It's really not rocket science. What you do is you sit down with a bunch of friends and you say, hey, I have this idea. I'm kind of enamored of it, but I need you guys to help me test it. You know, just tell me what you think of this idea. Do you see any downsides to this idea? Help me test the evidence. And so David Hume, the Scottish philosopher said, the truth emerges from arguments among friends. He doesn't hang out with my friends. I'll just kidding. Well, you can get together with truth. Yeah, yeah, yeah, for sure. You get together with people you trust and you help each other spot each other's mind viruses and you gently help them let go. Yes, yes. You gently help them let go. It's a good way to put it. And I think that what we're saying, someone who leads by example, that's very important is that you're you're best served by doing your best work. And if you do, like I've had friends that have lost a lot of weight and a lot of the people around them that see them lose a lot of weight, then they start losing weight too. Because they realize like, oh, if he can do it, like look how great he looks now. Look how healthy he is. I'm going to try that too. And they realize there's a path to do this. The power of example. Yeah. One is a simple one because it's not simple. It's actually quite complicated, right? Because we all eat and it's hard to not overeat. But it's simple in the fact that it's a real clear in and out, right? Good food in, you know, and then results and then cut out calories and, you know, add exercise, add good sleep, and then you get results. Whereas I think it's more complicated to cleanse your thinking patterns. And I think people, they cling to those like a security blanket, like a kid has one of those blankets that they don't ever want to let go. And your beliefs feel the same way. Yes. I'll give you an example along those lines. So I was brought up in a household that practically worshiped Martin Luther King. So Martin Luther King was practically a mean of saint, a secular saint in my family. And then years later, I learned that King was a serial philander. He just cheated on Coretta Scott King time and time and time again. Now when I first heard this, I was like, no way, you know, J. Edgar Hoover and this I made that shit up to smear him. I just didn't want to believe it. So when I look back on that moment, I could see that antibodies were mobilizing in my own mind to fight off threatening information. But it was fighting off good information, true information. So this is what happens when you embrace something as nearly sacred. Embrace something as sacred. Then when information comes along the threatens it, you'll reject it almost before listening to it or before really hearing it out. That's the mind's immune system overreacting to a perceived threat. By the way, there's a famous experiment in the history of immunology, a Russian zoologist in 1882. He takes a starfish. He stabs it with a thorn. He sticks it under a microscope and what he sees are thousands of white blood cells rushing to the scene of the injury and golfing the tip of the thorn and consuming, devouring it. He was the first human being ever to witness the body's immune system in action. I'm saying, I witnessed my own mind's immune system overreacting to information about Martin Luther King. And you can do this yourself. Imagine somebody, you log on one day and find that some jerk out there has been assassinating your character. Has just been tearing you down online. What happens in your mind? Yeah, mad. You get mad. You think who is this jerk? You think where is the heck is he getting his information? His logic must be screwed up. His character must be flawed. All of these thoughts swarm to the scene of the injury and try to neutralize the character assassination. That's your mind's immune system reacting. Is it? I mean, that's just, if you know that you didn't really do those things, it doesn't really, your mind's immune system, right? That's just, it loses fucking crazy person making shit up, bubmy. I guess I would say it's not the mind's immune system overreacting, but it is the mind's immune system reacting in your defense. Okay, I see what you're saying. So the mind's immune system reacting incorrectly would be your Martin Luther King. Right. Yeah, analogy. And then you could use that JFK's another example very similar. And so the mind's immune system could be a finicky thing. It can attack the wrong information and it can actually defend. So your mind's immune system can mobilize to defend false beliefs and it can mobilize to attack good information. Did you, when you were a young person, did you start off on this path of thinking this way? Did you start off with meditation? Did you start off with recognizing some flaw that you had like the Martin Luther King thing? Did that set you off? You know what it was? It was just having dialogues like this. I just loved having long form conversations with people I really cared about and just like shooting the shit with my buddies after school. Yeah. And exploring ideas, testing ideas, I just found that I loved that idea and I decided to devote my life to promoting dialogue. Honest truth-seeking dialogue. That was my kind of core conviction and so I went to grad school, studied philosophy and I tried to understand how reasoning dialogue works and what's the difference between dialogue that works well and dialogue that goes off the rail. philosophy and I tried to understand how reasoning dialogue works and what's the difference between dialogue that works well and dialogue that goes off the rails. And that's one thing that I could say is so early lacking in most people's lives, as long-form conversations. Everyone is doing tweets and text messages and you know you don't have much time to yourself and you definitely very rarely just sit down with no distractions for several hours at a time just talking to people. And talking about the things that matter most is really important. So my philosophical heroes going way back say, you got to think about what's important in life and you got to talk about what's important in life. And you got to examine your values and consider updating and refining them day in and day out. And when you do that, when you spend time on that, it transforms, it can transform your outlook on the world and it can transform your sense of well-being as well. So it's not a kind of meditation that involves sitting quietly but it's a kind of meditation that involves thinking sometimes with others. Yeah that's a big part of it right because you have to think how another person is thinking and like accept their thought and go, is that right? How does that go? And a lot of times other people's minds will spot mind parasites that you can't see. Oh yeah, right? So if you can help me spot my mind parasites and I can help you spot yours, both of our minds systems get mental immune systems get stronger. Yeah and not even just mind parasites, but just alternative perspectives or perspectives based on their own unusual experience. Yeah. Someone can tell you something, you know, maybe they grew up in Hungary or maybe they did this or maybe they did that and they can say something to you and you're like, oh, okay. Yeah. Well that's why you hate communism or oh, okay. That's why you think it's important to exercise. And a lot of times you get a much more complex and nuanced understanding of our world when you go down that path. And the farther you go down that path, the less likely you are to become a simplistic ideologue. Yes. Yes. Yeah. That should be enforced. Like that's something that, I mean if we really want to do this government or this country rather as a service or government, should actually be saying that to the people like this is one way we can make our country stronger. Yeah. If we have less ideologues, we have less people that are completely connected to one narrative and we'll fight to the nail. You know, like you see, it's like Twitter, Twitter political battles. I mean, there's so many of those where it's like, God, boys, let it go. Yes, so one world everybody, whatever's getting after it. So it's so minute to go you asked so how to start. Yeah. You start down this path. Imagine this. So you're teaching kindergarten, right? And said the kids are off. I'll play and doing the thing. And you say, hey kids, come on over to the story rug and they all gather around and they sit cross-legged there. And Joe, you say, guys, little Johnny over here, you know, he just followed the rules and ended up hurting little Susie. Did Johnny do the right thing or the wrong thing? And the kids kind of think about it. Well, he followed the rules. So he must have been doing the right thing. Another kid, no, but he hurt little Susie. He can't be doing the right thing. So what do you think guys is, does following the rules always always the right thing to do? Well, the real question is who's making the rules? Well, yeah, sure. Why are they making these rules? And if you can get kids asking, you know, come into that conclusion, you've started them down a path towards growing morally that's going to serve them well. So you can get kids interested in philosophical questions. Right. Is Nemo real or is he fake? I watched this wonderful video online from a dad who's in the street epistemology. Have you heard of this? No. So there's a bunch of philosophers and people who are kind of inspired by philosophy who go out under the streets with a cell camera and they walk up to somebody and just say, hey, you mind if I ask you some questions? And if they give consent, you say, all right, I'm going to, and then they ask them, you know, tell me about a cherished belief. And then they ask gentle clarifying questions to kind of explore that belief. And in a very non-competitive way, they get people to think really deeply about their values. It's a fascinating process and it was inspired by Socrates, but it's kind of a phenomenon out there, hundreds of people all over the world who do this. They're just out there having deep conversations about right and wrong and about core values with strangers. So they just have to find someone who's willing to engage for, what imagine is it's going to take a long time? Well, a lot of times they put a five minute clip up on YouTube and you can you can browse them and you know, the really minutes is pretty quick. It is. And if you're really good at it, you can actually have a deeply meaningful conversation in that time. Really? Yeah, you can. And some of the people out there doing really good stuff. That's not be good at it because my good conversations take fucking forever. I don't feel like five minutes in them barely even known the person. Also, I know I have time. So I'm just sort of slowly, but I also don't want anybody to be on their heels. I don't want anybody like defensive. Right. I want you opening up. So I want you to be comfortable and you're really good at that. And so this street epistemology video I come across online, right? It's like, it's a dad. It's a guy who does read epistemology and he decides to use it on his two daughters who are like seven and five. He sits him down with the moles strawberries and he says, Hey kids, um, do you think Nemo is real? You know, Nemo the character from the fish is the fish from the Disney thing. And one of them goes, yes. And the other one goes, no. And they said, well, why do you think yes? And one of them gives a reason. Why do you think no? Because fish don't talk. And these two kids are like actually working through what it is to think clearly about reality. And you're watching them like their minds just start to open right in front of your eyes. It's a brilliant little demonstration of the power of of conversation about what's real, what isn't what's good, what's bad, what's what's knowledge and what's mere opinion. These are the questions philosophers have been exploring for thousands of years. And if we have even kids exploring them from a young age, we could rebuild our society in a beautiful beautiful way. Yeah. And sometimes it's just one good teacher that poses a question to you that pop I had a teacher in seventh or eighth grade, not exactly sure which, but I was in Boston. I was in Jamaica Plain and this is this crappy school with this one teacher who is a science teacher, really interesting guy. And he was talking about space and he said, do you really want your head to hurt? He'll just go outside and stare at the night sky and think about the fact that there's no end to that. But there's no end just imagine just keep just go as far as your brain can imagine. And there's way more than that. You can't imagine how far space goes. Very cool. And he planted that in my head when I was, I guess, 13 or something and I remember going, oh shit, wow. Like it goes on forever. And I remember like laying in bed at night thinking that like I never thought about that way. You just suddenly feel the world, you get vertigo with the sense that the new space was big, you know, but it was just inconvenient to spend so much time dwelling on it. There was no reason for it. The world was confusing enough. I didn't really have to, I looked, oh, look at the stars. I didn't ever think, oh, there's literally no end to this. That's a powerful story. I love that. So Carl Sagan, right? The late astrophysicist was really good at getting people to think about the vastness of space. How tiny our little blue planet is. And the humility that comes with that and the sense of perspective and the sense of awe and the sudden just wonder that comes with that. I think it can be transformative. And Sagan is one of my heroes as well. Yeah. Demon haunted world is fantastic. Oh man. Yes. Yeah. He's, he's one of the original science educators. Like it was a, what's the best way to say it? Science, populist guy, public intellectual. Yeah. But there's like, not, I don't want to use a term propaganda, but it's like he propagated. He, he, he was so entertaining and interesting with the way he discussed the things billions, billions, millions of stars. Also a big time cannabis advocate, by the way. Was he? Oh, yeah. I didn't love the weed. Who would have thought guy was in the space and smoking weed all time. I learned something new every day. Yeah. He was a huge cannabis advocate. But he was a guy and in with his work really changed the way people thought about space. Yeah. Change the way people thought about the cosmos and really. And my favorite way he did that was at the beginning of a book. He titled a little pale blue dots. Yes. So, uh, Segan was on the team, the NASA team that piloted the Voyager spacecraft, which made its way past Mars and Jupiter Saturn and Jupiter and way out there near Saturn's rings. He convinces the team to turn the Voyager spacecraft around and photograph Earth when, when Earth was just a tiny blue speck in the distance. And he caught this image of the Earth from the farthest reaches of the solar system. And and he says, think about that, that one pixel blue dot in that picture. Everything you've ever cared about has played out in that one little blue dot every war that's ever been fought on that blue dot every, every bit of suffering you've ever heard of every joy. Every civilization has lived or died on that little blue dot. Let that be an inspiration and a, and a source of humility for us all. I just love that back to humility. Yeah, I don't do anything more humility inspiring than space itself. Um, I've been to the keck observatory in Hawaii. Have you ever been up there? I've heard about that. I'd love to go sometime. I've been there a few times, but I got lucky once and when I mean by lucky, we caught it in a perfect day where there was nothing to block the stars. Like no light pollution. Right. Now, well, there's never light pollution. The way they have it set up is they have diffused lighting on the big island and it, it's because of the observatory. Yeah. Right. They make it so that the, the light pollution doesn't get all the way up to the, the keck observatory. But when you, when one time I got up there and it was a full moon and that was a mess. It was like, oh, you don't want to be up there in a full moon because the moon itself reflects the sun and it becomes a problem when you can't see the stars. Got it. You want to get up there when the moon is not out. Yeah. And then the stars are magnificent. I still to this day, sometimes to think about it when there's a nice star filled night. I'm like, yeah, this is okay. Yeah. This ain't shit compared to what I saw in Hawaii. You see, so I saw the full Milky Way. Like you see everything. It's a mate. There's photos of it. Jamie's sleeping in fine. The night sky from the keck observatory in Hawaii. You see that. You go through the clouds. That's what's interesting. It's up on top of it. Yes. It's above the cloud layer. So as we were driving, I was like, oh, no, like we picked a bad night. Like that's what it looks like. It really does look like that. Oh, man. That's gold. Can you go full screen with that? But I'm telling you, there's an ancient shit compared to being up there. That is spectacular. This is so, it's like, it's like a drawing. If you saw, if you were up there, it's so crazy that the way it looks makes you think you're in a spaceship. Wow. That's what it looks like. Oh, man. Look at that. It doesn't seem like like this is, how is it possible that all this is up there? And I don't see it. And so before electric lights, that my ancestors saw that every night, every night. And imagine how that would change your outlook on the world. Change the Mayans and change the Egyptians and all these different cultures that they look to the heavens for the patterns that they use to establish their cities. Like the Mayans in particular, they mirror the cosmos in their, in many constellations in their designs of their cities. Amazing. Yeah. And I mean, just the sheer awe that you would have in looking up at this thing that you didn't know what it was. I mean, and I is the spark that works so many minds right alive, right? Yeah. I've got a friend who teaches astronomy at Carnegie Mellon University. And she's on this big crusade to end light pollution or to dramatically reduce light pollution. I always struck me as this kind of cookie little project hers. But she's actually probably been to keck observatory. She's actually seen how awe inspiring the heavens can be. And she thinks that if all of us got to experience that, it would make us more enlightened and more tolerant or humble. I think that could be a real problem with our civilization is that for the most part, most people experience a tremendous amount of light pollution every day. Most people don't ever get to see stars like that. It's only people that live in extremely rural places. I mean, maybe if you live in the middle of Montana out in the middle of nowhere, your night sky looks like that. Most people don't see that. And I was listening to one of your podcasts with a sleep expert who talked about how electric light is messing with our sleep. Yeah, Dr. Matthew Walker. Yeah. Yeah. It's definitely doing that. It's messing with us in more ways than one. It's certainly messing with our concept of our perspective of our position in the universe. Our perspective is that we're on earth and that, you know, I gotta go to work. And this is it. And I'm doing this. And I'm doing that. And I think we get humble when we're around spectacular examples of nature's beauty, right? Like people that live near the ocean, for example, are more chill. And I think one of the reasons why they're more chill is like, how can you take yourself seriously when you're faced with this vast quantity of water that could just wash over your city and just, I mean, you're at the edge of this insane volume of water. And it's very... And the power of it in the waves that come in and redwood trees. Do you want to do that for me? Yes. Yeah. Like Mendocino up in Northern California, in your woods. Oh, is up Crescent City up near Southern Oregon, Oregon, California. Yeah. All that stuff. For me, it's the mountains. The mountains are the most awe-inspiring for me. Like Colorado, or places like that where you're up there. And it says, everything's so beautiful. It's just so pretty... It's like the most beautiful artwork you've ever seen, but it's nature. Especially on a sunny day after the rain when everything's vibrantly green and the clouds are parting. And you see the birds chirping and you're like, God, this is pretty. It's so pretty. Would you call that a spiritual thing? I think there's something spiritual about it in that it's humbling. And I think one of the aspects spirituality is humbling yourself in the face of the Lord. Like admitting that you are powerless and giving yourself into the divine. What is humbling yourself before God or humbling yourself before nature? I do treating those as one of the same things. Well, they're similar, right, in that there's like... Especially space. Because space is the nature here times infinity. Because that's really what it is. Like you're... When you're seeing those stars, those are stars that are the center of other solar systems. Another solar systems that contain other planets. Another planets that might have mountains. And those mountains might have streams at the bottom of them with birds and you know, alien beings. And it might be very simple. Like there might be an infinite number of those examples that you're seeing down here on earth. Because all throughout the sky. So it's that spiritual experience that you get when you do see a gorgeous lake. And you know, in a fish jump in an eagle fly times forever. Times infinity. Times what my science teacher and eighth grade was trying to explain to me. Yeah. Just never ending. And a lot of my non-believer friends are almost allergic to spirituality talk. But I actually think that there's a place for it in this world. Because there are things that words don't capture. We need to be able to direct our attention to them and try to cherish them properly. The non-believer friends that I have that don't like spiritual talk. It's either because they've been around too much of it where it's nonsense. There is a lot of nonsense spiritual talk. Fake yoga people that kind of deal. Or they've never done psychedelics. The people that have done psychedelics generally are more likely to be open-minded towards the possibility of some sort of a spiritual realm and spiritual thinking. And that there's something more to this. And that what what's going on with most religions is they're trying to figure out they're trying to grasp and put down on paper what these transcendent trans-sending experiences transcendent. Yeah. These experiences that take you out of the norm, whatever the trance is. Right. And that transcendent experiences are real. They can happen and they can happen because of love, you know, you could just have a moment in time where you're with a person and you're holding hands and just you feel like the world's a different place or the birth of a child or you're connected to the Redwood Forest. Yeah. Sometimes for some people, it's even near-death experiences bring about it. Yeah. But there's moments in this life where you kind of get it for a brief moment and then you just get sucked back into the drone of the grind of the day-to-day existence of being an ant. And the age, some of the ancient eastern philosophy traditions suggest that as soon as you try to fix those transcendent moments with words, you've already lost the game. Right. Right. So we somehow need to get past our idea that we can control these by with words that stand for things. That's a real problem with the psychedelic experiences that people can't put them in the words. You have tried, but they're terrible. They're just pale facsimiles. They're not the real thing. It's a shitty representation of the actual experience here making me want to do some experiments. You don't know? None. I have done none. Zero? Choir boy. How dare you? I know. Sorry. But I'm saying I'm ready to open my mind. Well, it's a real problem with illegality. If they were legal and they were readily available with trained qualified experts and professionals who are educated in correct dosages and how to administer them, we would have been way further off as a society. Those two things, right? Light pollution, if we eliminated all that and psychedelics were more readily available, it would completely transform the way human beings communicate with each other. That had a cognitive immunology principles applied. Yeah. But yeah. Cognitive immunology principles applied and also recognition of the established methods of alleviating physical stress to relax the mind, whether it's through yoga, meditation, exercise, mindfulness, all those different things that are absolutely real, but practice by a minuscule percentage of the population. Do you think of what percentage of the population actually practices those things? Even just the exercise part. Do you have numbers on this? I mean, what percentage of people regularly exercise? Let's guess. Let's do you and I guess. I'm going to say, let's go with America. What percentage of America regularly exercises, I'll say 25%. Yeah, I was going to guess close to that. I'll go a little higher. I'll say 35. Oh, you rebel. I love it. All right. Let's see. What percentage of America regularly exercises? 20 CDs. The CDC says fewer than one on four. So 22.9% met the federal. Well, that's different. What is that? I typed an exact question you said and what I gave me. It says that they meet the federal physical guidelines. It doesn't say about exercise. So they would have had to answer a question that says, do you exercise? What are the federal physical guidelines? Let's hear this. You have a shirt on that says the question is the answer. You like fact check people in real time, don't you? Yeah, well, it's fun. The CDC study 22.9% of adults nationally met the federal federal physical activity guidelines. The percentage varied widely by state from a low of 13.5% of Mississippi to high of 31.5%. You were spotted. You were spotted. You were spotted. Yeah, I took a wild guess. I always love Colorado. Those people get after it. Go to Boulder. Everybody looks great. Or off and hiking and shit. So how are the people in these states meeting these guidelines during the colder winter months? To endure activities. So what are the guidelines? Is it say what the guidelines are? No, not in this order. Let's try to find something that must be just a certain amount of regular activity. It's physical. We can get a good sense of it. So that must be what it means. This is almost what you were actually asking for here. Age adjusted percentages of adults 18 through 64 met both aerobic and muscle strengthening federal guidelines through leisure time physical activity by state. Okay. 25% in my state of home state of PA. Florida significantly lower than the U.S. average. Texas comes in greater but not significantly different from the U.S. average in California. It's significantly higher. Look at Mississippi Alaska too. Where is Mississippi? Is it fucked? They're fucked. 13.5. Oh, that's that's real low. Poor bastards. Yeah, well, you know, some people just don't encourage to do it. California is like a super encouraging exercisey place. But look Colorado super high. They're the they're the fucking kings. 32. Yeah. Oh, it is. Rhode Island's real high. 25 New Hampshire 30. And I would never guess that. I bet these numbers correlate well with just well-being and happiness. Idaho 31. I bet that's a lot of people just doing outdoor shit. Yeah. While yolming 28. Yeah, it's outdoor activities. Yeah. Well, those blue ones, that's the place you want to be in terms of like the numbers. Hawaii. Well, why you got? Well, is it show Hawaii Alaska? Oh, why is not that good? Well, it's okay. It's like Texas Alaska is out there kicking ass though throughout their hustling. Now, see, that's that's where you have to go. If you want to be surrounded by healthy, happy people. Yeah, you can always do it yourself wherever you are. That's true. Right. Yeah, it's easier to do it. I think like when you go to Boulder, Colorado, that's one of the places that I've gone, oh my God, everybody's so fit here. They're all like out there hiking and doing things. It's a very, I think like when terms to like do surveys of people who are outdoor active, Boulder is very high on the list. I do remember straying from my choir boy ways in Boulder, Colorado. And then, well, we're going to wave on a little bit and then headed up to the flatiron. Yes. Beautiful hike. Oh, my God. Yeah. Well, it's so gorgeous there. That's the thing. Like, I went to Boulder for the first time. I think it was like in the early 2000s, there was a jujitsu seminar that a friend of mine was doing on. I was working in Denver and he did a seminar in Boulder. So we drove up to Boulder. And I remember thinking, man, how pretty is it to live here? I know. Like, you can't help but be in awe. You're surrounded by gorgeous nature everywhere you look. Like, there's something substantial. Yeah. Yeah. Pittsburgh doesn't have that. I'm afraid. I love my community in Pittsburgh. And, uh, but a lot of cool people that got to get out west of for the inspiration Pittsburgh's a good size city. It's not too big. You know, it is. It's actually a really nice sense of community there. Well, how many people live in Pittsburgh? Well, the city itself, like only a quarter mill, but the metropolitan area one and a half. See, that's why I like it there. That's I think there's a healthy number that you could get to. Couple million people, whatever it is. When you get bigger than that, it's one of the things that I love about Austin in particular. It's like it's not, but it's really like crazy. Even if it grows like crazy, this is like a million people here. You know, and there's a million on the outside. So there's like two million overall in like the greater Austin area. Still got some charms. It ain't shit compared to LA in terms of traffic and overpopulation. It's like people here are still friendly. Yeah. They haven't looked at other human beings like a nuisance. And that's I think the same thing with Pittsburgh. Oh, yeah. That's it. That is true. Although I've told the newcomers to Pittsburgh sometimes don't feel welcomed right away. Pittsburgh has another thing going for it though, the cold weather, the cold weather makes a heartier people. Well, and maybe a little bit cranky or cranky. Yeah, a little angrier. Yeah. Not quite as active. I'm definitely get cranky, you know, February, March, April. It's not good for you. You're catching me in a good month because yeah, spring's here. Well, I mean, it's like folks that live in the Pacific Northwest tend to be a little bit more depressed. And there's a real physiological aspect to that. They're not getting any vitamin D. It's terrible for you. Seasonal effective. Seasonal effective. I mean, vitamin D can help you a little bit, but really, you need sun. Yeah. You know, you don't just taking a vitamin is okay, but there's a feeling that you get where there's a reward that your body's like, yes, when that sun hits your face. Oh, my goodness. Yeah, you're supposed to be out there asking and sun beams. Yeah. It's like, oh, you're supposed to do that. It's good for your body. Yeah. And of course we live indoors so much now that we don't get enough of that. So then we go out. We put fucking sunscreen on disaster. Yeah. There's a lot of things that we in as like, when you think about the patterns that we follow as a society, it's not good for happiness. It's not like we overwork, we under sleep, we each shit, we don't exercise for the most part. Just look at that number. Three quarters of us are not exercising. That's nuts. Well, and obesity levels are crazy high and headed in the wrong direction. Yeah. And that was clearly exposed by the results of the pandemic, right? Like the people that suffered the most were the obese folks. I think you're right. 78% of the people that were hospitalized or died from COVID. Wow. Would you call that a comorbidity factor or something like this? Is that what the Is it one of your color? Yeah. It's a comorbidity. It's the most common comorbidity factor. Wow. It's awful because it's avoidable. You know, that's one of the most awful ones, but it's so hard. Well, what if we built a culture though where it wasn't so hard to get good exercise? What where it wasn't so hard to have good deep conversations? Right. We could do that. It's I think the way to do that is what we're doing right now talking about it and making an attractive thing. And I had a guy come up to me yesterday. And sometimes some people come up to me. It's overwhelming. You know, like this guy was like, he grabbed my hand and shook my hand. He's just very thankful and told me how much it helped him and how much it helps people. How much the show is? And he's, yeah, these conversations. He's like, please keep doing it. You know, you made me change the way I eat. You changed the way I exercise. And you know, my wife is the same way. We're out. We do things now. We eat healthy. It's good to hear. You know, yeah. And we love like listening to intelligent conversations and where, you know, we're getting books on tape or doing things so much differently. And you told me like a few years ago, we started listening and just changed this life. Man, keep doing what you're doing. But it's a very, you know, I got on what to do when that happens. I kind of freaked. It sounds like it sounds crazy, but I kind of forget people listening. Like I get locked into the conversation like you and I are just talking. It's just you and me. And I'm peripherally aware that other people listening. That might be one of the reasons you're so successful because people want to hear good conversations and learn from them. And you're fully present. A lot of times people you're in the conversation and they're half there and half checking their phones. Yeah, that's not good. When you're here, you're completely here. You have to be. But it's also you got to kind of not think about the fact that people are listening. You know, like sometimes Jamie now have a conversation. A lot of people are talking about this and people are talking about that. I'm like, oh, I got to get out of here. I don't think about it. Because if I do think about what people are thinking and saying and it's like, then you're going to think about that while you're doing it. And then paralysis by analysis. You'll get stuck. And then you also start thinking like maybe I should change and maybe I should be more like what they want or maybe I should, you know, be you got to accept criticism because it's people's perspectives. But you can't take too much of it in. And you got to kind of like know the people who are watching because you want to do a really good job. You don't want to be lazy. You can't just do it for yourself because then you'll have a lazy conversation. You have to know the people are listening. But don't think about it. kind of like know the people are watching because you want to do a really good job. You don't want to be lazy. You can't just do it for yourself because then you'll have a lazy conversation. You have to know the people are listening but don't think about them. It's like this weird dance that you have to do to do a podcast. So I mean we want people to be candid and open and willing to try out things in conversation and yet we live in this cancel culture world where people will jump down your throat with a slightest transgression. Yep and they'll take things and decide that they're slight transgression even if you didn't necessarily mean what you're like especially when you're tweeting something right because it's so much as open to interpretation. And that's a terrible way of communicating period. You know what we were talking about your friend that wrote the book about kindness about most people are kind. There's an aspect to this when you're not experiencing the person's social cues, you're not looking them in the eye, you're just tweeting or texting or emailing each other, whatever you're doing. It's so impersonal. It's so easy to be a shithead. It's so hard to be a shithead in person. How many times have you had a conversation with the person? You know, hey I remember when you said this and that and you're like, oh did I? I'm sorry. I didn't mean. And then you see them relax. But if you were just going back and forth you'd be like fuck you I didn't do that. I guess you did. I got you memory sucks. You're fucking memory sucks. And then you see it's worse than ever. Where's if you're in person, you know, you know, I don't remember that. Tell me what happened. And then they'll tell you and you're like, well I remember you did this. And then I go, oh yeah I did do that. And then you go, well we both kind of fucked up. Do we? Yeah. Yeah. All right. I'm sorry. But you're not, you're not whoever you were in your worst case scenario either. Like the worst experience that you've ever had. Yeah. I mean when you when you have a conversation to win the momentary battle of ideas or whatever. Yeah. A lot of times you're selling your relationship down the river. Yep. Right. You're selling yourself short too because you know your piece of shit for doing that. You know it's a terrible way to talk to people and I did it most of my life. I did it forever. And I think I stopped doing it as I got kind of older that helped just get more maturity, more recognizing when I felt good or bad after conversations and why and being sort of ruthlessly introspective. So as I got in my 30s I started realizing when I was doing wrong. But then I think that pig when we started in the podcast because as I started the podcast it made me go, why am I doing? Like why do I talk this way or why do I think this way? And like what is like this is all accidental but it's been the most spectacular education in the way my own mind works. And I think a lot of people are listening to you and realizing that this openness you have, this willingness to listen and learn and to that if they follow you in that they can become better people. But they don't have to follow me. Just do it. Just try it. Just follow your thinking. It's obviously not my idea. It's a really common idea. It's just not that well adopted in practice. It's because of how to have these long form conversations and thousands of them. So kind of riff on this for a few years. So I'm a philosopher and philosophers for a long time have engaged in this really rough and tumble form of idea testing. So you get trained pretty early. If somebody comes after your idea and comes after it hard you don't take it personally. They're attacking your idea and not you and the idea. You and your ideas are different things. So when you embrace that ethic you can go in for some serious as belief testing and idea testing. But when you're really going after each other's ideas you can spot a lot of the flaws in ideas rapidly. But the problem is you can lose your friends. Sometimes you have to lose your friends. There are certain friends that you have to lose. Sometimes you do. Now I mentioned Socrates earlier. The ancient Greek philosopher he was so good at this. He was so good at using questions to gently make people realize, oh my god, all this stuff have been saying it doesn't make any sense. And he embarrassed so many powerful people in ancient Athens that they sentenced him to death and made him drink hemlock. Yeah, that's a real problem. So we philosophers have been getting ourselves into trouble. Well it's just a long time. It takes a long time to steer someone away from their own ideology and their own way of thinking. And some people are never going to steer away. So if that person is your friend obviously in Socrates' case it was worse because it wasn't as friends. It was the powerful leaders. But if you are in contact with the person and you're trying to get them to shift the way they think and behave it's extremely difficult unless they're motivated to do so. And your approach where you take the time to really have a long conversation where you really understand just, I mean from what I've seen of your approach you're just really good at getting people to open up and share their worldview. And you ask the clarifying questions that get people to do that. And a lot of times if you just get people to open up they'll start to see where their their own worldview can use a little bit of modification themselves. And your approach is much gentler than Socrates was. Well the thing is that this is one of the reasons why I want people to wear headsets is because this is very unusual where your volume of your voice is the same as the volume of my voice and it's in our ears. And all of that's controlled by the soundboard. Well it's not just that. It's just the fact that you have headphones on. You're aware that we're one. It has that kind of psychological effect. Right. Because it's harder to talk over each other if you hear the person's voice like literally in your ear. Fascinating. So the other thing is it's real easy if you don't have a set thing that like this is what I'm going to do from 12 p.m. to 3 p.m. or at whatever you have scheduled. If you don't have that it's really easy to go. Yeah we've talked enough. Let's get the fuck out of here. I've got to go eat. I'm hungry. I've got to check my text messages. I've got to do this. I've got to do that. That's what we do most of the time. So to just sit down in a podcast format in a room. You're getting a candy time. Yeah in a soundproof room. So in the soundproof room and you have this dedicated time period of three hours where you're just going to talk. Maybe we should all do this. It would be very beneficial to a lot of people to do it sometimes. It's very hard if you have a regular job to find this kind of time. To do it every day. So I got to have the privilege of doing something similar when you're a philosophy professor. You basically go into a classroom and you just get to talk big ideas with a group of 15, 25 kids for an hour. And it's a dedicated time. Cell phones are off and you're engaged in really intense listening and learning from one or another. Similar but not quite as long for them. Yeah it's similar. It's all kind of doing the same thing. There's an exploring of your own humanity when you talk to people because we've all had conversations where we didn't do such a good job. Conversations are like everything else. It's like playing a game. You get better at it the more you do it. If you're playing chess or whatever it is, you get better at it if you do it often. And conversations are the same thing. I call the philosophical process of testing ideas, the reason given game. So back when I was teaching critical thinking, so when you teach critical thinking using a standard textbook, you basically teach kids like the 101 ways that reasoning can go wrong. And you say this is a fallacy and that's a fallacy and that's a fallacy. So be on the lookout for all these fallacies kids. And then what the kids realize is they end up going, oh fuck man, thinking is a minefield. I don't want to do that. Right. It is the opposite intended effect. It was complete. So I was doing this. I was turning my kids off my students off of critical thinking. And then I came across this idea that mine is having immune systems and that we can actually use them to spot mine parasites. And I said, what do you think guys? Does this make sense? That mines can get infected by ideas and they were like mines infected? Do you mean brains? And I'm like, no, I mean, can you mine to become infected? And I was like, yeah, which of your beliefs are mine defections and which ones are legit? And they were like, damn. And I said, all right, well here's what we're going to do. I want you to spend the next two weeks researching how the body's immune system works. And then we're going to try to do that for our minds. And we threw out the textbook. We took a totally new approach and they realized, hey, this idea testing thing, it's kind of like a game. I said, all right, well here's the game. I'm going to write up the rules. You're all players. Here, the kind of moves you can make. You can ask questions, you can pose reasons, you can pose counter reasons. And if you do that in a structured, disciplined way, a lot of times you'll deepen your understanding and sometimes you'll get the answer. So I actually think one of the best things we can do to strengthen mental immune systems is to teach kids how to play the reason given game. I think it's a far no way better approach to teaching critical thinking. Because otherwise it's too daunting. Otherwise too daunting or you absorb the critical thinking skills and you just weaponize them for your ideology. Right. That is a problem. And the other problem is that particularly for young men, young men seek to win things. They seek to win conversations because every win validates them. We're competitive. Yeah. But it also is like if you need validation, it's a great way to do that. Because it's common. So it's a common thing you engage in. If you don't have enough personal validation, if you don't have enough, if you're not looking at your life as being successful as you'd like it to be, you're constantly looking to get some validation and conversations take place all the time. And if you think you have to validate yourself by tearing somebody else down, you just become the person nobody wants to talk to. It's also just doesn't work. It's like, you know what it's like? It's like name dropping. You know what people name drop? It doesn't impress anybody because everybody goes, oh, there he goes again. But it just doesn't work. It's a weird one where people do it like, who the fuck it's impressed by name dropping? I was hanging out with Leonardo Caprio. People were like, what? Where'd you? No one could basically like, can you just label yourself somebody who's insecure and you have to have to name drop? Exactly. No one gets excited by that. But it's a thing that people do because they think people are going to like it. And so you could respond the same way when somebody basically tries to tear down your idea by acting superior and just smog more smarter than you are. And you're so insecure. You have to tear me down to build yourself out? Exactly. When someone insults you instead of changing your mind by giving you a better example of something, be positive. Give me an alternative. It's so hard for people to accept better versions of ideas than the one they're currently harboring. It's just, well, so we're going to learn how to do that. So one of the things my, so I'm founding a non-profit think tank to teach people how to do just that. And how's that work? So I love that term. Think tank. Think tank. You know what a fucking think tank is? Like how's the think tank go, Jamie? I have ideas, but I have no idea. That's what I'm saying. That's what I'm saying. But if you think about how many times you and I have these conversations and you've been in the room while people have the think tank is like one of them things where it's like, oh, what's the fuck is the thing? I think it's basically that though. Yeah, hang out. I'm a part of the think tank. Hey, you're here in the tank with Jamie. You guys think together that's a think tank. I want to be part of the think tank. That's my new goal. It's basically just a bunch of people who like to think and research stuff and do you guys get together as an email list? This is a brand new non-profit. So I'm just starting to bring together the researchers. Okay. We're going to help make it happen. It's called the cognitive immunology research collaborative. Cersei. Oh, short. Cognitive immunology research collaborative. Right. Like that. Right. So I think if we take this as a credit method, I mentioned before. This idea testing kind of a structured way. use something of your deft soft touch terms of gentle questioning to get people to open up. That's kind of step one. Then you ask the kind of questions and say, well, how do you really know that what Cheers A& is true? What's your source on that? And are you sure that that source is reliable? That's kind of step two. And then at step three, you kind of gently nudge people towards an alternative way of thinking about it that serves their own needs even better than the beliefs they had. That makes sense. It does make sense. I did that really fast. No, no, no, no, you make a lot of sense. It's a good structure. I was thinking immediately on that. Oh man, I left it back to the hotel. I was thinking immediately when you were saying that, that very structure is what's lacking in a lot of these really frivolous arguments that you see on social media, particularly on Twitter. They're not doing that at all. They're not doing any of those steps. Exactly. Yeah. You know what it's like? It's like people who are fighting and they don't know how to do martial arts. They're just swinging wild and some waffle house parking lot. You know? I'm not familiar with this phenomenon. But you know what I'm saying? There's a difference between someone who understands technique and strategy and martial arts. Versus someone who's just... I'm sure you've seen a drunken brawl. Those late night McDonald's drunken brawls that are on YouTube. And to the well-trained philosophical mind, half the conversation's going on right now. Feel like just drunken brawls. Drunken brawls. Or like bullies. Like an asshole is being a bully to some person, you know? And that person is trying to bully them back and they just fuck you. Fuck you. Play more. And online. Yeah. Canceling. A lot of it's like that and it's so unfortunate and so unnecessary and so destructive. It's also bad for you. It's bad for your mental diet. You know? Absolutely. That's a big part of what is happening with people. You're filling your mind up with this kind of discourse and it becomes commonplace. And when it becomes commonplace, it's like that is what you're... That's your go-to move. I wonder if you're... That sounds to me like you're on to something really, really profound. Which is that if our information diets involve disrespectful flame wars, our minds go downhill fast. Alan Levena, it's put it best. He said there's... Everyone kind of widely understands that bad food processed food is bad for you. Right. But he looked at social media and he was like, this is like processed information. This is very similar. Like cheese whizz for the mind. Ex-bingo. Cheese whizz for the good though. Mark, cheese whizz for the most episode of those. Where else we should be eating health food like Terry Black's barbecue. That's right. I don't know if this is everything you should eat that every day, but you definitely eat it when you want barbecue. It's just... There's a smart way to nourish your own mind. And the smart way to nourish your own mind is not going and looking for arguments to win on Twitter. Yes. That shit is not good for anybody. Yes. And so, I mean, deep heartfelt, mutually respectful conversations about the things that matter most, that's what we all need more of in this day and age. For sure. Yeah. So I have this little sort of side hustle. I'm a philosophical counselor. So people who are struggling with existential questions that often underlie their depression or other things basically say, I'm trying to figure out what they have to do with my life. You know, Andy, you study philosophy, can you help? Right. And man, people are just so hungry for these conversations. They just want a space where somebody listens to them and that helps them clarify their own thinking about right and wrong and what's important and what's not important. And man, if we just... I mean, everybody can get this from a good friend if you just make the time to practice it. Well, you're also experiencing healthy user bias, right? Because people are coming to you that actually want to know what's wrong and how to handle things. Whereas many people have never even... They never even internalized this to the point where they've tried to figure out what could be done better. Fair enough. That is true. So you got to want to change. You got to want to be happy. You got to want to make the effort to experience some light that comes through the clouds. You know, if you're in that Pacific Northwest constant gray blanket over here, you're like, the world fucking sucks, man. I don't know what you're talking about. We got to burn it all down, man. So what's the cognitive and analog of the Pacific Northwest and their gray sky? Well, those fucking people are so depressed. And if you look up there, they're always riding, right? Like over the last year. Everything ramped up. Yeah, it ramped up so hard up there. And I think one of the reasons why it ramped up so hard over there is they're already depressed. And then on top of that, you have this economic despair that came for the year or everything was shut down in the COVID. Yeah. And then you also have like this, you know, you have a high degree of people that are, you know, fresh out of the universities where they're being taught these sort of radical leftist ideologies and then they try to apply those in real life. And then they want to take down all these businesses and they're not doing like one of things that I was saying. They had that, um, the thing in Seattle where they had the occupied zone. Yes. They had this area where they called again. Oh, free zone. Some some some some some fucking ridiculous thing where they basically said no cops allowed here. Yeah. Remember they said there actually wasn't called that though. They got mad people were calling it that. Listen, other people called it whatever it was. So this is an area where and they took over this whole area like six blocks and they weren't letting people in there and they're smashing windows and taking over stores and yes, the autonomous zone. But meanwhile, I'm like, this is a good example of people not thinking ahead and just thinking like children because if you do this and you decide you're going to take over all these buildings and you're going to smash these windows and you're going to occupy these streets. What you're not recognizing is you didn't build any of this shit. You didn't earn any of this shit. You're playing by the rules of the brute. You're going in and you're deciding that you can take over this area and you are opening yourself up for someone deciding to do that to you with greater force and greater power. You're becoming a warlord. That's what you're doing. Yes. So here's a lot of this was motivated by the by the police shootings of young black men, right? Yes. Why people might be really furious and upset at what they were with sure. Sure. And yet when they conclude that we have to create an autonomous zone with no cops allowed, that's clearly turned up to be a bad idea. Well, they started doing the exact same things that a dictator would do. They were beating people up for filming things. They got shot there. They were enforcing their own rules and law with force and violence. So lots of bad, lots of bad ideas. All gone. A gang up there. Well, there's a lot of confirmation bias, right? They wanted only ideas to be accepted that made it look like they were doing the right thing. There wasn't a lot of people thinking about like, hey, guys, let's play this out. How does this end? So see, you're calling attention to a really interesting aspect of proper idea testing. So ideas when they take root in our minds often create behaviors which can affect our well-being. Right? So one of the things you have to be mindful of before you buy into an idea is what might happen if you do, right? How are you going to affect the future if you buy into this idea? So that's kind of, I call those the downstream consequences of an idea. Once you latch onto them, they start to affect the world, right? But scientists have always looked not at the downstream consequences of ideas but at the upstream evidence for the ideas. So ideas like stand in the middle of a stream. There's upstream evidence, downstream consequences. And the religions of the world say, I believe this because it makes me a better person. You're looking at the downstream consequences of, say, God belief, right? Right. Scientists are saying, meanwhile, but there's no evidence for God exists because they're looking only at the upstream evidence or it's lack. I'm actually, it turns out that if you go and take a philosophical deep dive on this issue, it turns out that both sides have a piece of the truth. Science is right that upstream evidence matters. And religion is right that the downstream consequences of our beliefs matter. We actually need to test ideas and pay attention to both. We need to be mindful of both. And in principle, this insight could allow us to adjudicate the centuries-long dispute between science and religion and arrive at a concept of responsible believing that ends this huge cultural divide. That's chapter six of the book. How is it possible, though, that science and religion could come together and have some sort of mutually agreed upon acceptance of reality, when they both have to be able to let go of the ideas that dialogue reveals to be problematic? Right. But science doesn't have ideas that they're holding in terms of what dialogue reveals to be problematic. Like science is just data. Science is data and testing. And then a bunch of people that have a background in this discipline examining the results and hopefully, especially to the layperson like myself, relaying an accurate synopsis of what the testing has revealed. Right. Well, it turns out, even scientific idea testing pays attention to sort of the downstream logical consequences of an idea. So even mathematics. So there are mathematical claims or equations where if you assume they're true and you follow up the consequences you end up in a contradiction. Oh. If you assume they're true. Right. So one way to prove something in mathematics is to assume that it's true and then see if you can derive a contradiction. Okay. If it turns out you can derive a contradiction, then you've just shown that it's false. Right. Because no truth should generate a contradiction. So that's called the ancient Hata word, Latin word for this, reductio, reductio ad absurdil. So if you can reduce something to absurdity, you get rid of the thing that led to the absurdity. Okay. And that's an example of how even the most mathematically rigorous scientists will sometimes look at the downstream consequences of a claim because it pay it leads to a contradiction. It can't be right. Mm hmm. It leads to meaning downstream of the idea. You end up with a contradiction. So even scientists don't just look at upstream data or upstream evidence. They're also to some degree mindful of what would our situation be like if we bought into this? What would be the downstream effects? Mm hmm. That makes sense. Yeah. And a lot more attention to downstream effects in science than we're led to believe. Now some scientists can do their thing saying, I'm going to prove this to be true or I'm going to prove this to be false. And I don't care what happens to the world if everybody believes it. But I'm actually saying, what wisdom requires that we look at upstream evidence and downstream consequences and consider them all. But if a scientist is just examining data and they want to prove something to be true or false, they can't really take into consideration what the consequences of proving something to be true or false are. Don't they have to just, I mean, because if they do that, then it's all open to interpretation and open to influence. And so then human personality and societal concepts and ideas, culturally relevant concepts come into play. Like, how does a culture fear about things? Is the culture, is it influenced any way by religion? So many factors come into play when you're not just looking at hard data. Oh, data. Well, yeah. I mean, I think there's an illusion that scientists live in this kind of bubble where they can focus purely on data and not be affected by their confirmation bias, not be affected by social pressures. Well, here's an example. Or here's a good example, a most extreme example, Oppenheimer. Oppenheimer in the Manhattan Project, right? Yeah, good example. Might be the best, right? Because that was a thing that they kind of had to do. But yet when it was detonated, it was such an extreme event. I'm sure you're aware of Oppenheimer quoting the Bhagavad Gita when it happened, which is one of my favorite videos of all time because he talks about it. And you see this super intelligent man who is contemplating the results of his own work and saying, oh my God, what I am, I am behold death, the destroyer of worlds. Wow. And of course, Einstein, who was part of the same group of scientists who understood that atomic weapons were possible, wrote a letter to the president saying, hey, you know what? You got to know that atomic bombs are possible. We understand the science behind it. For years afterwards, after the atomic bomb was invented, Einstein said that might have been the biggest mistake in my life. Yeah. Even though it helped us win World War II. Yeah, it's a great example of the possible consequences of just following the data and the science. If you have a goal, and here's the goal, the goal is to figure out a way to split atoms in a weapon and detonate it. And this is the goal. Okay, well, we're just trying to figure out how to make a weapon. Okay. But then the weapon gets used. And the genies out of the bottle. And when the genies out of the bottle, then hundreds of thousands of people instantaneously get obliterated. And then there's mutually assured self destruction that somehow another stops us from using it again. Right. Because the Soviets haven't pointed at us and the Chinese haven't pointed at us and we haven't pointed at them like fuck. Like what a terrible way to ensure peace. the worst way where you're both holding a gun at each other. Yeah. Well, and I mean, there's some serious downsides to the development of nuclear weapons, right? I mean, possible obliteration of, yeah. And we've come close at least twice, right? Very close twice to accidentally starting nuclear wars. I know the Cuban missile crisis and there was another one that was an accidental like there was a, there was some sort of a systems glitch and they thought that missiles were en route and they had a decision to make and they decided not to do anything and it turns out it wasn't, yeah. It wasn't real. And some Russian guy decided not to push the button and it was his, his refusal to push the button even though the flock of geese that had triggered the radar or whatever it was actually, he might have saved us. I think there's more than one of those that's been now and I'm thinking, I think this at least two or three of those moments throughout history where we almost fucked up. Yeah. So, so yeah, I mean, in a way, I mean, the entire story is a validation that we need to pay attention to the downstream effects of the beliefs we have. I mean, to have a truly, so in the book I basically say, let's set aside our political differences. Let's set aside our religious differences. Let's investigate together what responsible believing looks like. Let's come up with this shared standards that make good sense to us. Let's apply them and let the chips follow where they may. It may be that your religion, aspects of religion have to be modified. It may be that science will actually have to develop more sensitivity to the kind of effects they're having on the world. But we can't continue to indulge in irresponsible thinking or just assume that we're thinking responsibly without investigating the matter philosophically and coming up with better answers. Now, when you put together a book like this, do you have like an end goal? Are you hoping that people adopt it as sort of a guidebook? Are you hoping that it just spurs critical thinking and gets people interested and explore? Have an end goal. Are you hoping that people adopt it as sort of a guidebook? Are you hoping that it just spurs critical thinking against people interested in exploring ideas and more objective and analytical way? That's a big part of it. It's not a simple how-to-how-to book. I'm still still a whole lot of scientists who need to understand what cognitive immunology is and understand that it's about 60 years of evidence for the mind's immune system. It's out there. I can talk about it if you like. Is it why openly accepted or is there debate? It's only begun to be debated because I've coined the term cognitive immunology. I've connected the dots and basically said the science is coming. I was on a call with about two dozen scientists a couple days ago. They were like, damn Andy, yes, the science we need to build out the science. Let's go. How can I become part of your thing? It's a great term. It really is. When you say it, it makes you apply it to your own thinking and you go, oh yeah, that is what it is. I think it's dead right. Not only, we know that our bodies had to develop immune systems to avoid falling prey to pathogens. It turns out our minds had to evolve mental immune systems to avoid falling prey to stupid ideas. The wrong idea could get you killed. You can still get you killed. We all have some aversion to some bad ideas. We're all pretty good at weeding out right from wrong truth from falsehood. But we can all get a hell of a lot better. In fact, I would venture to say that our mental immune systems are functioning at a fraction of their capacity. And here's the true test. How many people in your life would you call deeply wise? POOO! A handful. A handful. Yeah. And so I know a lot of fucking really smart people. And everybody else has worth to do to get wiser. Yeah, I know some really smart people that are fucking dumb, you know, or compromised or mentally immune companies. Yes, mentally immune compromise or enchanted by the spell of the ego. That's the problem as well. Ego is a major disruptor of good mental. I've talked to some brilliant people on this very podcast that you listen to their thoughts and what they're trying to say. And you go, oh my God, see what you're doing. But I see where you're getting it. You're falling into a pit. There's a pitfall there. There's a thing that's happening. Yeah. And it's hard to understand and explain. I mean, if you have one foot in one of these pitfalls, it can be hard to see it. Yeah, it's like I think you have to done it yourself to see it in other people too. It's like one of those things like, oh, I could see myself doing that. Yeah. There's a, I think, I mean, one of the takeaways for me is that none of us has a perfectly well functioning mental immune system. Every single one of us harbors falsehoods, false ideas. And every single one of us turns away some true ones. But if we can get better at spotting and removing the bad ideas, our mental immune systems get stronger. Right. But we're not born with well functioning mental immune systems. Think about the six year old little girl who believe in the truth. Very true. So true. Can I say truth, very? I do. You need to coin that phrase to let that trademark. Let me try. I like that. I like the truth fair. I think I meant, okay, I meant the tooth fairy. What does it mean about four year olds and six year olds that they believe their parents when they tell them the tooth fairy? You said tooth fairy that's okay. That time you got it right. Tooth fairy. It's like it's haunting you right now. And I can't. You've got a mind parasite. Yeah. I like the truth fairy though. Truth fairy is pretty cool. So the, I think the fact the kids are so gullible. Yeah, instead of lying to them about someone dropping off money for their teeth, maybe they should get some money for telling the truth. I'm waiting. Oh, I got a story on that. There's a truth fairy. Okay. Right. Like Little Monica, you told the truth. I'm going to leave a little money under your pillow. The truth fairy came rewarded you. You've just, you've just made this like given substance to this. That's a good idea. Honestly, like a little kid, like how did this get broken? How about we trademark it together? Yes. No, you can have it. Yeah. It's yours. You put meat on the bones. Yeah, but it's good. There's something that you just get out there. Get it out there. The truth fairy. I like it. So check it out. My younger son. I take him to a Christmas party at his daycare center when he's little. And there's a guy in a Santa suit. And so far his mom has insisted Santa Claus exists. Right. She doesn't want to deprive him of the magic of Santa Claus. Of course. So we've been telling this kid Santa Claus exists. Like my kid checks out this guy in the Santa suit and then he disappears for a couple minutes and he comes back and he says, hey dad. I said, yeah, what's up? And he said, I don't think that's really Santa Claus. I said, why is that? He said, I just looked outside. There's no sleigh or reindeer. I'm like, out of boy. I said, that's my little critical thinker. You go boy. Yeah, I remember having explained to my kids that these are not real Santa Claus. This is someone dressing up like Santa Claus because it's fun. Not the real Santa Claus. The real Santa Claus. Nobody else sees them. And I remember them going, oh, I smell bullshit. See, they're mentally immune systems are stronger than we really like. Slowly but surely you have to, I just fucking hate the idea of it altogether. I was like, listen kid, I'm buying you these presents. You get you these presents because we love you and we want you to be happy. I don't think you need to lie and think there's some magical person that's sliding down your fucking chimney. In fact, you're probably undermining your own credibility. You are most definitely and it's more common than not that you do that. I mean, who doesn't tell their kids about Santa Claus other than folks that don't practice that religion? You know? Can I tell you another story? I'm following the same kid. This is from the opening pages of the book. So my kids went to school, to day preschool, at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh. Oh, is that the same one? The same place where the- Where Barry Weiss, her family was from there as well. Oh, she's a Pittsburgh. Yeah. Yeah, I'm sure your listeners all remember the horrific shooting of the Tree of Life. This is just a few blocks away from where I live. So my kids went to daycare in the same building. And one day, my, I think four-year-old son Kai comes out. My pack him in the car, Buckle in his Buckle and into his seatbelt and he said, I say, how's school buddy? He said, fine, we met God. I hit my wife and I look at each other and go, go like, whoa, what? Huh? Yes, I'd hold a cow, kiddo. And he said, he said, yeah, God came in and he gave me a high five and then he left. It's no big deal, Dad. So we make game queries. And we ask his teacher, like, what, what? God came to visit you. And she thought about it. She said, oh, she said, the rabbi who's got a big beard, he stopped it. He stopped it. I introduced him as a man of God. And he connected the dots, right? Oh, man of God. That's hilarious. God in mail form. Right. Wow. Yeah. So I mean, talk about pattern or eagerness to find patterns, right? The guy had a beard. He was described as man of God. Must be God. The guy always has a beard. I guess why would God shave? Wouldn't eat. Yeah. I don't know. I don't know. You don't do things. It looks distinguished. Well, it kind of does. But if I see someone with big crazy long beard, I usually think they're either a special forces guy or some crazy person or homeless guy. Yeah. Most of the people that I know that have big crazy beers are kind of psycho. I know a few philosophers who actually guess they qualify in both counts. You have been, how many people have long beards that are normal? Like God had a long beard. But all the other people, if you look at the ancient depictions of religious figures, very few had a long distinguished beard. Like doesn't God have a, almost always have a long distinguished beard? Is that to signify age? Like what is that? Wisdom age wisdom. Maybe. So why is he has a stupid beard that he gets all his food in? He's got to eat. Right. See, if I was bearded right now and I was stroking my beard, wouldn't that make me look wise? It does. I've only had like a real legit beard one time ever in my life. I grew up big fat, fake beard. But it was because a man I knew died and a bunch of us online. We just decided to grow our beards like his. Yeah. His name is Evan Tanner. Kind of a tribute. Yeah. Yeah. He was a UFC fighter and he had this big crazy beard and he was a, he was an adventurous person and went on, I guess what you would call walk about and died in the desert. No kid. Yeah. He died in death valley. Not on purpose. No. We don't know. We don't think so though. The thought is that he went out there to just sort of have an adventure and find himself. He was into that. He was into doing that. And everybody grew up beard. So I grew this big fucking crazy beard. Yeah. And one like all the way up my cheekbone. I'm trying to imagine what she looked like. Well, it looked like me with a big crazy beard. Yeah. Post a picture for your face. I'm sure it just one out there. I think there's one of me at a UFC weigh ins where I have a big crazy beard. Yeah, there it is. There's me with a big crazy beard. Okay. There you go. Yeah. That's wild. The same man. I forgot about that. That's wild to see. This is back when you were an announcer for a. I was still in an answer. Still like. Yeah. I just didn't invent this weekend. Good. Yeah. I just made me with a full crazy stupid beard. Yeah. I grew that for a few months. I don't remember what the time period was, but we all decided to do that. But it's a nice tribute. Yeah. He's an interesting person. He was a guy that like he didn't value money. He didn't value life experience. And he was very interesting to listen to when he talked and just really inspired a lot of people. Do you ever read the book Into the Wild? Yes. He talked about a kid who had a very similar set of values just wanted to be out in nature and sort of explore different experiences and ended up dying in the wilds of Alaska and not not death valley. But it sounds like there were some similarities there. I think there's a lot of people that just find the life that we're living that most people live to be very shallow and meaningless and unfulfilling and they just want something different. They don't know what it is. But they see the trap that so many people are falling into. It doesn't seem our culture makes it easy for people to find meaning. Well, it's hard because you have to eat. If you eat and feed yourself and it's very difficult just to pay the rent. But imagine a world where the jobs available were profoundly satisfying of our need to matter that you're going to imagine like a Dr. Seuss world because the world has to be completely different. I mean, this is an imaginary world, right? It is. But why not start moving us in the right direction? There's another counterpoint that the the the contrary position would be you need shitty meaningless jobs to inspire you to do something good with your life. It tests your will. Your will to improve upon your position. So maybe every kid should do shitty meaningless jobs. That's me. Yeah. Most certainly helped me. What shitty meaningless jobs did you do? Oh, I had a lot of them. But I think just being a kid working at, I worked at a place called Newport Creamery in another place called Papa Genos, these restaurant chains and you know, I delivered newspapers and I'd worked a lot of construction jobs and just bunch of different things. I delivered pizzas, bunch of different things where it's just like day in, day out. And then when it's over, you like think out it's over and then you're like, how do I stop this? How do I get out of this job? How do I make sure that this doesn't become my life? Yeah. I remember I was driving limos. Yeah. It's one of my jobs and there was a guy who they were looking at as an example of who we could be. And I remember this guy was overweight and like his back was bad, but he had a Cadillac. They always talk about his Cadillac and they were like, you know, you could be like Tony. You know, Tony, you know, he's got an easy job. Tony's working at 60 hours a week driving limos, but they were talking about how much money he makes. nine. He's doing great in like 60 hours a week. This guy's just driving around 60 hours a week and here he, and I was looking at this guy and he's like in his 40s and I was like, his life has already gotten to this. And they were like letting you know that you too could compromise your dreams and be like this guy if he just droned in and just showed up and just kept doing it day in and day out. That's a trap though, right? It is. Unless that's what you like, unless you like just driving people around. I'm not like shitting on the job. I did it, but it's I just wasn't good for me. For me was I don't want to do that. I got to get out of here. Well, I guess what I mean is I don't mean to dump on that job either. I just mean that when you set aside your passions and your sense of purpose and just do work, you don't even enjoy to get the bills paid. That can become a trap. Most certainly. And so many people in today's world are feeling trapped by that. Well, and then you get obligations, right? Then you have a mortgage or a lease in your place to live. And then you have car payments, wife and kids and then you can't take chances or husband and kids. Either or and you can't take chances. If you can't take chances, then you're really fucked because then then you have to figure out what to do with your time when you're off work. Right. And I've given this advice before. I'm like, you have to think about that time off work like you have to save your life and that you're working to save your life. Like whatever it is, whatever you're trying to do, you have to do it like you're trying to save your life because you, you are. So find the energy in those down moments to to reorient yourself and to find your path. Right. But then we're talking about all the other issues that people have that we talked about before like the lack of exercise and good diet. Those things rob you of your physical vitality. And if you don't have physical vitality and energy, it's very difficult to motivate yourself to do something. We've got those problems. Yep. It seems like to build a really good life. A lot of things have to go right. And our culture doesn't seem to make it easy to align all those paths. Those pieces. Yeah, that's one thing that I don't think I recognize enough when I was younger. When I was younger, I was like, just fucking work hard. I worked hard and I did work hard, but I was also really lucky. I've been lucky a lot. But also when I got lucky, I took advantage of it and ran with it. Yeah. So like some people get lucky and then they fuck it off and they don't they don't follow through and following through is very important. The follow through the grind. Yeah. Also luck luck is a big factor. It is a big factor. And man, I feel like I've been really fortunate too. Sometimes bad luck is good luck. Same one. Because bad luck makes you angry at your circumstances and it forces you to change. too much good luck, too much good fortune. You get soft and lazy. Yeah. Everything's so going so great. Imagine if you like entitled to stuff because you're sure everything's followed on a silver platter. Imagine when in the lottery at 19. Imagine being a 19 year old guy. I can mess you up. What if you won like a hundred million dollars in your 19? Oh my God, you'd be a loser. There's no way you would be a loser. Isn't it funny? I do see a winner. We've probably come across this fact that three years after winning the lottery, lottery winners are on average. No happier than quadriplegics or something like that. Something like that. Yeah. I wouldn't I would imagine first of all winning the lottery is also like, save you start a business and that business becomes successful and then you start doing well. People are going to ask for money, but they're not going to ask for money the way they ask for a lottery winner's money because the lottery winner is like, bitch, you didn't even earn this. You just got lucky. Give me some money. If you really love me, you're my friend. I'm going to try to start a business and all of a sudden you're starting to question your your best friends and motives. Oh yeah. And so it's so you end up getting alienated from that for sure. That's most certainly going to happen. And this happens to a lot of successful young athletes, right? So we have money and then the people close to them start asking for handouts and then they start to question whether their friends are real friend true friends. And a lot of them aren't. That's another thing. A lot of them they look at you differently because you're successful now. They said something like it's some crazy number of NFL players within X amount of years after they stopped playing or broke. It's really crazy. It's like so they go bankrupt within three years. I think it's something something nutty and it's like a high percentage. So part of that might be you know that they're just not taught how to manage or save and there's that. There's also the culture of like expressing how much money you have through material possessions and the keeping up of the Joneses. They're from Billy Corbin's documentary. Oh, broke on ESPN. 78% of former NFL players have gone bankrupt or are under financial stress within five years of retirement. Two years. Oh, excuse me. Two years of retirement. 60% of NBA players are broke within five years of retirement. And then 78% of NFL players are broke within two years. Here's the thing about NFL players you have to take into consideration. Also head trauma. They're getting hit in the head a lot. Which might account for the difference between the NBA and the NFL. I think it does. So you have the culture of keeping up with the Joneses with most pro athletes like nice things, right? You grow up poor, you hustle, you become a badass, you're a pro athlete. And now you want a nice car and a nice house and all these nice things and can I share a personal story on that? Sure. So I used to run a summer camp for kids, character education, summer camp for kids. And it's all based on the sport of ultimate Frisbee. Oh, okay. So I founded this small company in a few years. I had hundreds of hundreds of families sending their kids to me to learn the sport and to learn basic character things like resilience and a positive environment, attitude and teamwork, things like that. And so one day we're up in a local park, running camp. And who should be running laps around the track is Antonio Brown, the NFL wide receiver. You heard this guy? Sure, former stealer, right? This was before he, he was like a first or second year player, hadn't really emerged. And I walked over to Antonio. I said, hey, Antonio, could you come over and say hi to some kids, maybe sign a few Frisbees? And he says, sure, let me finish my workout. He comes over after he's a perfect gentleman, terrific guy. He signs some T-shirts, signs some discs. And I said, hey, Antonio, my, my kids who want to teach you how to catch. And so three of my kids, three of my best campers line up and I, I chuck the Frisbee 40 yards down the field and the kids just run, run, run down. And then they, pancake catch it, right? Right. So Antonio watches this and I said, all right, Antonio, do what the kids did. They're teaching you how to catch. And I, Antonio takes off. I just chucked this for as far as I fricking could. I mean, I sent an 80 yards down the field and he just zooms down under it. And of course, instead of, and he just catches it just the way the kids, kids teach him to the next year, he becomes the NFL's best wide receiver. I taught Antonio Brown how to catch. I don't think it works that way. I taught him how to catch Frisbee. I love the story though, man. It's a good story, but I'm pretty sure he's pretty good at catching. it. Yeah, you're probably right. Kind of part of the game. Yeah, you're right. Yeah. But I'm sticking to it anyway. It's a rough sport in terms of the damage that it does to your body and your head. And Antonio, and this happened to Antonio, man. He got his bail rung so many times and he's had hard life since. Most guys do. Most of those guys that get out, they have a really hard time. It's just, you know, your body's not designed to get in the car accidents every day. You know, and these guys, they're basically giving each other car accidents and training and I know understand that there are more cognizant of that now in the NFL, particularly after that concussion movie that came out with Wulse-Meth or, you know, that doctor who, you know, was, uh, Diallo, my, Diallo somebody. But do not remember his name. He's a Pittsburgh guy. Yeah. But his work with CTE and just popularizing this notion that this is happening to so many players. It's a real problem. No, it is. And I love both love of the sport and hate what it's doing to the athletes bodies and their brains. Yeah. It's rough. I mean, it's simply said about fighting. You know, I just watched some brain damage this weekend, you know, it was their live. Switched to ultimate, man. It's easy on the brain and also beautiful sports. Save it. I'm not saying, buddy. Try it. You like it. No, I'm sure I would like you watching it and stuff. I mean, that's Marcus Brownlee's that's, yeah. You had him on your show. Yeah, he's killer at it. He's fantastic. I did some videos and everything. Um, it's a beautiful sport. It does look fun. It does look fun. Yeah. Um, I'm sure. So someday I'll meet you out there. Maybe not. I'll teach you how to catch. Okay. He's got a catch. But now this golf is different. This golf is like, is that a frisbee? Yeah, frisbee. It's just how many throws does it take to you to get from a desert. One spot called a tea to a like a metal basket. But isn't it actual frisbee? Yeah. That's similar frisbee or the same frisbee. So in ultimate, we use a wide flat disc that has a lot of stability. And in golf, there are many, many different kinds of slimmer discs that will go farther and then you can curve them around to around trees and stuff. Oh, okay. I think on a disc is better. A frisbee is like a toy. You play a disc golf. Well, frisbee is, you know, well, frisbee is a brand name. Yeah. And so disc is the term we try to use. So you call it ultimate disc. Because they have putters, drivers for golf. For disc golf. Yes. But not ultimate frisbee. I just just won one disc for a. And is ultimate frisbee a frisbee or is it a disc? It's not made by the frisbee company. It's made by a company called UltraStar to disc. So the ultimate frisbee people, the frisbee people, where they get off light. Yeah. I'm telling the game without even it's, you know, you have to be a part of the sport and it's named after them. That's right. Yeah, we try to get on a crazy. We're trying to we're trying to avoid the use or frisbee. But what do you call it? Well, ultimate disc is one way to do it or just do you really say that? I'll not play an ultimate disc. And people go with the fuck is that? The pro league calls that ultimate disc. The ultimate is the short term. But a lot of times people don't know what you're talking about. Well, you say ultimate people think ultimate fighting championship. It's not what I think. No. That's what I would think. If you're like, you know, watch the ultimate this weekend, I'd be like, yeah, man, I'll comment it. Oh, yeah, go. And you'd be like, you'd comment it on ultimate disc. I'd be like, wait, what are we talking about? Do you follow any other sports besides football and disc? I'm picking the hockey right now. Are you really? My pens are in the playoffs. That's another sport where people get some serious brain damage. It's true. Do you know where they get their brain damage from? The crashes in the board. Yeah. Check the board checks. And then that's just the rattling of the body. It's not even the hits of the head. I'm guessing the hits kind of doesn't have to. Even have to doesn't even have to. No, there's a guy that I've had on multiple times that I'm friends with his name is Dr. Mark Gordon. And he works with a lot of traumatic brain injury patients. And especially of soldiers, you know, guys who breach doors and some football players and fighters as well. And he said people people get brain damage from jet skis. He's like, yeah, just this. Brang, brang, brang. He's like that constant rattling of the brain gives people CT. Wow. So you do it a lot? Yeah. So the brain is actually much more sensitive. Very gentle. Rapid accelerations and decelerations. It's just it's not just rapid acceleration and deceleration. It's a shaking. It's the impact. OK. It's like how about like soccer players get it? Sure with the heading. The header. Exactly. Yeah. Like I don't know, driving an ATV over Rocky terrain. For sure. 100%. Yeah. He was detailing all the different ways that the pituitary gland gets damaged. And the pituitary gland apparently is a very sensitive gland. And the way it happens is when you get impacts and a lot of these things happen, obviously butchering this. But the way he was describing is as it gets injured, it inhibits its ability to produce hormones. And then you find these people get very depressed, very moody. And one of the ways they fix that is by exogenous hormone injections. And it's one of the reasons why the fix, one of the ways they fix a lot of depression and former combat sport athletes and former football players, former soldiers. They'll get veterans. They did not really do that. They give them testosterone injections, human growth hormone injections. And then when you exogenously introduce these hormones and they get them back to their normal healthy levels, all their suicidal, well, not all of them. A lot of the depression goes away. A lot of the problems that these people are having is just this extreme feeling of fatigue and lack of stamina and lack of energy. All traceable to pituitary damage. A lot of it is traceable to TBI, traumatic brain injury. And chronic traumatic and encephalopathy. Why do you pronounce that? Yeah, I know a lot of it. See, a lot of people with it. Right. Yeah. I think my only contact with the concept of the pituitary was, did you know that the philosopher Descartes learned a little bit about the brain's architecture? And there was a little land in there that nobody knew what it did. So his hypothesis was the pituitary is like the wormhole between the physical brain and your mind. Isn't it weird when you think about these ancient theories that they had about how things worked and why they worked? It is. And sometimes we philosophers dwell too long. There it is. The pineal gland. Oh, I got it wrong. Thank you, fact checker. Well, I was going to bring that up next because the pineal gland is they believe that in ancient Egypt, do you know that? What is that? Is it Horus? Is that what it is? The imagery. Yeah, but there is a, there is a, compare Horus to the pineal gland. Yeah. See, that image, the eye of Horus, is they believe is actually a symbolic of the pituitary, of the pineal gland. Because if you look at the way Horus sits where it is, it really looks like it could be an image of the pineal gland. Look at that bottom one in particular. Oh, I mean, it's so similar. Look at even how it dips down. I mean, so much of the architecture is very, very similar. So the image on the right here, it looks like an eye with, I don't know. Yes. And so does the one on the left, the actual physical pineal gland. Then the thing about that that makes it really interesting is that that is also the place where psychedelic chemicals are produced. That's where the time-athlet trip to means produced. And this is like an Egyptian hieroglyphic on the right? Yeah. Yeah. There's amazing series of videos by a man who is now deceased. His name is John Anthony West. He'd been on my podcast a couple of times once remotely and once in person. And he was an Egyptologist and he made this series called Magical Egypt. And he really explored deep, deep, deep into the history of these hieroglyphs and what the interpretations of them are and how these structures are all like the temple of man is an intram, or temple in man, temple in man. I think it's one of the temples is literally it represents the various parts of the human being. And it's like the pyromet, or the temple of Luxor is that where it is. What is temple in man? So it in the like the pyramid or the top. It's what I think the temple of Luxor is that where it is. What is temple in man? See, if you might be saying it wrong. But in the documentary, it's just, it's amazing when you think that these people that lived thousands and thousands of years ago had this incredibly complex way of designing these structures that we still to this day don't exactly know how they did it. And they were so interested in preserving this story of, here it is, temple in man. Okay, I did get it right. And so the ideas of this temple is supposed to represent a human body and that various parts of the temple according to the hieroglyphs sort of depict various aspects. So it is Luxor. It is the temple Luxor. And so incredibly sophisticated thinking went into the architecture. It is so sophisticated. It's fascinating stuff. And you mentioned like the Mayans and the Aztecs in their incorporation of astronomy into their architecture. Yeah, well you got to think they're staring at these incredible images in the sky every night, right? I mean that would have to be so motivational. Like we want to like especially if you had deemed certain stars and certain constellations sacred, we want to represent those down as heaven on earth. And when you go to like Stonehenge or something, doesn't the light coming in on the summer solstice like shine right through a gap between ourselves? Yeah, that's in Egypt as well. There's certain pyramids where as the light goes through, it goes through and illuminates these corridors. And if you catch it on the right time of the year as the sun rises, it rises perfectly through these two pillars of man. So you know these people studied the motions of the planets and the stars. Yeah, but we don't know enough about it unfortunately because a lot of the records were burned in the Library of Alexandria and that was burned. Oh yeah. Pivotal moment in history by the way. Yeah, there's so much stuff that they did that we just left kind of back engineer and guess. I actually think that that burning of the library of Alexandria was one of the key reasons we descended into a thousand year dark age. So when information technologies come along and help people communicate better, society is begin to flourish and when you either weaponize new information technologies the way we're seeing and the way we talked about before or when you destroy enlightening technologies like the library. And by the way, some of the same people who burned down the Library of Alexandria were also busy closing down all the universities throughout Europe. And there's a reason why we entered a dark age because respect for learning was just trashed by people who were benefiting from stubborn orthodoxy. Yeah, that sounds familiar doesn't it? Well, I want to be applied as religion or political, right? It's like ideologies become problem. Exactly. I worry sometimes that we're on the, we could enter in new dark age. If the, if the stubborn orthodoxies and ideologies continue to flourish online, we could be in for a really rough, rough time in the future. We need to strengthen mental immune systems. It's certainly possible, right? It's certainly possible. And my fear more than anything is a power blackout. My fear is the grid going down and something happening where we can't access the information that's on these disks and hard drives and it'd be financial chaos. Yeah, we have so much information on hard drives. We have so much information that relies on the internet. And as time goes on, we move more and more of our stuff into the digital realm. And as it happens, I think about what we have now from ancient Egypt, the best stuff we have is all carved in stone. Like the Rosetta stone that showed us how these different languages, how the translations of them and then we have all these hieroglyphs carved in stone. We have these incredible structures that still exist thousands and thousands of years later. Again, made out of stone. If they had hard drives back then, they would have long begun. There'd be no way to access that information. And also imagine just what would happen to us was a few generations of darkness, right? Think about how long the Ice Age was and think about how it plunged so many civilizations into this completely different way of life where you have to deal with extreme cold and just the most some North America, like half of it was under a mile of ice, totally different world. As I understand the last Ice Age was about 15,000 years ago. I think it's a little less. I think it was a little less. I think it ended around 12,000 somewhere around. But most of the civilizations we talk about have since that last Ice Age. Yeah, they think. But here's another theory. The Younger Dryest Impact Theory. And this is Graham Hancock and Graham Carlson or Randall Carlson rather. Graham Hancock, Randall Carlson and a few other people, including Dr. Robert Shock from Boston University's geologist. They are entertaining this idea that there was some sort of an impact somewhere in the neighborhood of 11,000, 12,000 years ago that ended the Ice Age and that these impacts that hit particularly in North America and throughout Europe. They've left behind, when they do core samples. You can find this, I think it's called trite night. It's nuclear glass. In the nuclear glass, you find it at test sites like where they do detonate nuclear bombs. You've right. Or you find it where asteroids have impacted. They find this stuff all throughout the core samples in that range of like 11,000, 12,000 years. So just as a meteor impact wiped out the dinosaurs, a meteor impact helped to bring about the warming that ended the last Ice Age. Yes. That's what the theory is. It ended, and this theory is being more and more widely accepted. It was really dismissed just a few years ago, just a decade or two ago. But now it's widely being, because of the core samples in particular, because they find this nuclear glass. It's amazing. It's amazing. It's amazing. It's awesome. So this speculation about Egypt in particular is that there was more than one era of this construction and that perhaps there was a reset. Oh, some older civilizations that were actually beginning to learn about. So yeah, that's the idea. And one of the more compelling theories is based on the water erosion around the Great Sphinx. Because the Sphinx around the Great Pyramid has the temple. The Sphinx has these deep fissures around it that seem to indicate thousands of years of rainfall. The problem with that is the last time there was rainfall in the Nile Valley was 9,000 BC. So that predates the supposed construction of the pyramids by 7,000 years. You just blew my mind. Yeah. It's pretty heavy shit. You should see pull up images of the water erosion evidence around the Great Sphinx. And the thing about this is Robert Shock is, you know, he's a real geologist from Boston University. It's a very controversial idea and he's been much, much, much, it's much more accepted now because of go backly tapping because tobacco, go backly, tap, which was discovered in Turkey was more than 12,000 years old. This has been proven by carbon dating because of the surrounding area. It was covered up somewhere intentionally around 12,000 years old. And so that used to be the thought was where are these ancient structures from 12,000 years ago that would indicate that it would be possible for a civilization from that time period to create something so magnificent. Well, now they have this. This guy's theory helps to have this. Well, not this theory. Now they have go backly tapping. Go backly tapping is most certainly. So there, you see those things on the right hand side? That is the indication that according to Dr. Robert Shock, the way those things have been eroded, that would indicate rainfall did that. Okay. So you see how his theory is sort of like that? So the opposing theory is that that was done with wind and sand. And he disputes that. He said, no, there's no evidence of wind and sand being able to do that. And you see the difference between the way wind erosion erodes things and the way rain erosion does it. So you see on the left is evidence of what he believes is water erosion versus the right, which is wind erosion and sand erosion. Fascinating. Fascinating. So what if he's right and if Randall Carlson's right and if Graham Hancock's right and Graham has written books on this and had many, many, many discussions with people that disputed it or agreed with it. And he believes that there was probably some sophisticated civilization similar to ancient Egypt that existed, you know, 10, 15, maybe even 20,000 or more years ago. And that was wiped out by the younger dryest impact. And then in the Sphinx dates back to that earlier. They think the Sphinx could be thousands of years older than the current idea of what it is. The current idea is like 2500 BC. They think the Sphinx is around the same time as the great pyramids. Here's, you want to hear something really crazy? Yeah, do. Cleopatra is closer to the invention of the iPhone than she is to the construction of the great pyramids. And that's, oh man. How about that? That just, it just clashes with, but that's a fact. cartoon. That's not even like crazy speculation. Graham Hancock, Randall Carlson, Robert Chalk stuff. That's just fact. Amazing. Egypt is a magnificent civilization. So ancient. So ancient. And at one point in time was where it was all going down. Yeah, did that Cleopatra crazy? Right? See, that's true. 99 point 9% true. Not, or certain rather, it's true. Not. Yeah. Wow, shit. Do you know what I think we did three hours already? No, that went by like, yeah, it's almost four o'clock. Is that true with the Cleopatra shit? I'm looking through like one of those Qora things or someone asked that and then someone else has came through and is giving them all the evidence. Trying to find the year it says Cleopatra did, but it does say that that is a fact. Yeah, pretty sure it's fact. Cleopatra lived closer to the creation of the iPhone than she did to the building of the Great Pyramid. Is this true and how everyone has already explained the Cleopatra did in fact live closer to the iPhone launch than the building of the pyramids. The question remains how we typically associate both Cleopatra and the pyramids with the height of ancient Egypt. Both of these are false. Oh, the Egyptian empire went through three stages of civilization thrived and then fell and so on. The first was the old Kingdom which is 2, paradoxed and 86 BC. You can say what you're doing. Either way it's true. This is the Egypt that built the Great Pyramid. So Egypt is father older than we do. And then if you add in Robert Shock's theory about the construction of this finks, he is theorizing that it is at least so it would be thousands of years of rainfall the last time there's rainfall in the Nile Valley. the climate was very different somewhere around 9,000 BC, which is 7,000 years older than any of the think, well, it's got thousands of years of rainfall on top of that. So now you're like, a 10,000 BC or something or 7,000 to 7,000 to 9,000 to, it's like 9,000 BC, which is 7,000, yeah, 7,000 years earlier than they thought. But if there's thousands of years of rainfall that would have caused that erosion, if that's true, then you've got, you know, who knows how many thousand BC, 10,000 BC, 12,000 BC, for now. And there's so much, so right history, recorded history is what? 2,000 3,000 years old. Pretty young. I mean, if you count hieroglyphic. Two in a form is like, what is that? 6,000 years old. I think that's Mesopotamia, Babylon. Now, phonetic. That's sort of like 2,000, 2,500 years old. It's all nuts. And the way in which archaeologists and stuff are opening our eyes to the deep past is just fascinating. It's amazing. And what's really crazy is that's not that long ago. That's really crazy. I mean, phonetic languages several thousand years ago, several thousand years is nothing. Yeah. Well, let's see. We supposedly diverged from the common ancestor with the chimpanzees about 7 million years ago. And homo sapiens, as opposed to some of the other homo species that have since died out, just emerged what in the last 200,000, maybe possibly 400,000 years? It's nothing. Yeah. It's crazy. I used to have this bit about the creation of the United States. People think it was a long time ago, 1776, so long ago. People lived to be 100 years old. That's three people ago. Wow. Wow. I think I misspoke a minute ago. The homo sapiens occurred closer to 70,000 years ago. It's homo Heidelberg, and some others that go to a 24. That's even crazier. Yeah. Yeah. I mentioned Socrates a few times. 2,400 years ago? That's almost exactly 100 generations. Yeah. I mean, it only took 100 generations to go back to basically the beginning of my discipline, philosophy, as we understand it, no less, just 100 generations. That's it. That's so recent. And it's all hurtling by faster and faster. And then think about how much the world has changed within our, how old are you? 57. I'm 53. So within our lifetime, think of all the change that we've seen. If you go back to your lifetime, like when you were a child, civil rights marches going on, right? My mother was pregnant with me in the days leading up to Martin Luther King's, I have a dream speech. Wow. She wanted to go, but because I, I, she couldn't go cause of me. You fucked it up for my dad got to go. And I was born five days after the, I have a dream. That's crazy. Now think of now go 100 years before that. You have slavery. How crazy is that? That's right. You go 100 years before that. That's a mean country. You have muskets and, and indoor, no indoor plumbing. You have none of that. I know electric light. That's so recent. That's so recent. We get, we get this kind of myopia when we look back at our past. It's hard to even appreciate how deep the past is and how deep the past is and yet how shallow and yet how recent. And how recent the, yeah, the things we take for granted are. Yeah. I mean, the change that's happened so fast. So now, now taking a consideration that changes happened in our lifetimes with the invention and the internet. And it's sped up another 10 fold or more. It's like, and you know, if we go 200 years from now, it's unrecognizable. Then you're in the matrix. If we can last that long. If we can last up on, well, we need some critical thinking and the way to get that is mental immunity available now from Andy Norman. Thank you very much, man. I really appreciate you coming here. I really, really, really enjoyed it. Thank you. Great conversation. We appreciate it. All right. Bye, everybody.