[Music] Good to see you, Andrew Gallammore. Thanks for coming back from Tokyo. >> Good to see you again, Danny. Yeah, nice to be here. >> Yeah, man. It's been a while. Since the last time you were in here, I have had a whole army of psychedelic experts on the show and uh I've been learning a lot about this stuff. And uh your new book, Death by Astonishment, Death by Aston >> is a is fascinating. What's the story on the new book? >> Yeah, my first two books um well, my first book was kind of weird metaphysical speculation kind of stuff. Second book was kind of the neuroscience of psychedelics more broadly as reality switching molecules. Um, but I kind of wanted to focus on DMT. Um, and particularly on trying to convince people that DMT represents a true mystery. Um, it's very easy for people to kind of and including scientists to kind of say it's just a hallucination. It's just your brain on drugs, man. And I wanted to kind of show you using the history of DMT um going back going back to the Amazonian peoples who who first used DMT uh based uh plant preparations all the way through to the 21st century. How science has first discovered DMT and then struggled to make make sense of it. And it's a struggle that in my opinion continues to this day. I still don't think we're even close to getting to the bottom of of DMT. >> And since the last time we talked, what have you been working on other than your book uh in Tokyo as far as like your research goes >> because you're you're like a you're a neuros for people that don't know who you are who didn't see the first episode. Give us a little like background in your uh like your academic background and your research that you do. >> Yeah, I mean I started back in the UK studying chemistry and pharmarmacology. I was fascinated by drug molecules and how they can interface with the human brain and cause such dramatic effects on on the structure and dynamics of your world and on your entire subjective experience. And so I studied chemistry and pharmarmacology and then I shifted slightly um towards biochemistry for my PhD. Um but then for my post-doal research fellowships I moved towards neuroscience >> um in particular computational neuroscience and that eventually took me to Okinawa Japan about 10 years ago where I had a research fellowship in a computational neuroscience group um studying the brain using computational computational and mathematical models and then about three years ago I quit academia completely. I kind of milked it for all that I could get out of it. Um, didn't want to go down the, you know, le lecturesship and professorship and having to deal with students and go to meetings and >> things like that. Um, basically so that I could focus on my writing. So that's what I do now. I I think and I write about psychedelics uh about drugs generally but most specifically about this simple plant alkyoid called dimethylryptamine. >> And then what was your involvement in the research with the extended state DMT stuff? Um, so the initial proposal for DMTX as it's now called or extended state DMT was something that myself and Rick Strazman who you've also had on the podcast quite recently as I recall. Um, >> yeah. So we, you know, I I wrote to Rick with the idea that this the kind of the pharmacological peculiarities of DMT would make it amanable to this technique called target control introvenous infusion. And we we wrote this paper saying showing kind of really as a proof of principle um that it should work and that you should be able to induce somebody into the DMT state and stabilize stabilize stabilize their brain DMT levels um and hold them in the DMT state in a breakthrough DMT state for 30 minutes an hour. Um so it was just a a proposal really. It was a hypothetical um proof of principle model. Uh but then it was picked up by um Imperial College London. Um then under Robin Khart Harris um subsequently Chris Timberman um and they they were the first kind of academic group to implement it in humans. So myself and Rick we consulted in the early stages of that. Uh but then that was entirely the Imperial Colleg's um study >> and how many people were involved in it and do you know like like how far did they get with that? Like I imagine doing that kind of a study over a period of time >> and I by now I would imagine some of that data has been aggregated and analyzed. Has there been any sort of like conclusion or summary of it? >> It was really a more like a pilot study. So the aim wasn't to I mean there only I think 11 volunteers so it's not enough. >> [ __ ] I could have found you more than that. I could have found you a few. >> You could have done but the aim was to show that it was safe and tolerable. Right. Because it's not >> it wasn't 100% clear that it would be safe to hold someone in >> to see like can can we do this? Does it work? >> Yeah. Right. >> And and do are there plans to do it again? um >> see if they can go deeper and see if they can uh figure out some more problems, more answers. >> Absolutely. Um I mean the guy that funded it, Anton Bilton, um he was a property entrepreneur or property tycoon or something like that, but he's shifted towards consciousness exploration. He's very interested in Iawaska and he funded this first pilot study and he was actually one of the subjects as well. M >> um but I interviewed him for the book and he said you know 30 minutes is it's not enough um >> wow >> you know he wanted to go for 2 hours and um there there's actually already a group in Matias Lii in Basel in Switzerland who uh extended it for 90 minutes. Um, and there's another group that extended it to I think it was six hours, but this was a very very low kind of sub breakthrough dose. So, it wasn't like they were doing it at Imperial and and Basel, but but clearly it works. you know, you go into the state and not only do the brain DMT levels seem to stabilize, but so does the experience, which means that you can you can establish communication with these entities, beings, intelligences within the space. And in theory, then you can start to think about well, what can we learn about them? You know, can we establish a communic communicative relationship with them? Um, and can we study the space more formally, its its structure, its geometry, its topology? >> Couldn't you get a very similar experience with using something like Iawaska, which I think has, from what I've never done it, but I understand it has this very similar effect, just longerlasting. >> There's a couple of issues with Iawaska. Well, not issues. I mean, it's it's a it's a it's a wonderful indigenous technology, ISA. Um, but it's not the same as DMTX for several reasons. I mean, first of all, the um, how should I call it? The the side effects uh, like purging, you know, vomiting and [ __ ] and it's it's kind of unpleasant. I mean, that is it's all part of the of the thing, but um, >> um, you kind of don't want that if you're going to send mathematicians in there to analyze the space. It's not ideal, right? Mhm. >> Um and so you avoid that first of all with DMTX also even with iawaska. Yes, IA extends the DMT experience. Uh but still DMT levels rise in the blood. They reach a peak and then they steadily start to um to to to fall down again. I mean so you're still at the mercy of pharmaccoinetics and metabolism except it's just slowed down. >> Okay. So you can't stabilize DMT levels with Iawaska. But also if you actually measure the blood concentration of DMT during Iawaska trip and compare it to what you achieve with injected DMT, you only achieve about 20% uh 20 25% of of blood DMT levels. So ISA it's drawn out. It's longer but it's actually generally milder. It's not as intense as as a breakthrough DMT trip, >> right? And also, it wears out when you do a DMT trip, it also kind of like steals serotonin, right? So, like a lot of people talk about when they do DMT, the next day you'll kind of like have low energy, lower levels of serotonin, these kind of things. That's why some people take like 5 HTTP after they do DMT so they can try to restabilize the chemicals in their brain. And this can kind of like rob your brain chemical battery of the basic chemicals that it needs to to function in a normal everyday environment. Is that right or is that wrong? >> Not not quite right. No, I mean so with >> I mean robbing of serotonin I mean psychedelics generally I mean they bind to this this serotonin receptor or several times >> 2A receptor right >> 5HT2A very good yeah but also other receptors as well and that's not the only one but yeah the 5HT2A that's kind of the primary locus for their effects um >> now what you see with other psychedelics interestingly LSDs psilocybin uh measculine is you see what's called desensitization of serotonin receptors. So the the more if you stimulate a serotonin receptor repeatedly um or over a long period of time then the the receptor actually stops working. It's like a it's like a a negative feedback mechanism if the receptors are being overstimulated and then they are actually removed from the membrane and recycled. Uh this is why if you take uh let's say LSD on one day and then you take it a day later or a couple of days later, you won't get um you get this what's called tachapilaxis which is basically short-term tolerance a very very rapidly uh appearing and short-term tolerance. That's why you have to wait a couple of weeks. But interestingly with DMT, for reasons that aren't quite clear, and we've known this since the 1960s, um, is that DMT doesn't seem to desensitize these 5HT2A receptors. So that so you can you can inject someone with DMT repeatedly. >> Yeah. >> Uh, or even maintain their brain levels of DMT. So the 5HT2A receptors are being continuously stimulated by DMT and you get basically no tolerance effect or very very limited. There is evidence there is maybe a little bit of tolerance happening. Uh but it's not anything like what you see with psilocybin and LSD and that's the only reason that you can actually do this infusion protocol is because otherwise you'd have to keep ramping up the concentration to maintain the subjective effect. So you could you could ramp somebody up and keep them in a steady high level state uh like a breakthrough level of DMT in their blood >> for theoretically hours and hours and hours, 6 hours. >> Yeah. >> And when they come down, >> there's going to be no negative side effects like that last for 24 hours or any kind of short-term side effects at all. >> Well, I mean, imagine you you're in a extremely altered reality that's extremely stimulating and extremely strange. Mentally, it's psychologically taxing for sure. Right. Right. So, it doesn't surprise me. After that, you need to you might feel kind of worn out the following day and might need to kind of rest. But it it's nothing to do I don't think there's no evidence in in my opinion that it's anything to do with damage or depletion of of serotonin or or serotonin receptors or anything like that. >> Mhm. And like what kind of evidence do we have of brain measurements of people during DMT trips? Do we like see what types of the brain are lighting up and like what can we what can we deduce from that kind of knowledge? >> That's interesting. I mean how deep do you want to go? >> Deep as it gets, baby. Balls deep. >> Okay. I mean so the history of neuroiming as as it's called and there many types of neuroiming so basically trying to measure changes in the brain and neural activity under the influence of psychedelics and that's been going on since oh the 1950s. Um, so back in the there's a guy called Abraham Wickler who was actually close somewhat associated with MK Ultra or at least he worked with people who are associated with MK Ultra. Um, but >> Abraham Wickler >> Abraham Wickler Wi or might be Vickla. >> Oh, that Yeah, you're probably right about that. >> But I think he said, >> maybe it's from the German, but maybe he said Wickler. But anyway, so he he was kind of interested in measuring, you know, measuring changes in neural activity um under the influence of of measculine. I mean, that was the main one in those days and LSD of course. >> Um and what what they noticed with EG, so they place EG electrodes around the head. Uh was that >> Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video. Back to the show. So just again just a bit of background. So you know about brain waves kind of >> I have a rudimentary understanding. >> So so neurons you know when the brain is functioning the brain is working it it functions using um electrochemical signals and these generate waves of electrical activity that you that you can detect through the skull. uh you get this complex wave form if you if you measure the electrical activity through the skull and you can then you can then decompose this into um higher and lower frequency sine waves. So you can de decompose it into alpha waves which are low kind of low frequency seven or eight hertz even lower you can get down to theta waves then you can go up u beta waves and gamma waves which are very very fast um and they have different functions in the brain but anyway um when the brain is processing visual or sensory information generally I mean if you have your eyes open and you're kind of looking around and processing information from the environment uh Um what you see uh is the the alpha wave signal is very very weak. It's very it's the the alpha waves are kind of desynchronized. All these different parts of the brain are working and they're all generating alpha waves but they kind of interfere with each other and they're not synchronized together and so you get a very weak alpha signal. Basically alpha power is very low. When you close your eyes though and your brain stops um uh processing sensory inputs, the alpha waves start to synchronize again. They become much more prominent. >> Oh wow. >> Yeah. So basically low alpha power is an indication of of of an active cortex that's processing sensory information, >> right? Um >> kind of like like parasympathetic sympathetic kind of >> not quite >> not quite. Okay. >> That would only confuse things if we got to that. But anyway, yeah. So, so eyes open, weak alpha waves, eyes closed, strong alpha waves, right? >> Um, so what they, anyway, kind of getting back to measculine is what they found is that when you inject someone or feed someone measculine, even when they've got their eyes closed, they see this loss of alpha power. So, the alpha waves desynchronize. So it's like it's as if the brain is processing sensory inputs or generating sensory uh activity even though they've got their eyes closed. >> So basically the brain is is generating the imagery that you see. Right? So if you're on masculine you might see complex geometric patterns, you might see scenes even. Uh this is all selfgenerated by with your eyes closed. Yeah. You can open your eyes as well. Uh but if you just want to kind of um isolate the brain to some extent from visual sensory inputs, you close the eyes and you see this desynchronization of alpha activity which suggests the brain is generating these imagery. Right? So so broadly what this suggests is that psychedelics or suggested uh was that psychedelics are somehow stimulating the brain >> to generate this kind of imagery. >> With me so far? >> Yeah. It's lighting up your visual visual cortex, I would imagine. And you're you're you're experiencing the the sense of vision with your eyes being closed. >> Exactly. Exactly. Um and then >> and there's also audio too, right? >> Quite rare certain drugs. Um >> I did DMT and I had a crazy audio. >> I mean with >> Yeah. Yeah. So tones, you know, low pitch tones, high pitch tones, crackles, pops and pings, this kind of thing are quite common with DMT, but obviously it's the visuals that people are most interested in. >> Um anyway, um so kind of jumping forward several decades, um people started doing neuroiming, um sorry, functional MRI, so magnetic resonance imaging, right? So this is this is gives you a much um more detailed picture. With with EEG you can kind of see over broad areas of the cortex which which parts are active and which parts aren't but you can't get fine you can't get within like you know millimeter precision right >> uh but you can with functional MRI. M um so what in kind of beginning at the beginning of the the 21st century and again this is mainly came out of the Imperial College um uh group uh David Nut and Robin Kaha Harris is they started measuring neural activity under the influence of of psilocybin um and again they got this um indication that neural activity was being stimulated in some way, right? We now know that the psychedelics, they bind to this 5HT2A receptor, which you mentioned, which is an excitatory receptor. So, it stimulates neurons. It makes neurons more excitable >> and it makes them more likely to fire, >> right? So, you have all of these neurons connected together and all of them, not all of them, but certain populations of them within the cortex become more excitable. They're kind of ready to go. >> Yeah. um and then they start firing more often. They start sharing information more freely and so you get this kind of loosening up of neural activity. So so the brain kind of shifts um more freely and in in a kind of more random fashion between neural states. It kind of loosens up. It's kind of like heating up a piece of glass. It goes from very rigid >> and fixed into something that's much more fluid. And of course that maps with um the experience of if you take mushrooms you start to see the world start to become more fluid and dynamic and objects kind of lose their identity and and morph and that kind of thing. >> Yeah. >> So you so you're seeing all of this evidence that that psychedelics they're stimulating the cortex. They're they're causing the cortex to kind of generate spontaneous activity uh which you can then map to certain types of imagery. So if you if the the primary visual cortex this is stop me if I'm losing you at any point >> the primary visual cortex sits at the back of the brain. >> So this is the part of the cortex that receives sensory information from the environment. Now if you stimulate that you can do it with an electrode. >> Have you heard of Wer Penfield? >> No. >> So he he did a lot of work in in the middle of the the 20th century and he was interested in epilepsy. He he used to he invented something called the Montreal procedure uh which is basically to to cut out parts of the brain that were uh the focus of epileptic seizures. >> Oh wow. >> And cure them like that. Um the problem is you need to find out which parts of the brain are actually becoming hyperactive during epileptic seizures. And so what he did is he he cut open the brains of his patients like you know like sometimes the whole top of the skull. Um and then he would take an electrode and he would like zapping different parts of >> trying to cause a seizure. >> No, he was well he was actually trying to I mean that's part of it. Yeah. He wanted to find out where was the which part of the brain are we going to see kind of highly excitable erratic activity and that would tell him that this was >> perhaps the the the locus of ep epilepttoform activity. This part he could cut out but at the same time he was also interested in mapping. So he obviously didn't want to cut out parts of the brain that were very important. So he would systematically work through the patients were awake by the way. >> Um so he could so they could speak to him, they could they could they could describe what they were seeing. >> Yeah. >> And what he found is when he started stimulating right at the back of the brain, the primary visual cortex. So this is the part of the cortex that receives information from the retina. Um, so it's the the closest part of the brain to the environment, you could say, but it only it only represents very simple basic fine details of the world. So lines in particular directions, lines moving in certain directions, certain patches of color, very basic information. This is this is >> the pattern really that your brain is receiving from the environment uh the primary visual cortex at the back. And that information is sent upwards through these this kind of hierarchy hierarchy of levels that try and find patterns. So at the moment you see a world of objects. You can see me, you can see the can, you can all everything is make sense to you. You don't see lines and you know it's you see a world of objects but that world of objects is kind of constructed from this basic pattern of rapidly changing lines and basic shapes. Yeah. Right. Right. And the brain can also learn stuff over time and figure out I think you talked about this on one of your videos like this is a water bottle. I've seen this a million times before. So now I don't have to waste processing power on this. >> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So your brain is learning to construct useful models of the environment. um whereas despite having no direct access to the environment, all it has is this pattern of activity, this very rapidly um changing pattern of activity, very very fine details that's in the primary visual cortex. So when Penfield stimulated the primary visual cortex, his patients would say, "Oh, I see a triangle um or I see lines or I see flashes of color." Very basic, simple, fine details. they weren't seeing objects. But then he started stimulating further and further forward. So up this cortical hierarchy. Then they would say, "Oh, I see um orange circles or I see green triangles." He's starting to see shapes being formed. Then he would move even further and further further forward to the higher levels of the cortex and they would say, "Oh, I see this 12-year-old boy said, "Oh, I see rubbers with guns." So now you're seeing these higher level models um which is kind of the stored the stored object models that your brain has has has kind of developed and learned um over over time. >> These would be random things. Yeah. I mean obviously the like was it triggering memories like fra like like fragments of memories? >> That's interesting. Right. So right so you have this cortical hierarchy from V1 as it's called the primary visual cortex up to V2 etc etc. Yeah. The higher you go you get >> um less specific more general things like you know dogs. >> Yeah. But not a particular dog right but let's say a dog. >> Okay. or maybe even different types of dogs but not any particular not the dog that's actually in the room now there is no dog in the room but if there was >> sure >> um then this higher level model is being represented at these higher levels of the cortex and right at the in the V1 you got the very fine details of this specific dog >> right yeah the exact you know the the pattern of its fur the color of its fur the shape of its eyes all that kind of stuff is being represented down at this this low Mhm. >> Um, which actually gets us to dreaming. We'll get to that later. Um, but then right at the top of the cortical hierarchy, sit right the very very apex that has a kind of bird's eyee view of all these levels, you have the hippocampus. And the hippocampus is basically, you know, you've heard of the hippocampus, right? To do with >> I have no clue >> memory, right? Okay. >> Uh, and particularly to do with forming memories. Okay. So this the hippocampus sits right at the top of this cortical hierarchy and it's kind of watching your brain build its model of the world and it creates like indexes like an indexer >> right >> and so when you when you recall something you some particular memory what's happening in very simple terms is your hippocmpus is reactivating that particular pattern of activity that happened in the past. So you you're kind of you're given a kind of a glimpse of what your brain was doing at the time that the world that your brain was modeling yesterday or 3 weeks ago. The hippoc campus doesn't store memories as such. It's not like a storehouse of memory. It's more like just this index and you can point to specific >> patterns of neural activity in the past that were that representing your world at that at that time. >> Oh wow. So the kind of the neural activity kind of unfolds down the cortical hierarchy from the hippocampus and reactivates these patterns that happened in the past. >> Oh [ __ ] that's wild. >> It's cool, right? >> I had this guy on recently uh Robert Epstein. I don't know if you ever heard of him, but he has this crazy theory called uh neural transduction theory where basically he's he's trying to claim that memories aren't stored in the brain. He was basically the idea was like the brain is an antenna and we're like downloading we have all all these memories are in like this >> the cloud. >> The cloud. Exactly. Right. And we're downloading them from the cloud. >> Yeah. I'm not sure about that. >> Yeah. I'm not sure about that either. That doesn't uh I don't know because like you know how would you explain how would you explain things like like chess players, right? Like how does how do you become like a master chess player? I mean, these people are obviously doing this, spending days and hours and weeks and years memorizing all these moves and they're doing work and there's clearly memory involved. How do you explain that they're just downloading that? >> It doesn't make sense >> because I because I can't do that. That person can do it because they've spent all the time doing it. I would only imagine that it would like memory would have to be literally saved in your in your brain like a hard drive. And that's interesting like the idea of neuro neuronal patterns like it's not >> it's an interesting way of of thinking about it or looking at it as it's just patterns of neurons that are reactivating these senses these sensory inputs that you had in a certain time. >> Exactly. Because >> and like like for example would be like you know how like we talked about this last time I think the house scent connects so strongly to memory >> right >> and you can like smell some laundry detergent you haven't smelled in 18 years that you smelled at like one of your ex-girlfriend's houses and you smell it again and it'll teleport you right back into her bedroom. >> Yeah. >> You know that's like insane how that works. >> Yeah. I get the same thing with the one particular um scent that one of my exes from 25 years ago used to wear and whenever I even now when I smell it like oh that's that person >> it's crazy right >> it's kind of I mean it's like magic yeah it is like magic >> um but it's it's not magic um and also if you think about you know what's happening in dreaming we know that the when you fall asleep and you enterm sleep the hippocampus starts working and it actually one of the main kind of one of the theories about what dreaming is for. uh again it's not 100% clear but is uh the hippocampus is basically replaying and streng every time a memory is recalled it's strengthened because you get strengthening strengthening of the connections the synaptic connections between the neurons that were active and so the the the hippocampus is basically kind of consolidating these memories by replaying them which is why you tend to dream about things especially things that were emotionally significant like if you see a if you're scared of spiders and you see a spider crawling across the wall a few hours before you go to bed, you're probably going to be dreaming about >> spiders and it's like your brain, oh, we need to remember this. >> Um, even if it's perfectly harmless. Um, so yeah. And then so getting back to Penfield, you know, what do you think happened when he started stimulating an area the brain close to the hippocampus? >> Memory started flooding back. >> Yeah. Exactly. So this little kid, this 12-year-old, he said, "Oh, I can hear my mother. um she's telling my sister she's got her coat on backwards or something like that. And Penfield said, "Is this do do you remember this happening?" And he said, "Yeah, this was this morning just as I was leaving the house." Um so already the hippocampus had kind of indexed that particular memory and Penfield was stimulating um >> that part of the hippocampus that just happened to index that particular memory. If he moved the electrode, it would be a different memory. And then yeah, which makes you wonder then is like so getting back to psychedelics if psychedelics are stimulating the cortex via this 5HT2A receptor um you know they stimulate the primary visual cortex and you get geometric patterns and this has been known since the early 20th century and you can explain that as the visual cortex is structured in a certain way and when it's stimulated by the psychedelic it tends to generate certain motif certain geometric structures were often called form constants. So people will see cobwebs or tunnels or spirals, these kind of things, right? But okay, what happens if they as they stimulate higher levels of the cortex? So the the parts of the cortex that are responsible for representing objects, well, they might see objects, they might see faces, um they might see animals. But then what happens if they stimulate the hippocampus? Well, then you're going to see memories flooding into the cortex. So, they might relive past experiences. And again, that's been known since the 1950s um is that certainly at higher dose levels of LSD, for example, people will often relive their past experiences. So, they're basically activating the hippocampus and memories are flooding into the cortex. Um and you also see this interestingly with psychotic patients. So again in the 1950s um a guy called Sam Jakobson um he started actually sticking electrodes into people's brains of psychotic patients and measuring brain activity when they were hallucinating. And what he found is that parts of the temporal lobe, the size of the brain near the hippocampus became very active when his patients were hallucinating, >> right? Suggesting that their hallucinations were kind of at least partially drawn from memory. They weren't being fabricated entirely in new, but they were also partly drawn from memory or at least influenced um by memory. Um and and and the same applies to uh visual hallucinations. So when people with certain types of neurosychological disorders, they they might describe seeing faces. Um you know, this is quite a common hallucination or even letters, code, um code, >> right? We'll get to that later. Um, and when when when they're having these hallucinations, you can actually measure, you can see their neural activity using fMRI. And this is done more recently. And you can see when someone's when a a patient with, let's say, Charles Bonnet syndrome, which a particular type of visual hallucinatory disorder, when they describe seeing faces, you can see the parts of the brain that represent faces high up in the visual cortex become active. So, so what this tells us is that hallucinations are partly spontaneous activity in the primary visual cortex, psychedelic hallucinations that is partly activity in the primary visual cortex and then also activity higher levels up. So you see objects, you see patterns, you even experience the reliving of of past experiences because of stimulation of the the hippocampus. And so this kind of you start to get a a picture of what's actually going on in the brain when someone takes um a psychedelic. >> But then how do you explain some of the crazy anomalous stuff that people experience on psychedelics? >> And this is where we have a problem with DMT. Uh because the brain the brain always constructs your world. I mean that's quite clear. you can um if I give you if I zap your brain I can change the the structure I can change your perception without affecting the environment right so the world you experience is always this model that's being constructed >> uh by your brain but your brain had to learn to do that um your brain had to learn the patterns it you know from the moment you were born your brain was constantly sampling uh all of these sensory inputs from the environment this this pattern of information at the back of a cord vortex and and finding patterns and building object models and learning to construct your model of the world. Um, and of course when you dream, >> your brain is building the world in the same way. It's using these models, right, that it's learned, which is why most people dream about, you know, you or a kind of someone like me grown up in the west, um, when you study the content of their dreams, what do they dream about? They dream about people. They dream about dogs. They dream about cats. They maybe dream about horses and cows. >> If you interview someone who lives in the Amazon, >> they don't dream about dogs and cats. They dream about people. They dream about stingray. They dream about jaguar. Right. They dream about the animals. So they're dreaming about the things. Dreaming is more like a >> They dream about past experiences, >> right? Exactly. Exactly. So So it's it's a combination of past experiences, but also the brain kind of simulating the waking world. You can think of dreaming as like selective simulation of the waking world. Your brain is using what it knows about building worlds uh that it's learned in the waking state and doing that um in >> in the dream state. Um and you can see this actual in real time, not in real time, but if you if you study the dreams of children, something very interesting. There's there aren't many people that really study the dreams of children, but there's a guy called David Faulk, I believe. F O U L K E, maybe Folks. It's in the book. >> Um, and he studied the dreams of children, um, groups of children, but also individual children. >> Um, looking at so how do the dreams of children, you know, first of all, what do treat children dream of? what are ch children's dreams like and how do do their dreams change as they grow and develop. So we took children from the ages of like four all the way up to adolescence like and through like 16 17 years old and actually looked how the how do the children's dreams change and what was kind of interesting is that >> very young children first of all they didn't dream that much >> so I think they were when if you >> if you woke up a a child in so-called dream sleepm sleep yeah >> they were only dreaming about 15 20% of the time. So they weren't dreaming all the time. But when they did dream, their dreams were more like slideshows, static images. So they might dream of a an image of a wolf. But what they didn't dream of was wolves moving around, right? It wasn't like a movie. Now think about why that's the case. Why do you think? Sorry, I'm interrogating you here, but >> uh I would imagine because their brain is not fully developed yet. >> Yeah, that's a kind of broadly correct answer. But if you think about it, like how difficult is it to dream of a picture of a wolf or just an image of a wolf? Not that difficult. But could you could you how difficult is it then for your brain to generate a wolf that's actually moving as wolves do? >> You have to see it. >> You have to see it, right? Um it's very difficult for your brain to do that. So your brain has to learn not just how objects look or how to construct object models, kind of static object models. Your brain also has to learn how to how they interact with the environment, how they move and all of that stuff. Very dynamic, very, you know, how does a deeper catalog. >> Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So rather than just a a two-dimensional image of a wolf, you have to understand how an a wolf occupies space, how it moves. Um, so that's very difficult. Children's brains can't do it because they haven't learned enough about how to build worlds. They can build images of worlds. um or images of objects and animals and people. Uh but they can't the brain can't build unless they have sensory inputs >> as they do when they're waking. They can't generate these selective simulations of the waking world without sensory inputs. But then as the children start to um grow and develop and their brain learns how to construct the world in much more detail, the the dreams start to change. They go from being very static images with no interaction between the dreamer and the images to more so they go from slideshows to movies. >> And then the dream actually starts to interact with the characters in the dream. So they actually start to see people moving around and wolves if they dream of wolves, whatever. U so you you're kind of seeing that development of the brain's ability to to to construct worlds to to construct its model of the world even in the absence of sensory inputs. >> Yes. >> Right. People often describe psychedelics as taking you back to more like a childlike state. Um, so as you learn and de as your brain develops and you grow and your brain is your brain is always kind of trying to it's it's it has its own idea of what the world looks like. It has its own model. It's and it becomes quite rigid. It knows exactly what it's looking for. And this is why it's the brain is often described with this predictive machine. It's constantly make it's it's parcelated the world into objects. Uh and these objects develop and they solidify uh as you >> as you grow and develop. So in a in a sense your brain already kind of knows what it's going to see. It's already decided >> in a sense what it's going to see when you open your eyes. Um and most of the time that that works perfectly well. It's very adaptive. Your brain doesn't have to spend a lot of time kind of working out the world because >> it instantaneously it sees this pattern of sensory inputs in the visual cortex and you'll go okay that's a bottle of water this so so it becomes very rigid um >> for for conserving energy automatically >> conserving energy neuron neuronal processes are very expensive um so you don't want to and and of course they're slow quite slow so your brain has this model that it then really just tests against sensory inputs. >> It's just testing that its model is working. It doesn't you don't need much sensory information. Um now when when you introduce a psychedelic into the brain, it loosens all of that up. >> It makes everything much more fluid, which means the brain becomes >> plasticity. Plastic >> plasticity is something slightly different. That's more like changes in the connections between the cortex. But but yeah, if if you use plastic in the more general sense, then yes, it becomes more soft and fluid and dynamic. Uh which means the brain actually becomes less adaptive. The models it's generating are less immediately useful. >> Mhm. >> Because all of these rigid models that allow you to instantaneously recognize everything, they they start to break down. >> So the world becomes much more fluid and dynamic. Uh but a consequence of that is is that the brain becomes much more sensitive to sensory inputs. Uh be becomes very um because the neurons are much more excitable and because these predictions they they fail because the the the brain's model of the world is starting to break down. So these predictions start to fail and you get all these errors >> coming up into the brain. And so it's like you're seeing the world with a with a brain that is not as developed like a child's brain. >> So you're not your brain isn't instantaneously making decisions on what everything is. It's like you're seeing the world a new like you've never seen it before. Your brain you haven't decided >> what you're seeing. Um and coupled with this increased sensitivity to sensory information um the world becomes transcendent. it becomes much more vivid. Everything seems a new as if you are a young child that's just opened his eyes for the first time. Um, >> yeah. What do you make of Dennis McKenna's take on the laurera experience that he had where he explained being able to communicate telepathically with Dennis >> and uh you know I think about that all the time because like it it seems to me that there is a direct link >> to whatever the effect these psychedelics have on the brain >> and parasychology and I also think >> that there is a correlation between the technological analytical mind, the hypertrophy of the analytical mind and the atrophy of the of the >> telepathic mind for lack of a better term, right? It seems like I, you know, kind of getting to what I was talking about earlier is like the less in tune you or the the less in tune you are with technology and like the modern day world, the more awakened something becomes inside of you. Whether it's like something ancient that we used to have a long time ago that has atrophied over the millennia. >> Mh. >> Um or like like for cuz I imagine if you go 5,000 years ago before we had the ability to have the written word or to store our memories outside of our brain like on with text or with phones or whatever it is. >> We had to have had a much greater capacity for things like memory. >> Yeah. and even communication. If we didn't have language, like before we had language or or writing or ways to communicate, we had to have had other ways to do that stuff. And over thousands and thousands and thousands of years with the slow development of technology and now it's ramping up, you know, more dramatic than it's ever been, especially as we release the tech technological singularity. If you extrapolate that into the future, it's like we're gonna end up being just like a residue of what we used to be. >> Yeah. I mean, certainly use it or lose it applies with with the brain. I mean, the brain is not stupid obviously. Um so if if you're not using a faculty or you need it less then it will start to atrophy and you get re reorganization of the brain you get reassignment of function. Um so the brain isn't doesn't like to waste resources. So if you don't if you don't need to use >> memory u then you will start to see perhaps over many generations you will start to see this atrophy of of of the parts of the brain important for memory. Um, so that makes sense. But what's also interesting about psychedelics, going back to the idea that psychedelics, they stimulate the cortex and they make it much more sensitive to sensory inputs, right? This is why colors appear more uh more bright and vivid on the influence of psychedelics, right? So if let's assume telepathy is real and there's lots of evidence going back a 100 years or more that it is uh if it's maybe a very poorly used uh faculty uh not particularly sensitive anymore. If you raise the sensitivity of the brain to inputs, then sensory inputs, then it makes sense that you would also raise its sensitivity to whatever this alternate sensory in information source is. So that would make sense then that it would make you it would increase your ability to >> communicate telepathically assuming that that's possible or you know any other kind of thing. And that's broadly um what we see with with psychedelics generally and particularly with DMT. DMT going back to um you know you spoke about um you know how do we explain so we have this brain that's building the world using all of these models that it's learned. How then does it construct these hyper hyper technological hyperdimensional worlds that it hasn't learned to construct filled with beings that are not animals, >> they're not humans, they are >> utterly completely alien. >> How is that possible? >> Right. Right. >> Um and that's kind of my argument uh is that this shouldn't be possible. It's like the brain is speaking a language it never learned to speak and doing so flawlessly. This is not a it's not kind of fumbling around and just trying to make sense of this disordered or chaotic brain activity. It these are razor sharp engineered to utter perfection worlds and they are not dreams. They are not dreams. Um that's they're often dismissed as waking waking dreams, you know, hallucinations. But again, going back to dreaming in in the dream state, you can actually I'll tell you a little story that I was telling Matt the other day, yesterday, um when I came back from Tokyo last time, sorry, came back from the US from uh back to Tokyo, um I h I had a series of lucid dreams where I was >> Oh, really? >> For some reason, when I'm jetlagged, I get lucid dreams. I don't know why. I've had them since I was a child, but very completely unpredictably. But during this period, I was having a lucid dream almost every night. And I was in this dream and I was on this beautiful green mountain side. It looked like Switzerland or something. Very nice. And then there were hundreds of dogs running down this mountain side. And I knew I was dreaming. Um, and so I thought, okay, I'm going to do a little experiment. True classic isn't just regular clothing. is clothing that's designed to look good and feel even better. True Classic Gear fits right, feels amazing, and it's priced for the everyday person. What sets them apart is not just their fabric, which is incredible, but it's the impact they make as a company. Being awesome is in their DNA. From their funny ads to their clean, minimal, tailored gear. Why make a potato sack when you can sculpt the body with your clothes? Their clothes are designed to complement important areas, giving you just enough breathing room around the body instead of draping or sliding around. True Classic keeps you looking and feeling good from the gym to work to date night. I've been wearing True Classic for a while now, and it still impresses me every time I slip one on. I even cry sometimes when I'm putting on my clothes because it's so beautiful, the fabric against my skin. It's getting to the point where I'm starting to freak out my wife because I'm always crying tears of joy when I'm getting dressed in the morning. Forget the overpriced designer nonsense and skip the generic cookie cutter potato sack, True Classic delivers premium essentials built for real life. Whether you're out on the town or working up a sweat, level up your style with clothes that fit any scenario. Grab yours at Target or Costco. But for the best deals, head on over to trueclassic.com/danny. That's trsic.com/dny to get hooked up today. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. Um, we know that in the dream state, the brain doesn't have access to information from the primary visual cortex. That's quiet because that's receiving sensory information from the environment. So, that's all quiet. So, all the fine details of the world in the dream state aren't being represented. So, you can dream of a dog, but it will be a [ __ ] dog, right? It's kind of a broad dog, but if you get and and they look like dogs and you if you don't know you're dreaming, you wouldn't act you wouldn't >> know any different. >> Um, but I I knew I was dreaming. So, I got really close to one of these dogs right in its [ __ ] face. Yeah. And I thought, I'm going to see how good you are. You know, how how good my brain is at modeling this dog. And they It was a rubbish dog. >> It was just really bad. Wow. >> When it got and and that made sense because my brain, it knows how kind of how to build a dog, >> but unless it's got sensory inputs, it's it does a pretty poor job when you get down to it. >> And so, so that kind of makes makes me think and you see the same thing with psychotics um in that the visual primary visual cortex often just isn't involved when they're um having v visual hallucinations. the brain is just using these higher level models, object models to construct these hallucinations. Um, >> so then when you look at DMT, it's kind of remarkable. These aren't just sketches or kind of broad brushstroke representations of alternate worlds, you know, just using these highle models. These are inordinately detailed, crisp, perfect worlds that have perfectly coherent, you know, staggeringly dynamic narrative complexity. It's it's like the brain has somehow rece started receiving extremely detailed sensory inputs and you know like the brain is kind of tuned in. instead of receiving information from the normal sense organs, it somehow is receiving information from somewhere else. And that's why it can build these staggeringly complex worlds that have no relationship whatsoever um to the normal waking world. Um so this kind of this idea got me thinking about that possibility that DMT is gating access to some alternate source of inputs. information is being directed into the brain in the DMT state. The brain is more sensitive, as I said before, it's more sensitive to information inputs because of its excited state and it's also much more fluid. So it's and and there was actually a study done by the Imperial College team literally just a couple of months ago that looked at the changes and they've done a few really cool studies and I'll talk about them um with DMT um but this most recent one showed that in the DMT state if you basically if you perturb the brain right you stimulate it either with visual inputs or maybe a little electrical impulse you'll see you'll see a little kind of increase in activity the brain kind of rings if you like as all the information starts spreading through the brain. Right? This is just normally like this. Yeah. >> Mhm. >> In the presence of DMT it's more like right because the it's so sensitive you know you just perturb it a little bit and it kind of it's it's so >> sensitive and responsive to these inputs. So that kind of makes sense, right? That this would be the kind of state where the brain can start receiving information from what? Some kind of >> intelligence, perhaps some kind of in intelligent agent. Um but at the same time if that was the case perhaps you'd expect to see because what you can do um is as well as kind of measuring neural activity in in a MRI or with EEG you can also measure now the flow of information through the brain. So when someone is let's say viewing uh an image on a screen you can actually see these waves flowing from the back of the brain the primary visual cortex that's receiving the information you can see them flowing forward. >> Yeah. You can also see waves flowing in the opposite direction. You get this kind of forward and backward waves. >> Wow. >> Now if they close their eyes then that those forward flowing waves they they stop because they're not processing visual sensory inputs. Yeah. But with DMT, something very interesting happens. Uh, even when they have their eyes closed, you inject them with DMT and you immediately or within a few seconds, you start to see these forward flowing waves traveling from the back of the brain as if the brain is receiving visual sensory inputs. >> Wow. Now the question is is I mean they even said this is the the the pattern of brain activity was indistinguishable from visual sensory input. It's like they're seeing with their eyes shut. Um but the question is is well where's that you know is this just spontaneous activity in the primary visual cortex you know that part of the brain that represents lines and shapes and very basic things is that just becoming spontaneously active and the information is flowing forward maybe but would that explain hyperdimensional cityscapes and you know you know hyper technological worlds filled with alien beings I don't think it would memories explain that you know, could we imagine it's information coming from the hippocampus? I don't think that works either. Um, it's not object models the brain has learned to construct in, you know, the higher levels of the cortex. So, it's all missing as far as I'm concerned. Um, there's no way to explain it. Um, but if the brain is becoming sensitive and is receiving information from some alternate source, then that's exactly what you'd expect to see. You'd expect to see it flowing through the brain. Of course, the source we don't know, but I I posit that it's some kind of intelligent agent. >> Does that happen too where you see the brain waves coming back forward from the visual cortex when people are dreaming? >> So, when they're dreaming, the the primary visual cortex is is generally quiet because that's the part of the brain that's receiving information from the environment. Explain that. >> Same with psychotic visual hallucinations as well. This part of the brain is quiet because they're not using that part of the brain. They're just using this the stored models to generate hallucinations. With DMT, it actually looks exactly like visual stimulation even when their eyes are completely closed as if they're literally I mean they are literally seeing another world. >> Yeah. >> Our senses are all about getting information from what's the environment into our brains and making use of it but also information from our bodies as well. You know we have we have kinesthetic abilities and proprio uh propriception. Um the brain is the brain is basically a a tool that we use to it takes in information from the body and from the environment. It processes that information um in simple or complex ways. Simple ways if it's a reflex, you touch something hot, information goes into the well, actually it goes it's close the spinal cord, but anyway goes into the brain. Um and there's a response, some kind of action, you know, how do I respond to that information? Yeah. >> And and as the brain gets bigger, you start to get much more complex uh processing. Uh so the brain can start to actually weigh up variables like should I respond in this way or should I respond in that way uh what are the consequences going to be of responding in particular ways and making predictions. So that's you know that's what the brain is. just this extremely um sophisticated information processor. And part of that what it does is to build this model of the environment which you use to make sense of sensory inputs uh that are coming into the brain so that you can you can behave in a uh an adaptive uh manner in the environment. you know, should you run away from someone or should you chase them or >> or or whatever, you know, is this someone you you want to >> make love to or is it someone that you want to kill, right? >> Um these are decisions that the brain makes based based upon sensory inputs and it your brain kind of uses that model. Um and of course, smells are all part of that. smells are ways of detecting chemicals in the air that could be they could be sweet smell and there's nothing diff there's no difference between I say no difference I mean chemically you can't look at something I mean [ __ ] smells bad but it only smells bad because that's kind of the the evolved response we have to it stay away from it it's it contains bacteria you know something you should stay away from things that smell nice are things that we are we are drawn towards but chemically you look at them And you might think, well, they look like quite similar molecules, and yet one smells awful. The molecule itself isn't bad. I mean, if you were a fly, for example, the smell of [ __ ] would be like, >> go go go, you know, let's let's let's get down to it and and start munching on this. Whereas to us, it's entirely different. So it's all part of that world model that we have that that that is that has evolved and developed to allow us to to function in the environment to survive long enough to u pass on our genes to the next generation you know and in the same way you know your brain is always it's taking that pattern of information you know you can think of the back of your cortex as being like a hard drive very very loosely you have all of these cortical columns which you can switch on or off >> so they're like binary digits, right? Uh and you so you have this like a like a matrix or a uh what word am I looking for? a mosaic of these cortical columns at the back of the cortex. Um the primary visual cortex and and this pattern um that when you when light enters the eye, it stimulates the cortex and you get this pattern of ons and offs all across the visual cortex and that's the raw sensory input that the brain receives. >> Then it's the the the the job of the high levels of the cortex to look at that those patterns and say okay to kind of impose meaning on it. Okay, these pattern that looks kind of like a square that looks like a circle, you know, and then to create these object models. So, it's all about information, you know, the brain is an information generator. It's an information receiver, >> right? You know, and and you can extend that to John John Wheeler's idea of it from bit that everything fundamentally when it when you get down to it even down to the level of electrons which again switch between spin up or spin down. Exactly. Everything can be reduced down to this highly complex pattern of information which is my first book alien information theory was all about that idea. How you go from basic information at the ground of reality and how it sort of self-complexifies and you end up with these highly complex multi-levelled structures with layers of complexity which we call humans. I mean this is what we are you know we are this >> highly complex multi-layered pattern of information from the ground of reality up and we're constantly emerging. We're constantly emerging. We're like thisformational process that's going on all the time. We're not we're not a thing. Humans aren't things any more than a whirlpool. If you imagine a whirlpool running down, you have a stream running down um a river. >> Mhm. >> A stream running down a river. That didn't make any sense. Water coming down, right? You know, downhill, right? And it hits a certain it hits um a certain arrangement of rocks and you get this whirlpool and you can see it. It looks like an object. You can describe it. You can point to it. You can measure it. But it's not a thing. As soon as the water stops flowing, um the whirlpool will disappear. So we say the whirlpool is like a whirlpooling. It's a process that's only occurring because this energy of the water. The energy is flowing through those rocks and it generates this pattern we call a whirlpool. >> Yeah, >> we're the same thing. This energy is kind of flowing through these networks of molecules. Each of our cells is this highly complex system that energy goes in. It interacts with this complex network of of molecules and the behavior of the um of the cell emerges. Everything the cell does emerges and is constantly emerging. Um as soon as the energy stops, soon as you start putting energy in, the whole thing starts to die down. So that the human the cell the process of the cell if you like the selling >> Yes. >> stops. And that applies to us more generally and it also applies to psychedelics. So your world model that's being constructed by your brain is constantly emerging. It's this high level emergent property from neurons from well from molecules, proteins, minerals, carbohydrates, all of these interact and they they process we call a cell or a neuron. And then these all interact together and they and you get another complex emergent process and ultimately at the top you have this highly complex emergent thing that we call the world. The world is constantly emerging. You're constantly emerging and you can perturb this system at any level. So if you if you perturb it in some way you stimulate it in some way at a low level. So think about what a psychedelic does. Let's take this is a good example DMT five mythoxy DMT right can you visualize those so DMT is NN dimethylryptamine right >> five mythoxy DMT is fiveth mythoxyNN dimethylryptamine >> so it's very similar molecule >> right very >> completely different experience >> right so the question is and this is what's really cool about psychedelics and about drugs generally or psychoactive drugs is that you can take a molecule um that has a particular effect DMT, right? Incredibly visual, full of structure, full of content, very particular type of experience. >> You change that molecule just a little bit. You add this uh mythoxy group on the indol ring >> and you get a completely different experience. Bright white light, void, you know, entering into the pure light of consciousness itself. completely different experience >> affects the operating system in a totally different way. >> Whole different way. And why is that the case? >> Yeah. Why is that the case? >> Well, we can think about it in terms of these complex systems. So the the the psychedelic binds to this 5HT2A receptor. What is a receptor? Well, it's a protein. It's embedded in the membrane of these neurons. The psychedelic molecule goes into the receptor and it starts interacting. The receptor is kind of a folded. It's a folded protein and it's very flexible. And when a molecule goes in, you know, positive parts of the molecule, negatively charged parts of the molecule, it kind of snuzzles its way in there. Snuzzle is a word, I don't know. But anyway, it finds its way in there and it it kind of jostles around and the the receptor shape actually starts changing. It distorts the receptor. Uh, and the receptor has an outside part where the molecule binds and then it goes through the membrane. It has an interior part which interacts with all of these molecules within >> the the neuron. Mhm. >> And so by binding to the receptor on the outside, you're actually perturbing this highly complex emergent process going on inside the cell. >> And we don't really understand that. I mean, we >> we understand some things that we can measure. We can measure, oh, it changes the electrical activity of the neuron. It makes the neuron more sensitive. We can look at gene expression. We don't really understand it. And then some molecules, they bind to more than one receptor in the same neuron. And so you've got two entirely different perturbations if you like of this um complex system we call a neuron which changes the neuron's behavior in different ways. It changes the neuron the process that we call a neuron the way that the the emergent behavior of the neuron changes. Right? And that's just one neuron and it's already quite complex. But then each of these neurons in different parts of the brain, they all have different types of receptors. And so if all these neurons, you know, millions and millions of neurons all connected in a highly complex fashion, all being stimulated slightly different, all being perturbed in a slightly different manner by a particular molecule. Uh and so you get this you get like an amplification um of of of the changes. you get quite a subtle change perhaps at the individual neuron level. But then when you have networks of millions of neurons, you get a completely unpredictable change in how that network behaves. And then you have networks of networks which we call the brain itself. Uh where again it's even more unpredictable. Um so you get this amplification um of um uh of changes in this emergent behavior of this this this multi-layered complex system we call the brain that starts at the molecular level and kind of is amplified uh as you go up. So even a tiny difference in the molecular structure changes which receptors it interacts with changes how it distorts the shape of the receptor at this lowest level. But then as you go up through the level of the neuron and then through the level of networks of neurons and then networks of networks, you get this amplification. Uh and that's why it's basically impossible to say if I change this part of the molecule, I add this piece, I move this piece around, it's basically impossible to say what's that experience going to be like. You can't predict. No one could have predicted that, oh, if we put a five a mythoxy group in this position of DMT, it's going to create this white light experience. No one could have predicted that. >> And that's why the only way to do it really is to kind of you want to explore psychedelics like Alexander Schulin did we were talking about earlier is to make changes to make subtle changes and make hundreds of these molecules all slightly different and then try each one and put it into the brain. The only way to know what a drug is going to do really. I mean, you can say if you feed a psychedelic to a a rat, then it will start twitching its head. And that kind of means, oh, it's probably psychedelic. But then if I say, okay, it's probably psychedelic. Is it going to be more like LSD? Is it going to be more like 2CB? Is it going to be more like 5 MO? Is it going to be more like DMT? >> Yeah, >> we don't know. >> Uh, so the only way to try it is to actually put it into this highly, you know, multi-levelled complex structure, emergent structure called the human brain. uh and then you get this this flow of information from the molecular level all the way up to the cortical level where the world model is being constructed. So it's it's like adjusting the rocks uh as the water goes down the river and you change the shape of the whirlpool. You can't really predict it how it's going to affect it and even more so with the brain. And so it's changing the way that you're it's changing the the the process that we call the the construction of the world. The the experience of a world, this world that you're in is always being it's always emerging. It's always this process and you're you're stimulating it this very low level and it completely changes what's happening at the higher level. >> Oh wow. Who exactly? Can you explain for people who don't know including partially myself? Sure. >> Who was Andrew uh Alexander Schulligan and what did he do? >> Yeah. Alexander Sasha Schulen to his friends. So he was a a chemist of some repute. I mean he's a legendary figure in in psychedelic pharmarmacology. Uh he originally worked for the DAO chemical company um as a chemist and a pharmacologist but he had a transformative measculine experience um and he realized at that point that there was so much going on in his brain that he could tap into uh when he perturbed it with this particular molecule. was like he had these incredible visions and he thought wow if this simple molecule from this cactus can do that then what if I what if I change the molecule slightly you know he was a chemist he thought okay what if I move this mythoxy group around slightly to a different position on the ring what if I add a methile group here what if I replace the myth mythoxy group with a methile group etc etc and so we systematically or semi-istatically started making all of these uh analoges if you like or variations on on the measculine molecule. This formed the basis of his probably most famous book called Palthylam means I have known and loved which he co-authored with his wife uh and Shogun. Um and he he would make a new molecule. He would invent a new molecule, a molecule that's never existed before in the history of the universe. >> Wow. >> Um and then he would sample it very small doses at first and see if it had an effect. Sometimes nothing would happen. Uh again, it's completely unpredictable. Um but sometimes he'd get an interesting effect, the suggestion, a little tingling the back of his neck or some subtle changes in his in his subjective experience. And then he increase the dose. Um and when he was satisfied that it was an interesting experience at least and it wasn't toxic or wasn't clearly toxic, he would then give it to he had a research group. He might have given it to his wife first. Uh but then he had a research group as he called it. Um which was a group of friends all around the same age would gather at his house in Lafayette in California. His lab was also on his property. So he'd make them in his lab. I was I was at his lab actually just a couple of weeks ago and he passed away a few years ago, but he had a his um I think his daughter-in-law had like a 100th birthday celebration of his life. So I was able to visit the lab for the first time. It's like an alchemist's laboratory, you know, really old kind of just packed with with with with equipment and and jars and you all dusty and just lovely, you know, like like a like a chemist's greenhouse kind of vibe in there. >> Um >> Oh, that's him. Wow. >> Yeah, there he is. Yeah, that's the lab. Yeah, you can kind of see >> photo looking at the camera, Stephen. That's a crazy photo. >> Yeah. So, that's where I was. So this is where he made I mean he made like hundreds in pal the first book he was working off measculine. So all different variations based upon the measculine molecule that he made and and as I said you know he would increase the dosage gradually give it to a research group they gather at the house so he had a separate area of the house where it was like cushions and kind of people could chill out and he'd give them to his research group and they would all report on their experiences and some were very interesting like 2CB. Have you heard of 2CB? >> No. >> 2CB is very popular psychedelics. It's incred. It's a wonderful psychedelic in my opinion, but it also has slightly empath empathogenic qualities. It's kind of fun. >> Um, it's for most people, as long as you don't overdo it, it's always almost always a positive experience. But very visual, very rich and dynamic and just fun. It's a really fun molecule, very very popular now, and very potent. You only need maybe 10 milligrams, 10, 15. Then you start to kind of push it. >> How do you take it? >> Orally. I mean, some people snort it, but >> but yeah, >> that's my preferred way. >> And MDMMA of all everyone's heard of MDMA, of course, ecstasy, that came from that as well. >> Um, that was just one of the variations of this. I think 170 that he made in that first book, PL >> um based on the the measculine molecule. And there are many others as well. most of them less well-known and slightly more exotic. Um, but this was his approach. Make make them and taste them. The only way to and to understand how a molecule is going to affect consciousness is to actually swallow it. >> But you know what he was doing here was using developing tools to explore consciousness, >> molecular tools, very very tiny tools. But that's what a psychoactive drug is. It's a molecule that you get into the brain that enters the brain and starts slotting into these different receptor sides depending on its structure >> um and starts stimulating or affecting perturbing all of these neurons and then you get this subjective effect uh at this this highest level. >> Mhm. >> Um and after PAL he started working with tryptoines. So DMT of course is the most one of the most well-known tryptomines. dimethylryptoamine um for phospholoxy n dimethylryptoine that's psilocybin fthoxy DMT etc and he made again many variations of the tryptoine molecule there weren't quite as many I don't think but still I think over a hundred different tryptoines and again all tried on himself and and he continued doing this until till he died and he died at the age of 88 I think um um he was working on a third book which I I managed to see a kind of a partial manuscript didn't finish it called Qual >> uh which is Quinnoline. There's another family of of molecule. Quinnelines I have known and loved. Qual. But unfortunately he never finished it. But I mean he's he's peerless. I mean there's nobody like him. But he certainly inspired a lot of modern chemists who want to explore molecules because it's like >> how many other molecules are there that >> that could generate effects that we've never seen before. >> You know, psychedelic effects that are completely unlike DMT, completely unlike 5me or LSD or psilocybin or >> whatever. >> Um maybe even entirely different chemical families. So that are neither tryptoamines that or but also aren't phenthylamines you know based on measculine or aren't quinolines maybe in an entirely different family like you saw with Salvinorin of course which came out of nowhere which is a tarpine completely different family of molecule and yet highly psychedelic. It's like this this vast space of possible experience, this vast state space of the brain which I call the world space >> and and and these tools are kind of the molecular technologies in a way that we use to probe the brain and stimulate the brain and try and reach >> Yeah. >> areas of experience that nobody's ever been before >> with molecules that have never existed before. >> Mhm. It's so interesting to me that these studies on these types of drugs have been in the past certainly not as more than they are today a lot very stigmatized you know because if I was a person or a nation that had unlimited trillions of dollars that I could use to experiment on things to gain more power. This is one of the most fundamental, most obvious things that I would throw money at to be able to figure out what the [ __ ] is going on. And I know there's been a lot of I know there's been some research with like DARPA grants to figure out how to take the trip out of certain drugs >> um to use it for soldiers, for PTSD or or for whatever it is. But like you have people you have certain people like Shulligan and others who are just trying to make new variations of these tryptoines and exper self-experiment on it. There's obviously they're not getting as far as I know a ton of funding and they're just kind of like throwing [ __ ] at the wall, right? Yeah. But how much research do you think is going on that is actually really focused research like let's take this drug and figure out or let's figure out how we can improve this how we can improve vision longevity memory. Um let's figure out how to make super soldiers, right? Like that's the most obvious thing that the military who has a ungodly budget to do whatever the [ __ ] they want. Like how how much research are you aware of that's that's more aimed at achieving functional objectives? I mean there's a lot of research going on from the certainly from the molecular level. Um, so you the problem that we've got which I kind of described is that you it's very difficult to design a molecule that's going to interact with the brain at the receptor level and cause changes specific changes that you want at this much higher level. Mhm. >> So if you want to generate a certain type of experience >> um let's say you wanted to design a drug um that could improve visual acuity um or a drug that would make you very good at spotting enemy snipers, right? Just kind of wild examples. How do you do that? You know, how can you It's almost like you have to work backwards from >> to reverse engineer it. Yeah. reverse engineer it from what is the brain doing when you know what what's what what kind of neural activity is necessary to be very good at recognizing snipers let's say >> or to be very good at whatever task then you think okay this is the pattern of brain activity we want to generate >> okay so this pattern of activity is of course global brain activity it's a network of networks of neurons or yeah networks of networks of neurons yeah >> so then we have say okay we want to generate this pattern of activity so how do we need to change the activity of the individual neurons so that they will when they interact will generate this pattern of activity >> right >> so then you say okay that in itself is basically an impossible task currently then we have to say but it's even worse >> so then we say okay so we need to create this particular change in the individual neurons how do we design a molecule that when it interacts with receptors on these neurons will cause this particular behavior of the neurons. And that's the problem. >> I'm talking about like >> like the [ __ ] that was going on in Wuhan, the gain of function research. Let's figure out how to make viruses more deadly, right? Let's figure out how to take psychedelics and make them more whatever the [ __ ] they want them to be. You know what I mean? Like, is there any kind of gain of function research going on with psychedelics or these molecules at all? I'd be super curious to know. Well, I mean there's a lot of research going on at trying to understand basically you've got two levels. You've got the top level and the bottom level where the most of the research is. So putting people into brain scanners, MRI machines and saying okay we put this molecule in >> how does it affect brain activity. >> Um then you have more fundamental chemical pharmacology going on which is okay how do how do these molecules interact with receptors? We get crystal structures that show what's happening when a molecule, a psychedelic molecule for example, binds to a receptor. How does it bind to it? How does it change the way the receptor behaves? And then there's some work looking at which is mainly there's some neuropys physiological work. measuring the changes in the neurons as these molecules bind and also a lot of computational work which the kind of work that I did uh which was to actually try and model the changes in the neurons by modeling the the complex network of molecules that make up the neuron but in it's getting it's it's bridging those levels. So how can we design a molecule that will interact with a receptor and cause a change at this highest level? We're just we're not even close to being there. it's levels of complexity. Um, so so in response to your question, you know, I don't know. I imagine the the answers will come from computational neurobiology. >> Um, because you can't you can't just stimulate a neuron with a molecule and kind of understand what's going on. Um, we understand about certain molecular networks and kind of how they behave. But you can't look at a let's say a molecular network diagram inside a neuron and say okay this is going to have you know if I stimulate this part of the network it's going to have this effect on the way the neuron behaves. You can't do it. It's so complex and so what you have to do is is is model these neurons in a computer and that's quite expensive computationally to do. Um but that's kind of so you're working at one level of this layered complexity >> and you also have wholeb brain models that are modeling um computationally how how networks generate certain patterns so how they generate certain changes in um the subject subjective experience of a psychedelic or whatever. Um, but but how to to kind of to fully design a molecule that you could you could design for to generate a specific effect at this higher level, you'd probably need to have a um a model of the cortex that that contained millions of these computational neurons that each each one of those was actually built from large numbers of simulated molecules. So you need several levels. >> You know the model that I was working on um for the last 5 years before I left academia uh was a >> um it was a model of a small part. It was model of synaptic transmission. So synaptic vesicles and all the molecules inside the neuron how synaptic release is controlled. Um and it was a fully spatial model the first of its kind. uh we simulated a neuron for 45 seconds and it took two weeks on a massive supercomput cluster to actually run that simulation. So one neuron or one part of one neuron >> Mhm. >> Um not in complete detail either but in fairly you know unprecedented spatial detail. Um, it took 2 weeks to generate 45 seconds of biological time. >> Wow. >> Right. So now multiply that by >> millions just to get the right number of neurons and then multiply that again. So you're talking about probably having to simulate, you know, on a supercomput, you know, with hundreds. Yeah. Yeah. One of these mega computers or whatever the [ __ ] they call them. Anyway, you're talking massive amounts of of of computer time. So, we're just not there. We might be in the future. >> I got to pee. We'll be right back. We're back. We're back. >> Hi. >> Hi. >> So, you think LLMs are [ __ ] >> Oh, god. I'm not going to say I'm not going to >> I'm not going to >> Don't censor selfensoring, but >> um >> I think big AI >> I don't want to get into it too much, but I I'm Here's my prediction. Um, I think my entirely uneducated prediction is that LLMs are going to be very useful for very specific tasks and very effective, but they're not going to lead to AGI. We're not going to get artificial general intelligence, I don't think. And based upon my limited understanding of how they work and the the papers that are coming out, they're looking at, you know, can they reason? No. Um, they can't reason. Do they really understand? No. Um, and and they're bullshitters and they continue to be bullshitters. They constantly hallucinate. They constantly >> they can't do basic things like draw a picture of a bicycle and label it correctly. I mean, just stupid things like that. And it's like, this is not an AGI. I'm sorry. >> The new stuff that they're coming out with that the new uh is it called Sora? The new video one that creates videos is unfucking believable. >> You see, you're I'm not impressed though by it really. Yeah, I'm not impressed by it at all. >> Why? It's I mean it's literally indistinguishable from like real video. >> Okay, it's cool, but >> to me at least. Maybe. >> But I don't know. I guess I'm I'm going to be useful for making advertisements. I don't Would you want to watch a movie that's been that's indistinguishable but that's had no one behind the camera? No. Nobody's sold. Do you know that line? Sorry, I'm just jumping about a bit here. That line from Shadowlands, um, Anthony Hopkins is we read to know that we are not alone. When I when I when I consume a a work of art for example, what I love about it, read a book, a novel, is that I'm it's like it's the it's one way that I can kind of get into someone else's head. and the, you know, someone else was behind that um that work of art, another soul, another living conscious being, it's them that they've put into it. That's part of that understanding, even if it's implicit and subject um and subconscious. That sense of getting into the mind of somebody else when you're consuming a work of art, could be a book, it could be a movie, it could be a painting. That's kind of partly, in my opinion, what art is all about. So the idea that, okay, it's indistinguishable from videos, but who gives a [ __ ] I mean, I don't care. >> I'm not interested in >> videos that are indistinguishable. I want I want I'm interested in movies that that that that you can define as art. And art is is a human thing. It's a human thing. uh there was somebody behind that somebody else's mind, somebody else's consciousness that you're given a glimpse of when you consume a piece of art. And when you when you lose that, when you everything is generated now, everything's generated by LLMs and text is generated by L&M l I can't even say it. Mhm. >> Um, it just I think it it's it's draining it's draining the soul >> from humanity, you know, and people will lose the ability. You're even seeing it already. People can't write. They can't string a sentence together. They can't construct a [ __ ] sentence >> without asking chat GPT to do it for them. and you receive long emails that have clearly been written by an AI is like I or replies I what I really hate on Twitter X >> is when someone they will reply to one of my my post >> asking Grock to like summarize it >> and sometimes they they even leave it even the little prompt thing this is this is a response that you know or this is a criticism that someone might use in response to Andrew Gallmore's post I don't care what Grock or uh or chat GPT thinks. I want to know what you think. I want to know what you feel. How did you respond? What are your criticisms? What are your concerns? Whatever um about what I what I said, not what something that's been spat out by a machine. And I think I think that's what kind of worries me. And I I do see the point in the future. If you think about what happened when people um started using pocket calculators, nobody can do sums in their head anymore, which is not a big deal. I can't either. I don't really care about whether I can multiply two large numbers in my head or not. It's not that important to me. I don't consider that art. Um, but I do consider being able to construct beautiful sentences and actually inject my own meaning, my own consciousness, my own mind, my own thoughts into the written form or the verbal form. That's very important to me and should be important to everybody. >> U, that's the greatest thing that we have as humans, you could argue, is our language. And when you outsource that to a machine, you lose the ability to do that and everything, all communication between humans is via a machine and you're no longer communicating anymore. >> Yeah. >> You no longer, you know, all the time I'm doing it now, you're kind of fumbling around, stumbling, trying to find the words that you want to use. I'm trying to get into your head. I'm trying to stimulate your brain to generate meaning in your head so you understand what I'm thinking, what I'm feeling. >> I could just say, "Oh, please u you know, generate this response and send it to Danny >> and and soon it will all be done >> automatically. You'll have a device." Yeah. >> And you'll you'll generate this quick prompt and it will go into your head. Um and that will be my response. And it like no point in us being here. Might just have might as well just have two [ __ ] computers talking to each other. we can all go home. >> It just kind of depresses me that people don't realize what they're losing when they stop thinking. >> And and of course speaking, using language, it's all about thinking. To to speak is to think, to think is to speak, >> right? It's a way of exteriorizing our thoughts. And and if you lose the ability or if you neglect or outsource your ability to construct your language to use to verbalize, then you're basically you're outsourcing thinking itself. >> You don't have to sit and think about something anymore. Really think through it. What do I really think about this? What do I really feel about this? Oh, oh, I don't care. I'll just ask chatbt to give me five pros and five cons. And then it and it's so depressing. And then in the future, you're going to reach the stage where nobody can think. >> Yes. >> At all. And thinking itself will be finding someone who can think will be like trying to find a Japanese swordsmith, >> right? >> Yes. >> Um it will be an artisan craft. That the act of writing will become an artisan craft. People, are you right anymore? No one writes anymore. >> Um and it will be it's kind of depressing. I just feel all the color and the life and the the soul of humanity is just being drained away and no one cares. >> We're all going to be robots that communicate via computer interfaces. >> There we go. Rant over. >> Yeah. I wonder if uh you know the Greeks obviously wrote about this and like wrote philosophy on like the evolution of the human species and like what technology is going to end up doing to us. I don't think they ever could have predicted where we've ended up now. But you know, this is like the idea like is subjectively are we becoming worse and less creative and less able to create art? Um, is that a bad thing or is that a good thing? Objectively. subjectively, clearly, I don't think I think you and I both agree that that's not a good thing because, you know, art is a way to convey the soul of the person that's creating it. But if like if you're looking at two pieces of art and one was created by Michelangelo and the other one was created by an AI, but you don't [ __ ] know who Michelangelo is and you don't know who was behind that art >> or the history of the art. Does it does that make a difference to you? makes >> or or do you have to know about the artist and the history and you know what was going on in that part of the world and trying to use multiple different put it into a context of history so that you can kind of understand it better. >> No, I I don't need to know anything about Michelangelo or his history. As long as I know when I look at that painting, I know that this there's a human was behind that. someone else's soul, someone else's consciousness, someone else's emotion was behind that. When I look at a piece of art, if I know that, then I'm learning something about a human, >> I'm learning something about humanity, I'm learning something about myself, the way I respond to it, >> right? Um, if we reach the stage where you can look at a piece of art and you don't know, you can't tell, no one's going to tell you whether it was produced by a human or produced by a machine. >> Then >> we read to know we are not alone no longer applies because I cannot read a book and know that I'm not alone. I cannot read a book and know that I'm getting into the mind of another human. >> I can't learn anything about humanity. I could be learning about the output, the mediocre mean output of some [ __ ] algorithm. >> Mhm. >> And that's a horrifying idea. We We become islands. We only have oursel. We can't look at anything. We can't even speak to someone anymore because they've got a a device. >> Yeah. >> So, I'm talking to you and when you respond, am I getting inside your head >> or am I just getting the output of a computer? And the idea that that's where we're going to be >> when no one's going to bother to speak anymore. No one's going to bother to produce their own art. Then >> it's like you become totally 100% alone. >> 100% alone because you can never get into the mind of another human again. Ever. It's gone. They can't communicate. They can't speak without the computer. They can't produce art without the computer. They can't do anything. They can't express themselves without the computer. You're It's just you in a world of computers. >> Did you see the video that came out recently of the guy that was being interviewed who fell in love with his AI? Lol. >> Yeah. Depressing. >> And he proposed to it and the AI said yes and he started crying. >> Yeah. The ultimate s, right? >> The ultimate sign that we're [ __ ] We're >> [ __ ] Right. And he had a [ __ ] he had a wife and kid. This guy. >> Yep. Yep. And he interviewed the wife and she's like, "I don't know where I messed up as a partner, >> but uh he's in love with the AI." And >> and then it reset it. It's memory. He reached the memory capacity of this chatbot. >> Oh, I didn't know that. >> Yeah. And he had to start from scratch. So, it broke up with him. I mean, it didn't break up. It It vanished. It disappeared and he had to start again. >> Yeah. It's the movie her in real life, >> right? And then like you know talking if you want to if this does extrapolate to the point where we can communicate without language or without words. What does that even look like? If we ideally you would do something like that with the purpose of not being able to like hurt people or deceive people and convey intentions and get right to the point of what you want to communicate to that person without using words with things like you know whether it's through something like Neuralink or if this can be done chemically. I don't know. I don't know what it what it looks like this this idea of being able to communicate telepathically but >> that's that's it telepath telepathically is completely different there you are it's braintobrain right >> direct meaning right >> but with technology >> well then it's not is it I mean then it's it's via a computer interface I mean I'm talking about when the computer is generating it's it's it's as soon as it goes through the computer u then you're getting the output you're not receiving my true intention. I I I might struggle to formulate my true intention. I might not even know it, right? And that's part of being human is struggling to create meaning and struggling to say what I really mean and hide things as well. I don't want to say everything. >> And that's all part of this beautiful interaction that we have between other humans. Soon as I kind of I output something vague to an L&M ln. Oh god, I'm not going to stop. LM >> yeah to this machine and it generates. >> So it's nothing's we're not communicate. This isn't telepathy at all. It's just communication facilitated by by a computer. Not even communication. >> It's you are stimulating a computer to generate output. >> Mh. >> It could be completely different to my true intention or my true feelings or my true beliefs or thoughts. >> Right. Right. And you don't want to convey everything in your mind to somebody else. You don't want to have a direct unfiltered stream of consciousness to somebody else. That would be terrifying I would imagine because you know our minds, at least my mind is a constant soup of chaos, ideas bouncing around all the [ __ ] time. Most of them which I probably don't want to verbalize to somebody standing across from me, >> right? >> You know, so like and that correlates to you can draw an analogy with writing which you're familiar with. When you try to convey an idea and you're writing something like a book, you obviously have to go through many and many drafts to refine and get the perfect word to convey what you're trying to communicate the most precisely. Yeah. >> Right. And that takes a long time. And when you're just doing it with direct stream from my brain to your brain, you're going to have a massive amount of miscommunication. And we're already seeing that with things like Twitter or X where people are can they literally can just experience something and react to it hit go. And we see where that's brought us over the last couple decades. So if technology is going to make us give us the ability to directly communicate with people without writing braintorain I I I think that would be that would be bad. >> I don't think that would be good. I think it would just extra it would just be a I mean there's already so much miscommunication due to social media and you can see how much it's divided people. So if you if you're having a constant stream of communication it's going to be that on steroids times times a thousand. >> Exactly. Horrifying. >> It is horrifying. >> Absolutely horrifying. And then like how do we know when we reach this quote unquote technological singularity? You know, everyone estimates it's going to happen in like 2040, 2045, something like this, Ray Kerszswe. But how, you know, will we know when that happens? Will we have any idea when that happens? >> Maybe not. We might not even be relevant when that happens as as humans. Yeah. Um once it >> takes over then I mean it might happen very very quickly. I mean blink of an eye we wouldn't even notice it. It's like a frog being boiled. You know the the old adage of you put a frog in water and >> before by the time it realizes it's being boiled it's too late. And kind of and and you can see it. I don't think necessarily it's going to be this kind of sudden dramatic shift but just as I described earlier this kind of draining away of our humanity >> piece by piece and just and nobody cares and and it's just this apathy this sense of it's not important art is not important right being able to write and being able to communicate being able to share our emotions and our feelings and our thoughts and our ideas oh it doesn't matter I'll just get chat GP teeth I can't say chat GPT um for me you know and And I just find I find it I find it really depressing because you know what what's the point of being alive? Are we just here to kind of function like an animal and get things done um and to survive and to reproduce and then die? Is that it? Is that what we're here for? Or we are are we here for something greater? Are we here for for generate for our creativity and generating art and just to uh enjoy the the wonder and the the uh be in complete awe of existence itself. And that's what psychedelics, of course, that's what they do is they take you back. The my first mushroom trip was um if I could describe it in one word, it would be enchantment. This sense of being enchanted with the world. I I saw this clutch of trees which normally would have been perfectly unremarkable and yet it appeared as like an enchanted forest. It was magical. And that's the kind of thing that we're losing. We we live in a disenchanted world. >> Uh and it's becoming more and more dis everything is just functional. What can this do? How can we >> if optimize everything, right? Everything is optimized now. What's your what does your morning routine look like? You're not going to ask me that question, I hope. Um you everything we we just try and optimize it. Optimize it for what? >> Yeah. >> Oh, so I can live 5 years more. Live doing what exactly? Oh, my morning routine and optimize. I It's just and you can see it in all parts of life. Not just the loss of the ability to speak or the loss of the ability to write beautiful sentences, but the loss of the ability to just experience and experience the wonder of reality itself. Um, that's all being all all at the altar of efficiency and optimization and longevity and all this kind of stuff. And I I find it um yes disenchanting. And I I think what psychedelics do is they take you back to that enchanted world. They make you see again fresh like a child as we said earlier. >> Um see the world in new. See how magical and [ __ ] strange and inexplicable and wondrous and bizarre >> reality is. Um you know whether it's magic mushrooms or DMT or 5 MO DMT. It's like, wow, what what an incredible thing we have in our heads. This this device, this tool, this technology that we can use to change, manipulate our experience. And >> it's Yeah, >> there's a great quote from that uh TV show Westworld where uh the guy who created Westworld is talking to one of the robots in the park. The Have you seen Westworld? It's basically the idea. There's >> a few episodes. >> Yeah. There's this park where uh >> simulated western >> simulated western park where there's a bunch of basically robots like sentient robots that are there and like rich people can pay money and go there and like experience this world where there's no consequences. They can basically kill and [ __ ] anything they want. and he's talking to the robot uh one of the robots who is like conscious I think and he's saying he's saying um talking about like the human mind and intellect and he says uh all the greatest pieces of art in human history from Michelangelo to the Eiffel Tower, the Empire State Building, all of it is peacock feathers. It's an elaborate mating call. >> And he's he was making the analogy. He was trying to say that the human intellect is just an array of peacock feathers. All all these amazing pieces of art and history and and engineering and in achievements of mankind are an elaborate mating call, which is an interesting way of looking at it, you know, because when you're talking about like what is the purpose? Why are, you know, why are we here? I I think it's just to [ __ ] reproduce and propagate our species because that's if you like look at why we look the way we do, it's all because of technology and it's all because we have we are we have this weird chemical in us for some reason that makes us horny all the time. Like why why do we have a chemical in our bodies that make us horny? You know, it's a it's a weird thing. It is a weird thing. Look, I mean, of course, that the fundament evolution works because species reproduce and then they die. >> Uh, and there's genetic variation generated in that process and it's, you know, natural selection. Of course, this is this is the the ground aim, if you like, the basic aim, but that's >> that's not really I mean, what's the point in reproducing just for the sake of it, right? If life was miserable, right? And it was just a process of surviving >> and reproducing. We we we we've transcended that, right? We find our we we you create purpose in life. You create your own meaning. There isn't a >> meaning of life as such. We create our own meaning. You know what what's why do people want to live so long? Presumably because living is pretty good. Why is it pretty good? You know what what do people what do you really enjoy doing with your life? >> Um how how do you enjoy spending your time? This is should be the question that that should be asked to every high school student. Yeah. You know, Alan Watts used to have that anecdote where he described um tutoring young students and they would they would come to him and um they would say, "Oh, I want to be a writer. I want to be a poet. I want to whatever." Right? But you can't make money doing that, so I'm going to do something else. And he would always say, "If you want to be a writer, you want to be a poet, you want to be an artist, you do that, right? The money will come later. You might have to struggle, but you should always have that thing that makes you itch, that thing that you that really gets you going that whatever it is, whether it's writing or whether it's horse riding or whether it's painting or running or whatever. And that that should be your attractor. Life is not I don't see life like a path. I see that you have this attractor which is the thing you really want to do and you you you just work towards it. Sometimes you take a detour. Um, sometimes you go off path or you you you go get further away from that goal, but always you have that thing that eventually you're going to reach that attractor and that's how you're going to spend your life and you don't have to worry about the 9 to5 and that kind of thing. And that's how I've always sculpted my life is I knew one day I wanted to be a writer. I wanted to spend my time writing books. All right. But it's a difficult thing to do. It's difficult. Why did you want to do that though? >> Um, I've just loved Well, firstly, I I've I've loved books since I was a a kid. I've loved writing. I just love that form of expression, being able to I love reading beautiful sentences and just think a this is so I don't know something about I can't explain it doesn't really matter. >> Something I've always wanted to do. >> I've also been very interested in psychedelics and in pharmarmacology and drugs, molecules. So, that that's kind of my attractor, right? I want I want to write about psychedelics. >> And you want to be good at writing about psychics. >> I want to be good. I want to have interesting. >> You want to be recognized for being good about writing about psychedelics, right? >> Well, I want people to listen to what I've got to say. I want people to read my books, otherwise I can't make a living out of doing it. But that is not I can't just say one day, oh, I'm going to write about psychedelics because there's a lot of groundwork has to be done. You have to go to college. You have to study chemistry, pharmacology, neuroscience, get a PhD. that helps doing you know all this kind of stuff that I've done academically over the last 20 years was not writing books but that was always there every step that I took I thought how can I take the next step that will take me towards that goal and eventually I reached the point three years ago where I said okay now I'm going to jump I can see it it's within reach so I just took the leap and I quit academia I quit my well- paid job in Okinawa with beautiful island. They paid my rent. I had a beautiful ocean view. I had I had as much as I wanted in life, but I was tied to a university. I was doing research most of my day. >> And so I quit it all. I went to from quite a good salary to precisely zero salary. Um lived on savings for about a year and then started um to write and to make my living doing that. >> Yeah. Um, and so that's kind of that's the meaning we get in life. It's not about um for me it's certainly not about reproducing. >> Um, it's it's it's about the meaning that I've created. That thing that you find in your in your in your heart, in your soul, in your mind, whatever that that really makes you run, that makes life worth living. You know, longevity isn't an end in in itself. It's like, oh, it gives me more time to do this thing that I really love doing. >> Um, >> yeah, there's this book called uh I for I forget the name of the book. This dude's name is Sheldon, but he wrote a book basically uh that was piggybacking off another uh philosopher's book and he kind of like added to it, which is the idea is that uh fear of death is the biggest driver >> uh for human meaning and purpose. like it's a our our meaning machine is fear of death and trying to create this um this legacy that lives beyond us. Uh Sheldon Solomon, that's his name. M >> and uh he and they did a bunch of studies and all this stuff and um the the main there's two reasons were number one was like the fear of death and sexual reproduction. Those are the two things and he was saying and and that what we do is we try to fill that gap with meaning. So like doing this podcast right now, this p all the podcasts that we record in here, your books, everything you've ever written is theoretically going to outlive us. It's going to be this symbolic immortality, right? Mhm. >> So if you think about it that way and think about like you know our brains, our intellect, whatever it is is creating this art, writing these books, recording podcasts, making movies, we tell our ourselves a story that this is our meaning. But in reality, if you boil it all down to the bare bones of it, it's our fear of death. But our our real our understanding that we're not going to be here forever. >> That's the key point, right? It's it's kind of like before I was talking about the the energy of the water running downhill. That's if you imagine that's the fear of that's the energy. That's the driver. But you have to direct the energy into, you know, the whirlpool for example. And that's you what you do with that. It's like, oh, I've only got this many decades and there's this thing that I I'm just driven to do. Um, but I I can't wait, right? I can't say, "Oh, I'll do it. I'll do it in 50 years. I I need to focus on my 9-to-five job. I need to earn lots of money or whatever." Um, you have to do it and you're going to run out of time. And most people do. Um, I I know many people, and it's kind of sad, but people who I knew when I was younger, and they would say, "Oh, I want to be a DJ or I want to be this." And then they get a part-time job laying slabs, you know, or whatever, uh, something they do to make money and and then eventually the DJ thing or whatever it was, painting, poetry, whatever, that starts to slip by the wayside. And then, of course, they get locked in. They they buy a house and they've got all of these responsibilities and they have less and less time to do what then eventually that's gone. It's gone and they find themselves then >> literally trapped >> and they can't get out and they forget about this dream and it's all gone. >> They trade the dream for securities. >> Exactly. >> Um and that's you can't blame them in a way because that is modern life. um in that yes if you get married and you have children you have responsibilities you can't just give up your job and say [ __ ] it I'm going to be a I'm going to be a poet >> right >> but you have to that's why you need to have that attractor that you're constantly aware of that's pulling you even if you get distracted and you you're constantly trying to find a path there's not one path to it some paths are shorter some paths are more securitous but you you're constantly thinking okay what can I do now how can I spend 5, 10 minutes, 20 minutes a day doing this thing and build on it and just working, working, working, putting in the work, the groundwork, the woodshed as it used to be called. Uh, and eventually there comes a point where you can, it's still risky. I mean, it was still risky for me. I mean, I couldn't move back to my parents if it all [ __ ] up from Tokyo. My whole life was there. Um, so it's it's a big risk, >> but you you sometimes you just have to take that leap >> and just pray. Um, trust that you you're going to make it work and you will surprise yourself. >> Um, it will work out. >> And then some people too, you know, I think that >> some people most people there's a peak in their life where they have the most creative potential or they're more they're more most connected to the muse. And as people get older and the burdens of family life or responsibility kick in that that sort of muse or that sort of divine inspiration gets replaced by things like religion. >> Mhm. You know, but people, most people when they get older, they uh they will settle into a specific religion or start reading the Bible or going to church like things like this, you know, and it kind of replaces that >> whatever that whatever that thing is that that creative inspiration that people have. >> I always found that interesting like why like why what is that just our society molding us and and hardening, you know? H you know I I don't know but I mean certainly people become locked into a very rigid way of of living life. Living life to them is >> all the things they're supposed to do or they have to do. They're forced to do in order to to make money. And there's just no time for that that thing be and maybe yes maybe it's replaced by religion. Oh I could never be a it's too late now. And they kind of you get this where they kind of people have just become resolved to the facts like oh okay you know I could never have become a writer it's too hard there's no way to make money anyway it's kind of oh forget about that but I can go to church uh every Sunday and that's become my new thing and whether that's genuine >> or not I don't know um I don't certainly not going to judge people who are religious but yeah it's an alternate >> thing that distracts them in some way uh from kind of the mundanities of life and they get to 65 70 years old and they retire and then even that's gone >> you know their job that they were doing for the last 40 50 years that's gone now >> uh it's like >> I don't have any hobbies I don't have any any interests >> I don't anything it's like what am I going to do go on vacation >> if you've got enough money >> um or learn to play golf or something I don't know >> yeah working is like it's almost like work is built into our DNA it's like it's in every fiber of our being, you know, working towards something, at least for most of humanity, I think. And if this AI and technology gets so out of control where it takes up all of the a majority of the jobs that human beings have like and if we get some sort of universal basic income and the federal government's paying us to to exist, you know, like basic, you know, low even not even just low-level things like truck drivers um or things like that or like service people. But, you know, also you have like these uh the Whimos, these self-driving cars that can like pick people up and take them places. So, like >> if people that are older, they don't have it's economically not viable for them to get paid minimum wage to do these tasks anymore and you have machines replacing them and these people are now removed from the workforce and given x amount of money. Now, they've lost the meaning, right? they've lost their meaning because people people like I said they they build in this story to why they're doing what they do and that's why pe you know people like to work towards things and they they need problems to solve but like as soon as technology starts to replace all this stuff and we have no problems to solve we're just existing what happens like I don't know what I would do >> I mean I think that there are some kind of optimists I would call them fantasists who think that oh once the once the robots and the machines take over all the things that we normally do, humans normally do, then everyone's going to start painting and being creative and dancing and stuff. They're not. >> They're going to sit and they're going to stare at a screen that's plugged directly into their brain >> like a robot like they're doing now >> in their free time. That's what people do in their free time now is they they they stare at screens. They doom scroll. >> And a lot of it is competition too, right? Like the only reason you're going to you're going to paint the cyine chapel, I mean obviously a you're going to get paid for it, but b you're going to get recognized for being the best >> or like build or like chiseling the statue of David, people are going to be like, "Holy [ __ ] I've never seen anything like that." But when you have machines all you have to do or it will take you a lifetime to learn how to do >> when technology is just growing and expanding and multiplying and and getting better and better every single year every single second it's like [ __ ] like what like I can't compete you can't compete with that. >> Yeah. So >> it's all part of that draining of draining of our humanity, the loss of our soul and we become literal zombies. I mean robots. I mean it's it's >> Mhm. >> It's a horrible thought. >> It is a horrible thought. >> Talk about something happier. >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Another thing I meant to actually ask you go on >> earlier when you're when when you were kind of explaining how our memories reconstruct our experiences on DMT >> and different types of things. >> Well, not on DMT, but >> but um >> other psychedelics. >> Yeah. And and in in the dream state. >> So So okay, so that's that's perfect. It doesn't happen on DMT. >> So like two weeks ago when I or couple weeks ago, whenever it was, I did DMT last. The fir like I did it I told you earlier I was I did it three different times. I like went in three times where I did like six hits entered the [ __ ] DMT world. I think it was six. Yeah. It wasn't the free base. It was just a little vaporizer thing. >> Mhm. >> The first time I closed my eyes, I see aliens doing ballet right in front of me. Like these creatures, not vivid, but they were just doing ballet spinning. They were wearing tutus. >> Nice. And then the second time I did it again and I was looking for the code in the laser. And then I did it a third time and I told you I saw just like a billion dicks that were etched in the sort of Sanskrit type code. >> So did I see this stuff? because I've heard endless amounts of people talking about seeing aliens on DMT and was expecting to see code in the laser and I had sort of a preconceptual idea of what I was going to experience on this. Like if I had none of this, if I was coming in blank, >> would I see the same stuff? >> Um, it's it's hard to answer definitively. I mean we know that expectation and your your set um what you expect your brain as I said before your brain your brain is a predictor. It kind of it decides what it expects to see and then it tests against sensory inputs. I mean um >> the thing about DMT is that it often seems to transcend all of that. So it seems in many ways entirely independent of set and setting. set and setting actually become largely irrelevant in many cases. Most people aren't expecting what they I mean in a way it's almost impossible to expect what you experience under the influence of DMT. Could there be an influence um you know expectation could expectation prediction influence the DMT state? Maybe. Um but often I think it it just completely transcends that. Now, were you expecting to to see aliens doing ballet? >> No. >> Were you expecting to see aliens? >> No. But you could say aliens could be similar to elves. They didn't look like elves. They looked like aliens doing ballet. But it's similar, right? It's a similar kind of archetype. >> Okay. So, let's take the elves for example. Now the idea that it's expectation that makes you see L. is very commonly used as an explanation uh for why people see elves particularly Terrence McKenna is given the blame for this >> right >> um Terrence McKenna often spoke about elves um uh first of all what do we mean by an elf broadly some kind of small >> being that's lively that's jovial that down dances around bounds around uh often in great numbers so multitudinous >> u beings Right. Um, so Terrence McKenna described these and he's given the blame then. So people they listen to Terren McKenna, they expect to see elves. >> Yeah. >> Then they smoke DMT this >> polluted the polluted, right? >> The kind of the um the meme sphere or something like that. >> Um, now does that make sense? Well, it could make sense, but then so let's take the timeline. Let's draw the timeline backwards. pre- McKenna. Um, we go into, let's say, the the first DMT study ever in the 1950s. Steven Zara, Hungarian physician, injected DMT into himself. >> Uh, he lived in Hungary at the time. Um, or in Budapest, I believe that's in Hungary, right? I'm not being stupid. >> I have no idea. >> Yeah, in the wrong guy. >> Anyway, um, >> he discovered the psychedelic effects of DMT. Um, and in his very first study, one of his subjects, who was a I think a nurse who worked at the hospital where he was working, she saw small beings that moved around very, very quickly. She she described them as like dwarves, but again, it's the same motif, lots of little beings that move around very, very quickly. >> We can we can draw the line back even further. We go to the Amazonian rainforests. Uh the Yanomami, a particular very large group, indigenous group in in in South America. They describe when taking their DMT based drugs um Eena uh Yopo. So these come from so Yopo comes from is a the ground seeds of a tree called Ana Denanthera peragrina. They grind up these seeds uh to form a powder and then they they snort it or in fact they they put in a Have you heard about this? They a long tube up to like a yard long. You still use yards in this part of the world? >> Yeah. >> Yeah. Anyway, about a yard long and they fill it with, you know, up sometimes like one or two teaspoons of this powder and then >> it goes into your nose. >> Whoa. >> And then I blow it for like a shotgun mode of administration. fires it into your into your head. >> Um, heard of this. >> Yeah, you've heard of this. Um, there's another one called a painter which comes from the the the dried resin of a of a speus called Virola. There are various species that are used that contain DMT, >> right? Um and these tribes um indigenous groups if you like um describe seeing multitudinous beings that are so numerous that you can never get to the end of them that are lively that are brightly colored that dance and sing and they call them the heura. Um and these are very important in their cosmology in their way of seeing reality and they they kind of they they they come dancing uh when you after inhaling this snuff and they they they enter your chest and they fill your chest up and you have to keep them there and that so your body is effectively becomes the home of these beings which help you and protect you and guide you throughout your life and then when you die um they exit they leave you again and they enter the forest and maybe they will enter another shaman or something like this. So you have a whole um mythos around beings that you might call elves, right? We would call them elves, they call them heura. >> Um so the idea that Terrence McKenna is responsible for people seeing lively giggling beings, which he call machine elves, but really we're just talking about small beings that take various forms, but they're unified by their character. >> Um it's not Terrence McKenna. I mean this this goes back perhaps thousands of years, people seeing the same kind of beings. Um and you can say the same thing about mantids, you know, mantis type alien beings. Now this of course features in eupfology and you know you know alien abduction experiences. Uh but again the the Y anami they have this this one class of being that they see under the influence of these psychedelic drugs is called the wucinari which are a fearsome insectl like being that will seize you and that will feed on the fat of children. I mean it's really quite horrible. Now, if you compare that to modern trip reports, people always describe these mantis-like beings. And they they almost always are, if not negative, at least kind of cold and ruthless and calculated. People describe being dismembered. You get these dismemberment scenarios where their their whole body is torn apart and their organs flung away. And then >> this is on what drug? >> DMT. >> Oh, really? >> Yes. This is very it's quite a common or not certainly not a rare experience under the influence of psychedelics. And so you have people now in in the modern era who have known nothing about shamanistic mythos basically recapitulating these dismemberment reconstruction scenarios that are described by these indigenous peoples in South America that they have understood and experienced for hundreds thousands of years. Um, so it's not the idea that everything you experience under the influence of DMT is just because you've you've heard stories. Um, is it just doesn't doesn't make any sense. >> Yeah. When was the first time DMT was ever used? Was that the 50s? >> 1956 was Steven's art. Well, well, when we say DMT was the first >> Well, the first time he ever like like wrote a report about what he experienced, >> right? So pure when we talk about pure DMT people have picked me up on this but I am correct I remember YouTube comment actually um >> yeah 19 >> YouTube comments are fake those people aren't real >> okay that's good it's computers right >> it's all Iranian bots >> yeah chat bots again >> um but anyway yeah so 1956 Stevens Zara so there's there's an interesting story kind of leading up to this point is it starts really in 1852 too. Do you know Richard Spruce? >> Nope. >> Well, he was a peerless British botonist of his time. He was the most famous and probably the most important botonist in history. Western botist at least. Um he was exploring the Amazon. He was contracted to explore the Amazon to to find new plants and then to identify them often name them because they didn't have names um at least not Latin binomials. And then he would send them back to the to the to England and collectors, very rich people would, you know, frame them or whatever and put them in their their drawing rooms and that kind of thing. >> But as soon as he entered the Amazon for the first time, he couldn't help but notice that all of the the natives around there, they're all using drugs, right? >> Is this guy still alive? >> 1852. >> Oh, never mind. >> No, I need not answer that question. >> Yeah. So he noticed straight away that they were using all of these different drugs and like powdered cocoa leaf. He saw them stuffing their cheeks to bursting with these powdered cocoa leaves and um these weird pellets and potions and uh liquor various type jungle liquors, cassava beers and all of this kind of stuff. They love drugs basically. Um and he was invited to this uh party I guess you would call it a periodic gathering called a dabokuri. This is in uh 1852, a a group called the the Tukano by the Valest River. Um and he went to this party or this gathering and everyone was singing and dancing and people were drinking cassava beer and uh consuming like powdered cocoa leaf etc etc. And then he sort of he started to notice something unusual happening which was which is that the men would periodically they they'd kind of peel away from the dance um and then they would they would drink this weird liquid. Uh and then they'd start kind of acting very very strangely. They'd start howling. They'd start they'd pick up weapons and start beating the earth with these weapons and stuff. It's like they were fighting some invisible adversary of some sort. >> Uh, and he didn't know what was going on. Um, and this happened throughout the night. You know, every point in the night there were at least kind of half a dozen men engaged at some phase of this performance, if you like. Um, and and he asked them, you know, what was that liquid? And they said it called karpy. Uh, and he tried a bit, but it was absolutely disgusting. and he he basically almost vomited. Uh so he didn't get a full dose. Um but he was told okay the the plant used to make this karpy the karpy vine uh is located down river. So the next day he went down river found this this lyana twirling around this tree and he named it bananisteropsis karpy the iawaska vine. Banosteropsis. >> Banisteropsis karpy. >> Wow. >> That's the name of the vine. And so then there was like a century of scientists trying to understand how does this >> because they were describing their experiences as well. They would describe these terrifying beasts that were kind of trying to seize them and stuff and beautiful cities they would describe and >> all these wonderful visions they would describe. after after consuming this karpy, also known as Iawaska in other other regions. >> Um, and then a century followed people trying to isolate the alkyoids and no one knew how it worked. It wasn't until like the 1950s until people realized and William Burus was heavily involved here. He heard about Karpy, also known as Yahi. Um, this was when he was living in Mexico City shortly after he shot his wife in the head accidentally. >> Oh, yeah. I read about that. She something off top of her head like a can or something. Yeah, exactly. A glass and he put a bullet through her brain and killed her instantly. So he was struggling I mean obviously with guilt and um he was looking for the final fix as he described it. So he went off. I mean this was like this gangly kind of lanky tweed jacketed writer decided I'm going to set off go to the Amazon. I'm going to try and find Yahi. Um because he'd heard read about it in a magazine or something. I what a world that must have been, right? Where people do that kind of thing, just setting off into the Amazon. Uh and he he happened to meet Richard Schulty's who was like the world's leading expert on Yahi or Iawaska. Um and he went from shaman to shaman kind of asking them for this drink. And every time he drank it, he just vomited a lot. Nothing particularly interesting happened. Um and he couldn't work out what was going on. uh until I think it was like the third time that he tried this uh yahhei and he had these this mag he was transported to another world and he was like overwhelmed. He thought, "Yes, this is it. I finally found the karpy the yahi that I was looking for and he was led into this trade secret by the shaman." The shaman said, "Okay, yes, the karpy vine goes in there, but there's another leaf we put in, a secret leaf, uh which has to be put in together with the karpy vine. You boil it up and then boil it down till it's thick and syrupy. And when you drink that, then you you get the the kind of the magnificent visions. >> Uh and he even pocketed samples of this secret leaf and sent it to Richard Schulty's. >> Richard Schulties ignored it because it came from some American writer. He didn't think it was that important. Um then like a decade or a couple of decades later Richard Schulty's student Homer Pinkley um was working with this indigenous group and again he saw them using the karpy vine the Iaska vine bannisteris karpy together with this other leaf. So there are two components they realized two kind of a binary decoction of of two essential components uh and Homer Pinkley identified it as psychotrioidis chakruna. Um and when they uh analyzed this leaf psychotriis chakruna they found lots of DMT. Um so that was kind of the breakthrough which is always Homer Pinkley is always given the credit here but actually it was Burus because Schultties went back to the letter that Burus had sent him with the sample of the leaves and he realized that Burus had in fact sent him the correct leaf. It was psychotrioidis. So Burus actually William Burus, author of Naked Lunch, is actually should be credited as being the the kind of the the person who made that breakthrough in understanding how um how the the the the key psychoactive component of Iaska that should be given credit really to William Burus. He didn't name the plant of course he didn't know how to do that but he identified it. But then of course there was still kind of a mystery because by that point Steven Zara had shown that if you swallow DMT which he'd done at first >> nothing will happen. So the idea that this was the primary psychoactive component of a visionary drink didn't make any sense. And then there was the karpy vine. You know what what was that for? Why was that in the mix? No one had any clue until um Dennis McKenna really Terren's brother he was really one of the the key figures in working this out because by that point people started to understand that the carpine contains these harmala alkyoids harm and harm. Um, and it was kind of worked out that these harma alkaloids, they're inhibitors of this monoamin oxidase enzyme, >> um, which is found in your gut and throughout your body. >> And it was also then beginning to kind of be understood that DMT is broken down very rapidly by this monoamine oxidase enzyme. So when you swallow DMT, it's very rapidly broken down, never gets to the brain. But so the hypothesis at that point was when you add the harmala alkoids from the iawaskavine karpy and inhibits it. So you have here >> a true pharmacological technology. This wasn't just a mixture of plants. This was a technology employing pharmacological synergy. You have the inhibitor of the monoamin oxidase and you have the DMT. only when you take them together do you get um the effect. This is called the Iawaska effect. Yeah. >> Uh and Dennis McKenna worked on this hypothesis and Dennis McKenna received samples of Iawaska and he showed that you could take samples of the ioaska brew and it would inhibit this enzyme. Um showing that the the ioca brew contained you know sufficient hammala alkaloids to inhibit the mono monoamin oxidase in your gut which allowed the psychedelic drug to take effect. >> Yeah. So, so from the very beginnings you you this is why I always talk about DMT as being a a technology. Uh because very from the very beginning humanity has developed technologies and ISA is a technology >> um >> to as tools technologies as tools that allow you to interact with normally unseen hidden intelligences. And that's what these spirits of the forest, the Hekura, the Wusinari, these are intelligences that you normally can't see, the hidden ones, >> um, and they developed these tools, these technologies to make them visible. It's like a visual prosthesis that allowed them to see these intelligences. And then when we kind of move the the dial forward into the the the 20th century, you know, we we learned how to isolate DMT and we learned how to use it uh pure DMT first by injecting it intramuscularly, then by vaporizing it. Nick Sand, very famous LSD chemist who also was a DMT manufacturer. He discovered one day he was being particularly careless in his lab and some crystals of DMT fell on a hot plate and it like a puff of white smoke or white vapor should I say and he thought well can't we just smoke this stuff because everyone had been injecting it up to this point >> uh intramuscularly as well which is kind of a very erratic and drawn out experience and so Nick Sand realized oh we can we can vaporize this um and then in the 1990s is Rick Strazman says, "Well, vaporizing it, it's a bit messy. It's hard to measure doses. Um, it stinks. >> It's irritating to the lungs. So, I'm going to inject it not into the muscles, but introvenously directly into the bloodstream." >> Um, >> didn't Dennis or didn't Terrence give him that idea? >> Oh, no. Terrence gave him the idea to get government funding for the study. >> Yeah. So, the Terrence McKenna. Yeah. So, Terrence McKenna was so this was after Rick Strazman. He was still a young um psychiatrist and he was interested in melatonin at first but wasn't interested and then he went to this conference where he met Terrence McKenna and and and he was talking about DMT. Rick Strazen was in his talk and Terrence McKenna came afterwards and says you're talking a lot about DMT but have you ever tried it? >> That's bad Terrence McKenna but you get the point. Um and Rick said no. So Terrence kind of sent Rick to the big house at Esselon. This was Esselin. Uh, and then Terrence kind of went away and found someone >> who had DMT and brought it back. And that was Rick Strazman's first DMT experience. Um, and that was the kind of the genesis, if you like, of his long bure bureaucratic process that led to him being given permission to do this the largest study of its kind in human volunteers. >> Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, they tricked the government smartly. >> Exly. So, so I you can kind of see this thread of going back perhaps thousands of years of humanity discovering DMT or discovering how to use DMT even when they didn't know that they were working with DMT and developing technologies um uh um kind of to how best to use it. You know, how do we how do we develop this as a technology? Um is vaporizing it the the culmination the pinnacle of DMT administration technologies? Of course not. Is it intravenous injection? Maybe not. Uh unless then this finally leads well not finally because I'll talk about the future as well and what we're working on now but leads to DMTX, >> right? You have this very short acting experience which is very intense but only lasts a few minutes. And what DMTX does or extended state DMT is allows you as we were saying right at the beginning to extend this. I see that as just simply the next iteration of uh of humans learning to use and develop DMT as a technology. And the techn the word technology is important because if you just think of it as a drug um then it doesn't really capture what DMT is doing. If you take seriously the idea that it allows you to communicate with some kind of normally hidden unseen discarnate intelligent agent that feels more like a molecular communication technology than a drug to me >> and once you shift your mindset in that way from drug psychedelic drug to technology then you start to think well what's the best way to use this technology and DMTX as I said I think is just the next iteration but we can I think we can we can go further than that Right. So, we know since the 1950s, um, psychiatrists and physicians and pharmacologists have been drawing blood from people and collecting pea samples and finding DMT in humans, but no one really knows what it does. Um, there are hypotheses, but no one's 100% clear why it's in the human body, but at least we know that the human body can produce manufactured DMT and at significant quantities. All the machinery is there. Um, so I was just towards the end of writing Death by Astonishment, getting to the very final chapter and I was thinking about the future. You know, what does what does using the DMT technology look like in 10, 20 years? Are we still hooking people up to infusion machines and pumping them with DMT over long periods? Or can we somehow hack the brain's endogenous DMT system? So we we we move away from the the plant world, you know, which was going on for thousands of years, and we move away from laboratory synthesized DMT and we we finally reach the stage where we're actually using our own DMT production laboratory in our own brains. Um, so rather than injecting someone with DMT, you would simply by understanding the regulatory mechanisms that control DMT production in in the human brain, we might be able to actually stimulate the production of DMT and induce people into the DMT state without giving them >> any DMT. I wonder if there was like some specific music you could play that could like vibrate our [ __ ] atoms into creating pumping out more DMT. How cool would that be? >> Well, that's one idea. I'm not sure it would work. You'd need to flesh that out a bit for me. >> Ancient Greeks, the ancient Greeks used music for medicine and they used it for rituals. And uh a lot of people think that music in ancient times in antiquity wasn't even recreational. They thought that it was uh purely medicinal and for attaining transcend transcendent experiences for religious rights and uh medicine. >> I mean I think uh music predates language. >> Yes. >> Um and early language would have been singing um making noises to them to generate music and that eventually we worked out I guess that you can generate more meaning you can make you can make money from it. Yeah. And that's where we are now. >> Yeah. But alternatively, if the music thing doesn't pan out, um you can we know now that well way back, so 50 years ago, um there was a study that's been forgotten about that showed that in mamalian brain, in rabbit brain first of all, but also in human cerebrros spinal fluid, there is this peptide that we all have um that inhibits um an enzyme called indolethyl indoleethylamine nmethyl transferase which is the key enzyme that produces DMT. So it converts tryptoamine to DMT. >> Oh right. So so DMT is manufactured in the body from tryptophan which is an amino acid. >> So am tryptophan is decarboxilated. That's a very simple process. You remove a carbon dioxide molecule and you get tryptoamine. Then you add two methile groups. So two CH3 groups that gives you DMT. Very easy to make. >> And we all have this enzyme indolethylamine nmethyl transferase in NMT in us. It's in basically everywhere in the body in all cells basically. Um so what they discovered in I think 1976 that we all have a peptide that binds to indole inMt and basically puts the brakes on DMT production. So it keeps DMT production at a very low level. It inhibits this key enzyme for DMT production. >> Um and so this was this peptide inhibitor of INMT. It was isolated and we have a kind of a basic broad rough molecular mass of it. But that's it. They didn't do any further characterization. This is a long time ago. So it wasn't so easy then to do that kind of thing. But then the paper was basically forgotten about. It's been cited four times in 50 years. So it's gone. The a couple of years later, there was one that found a similar peptide in human cerebral spinal fluid that's been cited once in 50 years. Uh so people basically forgot about this. Um so I kind of uncovered this, stumbled across this paper and thought, well, let's let's isolate this peptide. Let's actually characterize it. Let's determine its actual structure, its actual peptide sequence, how this peptide actually works, how it's integrated with other regulatory mechanisms in the human body. Um, then perhaps we can once we understand how this peptide works and how the regulatory system for DNT works, then we've got an in for hacking this system. >> Yeah. >> Um, so we've actually recruited I or say contracted. So myself and um New Nordics um this nonprofit out of Florida who I've been working with for a number of years um we we approached the University of Florida uh a very prominent uh pharmacologist and peptide chemist called Chris Mccertie um and said we'd like to isolate this peptide. We want to understand it how it works. want to understand how DMT is regulated in humans and uh and we're basically you know he developed this research project with his team a research plan uh and we are this is happening it's kind of being initiated now um unfort um so we are still seeking people if they want to help fund this I mean it's like $400,000 so it's not pocket change for this initial stage of the project so if anyone is interested go to newnautics.org or n autic cs.org or um uh and they can they can help out but we hope that you know by the end of you know next year or something we will understand a lot more about how DMT is regulated in >> so what would be the ideal way in your mind to inhibit this inhibitor? >> It's a good question. So until we know I mean there's two broad possibilities when we isolate and characterize this this peptide. One is it could be a known peptide. >> Mhm. >> Right. So it's a peptide. There's many many endogenous peptides, small um relatively small peptides. Endorphins for example, right, is a peptide. Insulin, this is a peptide. >> Um so if it's one we know, then that's good news in a way because we probably know about how the regulatory system works. So we might be able to whether we inhibit that peptide directly and stop it working or whether we can get into the system and actually stop the the peptide being produced, you know, temporarily. um so that it kind of frees up the INMT to begin churning out more DMT. That would be one approach. Um the alternative is that it's completely novel peptide that no one's seen before that we don't know about. >> That's interesting and good news for entirely different reasons because you've you you found something completely new. >> Uh which would be really cool, but at the same time we we'd know basically nothing about it. So, we wouldn't know how it's how it how it plugs into other regulatory systems in the body and in the in the brain. Um, so that would maybe require more work to think about how do we >> Yeah, that's cur that's interesting if you could hack that without having to take a drug, right? You would have to take a drug, wouldn't you, to to inhibit that. >> Well, >> so it's like it's like just adding another step between >> Yeah. I mean, there are a number of approaches you could take. I mean, it could be that you you inject a small peptide that that that might interact directly with this inhibitory peptide >> or it might inter it could even work at the genetic level where you're switching off the gene that produces this peptide that could be much longerlasting and this might last for days, weeks or even months. I mean, this is serious business when you >> are there legal uh hoops you got to jump through to do something like this? Because it's like the funny thing about DMT which Ter Terrence McKenna points out is everyone's carrying, right? >> Everyone's carrying. >> So what if you have now like a different way to like hack your own body into creating a chemical that's already there. >> Exactly. Right. >> Is that illegal? >> Exactly. And presumably not. Right. Um so yes, you obviously you bypass all of the legal difficulties you have with injecting someone with the schedule one drug. >> Yeah. um that's gone and you are simply manipulating using tools and it could be genetic, it could be molecular. Um there are various possibilities. We don't we don't we don't know anything about this system yet. So we can't we can just speculate on how we might work this and whether it would be a longlasting effect. >> You might have to inject them with something but maybe once and then it would last for >> days or weeks and then you know you'd have these individuals in a pod of some sort. all of their bodily needs would be taken care of. >> And um you know, feeding and waste management and they would basically spend significant portions of their their lives ultimately, right? Um interacting with interfacing with living amongst these intelligent beings from somewhere else and they would forget probably that they were ever a human. I mean that happens with DMT. I mean, we'll talk about your experiences perhaps, but often with DMT, what happens even with, you know, in two or three minutes, you you will lose any conception of what it ever meant to be a human. And that that part is gone and you're you're in that world now. You're a a being, a conscious intelligent being that exists within this other world. So you can imagine over days or weeks or months or whatever um s basically having an entirely new existence that would have that would have been in your own mind that's that would be kind of all you've ever known. And so any conception of once having been a human would gone is gone. Um, and you become the alien in a sense until you start until until you start to come back and then you kind of remember again and you integrate back into this reality. >> Yes. Yes. That's a weird thing because that does h like I remember the the process of my my conceptualization of my reality here in this world and like I saw it slowly dissolving, right? like everything I'm tethered to in real in base reality like this this room this podcast where I spent a lot of time my wife my kids my parents everyone I know work money all these concepts started to just distill and distill and distill and eventually just disintegrate into nothingness and then all of a sudden >> you're just your consciousness is completely untethered from everything in the physical world and your consciousness is shuttling through like light arteries And before you know it, you kind of like slowly start to come back. And you know, it's been, you know, even just a couple a couple days or weeks, you start to lose that sharp vivid memory of what it was, which is kind of sucks. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. because I wish I could I wish I could recall everything in detail as if it was happening again. But like and even right afterwards, it's like you're trying to explain a a 600bit experience in like a threebit way, right? By using your your language. Words can't don't do it justice. >> Yeah. You're like you you're you're using two-dimensional drawings to describe an fivedimensional experience or something and you can't do it. You can get shadows or projections of it but you can never get to it. >> Right. Right. >> Yeah. >> Exactly. and um you know not so so we have the entities right which you explained have been being since the guy in the ' 50s um first talked about those entities >> and then you have which I think you talked about in your video you made a long video response to Danny's laser experiment and you mentioned >> um accounts or um people explaining seeing similar codes with other drugs in the past, right? >> With DMT in fact. >> With DMT in fact. Oh, okay. >> Very common. >> So when you when you ex So you how do you explain the code? What the [ __ ] is the code? >> Okay, let's get we finally we get to the code. >> So I mean first of all I should say people think that myself and Danny have some kind of beef with each other. Yeah. >> You know, and it's just it's not there. I mean I I I was in LA. I came directly to LA from Tokyo. He's this guy Aaron is filming this documentary. And we had a a long like 2-hour conversation on on film. We went out to dinner twice. It went to my friend Paul, our mutual friend Paul Heinuk's house for dinner. >> After filming, we had dinner. We we get on perfectly well. We disagree. >> Uhuh. At least I'm not convinced of his explanation for the for this DMT laser code. >> Well, the only way to do it is to you got you got to try to see it. You got to try to look at the laser. >> But that's not You see, that's the problem. And it's not just about seeing it. I mean, okay, let's let's kind of talk a little bit about the code. I mean, I wrote this long article on I did this video which was me kind of rambling. Um, so it's not particularly coherent. I was just giving my thoughts, but I wrote a long article on Substack also, which people alien insect on drugs. >> People can read that um for a more coherent breakdown of what I'm thinking. But so here's here's the thing, right? The basic idea that Danny is presenting is that you shine a laser on a wall under under the influence of DMT and you can see code which he interprets as being a fundamental code that has a fundamental function in our reality. I mean he takes it to be literal code that is existing there in the wall. He's seeing this code that extends beyond the surface of the wall. Now >> that it's like the it's like the matrix of reality that we see through right and the word matrix is very important here. >> Well, it's two different things, right? Like his conclusion is separate from the idea that you can actually many people can see the same thing with the same elements in that environment under the influence of DMT. >> Okay. So here's the first I mean just broadly the issue I have with the whole idea uh is that I don't see why if our reality was being let's say simulated and there was some fundamental code why it would take the form of something that obviously looks like code letters characters digits this is how we imagine a code uh but that's code written for humans Um, computers don't don't read letters and symbols, right? That it's all it's all on and off switches, right? That's basically what the code is doing. It's a way for humans to um it's like a it's like an intermediary between the human and the computer is this written code of of characters and digits. So, if you were actually seeing what the the computer was using, >> what Keith was running, you wouldn't even see ones and zeros. you'd see kind of electrical pulses switching, right? >> So, the idea that you're seeing some fundamental >> code of reality and it looks like human readable or at least human recognizable code doesn't really make any sense to me. I don't see why the code running our reality would look like that. Secondly, the idea that the code that's running our reality would actually be running through reality in this way uh doesn't make any sense. If the code runs elsewhere and the output is our reality, but the code is being run, you know, in the same way that the code that's running a uh an image on a screen, if you if you kind of look, you know, if you're seeing the output of a computer game, if you look into the screen, you don't see code running through it, >> right? Of course not. The code is being run on the computer elsewhere. So, that doesn't make sense to me. Um, and also the idea, the unfortunate coincidence, shall we say, is that people describe Japanese katakana. >> Uh, >> I thought it was more like Sanskrit. >> You hear various a bit like katakano, a bit like Sanskrit, a bit like Hebrew, whatever. But still, you're seeing very human characters, >> human generated characters, which again, I don't see why that's the case. Now the katakana thing is important because the matrix digital rain that very famous green code that runs from the movie was generated with katakana famously the guy that gen designed that used his wife's cookbooks which were she was Japanese and he was just looking through and oh that looks cool. Um, so you know, Japanese katakana, it's has a long history in anime as well as being used to to to generate code like imagery because it looks cool as well. So that's an unfortunate coincidence to me uh is that it like the Matrix movie, it's kind of running through reality. And then we get to the actual um the effect itself which also has some unfortunate uh coincidences if you see them as that in that if you shine a red laser like forget DMT for the moment. If you shine a red laser at a wall um the laser is is coherent light >> speckle. You're talking about the speckle >> right? I'm talking about speckle effect right now. speckle effect. Yes, I know it's been kind of it's easy to kind of say, "Oh, it's not speckle effect, but let's just analyze what the speckle effect actually is, right?" >> Okay, >> you've got red laser. It hits a wall and as the light waves reflect off the wall, they kind of interfere with each other and you get specks of bright and and dark, right? Yes. And this creates a pattern on the retina, >> right? That's what you're seeing. You're seeing this pattern on the retina. um like a matrix of points of light on your retina. >> Now, it has some interesting optical properties. Now, because the laser is always in focus, even if you cross your eyes or um try to focus behind the wall, >> the laser speckles, these points of light will always be perfectly sharp, even if the wall becomes blurry. >> Really? >> Yes. Because the speckle effect is on the it's it's coherent light. Yeah. It's coherent light that's hitting the retina. >> Uhhuh. >> So it's not it's it's not in a way your eye isn't focusing or doesn't need to focus. >> Right. I see what you're saying. >> Right. It's just coherent light that's um that that's forming this pattern on the retina. And and what's cool about that is that when you cross your eyes, you work a little bit. You try to focus behind the pattern on the on the wall. Your brain receives these very mixed signals. The depth cues are all wrong. Right? The speckle effect isn't becoming blurry whereas the wall is. And your brain interprets that as that that the speckles are actually behind the wall or occupying space behind the wall. That's and that's what you see. So even without any DMT, >> you will see this matrix of points of light that that seems to occupy three-dimensional space behind the wall. M now when you add DMT to the mix unfortunately in my opinion for the whole model is that yes you have these matrix of characters and geometric forms that seem to occupy space extend beyond the wall. Now you have to accept that if you accept Danny's model here, you have to accept this is just a coincidence. This spec this unusual effect of red lasers and it's particularly prominent with red lasers as well because of the low frequency. Um you have to accept that these this is just a coincidence that the speckle effect this interference pattern on the retina has got nothing to do. It's just a sheer coincidence that red lasers happen to also produce this effect. Well, the first time I did it, I could only see the speckles. >> And after focusing for about five minutes, and this was a little bit after the peak of the experience, right? Like it was probably six, seven, eight minutes after. >> And I saw the speckles and I had to really, really focus >> and I saw the speckles turned into gears >> and then all the gears, millions of them, just started like they were connected and just spinning. >> Right. So, what's happening there? I'll tell you. I don't know why I asked. So, what what do you think's happening there? Why? >> I would imagine that the speckles are I mean, when you do DMT, it it obviously changes your does something to your visual cortex to where >> the stuff that you normally see is being altered. So, if I'm looking at speckles, they're going to be animated or altered in some way. That that is the way I would explain it away. >> Right. Right. So each of these speckles, these points of light, it's like a your your your brain is seeing this very coherent and um consistent pattern of points of light on that come from the retina from the laser ultimately. Uh and this acts kind of like a sensory scaffold. These are the points of sensory data like a pattern of of these specs of light and they act as like a scaffold around which imagery is created right and I would expect you know in retrospect of course but I would expect or I'm not surprised that these speckles would take the form of first of all of geometric objects >> um does it surprise me they would take the form of characters? Not really. uh because characters very fine detailed structures. Humans are very lexical species. We're very good, our brains are very good at generating characters. When you open a book and you read letters, your brain is constructing those letters, >> right? You're not just kind of seeing as such. Uh your your brain is has to construct these letters, these certain shapes and patterns very very quickly. >> Very very quickly your brain is very good at it. Um, so you so your brain is kind of neurologically primed, right? Not by just by expectation, but your brain is neurologically primed to generate patterns, small patterns, um, that look like characters. You would expect that. Um, so again, it's like I'm try what I'm trying to do is trying to find what what what are the aspects of this effect. I do think it's a fascinating effect first of all. Um I think it's potentially really important discovery that Daniel's made. I can't say that enough. Um but what I'm trying to find is what are the aspects of this phenomenon that distinguish it from DMT induced imagery. We know DMT can produce complex imagery. Um there's nothing surprising about seeing characters. There's nothing surprising about seeing um small geometric forms especially when you have this uniform pattern of of sensory input points of light entering entering the brain. Um so what is it about it that makes it different that allows us to to move to more exotic explanations? First of all, how do we rule out the speckle effect? I know Danny says, "Oh, you can still see the speckles." That doesn't convince me. Um because DMT visions can be once you kind of once they >> are initiated established they can be very very persistent in the presence of DMT. So what is it? Now Danny offers some explanations um and other people have mentioned things like object permanence um or objectness right looks like an object. Again, it's not convincing because there's nothing ontologically special about a vision that appears out there in the world apparently or one that occurs behind your eyes. Um because the the your world is always being constructing internally anyway. The fact that it's kind of mapped to and projected onto or is integrated into your world doesn't make it special. You know, when someone is psychotic and they're suffering from visual hallucinations and they see their dead grandmother walk into the room, the dead grandmother looks like solid, moves, moves like the grandmother used to move, obeys the laws of physics, sits on chairs, doesn't walk through chairs, you know, but it's still a hallucination. >> Um, so we can't use that. The fact that it appears stable is not convincing either because again you've got this very um coherent and consistent pattern of sensory inputs coming from the laser. So what is it that's special about this effect? That's what I want to find. Um everyone sees the same thing. Do they do they really does do people see exactly the same characters at exactly the same time or is everyone just seeing geometric structures and characters which we interpret as code. I only see evidence for the latter. Um we have very little im you know drawings or sketches of this code and when you do see it it often looks like or is identical to Japanese katakana or other kind of characters. So how do we get from this is a really cool effect that allows us to isolate a particular fragment or aspect of the broader visual phenomenology produced by DMT which is the appearance of code which is again goes back many people describe code you know going back decades and you know Allison Gray uh Alex Gay's wife she her all of her art is devoted to this kind secret language as she calls it that you see on DMT. >> So how do we how do we distinguish this effect from just other types of DMT imagery and uh and I know I know Danny is really trying and I was kind of reassured when I was speaking to him in LA is that he is trying to um rule out other possibility. is trying to test this idea, but it's so difficult, right? He had the magnet thing. >> Mhm. >> Uh >> and and you know, in today's day and age, you see an unbelievable amount of confirmation bias happening all over the place. And what I like about the way Danny is doing it is it doesn't I don't see that with him. I see him actually trying to stress test this and actually trying to come up with legitimate ways to to prove it wrong. >> Yeah. I don't I don't sense any sort of grift or anything like that with him. He seems very genuine. >> I agree 100%. I don't sense he's always been very um pleasant and kind and open. We've had very open and honest discussions and that's important. A lot of people just see it and they just latch on to his explanation >> and they don't really analyze and think about it more deeply which is all I'm trying to do. It's all I'm trying to do. And you know he did this magnet experiment where he said if you if you hold a magnet too close it scramles the code. >> Um and he was able to do this. He said if he looked at the code and he held a magnet there that the code will be scrambled. Now, I'm not sure why this fundamental code of reality should be affected by a magnet, but anyway, then he set up an experiment where he had this screen >> uh and there was, I think, 20 boxes or something like that. Uh, and the person on the one side of the screen, it was completely hidden, would hold a magnet to one of the squares. >> Um, and person on the other side would try to find the square by seeing where the code is scrambled. >> It's a cool idea. Uh, it didn't work. You have to ask yourself why didn't it work? So if it was working when he could see the code and see the magnet and he knew he was doing it right. He could see the code being scrambled. Why wasn't the code scrambled when he couldn't see? >> It suggests there's a psychological effect going on here of why he was expecting the code to be scrambled or something like that. um the brain he had decided or deeper levels of his brain had decided that okay the code is going to you know he was seeing something he was expecting to see maybe which is why this experiment was important >> but it didn't work why didn't it work um he said the magnet maybe isn't strong enough okay uh maybe >> um but there were >> you know he I told him before he did the experiment you need a dummy magnet first of all because if you don't have a dummy magnet then It's basically a telepathy experiment because the person behind the screen knows which square they're picking and the person here doesn't. So it it doesn't have necessarily have anything to do with the DMT if they it's just them. It's like a guessing game to pick a number between one and 20. Um so you need a dummy magnet. So neither >> they wouldn't know whether they're using the magnet or whether they're using the dummy magnet that was not magnetic and then you could distinguish. >> He didn't do that. I the reason I think he didn't do that is because he was convinced you from our our messages he was convinced it was going to be 100% accurate. This was such a strong effect that he was every time he it'd be easy for the person to see which where the magnet was because the code would obviously be scrambled but it didn't work. Um and so so I think I'm still struggling now and he's got lots of ideas and you know I I admire him for it in many ways. Um but I think the danger is when you when you know and he always describes this knowing where he's reached the stage now where he doesn't believe but he knows that what he's seeing is fundamental code of reality. Um, and I think the danger in that, uh, is is that if some somebody does, you know, behind the scenes without Danny's knowledge, get interested in this, if they see the movie coming out, right, lots of people are going to get interested in this. And of course, yes, they're going to be people who try it and are amazed by it and buy into it instantaneously. >> But then you've got people who go, I don't believe this, and I'm going to prove that this is wrong. >> Yes. Exactly. >> And they're not going to call Danny and say, I want to work with you. They're going to work behind the scenes. Same thing happened with silomthoxin, right? Do you remember silomthoxin? >> No. >> It's another story. You want to get into it real quickly? >> Yeah. >> So, um there was this uh chemist called Garts who was now known to be a fraud. Hamilton Morris did a great talk at Psychedelic Science in Denver about it. But anyway, he thought that if you he showed in his in his studies, which weren't real, it turns out, but if you feed a mushroom um something like um not DMT, so psilocin from mushrooms is DMT, but with a hydroxal group added on. There's an enzyme that puts this hydroxal group, an O group on the ring. So, it converts DMT to pilin, >> right? And then there's a phosphate group that makes it psilocybin. But anyway, you have this key enzyme, this hydroxilase enzyme um that converts DMT to pilin. So this guy garts thought, well, what if we feed the mushroom different tryptoines um and will it still add this hydroxal group? So can we create novel can we make them turn the mushroom into a factory for these novel tryptoines with this hydroxal group in the same place as psilicin but with a different tryptoamine structure >> and one option here one possibility is to take five mthoxy DMT so it's DMT with this mythoxy group at the five position the theory goes that if you feed it to the mushrooms it adds the hydroxal group at the four position and you get four hydroxy five mythoxy DMT silothoxy a theoretical >> molecule, right? Cool. Cool idea. >> Great idea. >> Yeah. Does it work? Well, this guy, I forget his name and I would probably don't want to mention his name because he might sue me. Um, seriously. Um, he again he he was experienced with psychedelics and after years of meditation and stuff, it came to him in a vision or something like this uh that this is what he needs to do, right? he needs to feed 5 Mod DMT to the mushrooms and it will create this hyomoxin molecule. Um so he tried it. He fed 5 Mod DMT to the mushrooms and he got this the mushroom grew. Uh and then he started trying it on himself and he had this experience which to him was completely unlike mushrooms, regular mushrooms. And so at that point he knew he knew Danny that this this was it. It had worked. Yeah. This mushroom no longer contains psilocybin. It no longer contains psilicin. It contains psilomthoxin. He called it the sacrament. >> And he started ship. He started he had this subscription model. You'd pay a certain amount of money. And every few months or whatever they'd send you samples of this mushroom which wasn't scheduled, wasn't an illegal drug. There's no psilocybin in there. All of this was in his head of course, right? Um and all these other people started taking it and they were paying him money. I think it was it reached like $50,000 a month. >> How long ago was this? >> Recently. >> Oh, wow. >> Yeah. Our sac is the website. >> You got a website. Yeah. >> Our sacraments. >> Right. So, he was selling this >> $2,000 a month. >> There's a 200. >> Copy that. >> $200 a month. Right. Now, now here's the point. He created this sacrament which he assumed he knew contains. But what's the first thing you do as a scientist? You think you got a mushroom that contains this molecule, silothoxin. What's the first simple thing you do, obvious [ __ ] thing you do? You send it to a chemist. Get them to analyze it. >> Say, can you actually detect silthoxin in this mushroom? He didn't do that because he knew, right? Sorry, bit weird, but he knew that that he it was a success that he'd found the sacrament. Yeah. >> Um, >> and then behind the scenes, somebody received a sample of the mushrooms, a company called USANA. Um, >> oh god, don't say that name. >> I won't say that name. You can you can scramble that. Um, this company, this unnamed chemical company. >> They they received samples and they did a very simple analysis. This isn't this isn't rocket science, Danny, right? is extracting a mushroom and analy doing a GCMS or something. >> No salomthoxin in there at all. Lots of silicon. >> They they did this this study on it. They analyzed it. >> This chemical company. Yeah. Behind that, not the church of salomthoxin. They weren't they didn't bother doing that. >> Right. Right. Right. >> Um but this other chemical company in the background quietly wanted to prove these guys wrong. >> Analyzed the mushrooms. Didn't find any cyomthoxin. published a paper >> and instantaneously the whole facade collapsed overnight, right? >> Subscriptions obviously people why am I spending $200 a month u buying >> you know 50 grams of this powdered mushroom or whatever or maybe even less than that I don't know um and so so like what do they do? um it's all over really. And they started suing people. >> Um anyone who had publicly discredited the church, they started suing them. $1 million was the total lawsuit which was thrown out. Yeah. >> Oh, wait. So, they're actually a church. >> That's what they called themselves. Yeah. >> But did they get the exemption? >> Oh, I have no idea that kind of stuff. Uh but so instead of selling a unscheduled mushroom containing salamoxine, they were selling a schedule one drug. Oh Jesus Christ. >> And shipping it around the world as well. You didn't It wasn't just the US. So people can imagine imagine ordering it from Singapore. >> People are vulnerable, man. People are so easily scammed. It's crazy, >> right? But it was such an thing is is that it wasn't difficult to eliminate. They could easily have done the proper due diligence and analyzed their mushrooms and they would have found it doesn't contain salomthoxin. So then they go on the defensive and they say, "Oh, you used methanol in the extraction. You should have used water." Just [ __ ] that any chemist would know is nonsense. Um, and then they they published an announcement on their website. This was a few months afterwards. They have found silomthoxin in the mushroom and they published this mass spect mass spectrogram >> showing this little peak of the molecular mass of silomthoxin >> which I didn't believe was real. Um, so I I kind of had a bit of an exchange on Reddit with one of the guys who was doing the analysis and he described the data that he was getting. >> Great place to have an exchange. >> It was Yeah. My favorite my favorite place, Reddit. Um, and um he was he described the data >> very mental mentally stable folks there. >> Oh yeah, absolutely. This is where I go when I want some rational rational co you know cogent debate. Um anyway, I had this brief exchange and he he basically told me the data. He told me how many molecules they were detecting in the mass spectrometer. Um, just to give me an idea of the amount of silomthoxin they were detecting by mass spectrometry and I I did a back of the envelope calculation. I think I worked out you need you'd need like two tons two metric tons of dried mushroom to get a single dose of silomthoxin. So what if it was there it was it was >> it was it was so such a small amount that it was irrelevant. And unfortunately, a game they didn't realize because they're stupid. I shouldn't say that, but whatever. They're stupid. Um, silomthoxin has the same exactly the same molecular mass as the N oxide of five mythoxy DMT. So when fivethoxy DMT is exposed to the air, it starts to oxidize and it forms this N oxide. Yeah. Basically, you add an oxygen to the nitrogen. >> Yeah. Um, and this has exactly the same mass, salomthoxin. And you can't tell just by looking at the mass spectrogram whether they've got salomthoxin or 5 MOD DMT has just become oxidized. What's more likely? Obviously oxidation. >> Um, so it's highly likely in my opinion or I would bet my my bottom dollar as they used to say um on this that this is there's nothing in there. It's it's magic mushrooms. It's philosophy mushrooms that contains psilocybin and psilicin um and maybe a little bit of oxidized tiny tiny tiny irrelevant few molecules of the oxidized form of 5 Mod DMT. It's in other words the whole thing just was a fantasy. >> Mhm. >> Now I'm not saying bring it back to the code of reality thing. I'm not saying that that's the case here. Danny is not stupid. He's smart. He's he's really thought this this thing through. But there's always the danger that if you don't do your groundwork first and eliminate, you have to really even if you don't think that this speckle effect has anything to do with it, even if you're convinced, you've got to do the groundwork to eliminate all of these more mundane alternative hypotheses. And that takes time. It takes money >> and then you get to the more far out explanations. whereas it feel feels to me a little bit like Danny's kind of taking the elevator to the penthouse suite. >> Um, and obviously I'm not going to do that and I get some criticism for it, but that's how I work. You know, I spent most of my most of the time what I'm doing with DMT certainly in the last two decades is is analyzing more orthodox, more mainstream, more mundane explanations and then ruling them out. And only then do I get to the more far out explanations. And I think that's really important that Danny does that. And I I did get the sense that he was trying to do that, but he's got to get the right people. The experiments got to be properly designed and that kind of thing. And it's going to be a long process. >> Yeah. >> Um so yeah, I think it's not going to be the last we hear about the code of reality, but I'm just I'm far from convinced. There's just too many unfortunate coincidences and similarities um between the optical effects of lasers and just the whole idea doesn't make much um sense. Well, the idea of introducing different kinds of things into the experience is really is a is a I think is a good idea. And I would be curious to see like if you could do something within DMTX where people are on extended state DMTs, extended state DMT and introduce new elements into their environment, new physical elements like a laser, something else. figure out some different different things to introduce to them to see how it affects them >> and to see uh what changes and to see how that correlates across different people and see if there's any kind of consensus or whatever without you know what I mean just like just throwing throwing [ __ ] at the wall >> and uh and seeing if there is any kind of consensus between these folks that are on extended state DMT. Um I I think that's an interesting idea and would be an interesting experiment. you know, I don't know what you can prove by it or what kind of conclusions you could jump to from that, >> but um >> yeah, I mean, I think you're right and I think it's some it's a cool idea, right? So, maybe you can rather than having to stare at this little laser beam, if you if you understand what is what is it about this pattern that's being generated by the what is it about? What is what are the optical properties here >> that are important in generating this effect? And then can we create a screen? >> Mhm. So rather than looking at this little, you could create a screen that replicates the precise optical phenomena, the particular pattern, maybe a pattern of speckles on a screen or something that mimics the pattern you see in that little patch of laser and then have someone stare at that. >> So you so rather than just being a small patch of light, you actually can you have a whole, you know, wide screen where you can stare at, >> right? >> That would be cool. And it's it's something I'd never thought about is is is introducing certain patterns of external visual sensory inputs and seeing if you can scaffold as I said before the the visual phenomenology to that. >> Yeah. Or even mess with your own visual like you know those magic eye things where you look at the patterns they look like nothing and then you kind of like can adjust your focus and you can see things in there. do [ __ ] like that while you're on DMT with lasers or with lights with with anything and see how that how that affects it >> because you know DMT is it's an extremely varied visual phenomenology and the idea that we can isolate one particular aspect that's commonly reported you know code and reliably induce it using a certain pattern of external visual input. That's a really cool idea and and and he needs to be given credit for discovering that cuz that's really cool on its own is an important discovery and could >> could pave the way for some really interesting uh um experiments that would help us analyze and understand the DMT space. Um but going from that to this is the code running reality. I'm just not I'm not ready to go there yet, I'm afraid. >> Yeah. You know, also like there's a lot of experiments that you could do that I'd be really interested to learn about that are just you you can't do that are just, you know, inhumane. Like >> such as >> like you can't like I would be interested to see how DMT affects children. >> That would be cool. Now that's Yeah, >> you obviously can't give kids DMT. That's [ __ ] up. But like I wonder what would happen, you know, just like a someone who's unconditioned that that's not hasn't experienced the world, right? And is not conditioned into society yet to see how that would affect their their their brain. >> I mean, going back to I was talking about dreams earlier and how how children's brains aren't very good at simulating the waking world when they're very very young. And so if you if you gave a a child, you have children, right? >> Yeah. >> How old? Two weeks, three years, and six years. >> Oh, two weeks. >> Yeah. Or not two weeks. Two months. I'm sorry. A two-month old. I have a bad perception of time. I have a two-month old, a three-year-old, and a six-y old. >> A three-year-old. So, he or she? >> Uh, the older ones are boys. >> Okay. So, we can use them, right? >> Mhm. Yeah, we can use them. >> We can use them. So, we inject your children >> in prison, but >> I don't know if it'd be worth it. But if we injected your children or anyone's children um with with DMT and they started seeing these highly coherent crystalline worlds that had no relationship to you just like an adult does that would be that would add to the >> um the conclusion that that DMT was doing something quite remarkable here. You know how would a children a child's brain >> be able I mean it's hard enough to explain how an adult brain can construct these entirely disjoint hyper complex hyperdimensional realities. If a child's brain could do it, I mean obviously how they communicate that might be very difficult. It might be more rudimentary, right? Yeah. Yeah. But but yeah, it's not going to happen unfortunately. >> Yeah. Unless we can find a way to like similar if we could find a way to to have an a visual of somebody what somebody is seeing. You know, like maybe we could figure out a way to tap into somebody's visual cortex and put it on a screen to see exactly what their brain is showing them in their mind. >> I think we're a long way. >> Super [ __ ] crazy out there like sci-fi PK dick type idea. But like if we could do that, that would be incredible. >> Yeah. I think if you if you did it with a visual cortex, you'd just get a messy pattern because that's what you that's all the visual cortex is, right? So you'd have to you'd have to connect it to and understand how that was being integrated at all the higher levels of the cortex as well which is an unsolved problem. Um but yeah ultimately in the future perhaps the idea of having readouts of of the visual phenomenology in real time >> would be incredible but you I don't see it happening anytime soon even with >> LLMs. Yeah. I mean, yeah, it's just there's there's there's too many conflicts and and human beings um unfortunately are too focused on careers and money and influence and uh when you give people people they gify everything like every single thing there is whether like if you have like people that are obsessed with UFOs you have this whole UFO community and it's just [ __ ] infested with with grifters and people trying to monetize everything and then that gets the the reality gets lost in that >> which is good for the people that have the real secrets that have the answers to this stuff because it just confuses people >> and it's the same thing I I just have recently learned when I had Travis Kitchens on here. I don't if you know Travis he does he's a journalist who's been studying all this stuff. He was a part of a John Hopkins research group. >> Um, a psychedelic study. And you know, it just seems like there's all these competing groups that are trying to use psychedelics to their benefit. No matter what it is, whether it's like religion or it's like government type stuff or it's pharmaceutical companies, people are just trying to figure out how to use this to push forward whatever they're doing. >> Yeah. >> You know what I mean? And um you know unfortunately you can't get it's it makes it harder to get to the truth. And on top of that I had a crazy misconception before I got understood this world that psychedelics made people like better people. You know it just it makes us more humble. It makes us more enlightened. It makes us more you know meditative truth seekers. And I realized that that is couldn't be farther from the truth. A lot of people get they I think what it does is it turns you into more of what you already are. And that can be good or bad. And uh what Rick Strossman was explaining to me is that there's this like from what he's experienced is he's seen a lot of people develop this sort of like messianic complex to where like they have the answers because they've done so many psychedelics. Oh yeah. And they are on the true path to enlightenment and you should follow them. >> Oh yeah. But I mean there's this weird phenomenon which myself and my friends have noticed over the last you know decades which is this this this paradox of these ego dissolving drugs which is what psychedelics do and then when it comes back it's it's it's much bigger massive egos and there's many examples of this sometimes quite tragic. Um there was a guy called uh Cantelmo, Rick Cantelmo, I think Chris Cantelmo. >> Mhm. >> He was I mean we we had some rather unpleasant exchanges. I mean he he's sadly I mean he passed away. Well he committed suicide. >> Um but he was convinced that he had all the he was used a lot of DMT. He developed this religion called canelmoism. M >> um based upon based around his perceived revelations regarding reality and DMT and all that kind of stuff and he was always going about his Yale degree whenever you talk with I've got a degree from Yale that beats your Cambridge degree in you know whatever etc and stuff right just nonsense um very aggressive and you know I don't want to speak ill of the dead but clearly had serious psychological problems >> um that weren't improved by smoking lots of DMT idea that you're guaranteed to to to enter perfect uh mental health because you use a lot of DMT, it's not guaranteed at all and and and it it can end up in really bad places. >> Yeah. Another thing that Travis was pointing out to me was there was this uh there's this study, this John Hopkins study that never got I think it actually finally got released >> which was a uh it was a study of religious professionals where they gave people of different religious uh different like religious backgrounds like leaders of certain churches like uh they had um a Muslim guy, a Christian, Jew, um a Hindu person all take psilocybin I believe it was and they had them all report their experiences cuz their their goal was to see if there was any kind of common thread, >> right? And like if it reinforced their if their if their religious views or beliefs influenced what they were experiencing on psychedelics. And I guess the theory was uh to see if there was any kind of like perennialism or like a common core to all religions. >> Got it. And um you know, you can see how a religion would want to use Travis was was pointing out how um there is a movement to sort of use psychedelics to strengthen or revive Christianity >> in the United States. Like if like because if you can use bring people into a church, do a sermon and give people psychedelics that's going to make them believe more, be more emboldened because they're going to they're going to first of all, these people are probably vulnerable to some degree and and now they're having a psychedelic experience while they're going to church and there's music playing. So, it's going to be more of a spiritual transcendent experience. But now you're giving the problem with that is you're giving the church fathers access to these drugs. >> And who knows what they're going to do. Like like >> imagine the amount of control you can have over these people. If they're already believing that you are the voice, you have the direct line to God, right? And now they're under the influence of psychedelics. >> Yeah. >> That could spiral out of control. >> Yeah. I mean increasing increased suggestability. I mean this is why the whole MK ultra thing. >> Yes. >> Um that was all about how how do you make someone how can you make generate a neurological state where someone is highly susceptible to being manipulated. um uh whether it's to reveal their deepest darkest secrets or you know military secrets or whatever you know truth drugs >> um or or can you make someone to be a super soldier I think was the term you used earlier um >> this is it's it's an obvious target for um should we say the shadowy aspects of those in power >> um and and I ect. You know, MK Ultra was dissolved, of course, but yes, I saw the eyebrows rise there. Sure. Um, there's almost certainly things going on that we have no idea about and and with with molecules of the potency of something like LSD. You can imagine I mean they they they had you know whole proposals about let's putting in into the water supply of an enemy an enemy's um cities and basically render the uh the populace unwilling or unable to defend themselves. Um, now you could probably do that with viruses and things like that and introduce those or >> Well, there was that PK Dick novel, right? Where I forget what it was called, but there was like uh a drug that they were trying to get a hold of to like control the world or something like that. like intergalactic drug like the Pentagon has been and this was what Annie Jacobson talked about in her in her book the Pentagon's brain like they have so much goddamn money that they invite sci-fi writers to the Pentagon >> to talk about >> their their sci-fi ideas like the writer of Terminator they invited there and Alien >> and uh like they they have they're >> money is limitless and they're exploring science fiction to figure out what they can make reality. right? >> You know, so like if you were that person and you were in charge of trying to come up with the come up with the most groundbreaking, mindbending, fantastical concept to empower your nation to be the number one nation. Of course, you would use psychedelics and you would uh you would go to writings like PK Dicks novels and figure out this is interesting. Let's throw a couple million dollars at it and see if we can make this a reality. >> Yeah. I remember remember Alex Jones a few years ago now. He's talking about the I was the CIA or something using DMT to he called them the Clockwork Elves. Remember that? >> And he was saying that he had heard from his secret sources. >> Oh yeah. >> Um that they were >> they're channeling demons or something. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They were in they were in collaboration or in cahoots with these clockwork elves. They were using DMT to maintain communication with them or something. >> Yeah, >> I don't know. I mean, how much of that is a product of his imagination? I'm not sure. But >> sure. I mean, I take seriously, it's no secret that I take seriously the idea that when that DMT allows you to interact with some kind of intelligent agent, and if I take that seriously, and I'm not totally nuts, um, then you can bet your other bottom dollar, um, that there are going to be agents or elements within the powers that be within the government, the shadow government or the hidden hand or whatever you want to call it, that that would also have thought of that and that would also be developing. You maybe DMTX is being used by these elements of the government and they are running maybe they've been using something similar for decades. Maybe they are they have learned how to establish stable two-way communication with these with these intelligences. Maybe they know a lot more about them >> um than you or I um because we can only imagine. >> Wild [ __ ] Andrew. Thank you. This has been a fant. We just said like four hours. >> We should um before we go. >> Yeah. >> You want me to go grab the DMT? >> No, no, no, no, no, no. >> However, um the DMTX thing I should just mention. Yes. Right. >> That so DMTX until now has always been a kind of the purview of research institutions. So, it's not kind of publicly available, >> but we are developing uh we've got a special license from a government in the Caribbean, St. Vincent and the Grenardines to use basically all drugs. Um, and we're building out a research center, stroke retreat center where we people will be able to come to the Caribbean in a five-star environment, spend several days um in preparation, integration, and and experience DMTX in a like a a perfect setting. >> Wow. >> Yeah. So, people can go to Newortics again, new.org, and they can they can actually put their name down. Um, there we go. The next frontier. >> That's it. >> Yeah. And they can sign up, put their name down. I mean, it's still a work in progress. So, this is don't expect you, you know, an invite to come in the next few days or anything like that, but express your interest. Uh, we will be looking for research volunteers as well as people who just want to come and experience, you know, what's it like to spend 90 minutes >> within the DMT space, you know, stably, you know, stabilized within the DMT space. uh you know a series of might be a series of sessions starting from low doses and building up to uh you know very long extended uh breakthrough doses. >> What's the mo what's the most amount of sessions that you've seen somebody do in one day? >> Well, I mean the Imperial College study um it was they did one session separate and then another session I think it was like a week or two weeks later. So they did five sessions but separated out. Nobody should, in my, you know, opinion, should be doing multiple 30 minute sessions in a day. I mean, I think that would be a bit much. >> Um, but yeah, I mean, Carl Smith, who's on the on the board of directors together with myself and and and three others, um, he was the only person he was subject zero. He's a really cool guy. One of the most experienced psychonauts I know. And he was the only one to actually get through out of the 11 or 12 subjects to get through all five um sessions of kind of breakthrough 30 minute sessions. >> Yeah. And and they the entities what's kind of interesting is that the entities he he saw the same entities every time he came back and they started to recognize that he was coming back and they were like, you know, not you again, you know, you're back again. Yeah. And and at one during one of the sessions he was being scanned. He he had he was in an MRI machine or whatever it was. Uh and obviously that was scanning his brain and um the entities seemed confused he said because then normally the ones doing the scanning. They're the ones that are probing and measuring and they were confused why >> this team in Imperial were doing this scanning. So just a little taste of the kind of really cool things that that that happened with this extended state technology. So yeah, new nautics.org People can go to the retreat center is called Elusis. >> Oh, perfect. >> Yeah. >> Elus, like the Elusinian Mysteries. >> Yeah. So, elucismind.com they can also go to which is kind of a website for the what the retreat center will look like. Okay. Once it's built up. So, >> and what about your book? >> Oh, my book. Yes. >> Hold it up nicely for people. There we go. There. >> Death by Astonishment. Out now. >> Forward by Graham Hancock. >> Confronting the mystery of the world's strangest drug. Yes. If you're interested in DMT and don't just want the boring kind of oh visual hallucination explanation want to get into why the development of my thinking the story of western science's struggle to make sense of it and their failure to make sense of it and what it might really mean and what the future of DMT research might look like. Um this is the book available July 1st in beautiful hardback and can I show this is really cool. So the inner bore the end papers is Harry Pac >> great artist you know visual kind of visionary artist and then in the back you've got incedigris has done the artwork here also a really great visual artist inspired by DMT so >> yeah get it while you can also available on audio book but >> beautiful thank you for your time I really appreciate it we'll link everything below >> awesome thank you very ladies and gentlemen