The general gun experience. If you look at the bill that was passed, I mean I went over it last night and it's There's a lot of weird shit in there like why are we giving all this aid to foreign countries in this bill? Why is there a part of this aid bill that? Makes it a felony to illegally screen Like how does this out they sneak things into these fucking bills? These people are monsters. They really are like this should have been a real clear-cut thing aid to people that have lost All their income because of this they need to stimulus the fact that they they added in a a felony provision for people who stream Movies and profit from them like what the fuck is going on like how is You're not gonna hear me disagree look why is Pakistan getting money? Why is Israel getting did you see it Jamie? It's bizarre I don't understand the logic behind it. I understand how this got agreed to well What happens is the idea is this thing's gonna pass anyway, so you you help out your favorite lobbyists whether you're a Democrat or a Republican You sneak something in is that what? Yeah, that's clearly how it's fucking people Here's what I'll say. Okay. This is why tell your children actually matters in this debate. Okay I wrote this book and You can and you can say that's the pot book for folks. Yeah, you can say like this guy like he doesn't understand a lot of people Just like to get high and they can handle it. It shouldn't be criminal And you know Minority's bear the burden here. It's wrong. Let's legalize. Okay. Totally reason. And by the way alcohol kills a whole lot of people It's legal. It's advertised on TV. It's legal The rules should be the same. I totally get that. Okay If you read the book It's about something else. It's about this is Psychically harmful to a lot of people and we're not talking about it. Yeah, and by the way There's a downstream violence that comes from that sometimes that we're not talking about either. Okay To me those things if you read the book with an open mind are pretty factual and inarguable It doesn't mean by the way that you can't then say cannabis should still be legal You can read the book and agree with and say but you know what should still be legal for those other reasons fine That is not the way the book was treated last year. Okay. It was You hate black people you don't understand science. You're cherry picking go to hell Okay, so when I saw this happening this year with covid and I saw the New York Times where I used to work And you know what people can yell at me for saying I used to work there But I worked there for 10 years and I was a really good reporter there and I'm not gonna back down from my credentials because I am a good reporter You can say You can say you know what? Like lockdowns are necessary and we need to protect these old people and you know what we can't let the hospitals get over run But if I present evidence to you that's contrary Don't just shout at me that I'm an idiot and don't know what I'm talking about Okay, it's not gonna work. It didn't work with tell your children and it's not gonna work this time Okay, so and what I recognize was that unfortunately and it's sort of the elite levels of the media You know the times washing post NPR CNN The group think is overwhelming. Yeah, it's overwhelming on cannabis and it's overwhelming on all these woke progressive issues And it's gotten much much worse since I left the times 10 years ago and I don't know what's gonna turn it around okay and And it has terrible effects. Let me give you one example. Okay. We should all want to know where this virus came from I don't care whether you're public and or Democrat liberal conservative. I don't care what country you live in You should want to know if this is the result of a Chinese lab accident and there's some evidence that we can talk about that later Okay, and you should at least want to know that there's been a complete independent investigation into this Okay, this thing has messed up the world in a mammoth way this year Okay, and at the least we should want to know where it came from if it did come from some kind of accident I'm not saying the Chinese released it intentionally I'm saying there might be evidence that there was an accident because if that happened we better make sure it never ever Ever happens again. It's a very strange thing to me that people don't want to even investigate that They don't want to look at it and they're there I think they're afraid of racism or something there seems to be some sort of indication that there's a victim blaming thing There's a there's an aspect to it that also is anti-Trump. That's it. Yeah, it's anti-Trump. Okay. Yeah What happened in March was the progressive media first of all they were terrified because what was happening in New York What seemed to be happening in New York and they all thought they were gonna die and then once they realized that weren't all gonna die They realized that they could beat Donald Trump over the head with this and he would lose the election and they did and he did and look I'm neither a Republican nor a Democrat. What are you? I'm an independent basically I basically as I have said my politics are that it's impossible to be too cynical just like you said with the with the bill that They just passed it's impossible to be too cynical about the way these people behave. They behave. They behave terribly Okay, but so why is it that the New York Times won't even write stories about the fact that there's real questions about where this virus came from forget the ventilators forget the US response forget you know Donald Trump we should be asking that question The group thing is so serious that basic questions don't get asked right now Well, we were criticized on the podcast because I had Brett Weinstein who's a evolutionary biologist who discussed all the reasons Scientific reasons why it's there's there's evidence that indicates that this is not a virus that naturally occurs And also Just by co-incidence there happens to be a level four lab in who hands? What are the odds right you would think that people would want to put those two together? But it was something from the beginning that this group thing was established that you are not to question that and There was a whole article written about how I'm promoting this dangerous conspiracy theory that That this came from a lab that's been disproven, but it hasn't been disproven this proven at all No, it hasn't been disproven. There's there's there's never been a real solid proof of where this has come from That's right here nor there. That's right and and actually you'd say the evidence is sort of going the other way now I mean in favor of this and here's why if this thing is Originally came from some animal right we know that there was a virus that was 96% similar to it that they had at that lab okay But we've never found the virus that's 99% similar in an animal which is what we would expect to find Okay, that there'd be something really close that then made the jump from whether it's a sivit cat or a bat or a mink or whatever to a human They've never been able to find that. Why was that it connects with pangolins? So so so the virus is 96% Bat it looks like very very similar and then Near the most important part of it the part of the binds this receptor on yourselves that enables it to get in It's called the receptor binding domain is pangolin. Okay? So it just happens that it's a perfect cut of Mostly this virus that we know was in this lab this bat virus with a pangolin virus with a tiny addition that it that enables It enables the spike to attach more efficiently Okay, it's called the fern cleavage and and again where it's sort of the limits of my knowledge I don't want to talk too specifically about it, but Somehow this virus just happens to be mostly bat a little bit pangolin and we can't find any evidence of a virus that's like that to a 99% ile in the wild and believe me Don't you think the Chinese have looked in the last year or wouldn't they have looked if they thought they could find something? When SARS came the original SARS not SARS-CoV-2 they had found the viral host within a matter of months I mean the the the zoonotic one the the animal viral host in a matter of months and they published a paper on it There's been nothing like that now you can choose to believe that's because you know what? It's just in some cave in China that they haven't found the real thing yet or you can choose the question as you said There's this level four BSL lab in Wuhan Where it happens where this thing happens to seemingly have emerged coincidence coincidence crazy coincidence Yeah, but we're not allowed to talk about that. Yeah, if you talk about it You're a Trump supporter catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify Including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data cost all for free Spotify is absolutely free You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience