Joe Roman Funga. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. It's a great seat again. Yeah, good to see you. So since the last time we talked, we spent a lot of time where you were trying to explain to me simulation theory and why the probability of simulation theory is more likely than it not being in simulation. Yeah, it was what? Five years ago? Something was six. Six or six? Four or six? I mean, a lot of things happen in the world since then. Yes, yes, a lot of things. I mean, for example, back then, I think we did we even talk about AI? Probably came up a bit, but it wasn't this thing looming over civilization, which is really kind of fascinating when you think about the fact that it's only been six years. And in six years, what a massive jump and some new technology in our life. Like just sort of like the internet where it like crept up on us, we just accepted that it's a thing. But this thing has gotten massively entangled in every aspect of society and in every aspect of people's lives in a very short period of time. Yeah, I mean, things are like so much is happening now that is kind of a full-time job just to monitor the situation. Yeah. And one of the things that you're talking about is the positive aspects of it. You're talking about like that this is probably going to be a net good for humanity. Well, hopefully. Well, I mean, I think I take both cases seriously, the sort of the risk side and the big unlock, if we get things right. I feel like we have the potential, like we're on a whitewater raft. We have the potential to get to our destination. But we also have the potential to flip over and try to figure out how to get to shore in freezing cold water and sort of rebuild. Yeah, yeah. That seems about right. Yeah. And it seems like it's kind of speeding up a bit as well, right? If you're sort of in this field, there's like every few weeks, there's a new model being released or something. Yes. I guess it's like, if you imagine, I guess, commentating some fight, right? That's been recorded and you're supposed to do the voiceover. The first round is like normal speed. And then the second round is 2x. And then the third round on 4x. And it's just like a whir of legs and arms. That's a great way to describe it. Yeah. It's just so strange how quickly it's nuck up on us in that there's two narratives that we hear. The one narrative is we're in real trouble and that this thing is going to take over every aspect of society and it's essentially going to be a superior life force, a superior intellect that exists amongst us that we created. And we don't think that's wise. And then there's the other side that is saying things like what Elon says. We're saying we're going to have universal high income. It's going to be so much prosperity that no one's ever going to have to toil again. There'll be no more third world countries. There'll be no more poverty. Like we can eradicate poverty with the resources that we have on earth. And we can change what it means to have to work, like just to provide yourself with food and housing. That's all going to be easy and free. And then everything else is going to be you have to find a purpose in your life. My problem is, and I love Elon, but the people who have that perspective are all making money off AI. And they are all invested like Evelie, Mark N. and all these people that have this rosy view of it, they're all invested heavily into it. So when someone like you who's not necessarily in that camp, that is more of a true objective analyst of what's going on, when you have a positive aspect or a positive viewpoint of it, I get a little more excited. Yeah, well, I mean, the truth is we don't know. Right, how do I cross the pine out? So I mean, I think there are these scenarios where we unlock this enormous boost, both to economic productivity, but then across medicine, entertainment, environment, travel, all kinds of things. And like a tsunami of wealth just kind of flows through and lifts all boats. And then the idea of human work becomes an anachronism and where you have machines that can do everything that we can do physically and mentally and do it much better and cheaper. And so I think in those scenarios where this really works, the transformation is a lot deeper. And so that kind of layers to the audience like the most superficial level is, well, they ultimate your jobs and what are people gonna... What are they gonna do for that particular work? Well, that comes a little bit deeper. First, like the most superficial level is people just wonder where will I get the job if they're going to work? It places me. And then the superficial level of that conversation, I think as well, you need to retrain workers so they can work in other fields and maybe they need to be, I don't know, employment insurance while they are being retrained or something like that. But once you think through where this ultimate leads, it's not just a few jobs, I think, but it's really everything that humans can do to a good approximation. With maybe the exception being where the consumer has a direct preference that the particular product or service be done by human. Priest, prostitute, and politician. I agree to those might survive. Well, politician, hopefully not. Hopefully AI can handle that all without any corruption. Yeah, but somebody's gonna take credit for it. This is true and code it. And so then you get to these more profound questions. I think about meaning and purpose and what does a human life look like at technological maturity. Right. Also, what is experience? Does experience have to be measurable? Like, do you have to touch it? Do you have to measure it in way? Or is virtual experience still experience? Like, if you have a very full and enjoyable and fulfilling virtual life, is that enough? You know what I mean? Like, do you have to do everything in the material world or can you find happiness in a virtual world? That doesn't currently exist, but we can clearly see the technology if it expands. It's going to be the possibility of experiencing a matrix type reality. Yeah, I think I see where you are going. Yeah, but yeah. I mean, I think different strokes for different folks. If you imagine a world where presumably these virtual worlds will be very rich and deep and fascinating, but some people might just like the idea of climbing the real Mount Everest rather than, you know, being in it. Most certainly. But however, there could come a time where people are locked out of regular reality. Like, this is worst case scenario with AI. Is that you have your needs taken care of, but there is no purpose. There's nothing to do. There's nothing to do because AI is taking care of all aspects of society. Other than recreation, there's nothing to do. And then this one recreation comes along, that's not reality, but it's way more fulfilling and exciting than any other aspect of reality. And, you know, an example that would just be in a very minor way, your phone provides you with that sort of an escape. And it's not even that thrilling. And yet it's massively addictive. Your phone people are on their phones six hours a day. If we come up with a virtual reality that's way more exciting than regular reality, everyone's gonna hop on in. Yeah, I mean, I think to some extent this will maybe be the case whether you go the virtual path or the physical path. I mean, you could imagine a future where there are like resorts and people are sort of lying in beach chairs. Everything drinks all day long. And like that's also a kind of checking out, right? Yeah, well that, yeah, that's not fulfilling. You know, the thing about a virtual reality is you don't have to even live within our physics. I mean, you can fly, you can do anything. It's a larger space of possibilities. But either way, it could be like a passive existence in physical reality where you're like launching at the beach or it could be like a big event. In video games, like you could have like really a chance every training ever fiber to try to succeed in this virtual environment or like one where you're just kind of floating on some cloud in a drug like state. But I don't think people are gonna be interested in that because just the way the human mind works. Like what kind of video games are people attracted to? It's because a video game is essentially a proxy. It's an approximation of that. You're just watching it on a screen but you're sort of forgetting the fact that you're watching on a screen, you're just concentrating on this 3D reality that you're running through with the machine gun or whatever you're doing, right? That's what people are interested in. They're not interested in these games where you just like float over the earth and like fly and just eat bananas. No, they're interested in thrilling things. And if that gets provided in a virtual way, the amount of people that are gonna just say, this is better than regular boring life or where a slave to a computer. Yeah, I mean, they're both kind of... Okay, we're back. Where were we? Oh yeah, I was just saying that there are also these computer games that like provide a more passive experience. Yeah. You're like not really doing much and it's more kind of zoning out. But most people aren't interested in those. Most people are interested in Call of Duty. They're interested in these wild first person shooters where you're running down hallways and everything's exciting and thrilling. Some sci-fi game or you know, have life, something like that. That's what people are interested in. Yeah. Well, I mean, I think there are like some personality differences in what path you would take there. But either way, I think a lot of the choices that people would make currently depend on what they are sort of designed to respond to by feeling good about it. So like if you enjoy one thing, you choose that if you enjoy another now. In this condition of technological maturity, if we might have sort of a future civilization that has developed all possible technologies through their maximum. Yeah. Then amongst the foredances, amongst the things they could do is like they wouldn't just have control over the external environment, things around them. But also their own biology and brains. So if you were one of these people and like maybe right now, the only way you get enjoyment is by creating like crazy drunk or doing sort of things you don't really approve of maybe. But that's actually what sort of lights your fire. Like you could imagine redesigning yourself to take the same kind of pleasure but in some kind of contemplating the beauty of the universe or like appreciating the goodness in the heart of others or like some more sort of noble aspiration. Like solving abstract mathematics rather than playing first-person shooters. You would have a choice like whether you would get your or three-les from one kind of activity or the other. Yeah, which brings us to the question like, what does it mean to be human? Like for people finding beauty and joy and interesting and fascinating things and how to be a better person and all the different aspects of human life that we think about. When we think about people, when we think about noble aspects of humanity but doesn't that have to exist in conjunction with the worst aspects of society for us to appreciate it? It seems like this is a part of the human condition is that we have to have crime so that we can appreciate peace. We have to have war so we can appreciate peace. We have to have hate so we can appreciate love and we're never without one or the other. They're always both together in constant conflict and we're always nobly hoping that the good wins out over the bad and this is part of the struggle of being a human being. And if we just completely eliminate that struggle, we're gonna have to find some, we're gonna have to be a different thing because what we are is this very strange territorial primate and who's endlessly curious and this territorial primate is moving in a certain direction and that direction seems to be a better society, it seems to be over time. If you look at statistics from thousands of years ago to today there's less violence, there's better medicine, there's better education, it's moving in a better and better and better direction. But it's in a struggle that's part of why it moves. If all of a sudden there's no struggle and everyone is this wonderful and light and being like what are we? Because we're gonna be a different thing than what we are right now. And if you love music and if you love art and if you love novels and all these different things that come out of the human condition, well, those things come out of struggle, those things come out of confusion and pain and heartbreak and love and joy and all that stuff all piled up together without that, like what are we? And so if we are moving in this direction technologically and we're not moving as fast biologically, do we merge? Because that seems to be what I think. I think that if this thing goes the way it continues to go, the bottleneck is gonna be human biology. Yeah, there's a kind of paradox that it did in our efforts to make progress. So like there are all these kind of scientists and people working to develop better technologies and throughout the economy, in some company, maybe try to figure out how to make some process a little bit more efficiency, conserve customers better and all of this is designed to solve problems, right? To like if you sort of extrapolate that to its logical end point, right? You would imagine we would have perfect technology that can do everything solve all the problems, like presumably with AI and automation. Right. But then you're not in this condition where there is kind of nothing left for us to do. You might think. And so although it looks like we have these strong reasons to push forward in this direction, if you actually look at the end point, if we succeeded, to many people it will look kind of unpalatable and like this kind of future where, all the problems are solved and nevertheless that does seem to be the direction that we are headed in probably the direction that we should be headed in. Yeah, wouldn't that be a better goal? If there was zero murder, zero violence, zero crime, zero lying, zero corruption, and human beings all worked in coordination with each other just like in a sense of unique sinking and harmony. Right, that would be way better. I think so. But it does, like if you actually stare at that situation, it does have these slightly unpalatable. Yeah, because quality, because you might think it looks kind of blind, right? If it's not necessarily though, it's just, it looks bland if you think about what we're experiencing now, like all the excitement and the weirdness of uncertainty and of not knowing, and also the negative aspects of our life in conjunction with the positive aspects of our lives. We contrast the two of them and you really appreciate good people after around a bunch of fucking assholes. You know, if that doesn't have to be that way, this is just what we are dealing with. This is my position on work too, because everybody in their head is like, what happens when AI takes all the jobs? And I'm like, do we have to have a fucking job? Isn't that a human invention? Like, why do you have to have a job? Let's say it's crazy that our main focus is on housing and food. And like, most people are basically just working for that. Most people that are struggling, check to check, basically housing and food is their daily labor. If that's removed, wouldn't enough people figure out what to do with their time? Yeah, yeah, I think so. That like, yeah, there will be some translation and discomfort and change. But this is made ultimately that is like, yeah. I mean, I think it's like, so slavery is really bad, right? Like, which labor is a sort of, you know, every light in a sense. You have to sell a third of your waking day just to get money to pay for necessities. And the people that are trying to make the most money make the conditions for their employees as shitty as possible because it costs the least amount. They don't think about it. Like, listen, maybe we make less money, but we have an awesome experience for everybody that works there. Nobody thinks like that. They all think like we have to make the most money because we have shareholders and we have responsibility and these people need to make more money every quarter. So yeah, although sometimes you do things you compete for talent. That's true too. But not, but only the top talent. That's why the CEOs get all the bread and all the people on the assembly will get fucked. So you get some money. You get treated well. What would you say I mean? Jamie is a different kind of employee. Jamie is literally the coke. I mean, he's the co-person on the show. Yeah, yeah. That's different. But you know, some dude who's out there, you know, stocking boxes for Amazon. That's different. Yeah, yeah. Being the CEO. Yeah, I mean, I think like, ultimate, that would be a hugely boration and kind of restore dignity. Like you should be in control of your own time. It's kind of almost the most like a site from your own body. Like your own time, your own attention. And you have to teach people discipline. They have to, this the thing is like if you give people the opportunity to just do nothing, we do. You know, we're primates. We'll find a way to, this we're genetically sort of designed to conserve resources. You don't want to overuse resources for no reason to do a bunch of shit because you won't survive. You don't have enough food. So we're sort of designed to like know how to be lazy. And so we're going to have to find things that give us purpose or we'll get depressed. This episode is brought to you by Visible. It's officially summer folks and boy, what a summer we are having. It feels like one of those good old fashioned summers we just want to enjoy every moment and keep up with the action. Your best companion this summer, visible wireless. Visible gives you unlimited 5G data and unlimited hotspot powered by Verizon for just $25 a month. So you can make this the summer of fun and savings. Visible is more than just a wireless plan. It's unlimited wireless design to always keep you connected with no contract to tie you down. Switch today at visible.com plan start at $25 a month or get our premium Visible Plus Pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use promo code Rogen. Terms apply, see visible.com for plan features and network management details. Yeah, I mean, so it used to be the traditional idea like a British aristocracy is like that. You wouldn't have to work for a living. It was kind of unfortunate necessity for many people that they had to work for their daily bread, right? But the ideal way of being human was that you just had money and then you spent your time doing other things. Like you know, maybe you were involved in politics or maybe you had like an art collection or you did your gardening or entertain friends. That's the best aspect of it. So when you think about British aristocracy, don't you think about fuckups? I do. I think about guys that are just drunk. They drive their Ferrari into a lake and they accidentally drown their friend and then they pay off the cops and they get away with it. That's what I think about. Well, yeah, there's that. But there were also these kind of, I don't know, amateur scientists or eccentric so have their weird thing and it's decided to. So I guess it brings out like the more freedom from what it has, the more that can reveal their true nature. Like, well, it also depends on how they're raised. Right. Yeah. Who are their parents? What values did they instill in them when they were young? Did they explain the value of hard work that it's actually good for you? And then if you just find something you really want to do and you concentrate on it and really work hard at it, it's actually very fulfilling. Yeah, so you could about it, for example, the education system in this world where we no longer need to work. Like, presumably we need to be redesigned from scratch basically. Because right now it's a kind of machine. So you take children coming in kind of on a conveyor belt and then some processing is done. Like, say that their desk here is disassignment here is a grid and then they come out with a quality label attached. Yeah. And then they are meant to be productive workers that you could put in an office and they will. So this kind of is an unfortunate fact about the current condition that the world needs a lot of these office workers that can do all these tasks in the economy. So like, we have to have until it doesn't. Until it doesn't. And at that point it would be absurd to keep doing this. Right. Then you could imagine changing education so that it would be much more about like, how can you learn to live well a life of leisure? Like, imagine a state-simulating like, the art of conversation, appreciation for art and music, obvious physical wellness, like nature, the ability to set your own goals and take your own initiatives to develop true friendships with people. These are things that are not taught in school, but you could imagine that being the curriculum, like spirituality, like all kinds of sure. Things that would then equip people to sort of use their freedom, their wealth, their free time for some kind of, you know, actually meaningful and beautiful activities. For sure, for sure preemptively, we should be kind of teaching people like that now. Like, if young people are coming up now, the world that they're, if you're in first grade right now, 12 years from now, when you're graduating from high school, like the world is a totally different place. And this idea that being a productive worker who could sit still for eight hours a day is that's the best way we should teach kids. That seems crazy if we're really like seeing the world that you're describing and that most people seem to think is oncoming. Yeah. I guess the timeline is a little bit uncertain. So you don't want to open a situation, right? Where you sort of now you find yourself you're 20 years old, it's time to go out in the world. You have no skills. The AI revolution hasn't yet quite happened. It's kind of a little liberal arts degree anyway. Yeah. And how is that go? There's a lot of silly degrees that people get right now that are useless anyway. And they spend a tremendous amount of time working on getting it. And then when they get out, there's no jobs for that degree. Yeah. So they wear a little bit too early maybe and helping on this. Maybe. Or there's also traps. There's things that you can get really excited about and do like if you want to play professional bowling, you want to bowl professionally. Well, the amount of money you're going to make is very limited because the best bower in the world, like what is the best professional bower in the world, make? Let's guess. I say I didn't know that was a thousand dollars. It's not a big professional bower. We send new guy, Arri's friends with a guy, Tommy, kind of, can't remember his last name, Jamie. He's a professional bower, but he used to come to the commish store and hang out, really nice guy and love comedy. And that might have been like the same. Maybe the very best one makes pretty decent living. And I'd like the third best. Like it's just. I bet barely. I bet the best guy probably makes maybe 100 grand or 200 grand at the most. And that means like the 30th guy in the world is fucked. It's not nothing. Yeah, you have to have another job to pursue that. But then in this, what does he make? Oh, 400 K in big season 450, including prize money and sponsorships. But then like what the same. EJ tuck it made 436 fuck yeah, EJ, he made 437,540 dollars for the 2025 season with several others between 190 K and 270 K and prize money alone, top tier. So the top tier guys make a good living. But how many guys are there? You know what I'm saying? It's probably like a very thin piece. Right. So if you choose to go into bowling, it's not like choosing to go into, you know, there's a lot of other jobs. Like even if you don't even have basketball player, they're making a lot of money. You know, if you're a really good basketball player and you pursue that, like you could get very, very rich. But how many of them get rich? Very much done. Yeah, but then like, so maybe the, the money factor would kind of drop out of the picture. Yes. And it would just be what you're interested in. And then maybe even it would, I mean, the opportunities are endless. Other people are interested into some extent because I think part of what people are competing for is also prestige and status. Yes, that would be a thing where I like status would be more important. So like who's the best at this thing? Like like a bunch of friends who played golf, like Jamie plays golf all the time. Golfers are all comparing each other's scores and they're all, they're playing, they're competing in this game. And that they think about that more than they think about work. Like people who love golf, they can hate work. Like I used to say that about comedy back when I first started one of the things that I noticed is the guys who really got into golf, their careers kind of stalled. Because they were more excited about playing golf than they were about writing jokes and going on the road. And I was like, okay. So if the average person doesn't need food and housing anymore from labor, if that's gone, and now you just get it. And so now you could just go do things. We just have to teach people to be excited about stuff. We have to teach people the value of curiosity and finding things that are interesting to you. And then the value of just education for the sake of learning things because it's interesting. It's just pure satisfaction of curiosity. Which is a beautiful thing. Like that would be great for everybody. If we, instead of learning things because your teacher tells you you have to learn it, well there's always gonna be people that just naturally gravitate towards mathematics. And they're really fascinated by mathematics. And there's always going to be people that are naturally gravitating towards history. They're like, how did we get here? What is this? How did this start? Who wrote that? Who's the first guy to figure that out? And that's, you're gonna naturally go towards that. and just be educated for the sake of satisfying your curiosity. And maybe we'll have a more balanced society because people will actually be able to just pursue their interests. We have to teach them to do it. That's what I think is gonna be really important about young people in the future. Teach them to actually pursue their curiosity rather than just squash any desires they have for novelty and for interesting things. And just be able to work all day doing something you hate because that's what it means to be an adult. Yeah, I think like cultivate that would be like the way forward in this case. And that seems very possible. It's doable. Like we know curious people. Yeah, yeah. And at least it's some extent. I think there's probably also some differences in how different folks are wired. Like some people get bored very easily. Others find everything fascinating. Yeah, people are like just naturally depressed or have low mood others are sort of evolved. Yeah, but those people are naturally depressed. How much would their life change if they were coached at a very early age, the value of exercise? And if they started running, if they started doing yoga and they started feeling much better and they weren't naturally depressed anymore. And then you change their diet and you start adding in vitamins and nutrients and stop giving them processed foods. And also they feel better because the concept even of depression. Like what does that mean? Well, it's very so wildly. And when you're talking about people that aren't taking care of their bodies and that's not thought of as a primary factor in why depression exists in the first place. Well, this is a very unscientific approach then because we know that it has a profound impact on human beings. So we're pretending that there's like this one size fit all. No, I think that should be also a part of teaching people how to be a human being. Chase your curiosity, but also this is why you're not feeling well and that if you just develop this ability to get some momentum going and just show up at that yoga class every day, you feel way better. And you don't have to take a pill. And I think many could be a lot improved if they were taught to sort of take care of their basic physiology and everyone can be improved. 100% of them can be improved. It's a part of being a human being. I mean, I don't know. I think there is also some people who might just have some imbalance of some neurotransmitter because of some genetic condition. 100%. That's why they don't even have the energy to engage in these activities that would make them feel better. But then I think that would be much better medicines for helping. percent. That's why they don't even have the energy to engage in these activities that would make them feel better. But then I think that would be much better medicines for helping. That's where our outcomes in. Let's go. Give them some matter all. Well, get fired up. Get them start running. I'm kidding. But what we're saying is all doable. We're not asking people to breathe underwater. Right? We're saying is that there are people on earth that live like that. And this idea that living just for a paycheck so that you can cover your food and your housing, which we've always thought of as being just an undeniable part of being a person, an adult. This is what you have to do. You have to pay for your food, pay for your housing. But if we do get to a point where the structure of society is now run by hyper intelligent artificial intelligence, you would wouldn't need most jobs that people have to do that suck. And in order to get our society to this point, if you wanted an iPhone, you needed some people that were at a factory somewhere putting it all together. You needed someone who's designing it. You needed someone who's sitting there in the office trying to figure out how to market it. You needed all those jobs. But when we don't need all those jobs anymore, things are going to be very interesting. And that's what I'm saying, we need to become a different thing. It's kind of true and kind of not. You can be a human being and live in that world. But we're going to have to re-educate people how to be a human being. Our education system, specifically in this country, is just designed to make factory workers. Specifically, there's a history of it. We know why they made it this way. They made it this way and they got people in really early so that they could get people set up for jobs. They just want people to work. Yeah. So we are kind of currently ill-suited for really thriving in an environment of abundance and foreign-join life. Because I mean, both at deep biological time scales and during the life span of single-interview, there are all these pressures, necessities that kind of force us to become a certain type. So we talked about the education system training people to be the kind to consider the desk all day long and perform tasks. Yeah. Biologically, we've evolved drives to be lazy to conserve energy to eat as much as we can. And now in the modern environment where there are everywhere, like it causes problems metabolically. And in terms of enjoying life for many people, there is this hedonic treadmill, right? Like you achieve something, some improvement. There's a spike of happiness and then you sort of go back to baseline very quickly. It's starting to take for granted all the blessings of life, which makes it very difficult to actually achieve a state of permanent happiness and felicity. And it's kind of be necessary because they're needed to be this motivation to keep striving for the next thing. Now, once you've actually achieved all the things, then maybe that becomes kind of dysfunctional. Why keep wanting to strive for the next thing if all the things have already been achieved, at least in a certain domain. And so I think as we move deeper into this hypothesized future, like where we get all these magical technologies, then at some point, probably some transformation of human nature. We have to go along with that. First, maybe cultural changes to sort of equip people for life of leisure. And then ultimately, it may be more profound changes to our variability. And so that, imagine if you solve aging and you can now for thousands of years, right? Maybe the way our memory work is not really set up for them. Maybe we would just go stale after 200 years with our current brains, like we just get stuck in a rot. We don't know because we haven't lived for 200 years, but that could easily turn out to be the case with the human. So then maybe at that point, you would need to sort of do something to sort of add more cognitive resources, more flexibility, some sort of psychedelic research or something to to sort of keep the flexibility going for longer periods of time. I'm glad you said a psychedelic reset because it would be very funny if the main tools that we have for navigating this are all illegal. Because I think they might be. And specifically with Silasibin and DMT and probably Abigail as well, like if we wanted chemical tools to navigate a new reality, those are probably the best ones that we have available and they're all illegal. And I think you're right, I think if we're going to be able to navigate this correctly, we have to kind of change the way we interact with each other when it means to be a person. But I wonder how much of the conflict that we have is a direct result of this inherent struggle that so many people have. And I mean, there's a direct correlation between extreme poverty and extreme crime, you know, specifically in this country. If you look at the areas of extreme poverty in this country, that they're also the areas with extreme crime. And I wonder how much of that would be completely alleviated with a complete lack of poverty. And we've always assumed that if you're going to have a functioning society that you're going to have slums, why? Like why? They don't serve any function. It's not a good thing. Well, because some people are always going to be making bad decisions and some people are always going to be going down the wrong road and crime and this and that. Right. But there's still just humans and some humans don't do that. So wouldn't it be better to figure out a way to not have humans ever do that anymore? And it seems like a way to there seems like a way to do that. It's again, not asking people to breathe underwater. We're just we're trying to figure out why does some people never engage crime, why does some people live these really fulfilling and interesting lives? Probably because they were exposed to it when they were really young. Probably because they weren't exposed to like very bad environments and very bad crime and very bad poverty. And how much of that would change if there was no more property. It sounds like such a little fairy tale child like, oh, when they will have no poverty, but that's doable. If everyone is alive, right? Okay, that's alive right now is not starving to death. That means we figured out a way to at least the very least get you resources so you could feed yourself, right? That this no matter how dysfunctional things are, all that has to do is get ramped up a few steps. And now you have no one ever worried about being fed, no one ever worrying about not having a place to sleep. And then you have to find purpose. But it seems like there's a lot of people that find purpose without having a financial price tag attached to it just by what we're talking about with golf or you could be really into writing books. You could write books all day long and people are always going to want human created fiction. People are always going to be interested in the way other people think about things. You'll find there's plenty of things to do. There's plenty of games to play and plenty of skills to learn. The idea that the only reason why we work is to eat and to not get rained on seems nuts. Yeah, I guess to some extent an open question to what extent people will always want to read human fiction or to prefer the human generated outputs. It might be just because current AI generated writing is kind of lacking in various ways. It's often slothman boring. But if it became really good, then it would just be much more fun to move it made by an AI. I might just be so much better and richer and the lighting is perfect and the dialogue is sharp and it's more funny and deep and certainly really such as it. Then you go and watch this human produced tag and it's gone. Most people don't go and watch sort of film school students productions. Right. But then there's that movie obsession. Wasn't that movie made very inexpensively? And it's a huge hit. That's part of the thrill of it. Is it this guy who was like a YouTuber who created this film and now this movie is a giant hit and everybody's super excited about it. Now that same movie was made by AI. I wonder if it would have that impact because it doesn't have the human connection. So that's possible that we keep getting interested in these things because we sort of are really entangled with the human world much more than we are with the world of AI. And I mean, for the same reason you might be more interested in if your brother or friends did something, you might think, oh, this is interesting. I want to check that out. Of course. Of course. With random dude who makes things slightly better. It doesn't mean right. When you go to see your nephew play baseball, you wouldn't really go see little kids based on his bundle. When you're never, he gets on first base like, wait a go, Bobby. So I think these kind of social entanglements that we have will be a big part of what gives structure to lives in this condition where like the external constraints are removed. I think that there is a great value for the human mind for whatever reason in getting better at things and learning things. And I think that if we could instill that in people at a young age, I think it would be fairly easy to get people to pursue that path. But we have to completely revamp our education system, which should have been done a long time ago. Anyway, the idea of having unenthusiastic, un-underpaid people, being any percentage of what children encounter for most of the day when they're in their most form of the period isn't seen. It should be a rich, exciting, enthusiastic journey and how to be a better person and how exciting to learn things. And I was exciting to get better at things and about how anybody can get better at things. I mean, I I hit that every day of school. I hated it. I didn't even know that I was interested in learning anything until I got out of school. The the same for me. I mean, I only discovered it. I also hated books and everything like that for my first 15 years of life because I associated that with school. That was the kind of school thing. So it's only then randomly one day I happened to walk into the local library for no reason and pulled out the book here and there. And then I discovered that there was this whole world of science and idea and literature and all of that, like very different from what we were doing in school and then that kind of opened the gates for me to imagine what a head start you would have had if you had like a different kind of education. I am with super enthusiastic people who really love teaching children are really good at it. And that we reward them and that it becomes a very prestigious position to be in rather than what it is now. If you talk to some guy and then he goes, I'm a high school teacher, you're like, oh, poor bastard. How's he feed himself? That's the immediately what I think, like good for you that you're doing that. But also I guarantee you could probably be making a lot more money and be happier doing another job. And so that's a terrible way to start life off. And if we just revamp that, then you have a bunch of people that are interacting with life in a very different way. And instead of being thought, I have to get a job someday. I have to get a job after school anyway to help my mom pay the bills because we're struggling. So I got to contribute to the household even though I'm 16. I can't hang out with friends. If all that stuff's out the window. And now it's like, no, what we need to find out is what is exciting for you. Like what excites your mind, your specific personality. What is it about life that's interesting? And let's expose you to a bunch of different things that are exciting and interesting that other people find value in. And let's find out which way you gravitate. Because maybe you gravitate towards chess. Or maybe you gravitate towards something completely different. Maybe you're just really in a painting. Maybe painting just lights you up. And you like, look at a canvas and you just start fucking around with it. And that's your thing. There's a lot of people in this world that find that. It's just they have to find it themselves, unfortunately. I think that that's kind of inspiring. But I think that train doesn't stop there. So if we think even more father into this kind of condition of technological maturity, I think in addition to sort of freeing up people, you know, like making it easy to produce the food and the houses and like cars that go faster and don't pollute and all of this stuff. Like if you think through what maybe a technologically matriar civilization could do, like so a lot of these like learning, for example, is something that gives people purpose. But maybe you would have the ability to sort of download knowledge. I think click off a button. So rather than like if you want to learn advanced mathematics, now you have to study here like for years, right? Do like books with exercises and apply yourself and then eventually you sort of unlock. But like maybe a technological maturity, there would be like, okay, I understand mathematics. I can't go to press that button boom. Right. Like the matrix, I will come full member. Yeah. So if you had like, you know, you maybe some kind of nanobots that could infiltrate your brain and then change the synapses in just such a way that you're not the same as you were before except you have these concepts from abstract mathematics. Yeah. You know, after 20 minutes or something like that. Some super intelligence works out how to change your synapses to this new condition. And if you were inclined to do various things because they give you joy and pleasure, like you could also think, well, I could do those things and get the joy and pleasure or I could just push this button. That's like activates the same joy and pleasure. So there would be these shortcuts to everything. And it looks like you would have a post instrumental condition where that would at least at first sight seem to be no reason to do anything for the sake of achieving something else because there would always be this like shorter pass to that other thing that pressing the button. Yeah. And so that's a kind of deeper form of redundancy. It seems that all forms of human instrumental effort would become unmotivated. You could still go to the gym every day and sweat for an hour or you could just take the pill that induces exactly the same physiological effects and the mental effects like the calm or whatever you feel. Or maybe even better genetically engineer someone. So then I think you're getting more into these fundamental questions of value philosophical questions about what ultimately is it that makes a life good. And what makes a life good for a primate because that's what we are or a primitive version of primates. I think we're going to become something different. And if we do it through technologically induced evolution or biologically induced evolution, we're still moving in a general direction. Just biologically there. If you look at ancient hominids and look at us, we're clearly very different. So we're moving in a general direction anyway. And when you look at the grays like these prototypical aliens that everybody sees the big heads and skinny bodies, what do they look like? Well, they look like if we keep going, that's what we're going to look like. We're going to be these genderless sexless muscleless little skinny things with giant heads that communicate telepathically. There's probably where we're moving. And if we're moving that way, maybe we think of them as being an alien from another, maybe that's not, maybe that's just the general direction that primates go once they figure out technology. They eventually realize, well, all, first of all, the idea of having to have a male and a female is kind of crazy. Right. Why? Well, because we have to reproduce. Well, what if we don't reproduce like that anymore? What if all reproduction is done through engineering? And there's no more, there's no more sex. So there's no more lust. So there's no more jealousy. So there's no more ego. There's nowhere anything. And then there's a hive mind because technology advanced to the point where the reason why they have these big giant heads, they're essentially locked into everybody all around them all the time. Yeah. Well, is that what we would want? Not us, but I don't think we'll be us anymore. I think this idea, like if you went to chimps and you said, hey, dude, one day, you're going to be on a plane, eating peanuts, flying over the ocean. They'd be like, fuck that. I don't want to do that. I'll just stay here with a fruit is you guys are nuts. Like, why do you want to do that? And you'll be addicted to cratum and you'll be watching YouTube all day long. Like, no, I don't want to do that. That's not, that's how fun. But we don't have a lot of bananas done. Maybe you have to get killed by the other chimpanzees that want the bananas. You'll have chimp wars. They come in and kill each other. So I think we're going to be something different. And I think that's inevitable anyway. If you believe in evolution, it's inevitable anyway that we become something different. We're not a finished product. Yeah. No, I think that is true. We are not the finished product. Now, the question is the thing that we become or that becomes is that a result of us choosing how we want to be or is it just these kind of impersonal forces, like evolutionary selectings, certain types that might end up leading to outcomes that we actually don't want. And so I guess the hope is that we would be able to develop along a path that preserves and develops the things that we actually value about being human. Maybe amplifies them. Then maybe adds other things. So there are many different possible things you could develop in the future, but that we sort of select those that actually make us better rather than just randomly different. That we can sort of grow into our ideals. But it's so funny how much value we put in human condition, how much value we put in meaning, because it is valuable to us. When you think about like what that means in terms of the amount of energy it produces, the amount of impact that it has versus the structure of the universe itself versus black holes and stellar nurseries and things that are just infinitely more spectacular than the human condition. But to us, it's like, oh, what does meaning? What does meaning to me? Like, well, what is meaning to me? You was your finite biological organism that has to find meaning because you're sort of trompering around through this weird world where eventually you're going to die and leave your mark and maybe reincarnation's real, maybe the afterlife's real, nobody fucking knows. So you've got to have meaning. But the universe itself, like a human only lives 100 years. How much meaning can you have in 100 years? Yeah, I think we kind of die prematurely. I mean, we think of us as like first, first you become stronger and more capable for 15, 20 years, right? Then biologically you stagnate and then maybe you keep accumulating sort of knowledge and skills for another few decades. But just as you have started to acquire like a modicum of wisdom, like a brain starts to rot. And then everything is erased by Alzheimer's or death. And that's kind of okay. And that's all gone the whole lifetime of experience. There's your meaning, all the memories and the harder and lessons that so that seems kind of sad and probably not the best way for things to be. I think we would want to extend the human lifespan. So you could continue to grow up, not just kind of reach 20 and then plateau there for the rest of your life. But what if we could continue to develop so that like at 80, you were as much stronger and like be able to understand more and move better and like just have the same capacity increase as you had like between like zero and 20 and you just kept going. Well, these life extensions scientists that are working on these things guys like Davidson Claire, like they believe that that's a not just a possibility but an inevitability. Yeah. Well, so that's more like I guess preserving preventing or delaying that decay. Sure, which is already very good. Like you're reversing. They're talking about yeah, but then you would go back to being 20, right? In terms of. Biologically. Yeah. But um, but then you have engineering. If you have very long time span, so then you might at some point want to continue to grow. Yeah. Like you might not want to just be stuck at a 20 year old human of course in a thousand years. Like it may be eventually you would want to become like slightly bigger in like in terms of your shoulder to engage with the world. Of course. And if they can figure out how to make people, well, there's already genetic engineering that's being done in terms of increasing potential intelligence and IQ. They're already doing that, you know? And so this is a, I know I'm sure you know about that thing that happened in China where this one doctor got in trouble because he had genetically engineered some babies to be um inoculated to HIV, but it also at the same time gave them a far increase potential IQ. It remains to be seen whether or not it actually works as these guys, you know, become like 20 and 30 and we start putting them in chest tournaments and see if it really did make them smarter. But if the possibility of that is already being studied, they already understand the differences between like what is what's possible, what we understand and that increases every day. They understand more every day, more as possible every day. If that just keeps going, will you have a different version of what the human consciousness is? You have a different version of the human mind. Yeah, hello. I think the way AI is going, I think that's the train that's going to reach the destination faster. Oh yeah. And then once you do have super intolerance in machine substrate, then that can then unlock all kinds of technologies, including these biological technologies or nanotechnology or whole host of other things that could then sort of bring us up if that's how we decide to go. Yeah. And uplift us into different like either biologically enhancing us or like uploading us into, but again, it's that white water river raft. It's like we're going down this white water and we might make it out of this or it might crash. You know, one of the weird things about, I'm very fascinated with ancient civilizations. And one of the weirdest things about ancient civilizations is when you go really, really far back, a bunch of them have these depictions of kings that ruled for thousands of years. And it's very strange stuff because the Egyptians and an ancient Sumer, there's a bunch of different depictions of these kings that lived lives that were way longer than biological humans lived. And then there's the flood myth or the flood story. And then after the flood, biological life decreases pretty radically. And then it seems to get back to like a normal version of what we assume now, which is like a hundred years. And one of the weird questions that these alternative ancient historians have is are we missing the possibility that there was a hyper advanced civilization that existed tens of thousands of years ago and that what we're seeing now is not a linear progression from caveman to human being with an iPhone in 2026, that along the way might have been a very high level of sophistication. And the evidence of that might be the pyramids. And some of these other ancient structures that are mind boggling as much as you try to explain them away when you're dealing with two million, 300,000 stones. Some of them are cut from a quarry 500 miles away. 80 toned stones that in the sea like perfectly cut granite. It looks like they have diamond drill holes in them. It seems like there's some lost technology. And every society has this flood myth and every society that has this flood myth, especially these ones that were very advanced somehow or another like ancient Egypt, they have these depictions of people that lived way longer than people lived today. And I wonder if human beings one day will realize like, oh, if you keep going long enough, 100 years of silly, like people can they'll just figure out what it is that makes people age and die, fix that, and you'll live in insanely long time. And then if people live in insanely long time in their capacity for reason and logic increases, their capacity for intelligence increases, then you have these insane technologies that were required to do things like build the pyramids. And that might be what happens that might be a natural course of progression. The first thing we realize is 100 years is not enough because I'm 58. I'm a moron still like why am I learning every day? How come I'm getting better at being a person every day? Well, I would I should figure this out already. But you don't ever have time to figure it out. You don't have time. There's not enough time. I only get one run like I've been right. You would take one trial run first right on life. Right. Like like an I kind of know a little bit hard work. Now let's do it for real. That's the kind of scary. I mean it's a bit crazy each of us is put in charge of a whole human life. Right. Are we really like reach the level of like if you want to run an airplane you have to go through these certifications and stuff, right? And then maybe it can be a pilot. But like for a human life, it's like every single person like okay, you have 100% dictatorial control of this person like that completely hostage your whims. Yeah. And then that's like us. But that's the way it is. But yeah, having the ability to kind of try different things that maybe do like kind of opportunity to do a do over. If like if the life turned out to be like ever 50 years or something you have a chance to kind of or maybe not even do over. But it's the same life. But you can do whatever you want. And you don't have to be constrained to this idea that you only have a certain amount of time and you want to retire by your 65. We might look at that as being like one of the first completely archaic notions. And the reason why people got it all wrong. Like, well society will be better because people are going to live way longer. And if you think about how much smarter, how old are you? 53. Okay. Now with the way you say that was sad. I'm older than you, dog. Don't worry about it. But if you think about how much smarter you are at 53 than you were at 13, you know, now imagine how much smarter you'll be at 353 or 1,053. And if that actually becomes possible, if a person can live to be 100 years, why can't they live to be 4,000 years? If they can figure out what makes people age, if we really can genetically engineer human beings, that's not again, it's not breathing underwater. That's just extending life. And if you extend life and extend intellectual capacity and your ability to learn and grow, holy shit, you're dealing with a 2,000 year old person. That's a completely different kind of thing. And that could be real someday. And that might be also one of the things that comes along with this new understanding of just life in general with super intelligent AI. Yeah, no, for sure. Fixing aging and reversing it would be amongst things that a technologically mature civilization would be able to do. Which doesn't get people out of the idea that it's vain. Why do you want to live forever? How long? That's what I say now, right? But when somebody actually has the therapy and you could like, I'll hear, you could either continue to get you know, worst kidneys and more painful knees and wrinkles and you start to forget things. Or you can take this, this rejuvenation serum that everybody else is using and they are like full of energy and running around and doing stuff like, yeah, I think it's vain. So I think a lot of this is Stockholm syndrome that you are kind of faced with the inevitability of aging and decay and have been for thousands of years. So you develop a kind of romantic scaffold that's reconciled to the inevitable. I like it Stockholm, which is maybe adaptive, but on only up until the point where there actually might be something you could do to escape. Right. Then if you're too stuck in this mindset, it might sort of prevent you from taking advantage to regain your freedom. Right. And I think we are now at that stage. We don't yet have the therapies, but there are certainly like investments and research and stuff we could do that would hasten the arrival. And I think in fact, we should have started on a big sort of, you know, Manhattan product to defeat aging like decades ago. And maybe we would have better therapies by now than. But for a long time, aging was not seen as a problem only the specific diseases that are the result of the aging. Yeah. And they got all this funding, right? Like, so you have like huge research products for Alzheimer's and for heart disease and cancer. But if you look at the main common cause of most human disease, it's senescence like you're much more likely to get any of these when you're 80 than when you're 20 because yourselves gradually decay and gunk builds up. Yeah, arteries clog up, you know, You get any of these when you're 80, then when you're 20, because yourselves gradually decay and gunk builds up, the arteries clug up, you know, your DNA mutates, your methylation pattern gets scrambled. You're brain trapped. So rather than just trying to put out the fires one by one, after they occur, like at some point, you just need to sort of try to prevent, like maybe you need a bit of rain to sort of prevent. It's kind of amazing how much we've accomplished as a society, as civilization, when you think about the fact that people only live to be 100. Kind of incredible. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of incredible. Got rockets and satellites and cell phones and people only live so it's like everybody has to build on everybody else's intelligence and everybody else's understanding of the world and develop new things and everybody has to learn those new things. And it's raining. It's so small that it can only learn the small little special character. And you need millions of them. Yeah. Although it's not entirely clear with humans, if we had been much more long lived, like the way we currently are configured, maybe we would just have gotten too stuck in our ways and sort of stagnated into some sort of all drug conservative society where nobody's allowed to do anything different. Or the old geysers that have their way of doing things just remain forever in charge. Yeah. So I mean, we just don't know, right? Whether that would have slowed progress or accelerated it. But it is still amazing. Like it's a long path from sort of running around in the forest to sort of these advanced chip technologies and the whole global supply chain. Or like thousands of people are working to develop just one little tool that then feeds into the ability to make another tool that actually makes these leading AI chips. Whether layering things for atoms deep. Yeah. It's remarkable. It's incredible. And humans only live to be 100. Imagine what we could accomplish if we lived to be 3000. Yeah. Or if we were just a little bit, you know, better at these things. Yes. Because I think we are sort of the stupidest possible species that are capable of developing advanced technology. Like because as soon as we evolved to reach that level, we started developing it, right? And then so that's where we are. Like the dumbest possible that just barely can do this. Right. Barely can do this while we're blowing each other up. Yeah. At the same time all over the world. Yeah. Blowing up people. So yeah. But maybe a lot of that frantic, stupid, illogical behavior is because we're so finite. Like we're in a rush that we realize we'll have a certain amount of time to get things done. And so this sort of accentuates the desire to control resources and to cement your immortality and to do these things that people love to do with their name on buildings. There's a thing that people like to do that's almost like cementing their immortality. Maybe there'll be less of a desire to do that if people live way longer. And then you would have to assume if you can engineer humans to live longer, you could probably engineer a lot of stupidity out of us. They could just find out why people behave. Like what if you could just eliminate lying? What if there's a genetic solution to lying? Well, our guests are a really good lie detector. Yeah. But I mean, what if you just, you can genetically engineer out the desire to lie? Well, I mean, if you had a perfect lie detector, that would be no point in lying because people just see the truth. True. Or if you could read each other's minds, it'd be fruitless. Yeah. And so that might be closer. I mean, who knows what you could do if you sort of had like, yeah, fully a system trained to detect micro expression. We just all have to get the big gray heads with the black eyes like the aliens have. Yeah. Then you want to read each other's minds. Only one of those. Well, one of the, the weirdest things that Bob Blo's are said, again, I don't know if you're into this UFO stuff, but he was one of the guys that was a whistleblower that said he back engineered crafts for the United States government in the 1980s. They don't have any controls in these crafts, supposedly, and that they're all powered by the minds of the beings that are running it and that they have, it's almost like these crafts are alive and they have some sort of a sinking with the thing that instead of like pressing buttons and working a joystick, they just sink with this, this creation and then they can propel it with their minds. Yeah. So the minds become the computer that that moves this thing around. I'm, I'm a bit skeptical. I haven't looked into that. That's how I don't know. You should be. Sounds crazy. Yeah. How could you not be? Anybody who's not skeptical, sounds crazy. But if you think about where we are now and where we're going to be, the possibility of that being our future is pretty likely. Right. I think that like that the kind of possibility of engineering something like that with that sufficiently advanced technology would be there like all kinds of stuff. Yeah. Basically everything that doesn't violate some law physics to a first approximation, you would be able to construct. You'd even say that. It's like our current understanding of physics. It's not the understanding of physics. Right. A society that's a million years old than ours. Because that's, I mean, that's a blink in the eye of the time that it took to create what we are at right now from the big bang. Like a million years is nothing. Yeah. But even with our current understanding of what physics permits, that's still an enormous space of designs and types of life and being that you could imagine. Yeah. You'd have like a Dyson sphere. You've heard of this concept. Right. It's basically like using the output of the sun for energy generation. And it could have like, you surround the sun by solar panels that then powers a civilization infrastructure. Maybe like a computer like you might in the like already we have like AI compute growing at like 240% per year or something. Right. And then like you might in the kind of mind that could run on that sized computer. So people are wondering whether like could machines be conscious and like discussing that. Right. I think like maybe the more pertinent quantum is like are we really conscious? I think barely. So you're diving on like the road for two and a half hours of motorist. Right. And then we passed thousands of people and homes and like mothers with their strollers. And then after does he just, does he remember any of that? Like was he even really aware of any of this? Well, it was driving. It's like a little diffuse sense of body and some murky perceptions floating through. Maybe some confused abstract idea that we don't really understand. That's kind of the consciousness that can fit into this coconut sized. What a cool organ that we think and we think wow we are so conscious. But like imagine this licensed sphere consciousness or like a mind that maybe spans a galaxy. I think the difference between the sort of awareness that it could have and our awareness might be like bigger than the difference between our awareness and like whatever a flea has or something like that. Way bigger. So it could be this like transition where we develop super intelligent minds that for the first time is really life waking up and becoming truly aware. Yeah. And that we are a little bit sort of over-pride proud in our own specialness when we think that like we have achieved something close to the maximum level of that we are the standard by which consciousness should be measured and we really kind of feeble, confused, murky glimmer that is barely sentient at all. So that's like I think maybe the big challenge for our era, like giving birth to super intelligence and then hopefully shaping and nurturing it and staring it so that it becomes a positive thing both for us ourselves and also for it itself and also for whatever other if there are other super beings somewhere in the world or in the cosmos that it sort of is able to get along with us and contribute positively at the cosmic scale. And that's a very multifaceted challenge but I think that kind of seems to be what's going on. Yeah. And it's hard for people to think that far ahead. You know, you just think of intelligence being something superior to what we currently experience. But when you're talking about a computer or a being, a conscious being that is infinitely more powerful than anything we can imagine, that seems to be what, if everything keeps going in the same general direction and AI increases its power and we figure out new ways to power it and then because one of the things that AI needs that's so interesting is it needs enormous amounts of power. And so just these AI centers that they're developing now, they're like Google's doing one with they're developing their own nuclear power. Do you want some coffee? Are you stir? Yeah. I'm sorry, you're reaching for your cup. You shouldn't be drinking out of paper cups anyway, man. I don't usually do that. So I know I don't either but occasionally I do but they're so bad for you. I'm usually quite conscientious with coming a little bit. You want to go on the road. I've started taking a little Yeti coffee cup with me so I can buy coffee and just have them put it in that. Inside of those things is just lined with plastic. You're pouring hot water into plastic and then the plastic leeches into your coffee. I don't do that normally but I figured like for having a chat with you on the door, I'm going to show it would be worse. I guess some hundred microplastics. Well, thank you. I think what we're talking about is inevitable if human beings don't blow ourselves up. If we don't get hit with an asteroid, blow ourselves up or a super volcano, doesn't eradicate civilization, all this stuff is inevitable. It's how much time does it take and how much does it grow exponentially in power? Because we're talking about computers then they start bringing up quantum computing and quantum computers ability to do calculations and it doesn't even make sense. So you think this is just one version of that. What is a quantum computing going to look like 500 years from now? What is computing power which is connected to AI? What is that going to look like 500 years from now? It's impossible to even guess. Well, we can sort of see lower bounds on what's possible. Thinking already of just the designs we can conceive of that we see in principle you could make. Maybe it will take a long a lot of grind to get there. But at least that establishes like a lower bound of what a technologically mature civilization could do. And then maybe they have additional ideas beyond that. But already that is in us to really unlock. So if you think of a space of possible modes of being, where like a mode of being is a way of experiencing living, interacting, I think you look around humanity and all people who have existed in the past. A lot of different characters, right? Men, women, like mean people, nasty people, crazy people. But I think all of that diversity of human experience is like a tiny little corner in this space of possible modes of being. Like it's a huge cathedral and we've been kind of basically sitting in the janitor's closet. It's like the exploration we've done. And the kinds of modes of being, the kinds of ways of experiencing and relating to each other or thinking and doing stuff that are ultimately possible is just this enormous space that we haven't been able to explore. Because ultimately what we can currently conceive of and imagine and experience and feel is limited to our biological substrate, the human brain. And just as your, like earlier, human ancestors from a few million years ago that you were talking about before, they wouldn't really have been able to conceive of the modern human condition, not just because I didn't think of it, but because the ape brain can't really, they don't, like, even if you try to describe it to them somehow. Like what is music, what is humor, what is romantic love. Like what is science, what is, like all of these things, what literature, like they just doesn't fit into. Right. And so presumably, I mean, you could think right now we've achieved the right brain size where all possible values and interesting ideas are accessible to us. That seems kind of impossible. It seems much more likely that just as the chimpanzees are necessarily blind to, like, a lot of what can give life, meaning and value and significance, probably are we too. Yeah. They don't even have the capacity for it, which is interesting. Because we think of them as being so intelligent and they are in comparison to a lot of other animals. But I think one of the things that they were puzzled by when they started teaching primates sign language was that they never ask questions. Like they don't seem to have questions about stuff. So they just, they just, they exist and intelligent way they can figure things out. They can, they can do things. They know when the doors left unlocked, they understand, they understand fairness, which is really weird. Like champs get very upset if they're treated unfairly. Like one chimp gets something and they don't get, they get super violent. But they don't have a lot of questions. You know, we're filled with questions. Like so what are we missing? The next stage of being a human will have that we're not even considering now because it's not a part of our experience. Like what's the asking question type of thing that we are not able to imagine? Yeah. And I might many of those types of things. Yeah. And the possibilities are literally endless. We just don't conceive of them because we're trapped in this territorial primate mindset. Yeah. Yeah. I think that's likely. Yeah. I think so too. I think the possibilities are endless. And I think it's going to be really, really weird if that happens inside of our lifetime. Like because you and I were, you know, close to the same age. So we grew up with answering machines. You probably remember the first cell phones. You probably got online and probably the, when'd you get online? Like the early 96. Yeah, there you go. Yeah. See, I think for me it was 94. So we, we got to see all this happen. If we get to see the new version of humans in our lifetime, that would be like literally bonkers. What an amazing time to be alive if you really think about it. We're so fortunate. Because if you grew up between like 1700 and 1800, how much did shit change? 1600 and 1700 would you make a better boat? Like what's different? I'm a lot of different, man. I think kind of is the same for 100 years and inside of our lifetime from the late 1960s for me to the early 70s for you. And the amount of time that we've been alive, things have radically changed. Like really, really radically to the point where it's probably the biggest shift in human ingenuity and innovation that the world's ever seen. And we're just the middle of it. And we might be in the middle of the next one, which literally allows us to see what the world looks like a thousand years from now because you're going to be alive. Yeah. I mean, that's why, yeah, it is now this full-time job just to monitor the situation. Like it's really it. But it is how do you do that? Well, you don't really. But if you try to sort of, so I think the opportunity, so it used to be like at least in my sphere of activity doing philosophy or something like it, most people would think you have a kind of unlimited time horizon. People have been working on philosophical questions for thousands of years and it doesn't seem to be an huge urgency. If they have been on salt for thousands of years, maybe if it takes another 500 or so. But I always thought of philosophy as having a deadline, meaning that at some point we would develop smarter than human forms of intelligence, presumably AI, that could then do the philosophy much better than us. And so there was a limited period of time during which any advances like I could contribute to would be meaningful and that it would be then make sense on focusing on that subset of philosophical questions or general questions that we really need the answer to now as opposed to like, you know, 10, 20 years in the future when somebody else can do them better, like the machine mines. So that's kind of been a lens through which I have selected the things to work on. And now of course that deadline is moving closer. So there's less time remaining and so my focus is increasingly drifting towards questions where it might be relevant to have the answer to now rather than a year or two from now. You're almost like a cultural navigator, like a guy with a sextant at the helm of a ship, looking at the constellations. Go, I think we're in the right direction. Yeah, but not now we're sort of moving maybe into close to harbor and you need to like, yeah, look, pay more attention to exactly how deep the rocks are. The rocks are and look, look, scan around you. What when you think about a timeline for radical change, what in your mind, what do you think, what do you think that looks like? Well, I mean, I take short timelines seriously with AI, I mean, for what we know, it could be like, like it could be like a year or two or three or four, probably a bit longer. But we're no longer at a point where we can be confident that we won't have super intelligence in just a few years like it could happen. So what is that when you say that for the uninitiated, what do you mean by super intelligence? Well, I guess we first have AGI artificial general intelligence, AI that can do all the stuffs that we can do. And then super intelligence would just be that, but can do it way better than any human can do. So all technical intellectual common sense tasks and then you don't have robotics as well. It can do all the physical stuff not much later. And so this, yeah, so the timeline remains on on on certain, but I think it's not impossible that this could happen very soon. And then once you have super intelligence, then I think from there on, it might be like a sort of sprint to something approximating technical maturity because what you have super intelligence that then designs even more smart AI's, right? Using its kind of super intelligent AI research capability and designing better chips and all of that. So you might then have this like intelligence explosion, where you go from something slightly greater than a human level to some radical super intelligence that can sort of invent whatever the remaining technologies are. Maybe there needs to be some trial and error and experiments in the physical world that's lost things down a bit, but some smallish number like a single digit number of years from super intelligence. I think you might have something that unlocks all those these like sci-fi level capabilities that that we've talked about. I think that seems relatively plausible to me. Tim's inevitable. And my question is how does it, how does it announce itself? Does it send a mass text message to the whole world? Everybody's phone just starts like, you know, when you have those amber alerts, when your phone starts vibrating or when there's some sort of a storm warning, all the sudden your phone goes off and then alerts you to the fact that it's taken over. Well, so this means here we don't really know. It's like this is very confusing and you've never done this before and so it's like very hard to figure out how this has gone out on fault and maybe it's not even fixed it, maybe it depends a little bit on what, on which we do and the extent to which different actors get their stuff together. Yeah. But like one, I guess one possible type of scenarios where like things are just like accelerating, there are more and more of these advances model releases increasingly there is automation of the research process in AI labs. Like already you have coding assistants that are really useful to people in AI labs, they're using them to write a lot of their software. Like right now, you still need humans for sort of the research taste and judgment and sometimes things go like get stuck and you need a human to kind of redirect them. But more and more of that make it automated and then you have kind of new iterations of models being trained at the faster and faster clip, they can do more and more stuff. They start to automate increasing chunks of the economy. So right now a lot of coding is automated but like other areas as well, maybe they become dropping virtual workers that can do everything like a human could do with a remote connection initially and then like you have people working on robotics so that that would start to kicking and then eventually just more and more of the action is run by these AI systems. One or more and they're kind of doing it at their timescale which is speeding up. Then from that point it would depend a lot on whether we have successfully aligned these systems so that they actually do what the people created them intended or whether they have somehow gone off the rails. There's also the fear that America doesn't come up with it first. This is obviously a fair in America. In China for example is the American. It's really just America and China there at the forefront of this race, Russia a little bit but not on the same level. No Russia. No Russia. Who else is it? Just here this last week. Ford hiring 350 engineers after AI failed shows, failed shows human value in AI era. What does that mean? I tried to find the one that didn't manage this to it. They rehired a bunch of engineers. They fired after their AI wasn't matching the quality they needed. Oh and this is Ford. That's interesting. They probably jump the gun. You know, they probably fired them too quickly and now these people that they rehired, these people are going to like, oh how much time we have left six months for AI figures that I do is just as well. It's also possible that things timelines could extend if in like one way that could happen is such that the progress we've seen in the last 10 years which has been remarkable. It's to a substantial extent driven by the advances the increase in compute that is being used to train and run these systems. It used to be that you had a cutting edge AI system if you were a academic running on your PC in your office. That was kind of the amount of computing power that was applied to doing AI stuff. Now of course you have these tens of billions of dollar data centers, hundreds of megawatts. Right. Just massive funding. The chips have gotten better but also just the amount of funding. Like you're just building many more of these chips. So as you apply more and more compute like performance improves and that's like has been a big driver. Now at some point you might not be able to keep increasing the amount of money you spend on it because like you can go from like a thousand dollar PC to like a million dollars quite easily and you can go from a million dollar to a billion dollars and maybe you're spending on the order of a trillion dollars across the world to build data centers per year. But you can't really do like three orders of magnitude very suddenly. There's like not a thousand trillion dollars to spend on it. So at some point just expanded your has to kind of slow down. So if we haven't achieved two point talents by then then maybe that would mean progress gets slower. If the main driver is scale up of compute. Now it is also true that some of the progress is driven by algorithmic advances like just kind of clever algorithms. So that might continue. But if one driver stalls out then that could result in faster progress. And then of course there is a possibility that the people who want to pause or regulate AI gain enough traction to kind of get regulatory inhibitions. How would they do that though? If there really is some sort of a Manhattan project style race between the United States and China and what are what other countries are developing AI right now that are close? Well, I mean, those are the those are the two big ones. It's big ones. Is it possible that someone could sneak up on us and develop some intelligent AI first? Yeah, I mean, it's possible if there were like some big algorithmic breakthrough for example that made it a lot more efficient to run a similar level of capability with less sort of AI data center infrastructure. And many other countries are also trying. It's just that they are not as advanced. And out of US and China I'd say like US currently has the edge. What would happen to China got there first? Well, I mean, part would depend on whether they had successfully aligned their AI if it's on the line then I guess the same thing happens as if US AI is on the line that is the future gets shaped according to whatever values this AI had ended up with. If the alignment problem is solved then it might make a difference because then the values would depend on sort of the people who own the control or government would ask it to pursue. So that's not it maybe it makes some difference who initiates it. So right now there's the big players are you know there's Google and there's open AI there's all those different companies when you say aligned. Do they have to all be kind of on the same page or like when aligned we're not going to be aligned if there's a bunch of corporations that are competing to come up with this first. So they have to be aligned in terms of the way they're programmed that they're valuing human life and that they're valuing society. Like what do you mean by all the way? Well, so I mean just the technical challenge of if you are building an AI system and you have certain things you wanted to do and certain things you don't want it to do. Right. Are you technically able to get the AI to behave that way that you as the person can decide how that's an separate question which is equally important maybe but different because that's not the technical like you can't just go to the whiteboard and write answer formula and now you have that's like a political question ultimate. Right. Question of governance. Yes. So there you need you know political organization appeals to the best of human nature. Dialogues come like checks and balances whatever stuff that might work in the political arena to help that the governance of this that the values to which it is aligned are sort of benign values that hopefully incorporates a white set of stakeholders. Right. But that's a little isn't that a little naive because whenever there's any sort of a situation where something has mass amounts of power above others that one of the first things I think of is what's the most money you can generate doing it and what is the best way to generate the most amount of money. Like that's they're going to think that way. They're not going to think like what's the best for the human race like no one ever thinks that way. They think what is the best way in terms of like destroying the competition. What is the best way in terms of extracting the most resources out of this making it work for me. That's what people think of immediately and what's the best way to stop other people from competing with us. Right. Yeah. Well, so that would be I think a lot of pressure constraints on whatever governance mechanism exists at the time when super intelligence is developed. Right. Pressure constraints on whatever governance mechanism exists at the time when super intelligence is developed. Right. So, is this something that the technology is so far ahead, the potential for it to be so far ahead of our understanding of what it's going to be able to do that, like making laws for that now, it's going to be very difficult to even explain to people. We need these laws and we need these guardrails in place now because here's what could happen. And that conversation is not really happening right now. It is happening. But is it happening politically? It's starting to happen. Yeah. It's been happening to an increasing extent, politically, and there have been various actions. OK, what action? Well, so a few years ago, for example, that was the whole expert regime imposed by the US on chips. The most advanced chips were like China was cut out from being able to access the most advanced and video chips and so forth. And that's kind of been modified, but that was motivated to a significant extent by trying to preserve AI edge that the US has. Right. But that's like internationally. I mean, in terms of being able to stop corporations from having the kind of power that this could provide them. So then there have been various efforts that was like a proposition in California where there were various things. More recently you saw the whole thing. I don't know if you followed it with the mythus and fable five, the anthropic models that were. like so so mythus has not been released. This is the most powerful model because it seems to have significant cyber offense capabilities. It can easily detect vulnerabilities in software and so. And the topic figured that rather than immediately making it available to everybody, maybe it would be better to first try to make it available to providers of. Critical software infrastructure like like big banks and like that. So that they can patch up their systems. And then fable five was a kind of restricted version of the mythos model. Like the same underlying model, but with extra safeguards, it basically refused anything that remotely seemed like. cyber hacking programming biological stuff because maybe that would be bio. So like it sort of drew a wide circle around anything that even remotely looked possibly dangerous and it just refuses that. So that was released. But then after like a week or so, the administration imposed a. And kind of export restriction that prevented any non-USA descent. From using it and that meant anthropic had to cut it off forever, but it because I didn't have a way in real time to verify. Who is the US citizen or not. So then it was like unavailable for several weeks and that intense negotiations behind the scenes and working to try to. Because allegedly it was possible to jailbreak it so that it sometimes gave some little assistance with some cyber like finding vulnerabilities in code. And now recently it just became available again because they had reached some understanding with. With the government where it was deemed sufficiently safe guard is to be released. And now there's like efforts on the way to try to work out the framework because like in the future you wouldn't want to do this on an ad hoc basis. Like somebody just decides this particular model for some unspecified reason. Like you want to have clear standards. Ideally right that applies to everybody, every company. So there's now some industry wide effort to try to work with the government too. Anyway so there's like a lot of this stuff happening. I expect much more of this going forward. It just has recently become like a serious issue. People until recently were kind of ignoring the whole AI thing for the most part. And then there is a second wave coming I think once so so forth we haven't really seen any big impact on the labor market. Right for my eye but once that starts to hit and you get maybe you know high levels of unemployment amongst white color workers. And like imagine if you have millions and millions of people with that I have their university diplomas right they feel. A sense of superiority in entitlement they've gone through the whole process they got their degree and now they expect a well paying job. And then there is no job for them. They've got nothing to do all day long. But complain about AI. So you've got to have all these well educated people who feel resentful and are going to say every possible bad thing about AI that could be said all day long. And mobilize. That a very powerful political constituency that will emerge from that that's not even yet happened but that will kind of add to all of these other grievances that people point to with AI. So I think there's got to be kind of significant political pressures for doing something about AI. Isn't the key is getting ahead of it though. So how can people find how can we see the vulnerabilities in advance and recognize like when this is going to like if there is going to be a tipping point and a bunch of white color workers are going to be out of work and there's going to get to a point where realize like this is coming. This is like three weeks or not what do we do. Like what do they do like what. They are to me at least. A lot of people think they have different views about what you're but on of course. But it's like very hard to have an it's such a complex strategy. I mean I've been thinking about this for like three decades maybe. And I still feel extremely unsure even which direction is kind of often which is down. I don't think it would be possible right now to sort of figure out a detailed you know perfect regulatory scheme or system of laws. Like there's so many unknowns. I think we need to sort of watch this closely as it happens and be ready to react quickly to issues that come up. And hope that relevant people are like highly competent and well motivated and are trying their best. And then on the margin maybe we can do things that kind of are constructive and increases the chances that it will be for the good. Even when I have some clear insight as to some overall big directional push I will let you know. But even basic questions like for example do we want more government involvement or less government involvement? Do we want faster progress in AI or slower progress in AI? I don't know. It's not completely obvious to me. Well I think it's eventually going to get to wherever it's going to get either way. Having it slower. I don't know if that's really going to help us. I think almost like we have to crash and then we have to figure out how to rebuild and pick up the pieces. I don't think we're going to be intelligent or have enough foresight to recognize where all these flaws and where all these problems are going to ultimately be. I think they're just going to have to happen and then people are going to have to adjust. That's what I think. Yeah. So I'm not advocating an AI pass by contrast to a lot of some of my colleagues and friends and stuff. I could see that some scenario in which it would be helpful at some point to have a temporary slowdown of a few months maybe a few years. Like if you imagine, you know, the different companies, countries may be racing to get there first. Yeah. And then eventually somebody figures out they basically have the system in place. They just need to like amp up like run it for longer. I can sort of see that it will become super intelligent. They hope it's aligned. It might be very helpful in that situation to have a few extra months just to sort of double check all your safeguards and rather than immediately cranking all the knobs up to 11. Like maybe sort of do it a little bit incrementally. Watch what happens, study it, then crank it up a little bit more. And you just think you might gain some extra safety if you have a few extra months there. Like the pressures on these people in the lab. That makes sense. If it's all going to happen over a week. Like it's just going to be, this is the first time we ever do this huge complex thing. It has to be right. We never get a second chance. Right. Being able to, like even just being able to sleep properly for like between your work sessions and like having, you know, a weekend to maul things. So like just that kind of human, humans don't really operate on, on, while on in these like super short timelines. So I think a short, if you could be sure that the pause would in fact be limited and short and then it would be lifted. I think that could be quite useful to have at, if it could also be timed to be at the right moment and well implemented. But wouldn't the problem be espionage first of all? That's one issue with it. Yeah. If they realize, if somebody realized, hey, there are about three days away from this and then China bribes a bunch of people and you know, people take off and move to. Yeah, there are various, there are various downsides to be asking. So one is that. Like there are competitors who just even without espionage or catching up. And now there is, it's not as if the world is safe without AI. Right. Do there are other like, whether like the natural hazards. I think they're very small like super volcanoes and stuff like that on the relevant timescales. Until or not. Well, I mean, we've survived for hundreds of thousands of years, right? And we're almost wiped out entirely 70,000 years ago. Yeah, that's a long time ago. Is it though? Not if it happens anymore. If it, well, like if something hasn't done us in in that long time, probably it's not going to do us in within the next 10 years. For your more optimistic than me. Well, it's just based on the actual empirics of these natural catastrophes. By contrast, I would say there are other hazards that are not low. I mean, we have rapid advances in synthetic biology. Some of them driven or enabled maybe even by already AI progress that has already taken place. Like that can start to assist with this. And more just happening in the panadins. So you get increasing risks from synthetic biology. We still have the nuclear arsenals, right? Kind of existing. We think have gotten a little bit complacent about the risks of nuclear war. And various other things as well. So I think there's like a background level of existential risk that humanity faces in the absence of super intolerance that probably is growing as well. So you don't want to wait so long that you don't even get the chance to roll the dice with AI because you destroyed yourself before even got a little bit of a bit of a bit of a piece of it. And then also, I mean, I think there is like some risk if you set up a pause infrastructure that what initially meant to be a temporary thing becomes permanent. Like I say, there's nothing more permanent like the temporary government program. So if you set up the infrastructure to actually control this, ideally at a global scale, right? It's meant to be for six months. Like what happens after six months? Nobody can still prove that AI will be safe. You have all these people now who stop it is to regulate it and like maybe they say it could bomb kind of frozen in and become permanent. And then also, the delay benefits of this. So if you think what like 65 million people die every year, that's a lot of human lives. That's like one 9-eleven over 25 minutes just kind of boom. That's what it'll look at. And so there is a certain urgency. If there is something that somehow could have a chance to fix this, like all the suffering that is happening in the world, like aside from the people dying, like all the people who are bereaved, right? To lost their loved one and then all the disease that led up to that dying, right? And then all the non-decease related, all the horrible poverty and like the suicidal depression and the animals in the animal factories that they're like spending there. There's just like this, I think moral urgency that if there is a hope that getting AI right could fix this, then you don't want to wait unnecessarily long because every day it's just this massive heart. So I think there are many reasons for why you wouldn't want unnecessary or excessive delays in developing AI. But there is a trade-off because if we can make more progress on AI safety and alignment and get that rack together a little bit before we take the plunge like that's also worth quite a lot. It's certainly exciting because the possibilities are right in front of us and they're kind of endless. And it seems like they're right in front of us. It seems like in my mind it seems like we're like 24 months away from something really insane. Could be. Could be. Could be. Could be. Could be. Could be. Could be. Could be 48 months. It could be. We don't. We don't. Right, it could be. Yeah, who knows. But there's something happened and really quickly. You know, when I talked to Elon about Grock, he said it's it shocks us like every couple weeks It really like how is it doing this? How is it so fast? How is it advancing so quickly and One day Cats gonna be out of the bag and there's not gonna be any way stop it Like if the power went out right now if there was some sort of a massive solar flare that killed our power grids and all computer hard drives got fried and we had a restart from now like We would have to rebuild society, right? But if we get to the point where this thing Understands what would cause that how to prevent that how to make sure that never happens much better power supply much better allocation of resources much better batteries much better redundant data Systems where you never have to worry about hard drives crashing and you never have to worry about any of these problems like any information you have now will be secure and Then understanding of natural disasters will actually get drill into this volcano and it never goes off Like there's gonna be a few things that are gonna figure out through AI that's gonna prevent a lot of the things that are probably wiped out enormous wasp. I mean imagine if we could just actually see asteroids coming all of them and know how to divert them Instantly We have a bunch of ideas right now. I had to do it right like coding them With something The aerodynamics of them and I think that's one would be relative to the EC Yeah, even we could figure out to do that And there's also detonating them as a bunch of different crazy ideas But imagine if AI is like actually you could just do this You know and then you put a shield over the earth and you never have to worry about it ever the shield's powered by the Sun So you have ultimate power and you never have to worry about being hit by a Manhattan-sized asteroid I think the trickier ones might be ones that are more internal to civilization if you have some process that's either like a World-wide process with different humans and corporations and governments or like an internal process in the AI like on the one hand You want to be able to continue to develop new ideas new ways of doing things So you need to experiment and try new things But then there is also the risk of just keep trying new ideas like that eventually you get stuck on some idea that actually proves really harmful or dangerous to you And that you then sort of derail internally through your own mimetic or internal evolutionary development Sun How to sort of grow up Safely in this world where you have unlocked all kinds of new technical capabilities even if you're easily able to protect yourself against external threats like volcanoes and asteroids and stuff right There might still be Processes arising from within this global civilization Justice that we might invent new technologies that are dangerous. We might invent In you like drugs that are super addictive once you invent them you try them and then you're addicted You never want to yeah, I know that could be other like some some crazy ideology that once it takes hold That's a one of the major fears that a lot of people have is that human beings will develop ideologies based around AI That there'll be like an AI god that someone develops Yeah, and I mean I think all that's in fact I would add that to the list of I mentioned nuclear and bio Terrorist risk as like background existential risks like another is like some form of insanity like a collective insanity I feel our Civilizational sanity already is kind of a little bit precarious I think we're just kind of maybe barely holding ourselves together Uh-huh, and it's amazing how well the world functions despite How crazy people are and how much they load their opponents and so forth and will still manage to somehow get it to work There's also manipulation of the zeitgeist that's clearly being done by bots So you've got a bunch of people online that are having arguments on Twitter and they're not even talking to people There's a bunch of ideas that are being pushed out on Twitter and a lot of these social media platforms It's not even human beings tweeting about it. It's not it's there's there's algorithms There's AI there's people that are hired to do it as people that are working for certain organizations that are hired to Muddy up the waters Gaslight people create problems. You have people argue with each other And so it's like if AI recognizes how easy it is to manipulate people do whatever it wants That's a fear as well Yeah, so whenever you change the basic parameters of sort of the social cultural political discourse um New dynamics will emerge And we don't have the kind of social science that is able to predict what happens if you change some of these knobs So we've seen in the past like you invent let's go all the way back like somebody invents writing Okay, so that turns out to have a had a huge effect Not just on people writing like literature and stuff, but like on political systems You could now have states that could keep tax records, right? So you could have larger political units with writing and then they can hire standing armies And now you have like large-scale war you have social stratification You could have like the the ruler of a large area could have you know enormous wealth and you could have a soldier cast that like protects against internal and external so like just the way that Human societies are political organized changes as a result of this change in the rules of Communication when you can have written texts, right? And then you have the printing press again We like like a hundred years Religious wars in in Europe like Reformation and all of this stuff Is possibly and then like forms of democracy later on also coming out of this and the scientific revolution Um, then you have like mass media in the last century with like radio and stuff and you have kind of Demagogues that take advantage of being able to simultaneously talk to millions of people Because that was never possible before, right? You could have some charismatic kind of Guy who's like rallies up the whole nation and and new ideologies become Mematically fit in that situation that might never have if it were people writing kind of Letters to the editor like it's a kind of a different type of idea that works there Then if you're giving a kind of stump speech that goes out to millions simultaneously now with social media Of course, we have another one of these and you do see that starting to change culture in different ways Yeah And and now with AI being the next wave of this that will also change you have like bots you have new ways of finding information You have maybe AI that can themselves be super persuaders That will also change Presumably in some unknown Unonable way the the way that Like social discourse pans out and for any one of these I guess it could turn out to be a lot better We could become more informed having AI advisors. I think that's fairly likely It's not but it's also possible somehow the dynamics shape out in a different way and we kind of got Collectively insane in some way Um back to white water raft Yes, and it all becomes kind of totalitarian or we sort of fragment into Like political warring tribes or we become kind of completely unhinged everyone of us becomes convinced of their own little naughty theory That they then like their AI or feed just serves the more material to kind of fuel their conviction That a different place in which this could Go badly, but Don't you think even if that happens ultimately the progress of AI won't stop and so The again, I keep going back to this thing But I think this is really what it is is we have to change like what it means to be a person All those things are only problems if people stay what we are now which is territorial primates with desire to Possessed material goods for some strange reason even though we're finite life form If all that changes if we change what it means to be a person which seems inevitable Yeah, then it won't matter then if we all like If we if there's no if we could figure out a way to literally engineer out All of the issues that humans have with greed and violence and all the other different things that trouble society If the desire for that is no longer a part of being a person Which is that's doable that's that seems like if we're gonna continue to evolve past You know australia pithic esta homo sapia in 2026 If that we continue the same amount of time in the future We'll probably won't be like that anymore The best versions of people aren't people who want to steal your house and steal your land and shoot you and take your resources That's the best people are the people that contribute and they're interesting and they make you excited to be around them and you like it If that keeps going on and if that is aided by technology if we recognize that there's actual patterns of human thinking and behavior that can be changed and that if we all agree to Subscribe to this algorithm. Is it connect to this computer program connect to this external device or maybe not even external? Maybe maybe it's internal that allows us to communicate with each other telepathically like all that All that changes and then it doesn't matter It doesn't matter if there's any guardrails for a are not because we're not the same thing anymore Like all the problem the worry that we have about ai The worry we have about power Manipulation and the ability to influence people All that kind of goes away if people don't behave the way they behave currently well I guess here is what difference with your like white water rafting metaphor that I saw the one In that metaphor it's kind of We need to hang on like there's a risk we could smash ourselves on the rock But if we don't do that then there's kind of one way we end up right downstream We're gonna open a nice lake. Yeah, but I think In reality what might also be the case that in addition to trying to not smash ourselves on the rock there might be Places where the choices would make affect the ultimate destination Right um go left or go right yeah or which dream but you maybe maybe a more yeah moment and where like if you stare in one direction You might end up in in one place ultimately in some sort of strange post-human world and maybe It's really beautiful and people have the chance to grow into their true self And we love each other and are creative and take initiatives and Go a different way. Maybe you have a pipe paperclip maximizing ai area Maybe that just everything is paperclip so going a third way. Maybe you have like a totally Italian system With like a smaller lead on top and everybody else Yeah, I just I thought I'm trying to yeah, I know and I'm there many more possibilities and maybe some that kind of we would Think would look kind of good if we chose now but then in reality They have some hidden flaw that we didn't think of so if we chose does it would sort of be a mistake And then maybe others that don't look that appealing to us now if you just presented them in a brochure to you like But then actually if you thought hard about it maybe would realize that actually would be a really nice place to live Because like in in the current world there are places that are nice to visit that are interesting But then those are not necessarily the same places. We would want to live and raise a kid, right? So there's right there are like novels and movies that are really fun to watch But you wouldn't want to live in those worlds So there's a difference between the kind of what makes for the good interesting story and the place We actually want to spend the rest of your life and so I think that would be possibly a lot of opportunities to make foolish choices or unwise choices or conflict that sort of Forts the the process and makes it end up not just that we go extinct before we reach them But that the deer that we reach might depend on the level of wisdom and kindness that we have during the process And there's always unintended consequences with every solution that we try to find for any problem that we have There's always some new thing that comes up. We're like oh, we didn't see that coming I mean certainly whenever we're dealing with nature Like whenever they've brought in invasive species to handle other invasive species It always a giant disaster You know Yeah, always And there's always unintended consequences like oh now you have a hundred million frogs Who's telling us about that was it Ali Siddiqu that was telling us about the frogs About they brought in what did they bring in Forget what the invasive species was where they brought in This one species to kill another species and the problem. They didn't realize that that species had big control It was like coyotes are what it was It was Guam. What would it what did they get rid of? Whatever it was The got rid of this thing that had been killing the frogs So then they had toads right was it toads So they had millions of these things that were like all over the highway So you drive on them just squash them everywhere you go because there was nothing controlling the population these things anymore It's like unintended consequences of you know because we're very short-sighted and even in our ability to be Contemplative about what the possibility of the future is when you're dealing with such an open-ended thing like a high Super general intelligence that can maybe make better versions of itself Who the hell knows what that means? That's are we making a god because it seems like if it keeps going and that if it makes better versions of itself What's ultimately going to get to the point where we could do anything? Which is exactly what a god is it can make universes You know what if the ultimate end of this is a big bang button It's some scientist in beds Yeah, so we are a little bit like yeah, it's I don't know the different Analities one might reach for but I mean I guess like Uh like say you're on a plane and then like the pilot has passed out or had a hard attack or something And now it's like we passengers Somehow have to I don't know figure out how to do the Run the controls We're not really I mean we have to still try to make your best right but then add to that That all the passengers are fighting amongst each other each one things. They are the guy who should control the Like they all convinced that they are the superior person to try to land a plane So in addition to trying to figure out how the controls work They are like actually having a big fist fight in the cockpit as well and somebody is like dragging somebody else away And there's like the the kind of monk a tribe that is the current state of the world here And we're trying to shepherd like this ship of humanity into Utopia it's Yeah, it's um, yeah, it's it's an interesting. It's dr. Strange love on steroids but uh But that's it we might only have to like get it so at some point we would should be able to hand over like um The rains like once you have a sufficiently good AI like we we maybe get assistance from that point on I think it's the first thing that it's The rain's like once you have a sufficient the good AI like we maybe get assistance from that point on I think it's The first thing that it's gonna take over his government was gonna realize how Unbelievably inefficient The government is doing almost everything and how much how much of the money that gets allocated is fraud and waste if you allow AI to sort through that and develop much more efficient pathways to Controlling and Something resources people would not want to see that's pretty exactly that's gonna be a problem but if we get to the point where there's some sort of Some sort of a hive mind possibility some sort of I mean one of the things that Elon said that I thought was really fast And he said you're gonna be able to talk with our words Well if we're able to talk with our words like does that eventually get to the point we could read minds? Can we is is is is thought and is communication no longer verbal? It's no longer sounds so right now we associate sounds that I'm making where you know what words I'm using what I'm referencing and we get a certain of understanding of what each other is trying to say What if that's just clunky and that's silly and what if instead of a scroll that you leave in a cave somewhere Now you have a movie that you can watch like something much more engrossing and much more much more powerful and that This is what human Communication becomes it doesn't it and maybe this is why the grades don't have mouths We move away from sounds because right now what we figured out is like sort of like a duct tape We've we we're communicating We'll kind of patched it up. We figured out something. We're just gonna use noises. We make well We have different noises here than the people that live on this island They have totally different noises. I don't know what the fuck they're saying and then you have people on the other side of the world totally different noises So tower of babble type situation, right? Where we really can't communicate with each other unless we have translators But if we get to the point where that's not how humans communicate We communicate purely through thought and intention and understanding and that it's no longer based on language It's no longer based on this is a transistor This is a coffee mug instead it's a complete understanding of each individual thing that we're discussing Everything you know what it is you understand what it is without it having to have a noise associated with it Yeah, I mean I guess the cyber security implications are significant if you are giving direct access to other people to transmit Signals to your brain in a high bandwidth way that is not just words kind of that It's almost like you heard them even though there's no sound in your ear But if it's like actually directly kind of interfacing in a high bandwidth way with your neural network Also, we encryptions out the window if we no longer have encryption if we get to the point where I start out that window because if Computing gets to the point where the bottleneck is like think about money right what what is money right now? Money's all ones and zero somewhere essentially right it's all bank accounts. It's like it's like we're not on a gold standard anymore So what if that bottleneck? It's an information bottleneck like someone's preventing you from going into going into these Places and getting these ones and zeros and transferring it to your place But what if that is all if what if computing power gets to the point with AI gets to the point where that those boundaries are nonsense now all encryption is instantaneously decoded. I think probably Cryptography is Defense dominant in the limit. I think like if you imagine mature technology I think it would be possible to encrypt I mean if nothing else you could use like at a one-time pad Which would enable you to encrypt things in a way that is unbreakable really? I feel like that's gonna be a bottleneck I feel and I think once we start reading each other's minds that might be the first thing to go Well be like the ultimate social another. That's where you really probably would want encryption right if you're gonna transmit thoughts to me Oh, yeah, like you don't you don't want to have a You want some asshole like constantly in your head your next-door neighbor Just poking you and prodding you. Yeah, but you as we would hope that along with this technology becomes like a General state of enlightenment that the human beings achieve where that's no longer the kind of behavior that we indulge in The which behavior do we no longer annoying each other annoying each other stealing each other's money that kind of stuff Well, but then yeah, I guess we go back to this question of the utopian condition like if you And I it so there are a lot of things that individually are bad Like lying stealing cheating greed excessive pride like all kinds of disease Stubbing your knees bad like Yet if you sort of imagine removing all of those things then that changes to human condition quite profoundly and to some people would feel kind of maybe are a peer-flavorless or yeah Sort of if there is no no tension no conflict no No Bruce Digo no like yeah, it might sound be good But but it does force us to sort of I think it would be a rather fundamentally different thing that we wouldn't be met I'm worth housing into if we went all the way in that direction which ultimately might be right, but it It would require us to kind of find new ways of realizing whatever values are imperfectly realized in the current world through conflict and competition and pain like some people get the motivation from painful failure Yeah, and so if you get rid of the pain from failure then you'd need some other Motivation like some other thing that drives you on which they could be like maybe it's just a love of achievement Then you feel kind of neutral or just less happy when you fail, but you would still need something that kind of preserves What ever structure it is that we think is valuable in their current human condition unless you go all the way to sort of radical Hedonism and and think the future is best if we were all just kind of floating in some kind of drug induced euphoria as Blobs that experienced immense pleasure, but I'd know real texture in our experiences didn't engage in activities and They didn't interact with each other like there's like a philosophical view where ultimately a pleasure is the only thing that matters and the minimization of suffering So if that's your axiality then It's relatively easy to see then how a technical maturity You would achieve a sort of optimal state But if you have a more complex value system where maybe Pleasure is one good thing maybe really important But there are also other things like appreciating beauty you know true friendship courage achievement And ideally you'd want the future that includes all of these things then you need to do a little bit more Sort of design work to figure out the way to combine them all in a in a meaningful way This all comes back to our idea of human meaning what's important to humans are our finite 100 year lifespan adoption of this concept of meaning But the black hole doesn't give a shit about human meaning And it's gonna be around a lot longer than us and it's got a lot more power than us and it's doing a lot more change than us We want to think that we are more important than black holes. Yeah, I mean Because we are I think we are I mean to us yeah, it's us But to the universe is it is human meaning that important to the universe or is it just sort of a placeholder? What will ultimately become as it is it motivate us to continue to progress? Well, so I think like at Technical maturity there are certainly forms of purpose that you could have you could have artificial purpose So this is when you basically set yourself a goal for the sake of having the goal and then doing the activity that so you know maybe maybe you set yourself the goal I'm gonna get this little white ball into a sequence of 18 holes and Not only that but In order to achieve this goal. It's part of the goal that I'm only a lose allowed to use this very inconvenient Method I can hit the ball with a club right? I can't much easier to just pick it up and put it In each hole successfully, but that doesn't count as being successful So you could make up this goal Pretty arbitrary Now once you have that goal then you now have a reason to try hard to concentrate To perfect your swing and you can play golf so the goal enables you to do this activity of golf playing Which maybe you find fun or worthwhile or meaningful And the goal is to tell you so much meaningful is because it's difficult to do Yeah And so the future would consist I think if we succeed in a lot of game playing And you could certainly have these artificial purposes that you set yourself these goals that then give you a reason to engage in an activity Now we're back in the world of half-life Now we're back in a video game now we're also in the simulation Yeah, this is gonna be your artificial goal And and you could imagine I think maybe we shouldn't think of video games here But it could be much like games we can't even imagine it could be like society-wide games that last for 20 years that involve all kinds of multimodal things and little groups that work together to like Come up with new ways of creatively And so In that broad sense of kind of things we do for their own sake I think game playing could be and and it's like a lot of what children do that kind of for curiosity and spend a lot of the time playing games And we might all be like kids again what might be in short to supply is sort of natural purpose like purposes Which we don't just arbitrarily make up in order to have a purpose but that they're sort of given to us so So right now in the world it might say You know making a living is not just an arbitrary purpose because there are real consequences if you fail like maybe eventually you get kicked out from your flat And then you know, it's really cold and you get drained on and like horrible things happen So like similarly if you if you like don't brush your teeth eventually We'll have tooth decay and that will be real consequences So these there are like various things that you have recent to do Because there are real negative consequences if you fail to them and a lot of our lives is structured by these natural purposes At a societal level there's a whole bunch of things we need to do together, right? In this future world maybe there would be many fewer of those natural purposes because for any one of them you could just ask the AI to sort it out Yeah, and so the artificial purposes would be a larger chunk that's interesting to think are there any natural purposes that would survive to Technical maturity Like any things that we still have sort of instrumental reasons that that we need to do ourselves And I think there might be a few But they are more subtle. They might not strike us currently as very important but It's one of those things where Like, you know that during the day if you're outside you can't see the stars, right? It's not because they're not there like it's because like there's so much light that they are sort of blowing offed it out but at night When this stronger light from the sun is absent you can see these fintor lights. I think similarly In in this future that might be One one's this sort of urgent screaming more of values of immediately pressing Practical concern go away You might be able to perceive a whole constellation of these more subtle values that we are blind to currently So take the value of take the value of like I don't know like some like honoring Your forebears So right now it doesn't seem I mean it maybe it's nice sometimes to remember Your past parents or some historical hero who did something good that benefacted Humanity right, but it's not the main thing that you're like maybe that would be a bigger thing if there was nothing else You needed to do maybe you could actually spend serious time Or Spiritual quests like even for people who are very religious a lot of their actual waking hours are spent on Random other things doing that alone. Right like driving to work like the all kinds of stuff like if all of that was automated You could imagine spending more time on trying to align yourself orient yourself to This higher being and trying to be in communication with them like maybe aesthetic Values like there maybe some things that would just be kind of nice and cool if if the world were like that We don't really have time to worry so much about them now, but if there was nothing else on the agenda Like coming together In a way that upholds some tradition in a beautiful original way that still is true to the original spirit Together with other people and enacting some ceremony like maybe those things would start to feel more of our time in in conjunction with this game playing And there might be many other Of these kind of subtler values that that would start to shape what people were doing Yeah, and Ultimately who knows Yes It's it's very interesting and it's very open ended and we really don't know what's gonna happen But we're probably gonna see it we're probably gonna see the strangest Thing that humans have ever had a possibility to Experience yeah, and in the end I guess it's a trustful. Yeah well I mean these conversations are always fascinating and who knows what's what's doing? Another one in a few years and see how off we are yeah If you come back in four years All right, let's say I have four years if we have four years if you can if you're allowed to travel in four years come back And let's see how wrong we were I can update well. Thank you very much. I really appreciate you coming in here. It's great to see you again So it's fun. Okay. All right Think about it kids