Go run by the Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day. Well my friend how are you? Hey, good to see you again. Good to see you brother. It's been a while. It's been a while and there's a lot of interesting development so this is the never-ending story I feel. The never-ending story of mushrooms. Yeah. So this giant one that you brought me, explain this again because you were telling me out there I'm like let's see this for a show because this is just crazy. Sure, this is the best gift that I can give from my college as to a friend. This is a rare old growth mushroom called a Garacon. Only grows in the old growth forest is now in the red list of threatened species in Europe. This one was found on the ground folks so it's important that people don't pick these. They're very rare. Literally one out of a hundred times the old growth forest I'll find one. So this is a really important that people understand how important biodiversity, micro diversity, we're talking about fungi. A Garacon was first described by diasquarities over 2000 years ago as elixerium at long them, vitamin, the elixir of long life. It's also revered by the Haida and the Clicca in the Northwest First Nations as a mushroom very important for their own farm or copia. So 2000 years history of use other sides of the world and directly after 9-11 I was approached by the bio-shield bio defense department and they ran over 2,200 assays. The concern was weaponizable viruses. So they saw an article I wrote in herbal gram called novel antivirals from mushrooms a whopping one page long. That's all that was in the scientific literature. So I knew in my intuition this rare species could have some properties of more than 2 million samples tested by the US Defense Department, US Amrad, US Army Research Institute and Fructures Diseases and NIH and collaboration of more than 2 million samples, synthetics and natural compounds. We were in the top 10 of all samples active against in this case, pox viruses and we were the only natural product. So there's a vetted press release that talks about this that came out in 2004. So I've dedicated my life. I have a company. Unfortunately I've put in a lot of my resources. I've literally spent millions of dollars collecting strains from the old growth forest and I'm happy to announce that we have more than 107 strains of agaricon isolated from Northern California even northern Arizona, British Columbia and in Europe. I have now the largest culture library of agaricon in the world. And so people go, why is important? Well, it's not important because the old growth forest or the climbing I mean it's less than 1%. But I believe the old growth forests or cultural libraries that will be essential for bio defense. And from the research that we did with a bio shield program in 2004, then I have a TED talk in 2008 that talks about this. And that I'm very thankful that we have completed a COVID-19 clinical trial. The results of Rich was presented at the Georgetown University of Medicine, School of Medicine on September 23rd, 2023. And what we looked at in my colleagues and superb physicians and researchers led by a great team at the Crop Center for Integrative Medicine at the University of California, San Diego. And it's a double blind placebo controlled study. And in that study, the idea was to look at vaccine enhancement. So before mRNA vaccines, there's just so much noise and confusion and you know that it since the dust hadn't settled enough. But the mRNA enhancement vaccine, which is called Mach 19, they gave half the patients a placebo, which was my sodium grown on rice. I'm sorry, just rice. And a garracon and turkey tail combined that were grown on rice. So one, the control of the sea of those just rice, neutral. And the other one is a garracon and turkey tail that turkey tail is the most well studied medicinal mushroom in the world. We populated a website for physicians at mushroomreferences.com, no branding, just pure science. People can go to mushroomreferences.com and see this. So double-blind placebo controlled and they literally recruited people directly out of vaccination lines where people getting Pfizer or Moderna vaccines. And said, hey, do you want to be involved in a medicinal mushroom vaccine study, enhancement study. And people then signed up. And so they got, they consumed a garracon on turkey tail or the placebo for four days. And then they measured symptoms, post vaccination, and then six months out. And so there are two slides that I have that I sent along to that I'm allowed to show. When you say symptoms post vaccination, what do you mean? Well, it's not quite showing up there, Jamie, for some reason the chart, both of them, you might have to do a PNG on the snapshot. Which one, you want both at the same time? No, just see if you can, the charts are not showing up for whatever reason. In other words, so what happens, I mean, I've got M&R vaccine. You feel like you're hit by a truck, right? Two days later. You got the vaccine and some physicians say, well, that's your immune system, acting, or reacting. So there was 10 symptoms that the CDC was identified, Center for Disease Control, that are adverse events due to vaccines. There actually, UCSD has 25 symptoms. So the idea was to look at whether a garracon on turkey tail reduced the adverse effects of vaccines. And how would they do that? Well, they measure they ask you. You get a headache. Right, but I mean, how would the mushrooms reduce the... Well, this is very good question. We had to convince the FDA that these were safe. And so because we had sold hundreds of thousands of garracon on turkey tail with no adverse effects, we were able to prove that. So it went through the, called the institution of review boards and the FDA for approval. And they approved it. Now, the biggest concern they had was if you stimulate the immune system, which is the presumption of how these mushrooms work, you could create a cytokine storm. And so this is one of the charts though. This was written up in JAMA. And the concern was a cytokine storm, poses the greatest risk, not the virus itself. And so when people took a garracon, the day one is where the vaccination occurred with Moderna or Pfizer, mRNA. And then if you look at the black line, that's the placebo, which is just the rice. And FOTV is FOMI top sufficient Alice trimidase, versatile, that's a garracon of turkey tail combined. And you'll see that day two and day three on the scale there, there's almost no adverse effects. And whereas those people who did not take a garracon on turkey tail had a massive increase in adverse symptoms. Now, articles just came out this past year, 30% of the people avoid vaccinations because they fear of the adverse effects. Because they hear people miss school, miss work, they feel terrible, they go, I don't want to get a vaccine. Not just that, the really scary ones like myocarditis, pericarditis, heart attack, strokes, all the clots. So the reason why the FDA approved this, we have an argument is we found that these MUT2 mushrooms stimulated was called anti-inflammatory cytokines, interleukin 1RA and interleukin 10. Now, most of the, when you have an immune response, many of these interleukins is part of your natural immunity, but they can cascade and they can then unthrottle create a cytokine storm. So most people then die from overstimulation of the immune system, inflammatory reaction. We found that with a garracon and turkey tail, we were able to reduce the adverse effects, or inflammatory effects, headache, sore throat, insomnia, muscle ache, soreness, malaise, etc., insomnia is also included. So this was a big surprise. It was double-unplicy of I had no access to any of the data until it was unmasked, which is normal. So we found that and then something else very, very surprising occurred. And as two credits of my colleagues, they came up with this idea at the University of California, the Crop Center for Integrative Medicine, is let's look at antibody extension. The idea with the vaccines that you created and antibodies to prevent the spike protein from been docking on your cells and getting interest in infecting your cells. So they looked at people six months later. Now, 89 out of 90 people, I think, came back six months later, tremendous conformity. Let's take your blood six months later. And then Jamie, if you can put up the next slide, and this is what we found that was so astonishing, is six months later with the short exposure to a garracon and turkey tail, there was a carry-on where the antibody response was far greater than that of the reservoir of antibodies just from the vaccine. These people that had actually contracted COVID as well, these are what we call naive. We want them, when you get COVID, then the antibody response was very cloudy, then you have antibody response from your natural immune system, then you have the vaccine itself. So these are called the vaccine naive group. I mean, the virus, the naive group, we did not want them to have virus. So we tracked them to make sure that they did not get the virus, but this elevates you into a state of immune readiness. And this is the thing I did not know. I did not know if you're immunologically depressed. You have immunologically lower activity due to whatever reason. If you get a vaccine, your antibody response is not that great. Your immune cell levels are very low. They're very not very active. What's exciting about this, the immunologist, is that if you can up-rigulate immunity and then get the vaccine, your immune cell population is much more robust, much more responsive, and so the antibody response is much greater. And this is what we found. The fact that extended about six months, we didn't go out a year, we didn't go out longer. And this is just for a short dose, short dosing of only four days. And this was the dosing that happened right after the vaccine. At right simultaneously in the same day in the vaccine for four days. Now this is one of my favorite phrases by Voltaire. I don't want the perfect be the enemy of the good. You can twist yourselves into pretzels that's the time to explain how this works. But the bottom line, it does work. And if you could up-regulate community immunity of the population, the problem that I did not realize is immunologically depressed people, when they get a vaccine, their antibody response is not only poor, but they become a breeding ground for vaccine resistance. So you have a lot more virus replicating. You want to stop the viral replication early on in the process. So the more antibody response and more robustly response is specific to this virus and other viruses. And this is what we're really wondering. Now, wow, how does this carry over to other viruses? Can I stop me? How does it work? What is the mechanism that's causing this to happen? We think there's an entourage effect of multiple mechanisms that are in play. We know that increases cell immunity, so daughter cells, when they're created, don't pass on the virus. We're then able to show that, which is extraordinary. So, to speak to host offensive immunity, the immune cells, the immune cells that are enabled, the endogenous immune systems, able to prevent the virus from replicating. And that's what's so exciting. We know the anti-inflammatory effects. So we have this, as one person said, you're putting on the gas pedal and you're putting on the brakes at the same time. You can augment immunity and decrease inflammation. Now that's what these vaccine companies are spending billions of dollars. List creative vaccine without any adverse effects. The fact that you can take a natural product that's been used for thousands of years, or diastoritis is when the father's of medicine, the fact that's been used for so long. We know it's safe. And now, in this time, we are finding we have 100 plus strains of agaracons. So I think we have a super strain in our library. And that's what I'm trying to discover. What strain in our library of 107 strains now? We just used one strain and we saw these effects. So if we can boost community immunity, then we can ameliorate the spread of pandemics, obviously. And when you're saying there's all these different strains, there's 107 strains? We have 107 strains in our library, the largest library in the world. There are probably hundreds of thousands of strains if there are hundreds of thousands of mushrooms or millions of mushrooms, but there aren't. So this species of rapidly on the brink of becoming extremely threatened, if not extinct. Can it be repopulated? We can culture it in a laboratory. All we need is a tiny piece of tissue. You can't reintroduce into forests. We have inoculated from snags, which have been unsuccessful. The idea would be we'd like to reintroduce into forests, or we can, these forests are like islands, a genomic library, some islands that we need to protect. And this is why it made the statement, my TED Talk, we just saved the old growth force as a matter of national defense. That's not quite correct. It's for international defense. The viruses don't care about borders. And we're going to jump into a period of viral storms. We're going to have viral storms converging at us all the time now. And it's due to fact reforming the collision of industrialization, suburbanization, ecosystems on those margins. But we're facing now this currently in the news is bird flu, six different herds of cattle have been infected with bird flu. First time in history, first time in history is jumped from birds to large mammals cattle, from Idaho. And it's now got scientists on high alert. This is from nature. This bird flu outbreak in US cows, why scientists are concerned, the virus has killed hundreds of millions of birds, has now infected cattle in six US states, but the threat to humans is currently low. Currently. Currently low. Because if it jumps to pigs, we already know the viruses that infect pigs can infect very likely humans. So cows and pigs are oftentimes in the same farms. And if it jumps to pigs, we're in big trouble. Because that's just one species away, historically in virology. And one virus is, H1N1 is a swine flu. We found high activity at the Bauchial program of a gheric and also against H1N1 and H5N1. Is it possible to give this to cows? Don't know. Don't know. So my concern and those of other of ourologists that I've been in contact with for literally decades now is it strains at six herds of cattle from Idaho to Oklahoma to Texas would spontaneously get bird flu. It's not like the cattle made contact with each other. So there's more than one epicenter. When you have these epizuotic centers where the virus can jump to larger mammals, then you have many, many, you know, ground zeros, you know, for the virus to emerge. So if it jumps to swines or to pigs or hogs, they increased likelihood it jumps to people. So it's a very big concern with Wuhan. Okay, it came out of one city, one location. But this is showing epidemiologically that the virus is jumping to larger mammal simultaneously. Right now it doesn't have the mutation. So there's very low risk, let's be very clear about that. There's very low risk, but virologists are an extremely high alert because of this unusual pattern of sudden occurrence, first time ever, it's jumped the seals and bears, all things. And as the devastated hundreds of millions of birds around the world. Do they have any idea what this is? So they originated with birds. Yes, it's called bird flu. And do they think that it's just birds traveling to these different herds? And they're going to be speaking. That's the modality that most... But they just fly around, give it to new plants. They go to a pond and you know, they're co-minging the virus in drinking water. You know, e-grits sit on top of cows and get bugs off the backs of large mammals, etc. So migratory birds, of course, is the most obvious vector. But when you have fact reforming of chickens and hundreds of thousands of chickens this past year, I think hundreds of millions of chickens, if you look it up, have been euthanized in the past year because they did get H5N1. And so the chickens start sneezing and they get sick and it's extremely communicable. So especially about the chicken farms very quickly. So the USDA, NIH, everyone involved in the biosecurity is extremely concerned about this new event, which has happened in the past few weeks. And that report I showed you just showed up yesterday in nature as well. So if it mutates, you know, it's a whole new pandemic threat and it's much more severe. The estimates from the... From humans getting bird flu, H5N1 is up to 70% mortality, 70%. Not 0.1% or 0.01% with COVID is 70%. Now some people say 40%. Okay, you reduce it by 30%. We do have vaccines already in the pipeline that are anticipating this. So that's a good news. The flu virus... Viroms has called has been very well characterized. But the mutation rate is what's concerned and there's sensitive so many different localities that are spontaneously infecting cows. This virus is on the move. And that is the concern that we all have. And so by boosting community immunity, we can then have more immune cells to produce antibodies to make the vaccines more effective. And the idea is you can help avoid vaccine evasion by having your endogenous immune system at its peak performance. So how does this... How does this stuff work without vaccines? We have early evidence on how it works without vaccines. And I want to be very respectful, but I also have to be very professional. I am not at liberty to discuss those results. For a number of reasons, one of which the data, as I mentioned, is a little clouded because the people that we were bringing in to the first study, we didn't have them as well characterized. But clearly, a Garricon-Anturcatel, with the evidence that was presented, again, September 23rd, 2023 at the Georgetown University School of Medicine. These two charts I can present to you because they were publicly presented. We do have a paper and process that's being submitted to a journal and it has to go through with an acid test, a purie view, et cetera. But there's a team of us and we're very excited about this research results because it's not going to... It's not going to be the vaccine or the month scene where you just are constantly creating getting new vaccines for every variant. If you can have your endogenous immune system on the ready, then it can then have an innate response to these viral infections that will ameliorate their spread. That's the whole idea is to keep the viral loads down to slow response. So what is the mechanism that these two together helps strengthen your immune system? Well, that's a really good question. We know that with a turquetail, we did a breast cancer clinical study phase one that was also published with breast cancer patients. We see augmentation of many immune cells, including cytotoxic T cells, macrophages, and natural killer cells, statistically significant. It also was a phase one study. For people to know, phase one studies are pretty small. There tend to be safety studies. There are usually a few dozen people. Sometimes there's a few of six heart study, but had 90 people, the COVID study, the breast cancer clinical study, I think had about 28 people, but also compared to the seabell, the mycelium grown on rice. This is so important. It's not the fruit bodies. It's the mycelium that has this effect of being able to upregulate immunity and downregulate inflammation. So when the breast cancer clinical study was shown to be safe, it was shown to augment several of the immune cell responses for how much? Well, there's two ways of three ways of answering that. There's the amplitude of the immune cells, which is, I think, as I remember six times baseline. There is different immune cells in terms of their activity and how they increase. But the significant value, which is the P values people know it, was I think less than 0.001. It showed highly significant effects, which are outside of the realm of chance. And so we were able to show immune regulation, the breast cancer clinical study did not measure anti-inflammatory cytokines. And so again, we have this incredibly complex immune system that's developed over hundreds of millions of years. It's not this magical polar approach that many people enter a great of medicine are focused on. It's the entourage effect. And so when you create an entourage of enabling stimuli that has the immune system react, a lot of us believe there's cross talk between the receptors. Receptors saying, okay, this is helpful, it awakens other receptors, and then you get this so quorum response of the immune system at a higher state of readiness without being detrimental to the body as created the immune system. So the cytokine storm and overreaction of inflammatory responses is a huge concern with any immunostemulant. So that's why in JAMA, we let her, it was written up to the concern about cytokine storm. I co-authored an article with the University of Arizona School of Medicine physicians, so warning people be very careful about immunostemulation even with the medicine of mushrooms. But we had this evidence already that the mushroom mycelium throttled back of the inflammatory consequences by up regulating interleukin 1RA and interleukin 10. And medicinal reference, mushroom references.com, you can see all these references right on the front of the website. So all this stuff has been used forever, right? It's been used for thousands of years. And what do we know about what they used for or how they found out that it worked or anything like that? That's a really great question. Actually, it was used as an anti-inflammatory, as a pultus to reduce muscle aches. And would they just use the fruiting body? The fruiting bodies would be powdered. The fruiting bodies are not the... The fruiting bodies have may have anti-inflammatory actions, but we found that mycelium increases the host defense in support community, your innate immunity. So this is why it's been used for thousands of years as a pultus and ointments, et cetera. And so it has a long, you know, back in the day before we could allocate the different aspects of what's happening medically in the human body. And so it's sort of like this very broad umbrellas that we're describing, you know, getting into homeostasis. This is... Take this with food without food. Either way. It doesn't matter. I take them in the morning. No, it's beating them. Why am I sitting here? It's telling me all these things. I'm getting scared. Don't be scared. I mean, this is not a time for widespread panic, but it is time for to be... Well, I mean, the analogy I make, we all buy car insurance, right? In the unlikely hood that we're going to get on car accident today or tomorrow. So why not preemptively invest in your own immunological health by being prepared? So should you get exposed, you don't become a super spreader. And so this is where I think we have a potential breakthrough in integrative medicine. And I want to give a shout out to my colleagues at the University of California San Diego, the Croupp Institute. They are the ones that came up with this idea of vaccine extension. Because so many people are concerned about how many vaccines do I take and what happens when you take so many vaccines. So the idea of having your innate immune system at a state of readiness, so vaccines work better and you have to use them less. I'm asked to holy grail of that vaccinology. And what is this, but that's back to my original question. What does it do for people who don't want to take vaccines? Can it help their immune system fight off things? We know, and I've got to be very careful how I say this, but we know that these, mycelium-based products are like Eric on an inter-ketale support the immune system. This is clear. Now the immune system has many challenges from bacterial infections, viral infections, cancer, just cells getting old and dying, not having apoptosis. Apoptosis is important for you to get rid of your disease and aging and dead cells. So it's a very, very broad landscape. So I'm not trying to be, I'm not dancing around the definitions, but I am very much restricted on what I'm able to say. I understand. Yeah. I can say that these, Eric on an inter-ketale supports the immune system. We have very good evidence for that. I can say that in combination, based on the earlier evidence, and we need more studies, but this is a placebo double blind controlled study, we can show that we reduce the adverse effects of the mRNA vaccines, with this population that we've studied of 90 people, those who did not take a Eric on a turkey tail had adverse consequences significantly less than those people who took Eric on a turkey tail did not have adverse. So it helps people not avoid vaccines because of their vaccine hesitancy. I have a dear friend and their family is very conservative Christians and they just refuse to get vaccinations. They isolated themselves. And at first, that was on the left side of the fence being a weight of second. Why aren't you getting vaccines? I've come to understand why they didn't want vaccines. I totally respect their opinion and what they did. They're very interested in many people who are not needing a vaccine. How can I have built innate immunity? When it comes to the pandemic storms, the viral pandemics that we face, we are an unprecedented times. What happens when we get multiple viral variants, not only from flu viruses but from other viruses, because of loss about diversity, because of fact reforming its spread so rapidly, we are at the convergence of possibly multiple virus and viral pandemics converging at the same time. That is not improbable at all. So it's really we need to get our act together and everyone needs to work together. And what we think that we have in many other physicians who are knowledgeable about the subject, who have studied this very carefully, who have looked at the data are excited about it because it can help innate immunity. So whether you get a vaccine or don't get a vaccine, your immune system is supported at a higher level of readiness. So when you started doing this, and you said there's 107 strains that you guys have identified and isolated, what are the differences in those strains? Is there some more potent in others or some have different effects? Excellent. You guys have identified and isolated. What are the differences in those strains? Is there some more potent in others or some have different effects? Excellent question. With the BioShield program, I think I submitted six strains of agaricon on the three showed any activity in the BioShield program. So three showed nothing. Three showed nothing. Two of them were active against flu viruses. And one of them was an active against pox viruses. Now that's weird because pox viruses are DNA viruses. Flu viruses are RNA viruses. And so you think the modality would be different. But it just speaks the fact how little we know. I met a Nobel Laureate in San Diego. He got the Nobel Prize in immunology. And I'm not going to mention this name. But he gave a great quote. He goes, I can't believe I got the Nobel Prize because I know shit about the immune system. And he was a Nobel Laureate. He just said, it is so incredibly complex. Every time we think we understand it, there were challenges with new ideas or contourage or assumptions. So it's really important to keep an open mind. The beauty of agaricon or turkey tails, the multi-thousand-year history of use, traditional Chinese medicine has been advocating this for literally 2,000 years. Long history in Europe, long history in North America with indigenous First Nations. So this is, I mean, I think, so let me really put this in the context. Alexander Fleming, most people know the story, 1929. He got a mold and his petri dish was growing, staff bacteria. And there was a zone of inhibition. The bacteria stopped growing. So he looked at that margin of no growth. And he thought, well, that mold is excreting something. It turned out to be pen and so on. So he published that. And there's a massive number of researchers all over the world, especially in London and Europe. Started isolating molds to see if they could find a highly potent strain that produced pen and so on. So, but they couldn't industrialize it. And then the Netherlands and the Imperial College, they did a lot of work, but they couldn't scale up the production of pen and so on during the World War II, until a lab researcher by the name of Mary Hunt, working in Peoria, Illinois, at a USDA laboratory, went to a farmer's market and found a moldy cantaloupe. The moldy cantaloupe was covered with a golden mold. And so, Alex Interflamming, discovered pen and cilium, notatum, she discovered that pen and cilium chrysogenum means gold, gold and color. And then she isolated that mold and it turned out to produce six times more pen and cilium, at least, of any other strain here to it discovered. And the advantage that we had in the United States is that we had corn steep liquor. We'd grow corn. And according to the corn cobs, you boil them in water, you can make corn steep liquor, and that turned out to be a perfect medium for the massive production of pen and cilium. The Germans, they had a factory, they were making pen and cilium, it got bombed. So, they were kicked out of the race. The Japanese developed it. Pen and cilium literally saved hundreds of millions of dollars because of Mary Hunt's cantaloupe. You mean the lives? Yeah, the husband was the whole lives. Sorry, I just spoke. Hundreds of millions of lives because of her moldy cantaloupe. That's wild. And just, I think, a garracorn with 107 strains when we start sequencing them, we see the whole genome sequencing on 95 strains so far. Whole genomic sequencing, so we have the entire genomic fingerprint. And to go after your question, we have found four or so different clades. These are these little sub-genera. It's sub-genomic associations. Lineages, you might call them. And in those lineages, we are just beginning to see early signal of what lineages have greater potency as an anti-inflammatory and also for supporting the immune system. So, this is my biggest contribution to science. I hope historically will be because of this library. And I've literally spent millions of dollars. I'm not exaggerating. Millions of dollars on a garracorn to a mass 107 strains. And working accumulating more, we have published this in the commons, large genomic library databases. So other people can see this. And so you said there's four strains that you identified that were particularly interested in. Yeah, that was, that was, it was the BioShield program. And so, so out of the 107, how many of them are viable? Well, we didn't have 107 back then. I only had six or seven strains back then of the BioShield program in 2004. So in 2024, now we have 107. We only had one choice for the COVID-19 clinical study. So I chose the strain of a garracorn that was the most robust that we saw on our early in vitro tests with a BioShield program. And have these 107 strains that you have currently? Yes. How many of them have you tested? Well, in terms of how many of we tested for immune support? Yeah, for everything. Clinic, clinically? Only one. Only one. In vitro, I think seven or eight, some of them are not active. We are currently involved with another university who is now testing multiple strains in vitro. And we have new signal now. And I want to show you how big these are garracorns cut. So can we get you? Before we go any further? When you identify ones that aren't active, do you bookmark them and see if you can try them for other things that could be beneficial to the human body? Or do you just only look at the immune system and do you always assume that they only have one mechanism? We, the answer to that question, I'm a very small company. I have 150 employees on the whole company. I have eight or nine full-time researchers. There are so many applications potentially of this. We have to be very narrowly focused on that which we can achieve. If I was a large-source issue, as a resource issue, if I was a part of NIH and I've made NIH applications, one out of eight, it's made it through. But it's very, very difficult for an independent researcher like me to advance the science without collaboration with larger entities. So it mostly determines. It seems like if we're finding these benefits and these mushrooms, it seems like it's to anybody, to everyone's benefit, if there was some large-scale funding of some research on this. Because if you bookmark these ones that don't have efficacy towards the specific goal that you have, is it possible that we would be missing out on some of the other additional benefits to these mushrooms that we're not aware of in these different strains? As an immunologist, our team said, because inflammation is such that the root cause is so many illnesses, the fact that you can upregulate immunity and downregulate inflammation as implications across the medical field. Right, but they don't all show this ability, correct? That's correct. And the ones that don't show this ability, what I'm saying is, is it possible that they have other effects, beneficial effects that we're not measuring, because we're only looking for this. Absolutely, of antifungal effects. The weird thing about a garracon from my experience is the only mushroom that grows on an old growth tree. All these other trees I find, I find four or five, six, maybe 10 different species. But when I find a garracon, this is an example, this is my good friend Scott Baker, he climbed a hundred feet up to this garracon. We got a tiny piece of tissue, the size of your fingernail from the bottom of that, and we got that in culture. Four or five years later, a storm came through, broke off that tree, that garracon now is not there. So we saved it. We've saved it from fires, garracon, we've saved from logging. I've actually had some logger buddies of mine who know about this. Look at the size of that one. This is the biggest one we've ever seen. And this one is over a hundred pounds, over a hundred years of age. And it is... It looks like cement. Oh, those are annual growth rings. Why? Basically, they're annual growth rings. I have to say, this is my conigae, he's known as Yosemite Sam, and I do have permission to show this. So it looks like Yosemite Sam. But this guy, I mean, that is a massive garracon, the biggest one I've ever seen. So do you go on the old both forests, subject to vast weather changes, wind, and rain and snow, and they live for a hundred years and they don't rot. What is about this fungus that allows it not to rot? So it seems to have a host offense of protection in Italy. And since we're more closely related to fungi than any other kingdom, and the anti-bacterial antibiotics that we've gotten, mostly have come from fungi, but we've very few anti-fungal antibiotics. And so research is also showing that these agaricon and other polypropachums are active against pathogenic fungi. So it's an interesting nexus point that agaricons in the center of anti-viral, anti-bacterial and anti-fungal, and yet has such a long history of use and safety. So we're really at the threshold. This is where science can get ahead of itself and be so reductionist. But we are whole systems of enormous complexity. And science tries to deconplexify and disambiguate things so it's very narrowly focused so that it's a stimulus response that can measure. That's not way the human immune system works. It's the entourage effect, the synergy, and keeping that imbalances, the key. Now, there's between two and 20 million species of fungi. About 10% about 140,000 species to 200,000 species or so are mushroom form of fungi. We've only identified 14,000. But it's another really curious phenomenon. But 1% of mushrooms are poisonous. About 1% of them are edible in choice. But 1% of them are psychoactive. Are psilocybin present? The other 97%, they're just, you know, they just don't taste good. They're not poisonous. They're not other than interest. But what do you think is going on with the amineetumascaria? Is the amineumascaria is one where there's this historic use. There's all this mythology that's connected to Santa Claus and shamans and elves and all these different things. But most of the people that I know that have tried it have not been able to experience like extreme psychoactive effects. I have consumed amineumascaria and aminepantharina on multiple occasions. And my aminepascaria, but the higher doses, it's a some differus. I could put you to sleep. I get dull yellows and browns. It's not a euphoric experience. Dog yellows and browns. When you get dark, the colors are not bright. You know, it's not like that you're flying saucer in the background here. Everything is very, very diminished in terms of the color rama. You know, it tends to be muted colors, reds and browns, but not blues and you know, fractals. So you're talking about what you see that is hallucination. Are you talking about like actual colors that you see look differently? Actually, colors I look at are different. So it changes the visual spectrum. It changes the visual spectrum. Aminepantharina, see, aminepascaria has musylol, muskren and ebotenic acid. Actually, I had very little muskren, but the muskrenic symptoms cause you to salivate. And as you send up, you know, salivating and tearing and lactating, et cetera. So it's a, so these shamans in Siberia by consuming aminepascaria, they would remove the muskrenic symptoms. And then the urine, because they biretholder through a body, it would be high in ebotenic acid and in muskrenal. And these are the, it can sense purifies it. So I mean, this is a legend that's mixed up in fiction and fact and fables. I will say in the field of mycology, from my experience now, over 47 years studying this subject, many of the folk lores been validated only lately by science. So before people are super skeptic and think this has no relationship. Well, with the Santa Claus myth, okay, the aminepascaria grows underneath trees, the fur trees, first trees are Christmas trees. There's the berserkers. Legend is that the berserkers are surrounded, you know, 10 to one by a very powerful army. These Norwegian, Siskandenavians, we're gonna be slaughtered the next day. They've made a giant pot of aminepascaria, you know, a brew, they drank it and then at dawn, high as a kite on the enemy mascara, they took off all their clothes and they just became these mechanistic warriors that attacked the other side, freaked them out and they won the battle. So that was how the word berserk came about from the berserkers, they went berserk. And so that's the origin of that. And it is aminepascaria that we're assuming it to. Aminepascaria, but aminepanthrena does not have muskren in it. So I aminepascaria several times, as my friend and I looked at him and he was foaming with bubbles all over on his mouth. I said, dude, you look like you have rabies. He goes, you should see what you look like. And so, and it puts you to sleep. The biggest concern about aminepascaria's hypothermia by most of us experts, because you can actually fall asleep in the snow and then you can get hypothermia and die. Very people, if any, have ever died, there's one potential report, has killed dogs. But there's a repetitive motion syndrome. It's very, very strange. And I aminepanthrena as well. And I don't think I told you this story about my pantherina experience. I don't want to be redundant here, but I had a heroic experience on aminepanthrena. And that one was very, I had repetitive motion syndrome. And I was living up in the mountains. I had freeze-dried aminepanthrena. I knew it didn't have muskra and I didn't even know what's scary. I foamed a lot. It wasn't that much fun. So I knew pantherina was four to five times more potent. So I took the freeze-dried specimens from the Herbarium, from the college I was working at. I was living underneath a volcano up in Darrington, Washington, and I was with my friend Dave. And he had his smaller body weight. And so we made an omelet, let's try pantherina. And he trusted me, note to self, note to others. And so we ate the pantherina in an omelet. And I cut the omelet bigger for me because I'm a bigger body weight than to him. And we ate the mushrooms like at 10 o'clock in the morning. And omelet, they're delicious. And dressed across the river was a square creek campground. And it's where the tourists come up and their window baggos and campers and their families and stuff. And we're long-haired hippies. And I said, just on the other side there, it says, heel that we can get up on the heel side. It's an incredible view of the valley. It's snow-calfable cano, just a great vista. Let's go there. So for some reason, it's so close, but we drove my car like 1,000 feet to this campground went over the bridge over the little river. And we parked just on the outside of the campground where all the campers are. And so we walked past all these tourists and their families. And we went up on the hill and then we're sitting up on the hill and waiting for the mushrooms to come on in like an hour. Nothing, no experience. Like what's going on? And this is very typical, by the way. This is a characteristic. And the misterium pincherina take a long time for the onset of first symptoms. And then we're up on the hill and I'm looking out on the hooray beautiful view. And suddenly, this wave came through our visual field, like this invisible wave. And I said, do you feel that? And he goes, yeah, I felt that too. And we're like, whoa, we're feeling the same thing. And then our visual fields are getting distorted. And they start coming on so fast. We're going, holy shit. We got to get out of here. You know, this is coming on too fast. Let's go back home and be good because it's more intense. So we walked back through and I have a rolling flex camera at a 35 millimeter, a bit of a talk of rolling my life. And then we're walking through the backs out of the campground and there's all these kids and families and window baggos and camper vans. And then I remember this one window baggos as the longest window baggos in the universe. Every time I was walking, it was a window baggos of no end. I couldn't get past this one window baggos. I kept on walking. Couple. My friend, and then finally, we got past this window baggos. It seemed like it took forever. And there's my car. And for some friggin reason, I locked the door. And I have my keys. And I looked at the key hole in the door. I looked at my keys. I went, just that one. Just, uh, me and my friend goes, everything okay, Paul. Everything's fine. Just give me some time. And then, you know, after how many times magically, just by the fact I tried so many times, I think it just slipped into the lock and unlocked the door. I said, okay, so I sit in the car and now I have to put it in the ignition. And I'm going, oh no. My friend goes, maybe you shouldn't drive. Yeah. Good advice. Maybe I shouldn't drive. So it's just no way. I couldn't, it was getting more and more intense. It would not be responsible to drive. You know, so absolutely the right decision, not to drive. So then I got out of the car and the camera's on my lap. And then I got out of my car. And you know, meanwhile, a group of people started gathering. Because we were there for a long time trying to get into the car and trying to, and so these people got kind of curious. And Dave goes, you know, some people over there are kind of gathering Paul looking at us. And I didn't want to look at them. So I get out of the car and my camera falls and it hits the ground. I go, oh shit. I just dropped my really flex camera. And then I picked up the camera and I go, wow, I just dropped my really flex camera. I drop it again. Oh no. And I pick it up. I go, did I just drop my really, camera? Oh, I dropped it again. Repetitive motion syndrome. I picked up that camera and dropped it. Dozens and dozens of times. Oh my God. Meanwhile, the cluster of people got larger parents or other were holding their children close to them. I'm like, we don't know what's going on here, but it's getting weird over there. So pretty soon I had a very large group of these campers that were all watching us, being became in their distance. And I just repetitive motion syndrome of dropping and dropping and dropping. And so finally, we had the staccato pace. The timeline of the day got broken upside. Warning when we ate that I had evening that had early afternoon, then I had early morning that I had late afternoon that I had evening. The whole threat of time was disintegrated, like an scrambled. And so then we walked. And I lost Dave. Daddy, I figured Dave, you're on your own buddy. I got enough to work deal with here. And so we walked over and we walked over this bridge and we got to my place. And I got to my house and I had a combination lock on the door. I was like, oh my God. Last thing I need is another. So I spun that combination lock and I couldn't get it open. And then I went into convulsions and they felt good. So I'm convulsing on the ground and spiking like this. And every time I convulsed right afterwards, it actually felt good. And so I'm convulsing, but it seems to be helping me. So like convulsed and thrashing on the ground, don't know where it happened the day. And so I go back to the lock and I spun it and it's magically the lock opened up. And then I fell into bed. And then I had this amazing rush of Einstein's un-spining thoughts. The thoughts were just so profound. I go, oh my gosh, if I could write these down, these are just so important, conclusions of great mysteries of the universe. I have this at my hand. And just before I came to the object of the sentence, I'd have a prepositional or adverbial phrase. And then I get a tangent. And I saw a death then has been perpetual tangents that never gave you the satisfaction of having completed the thought. So I went down this rabbit hole constantly forks in my thinking. And then I blacked out and then at the end of the day, the sunlight came through the 12 hour experience as the long experience. And so there's no summertime then at the very end of the day, the sunlight came through a flicker of my eyelids and I woke up. And my friend was convinced I was trying to kill him because I was a mushroom of expert. And so I had no idea this would be this intense. So what did he, where was he during this time? He ended up in the cabin and safe, but he was like a statue. You know, it was just there sitting when I got up, just looking straight forward. And we spoke a few words the next day and for the next few days and then, you know, Dave went on. This is life journey. I think he's convinced to this day that I knew what would happen. But this speaks to the berserkers, the idea of repetitive motion syndrome. Andy, while who if you've had on this show, he was at Cougar Hot Springs and he was going to trail the Cougar Hot Springs and somebody ran on the trail said, when you know, doctor, we're in doctor. This person out there is trying to kill himself and he's a doctor. So he goes up there and there's this big hippie guy on this log or on the bridge, swinging his legs wildly covered with blood. And before Andy's eyes, this guy throws himself off the bridge. It right onto the rocks and the creek down below, you know, 10 feet or more below. Smashes himself and gets stunned and looks around and walks back up and gets on the bridge again and throws himself on the bridge. So this is why if someone had killed somebody on M.D. and mascara or P.N. through, you know, I would testify as an expert witness to their out of control. They have no control of their repetitive motion syndrome. If you wrote a red watch Tales from the Crypt or some witness something violent, because you went, when you re-remember you re-enact, there's no control of your memory interaction. So pharmacologically, that must be really interesting, you know. The real scientists have been studying this for a long time. We can't quite figure it out. But I think this underscores the point that mushrooms are chemical wizards. These are, they are, have enormous potential for exotic molecules that interface with human health. And there's a huge pharmacopoeia, micropharmacopoeia, inside of mushrooms that have not been fully explored. I think it's true with the Garrocon, I think it's true with the Sol-Sibin mushrooms. Certainly true with the M.D. and mascara, etc. Ironically, M.D. and mascara is legal. There's no restrictions. You can possess the 100 pounds of it, but you can't possess a tenth of a gram of Sol-Sibin mushrooms without breaking federal law schedule one. So how can a mushroom that makes you happier, less violent, you know, resolve your PTSD, depression, etc. How could that mushroom remain illegal and yet M.D. and mascara and pantherina are legal? So it's just the juxtaposition. But for the record, no species should be illegal. It's the hubris of humans to think that we can dictate that a species is illegal. That is fundamentally wrong. Agreed. My question was about the amideed of mascara. Because you're talking about a Garrocon and how many different strains there are and how different strains are effective at different things, one of the things that McKenna believed was that because he had never really had a positive experience with the amideed mascara, but there was so much attached to it. He thinks that it was probably very, very, very bull genetically, very bull. Seasonally, very bull. Just so much like a Garrocon, there's probably many different strains of amideed. So these ones that they were attributing to like the sacred mushroom in the cross, John Marco Legro's book on amideed and mascara and the Bible. Do you think that it's possible that at one point in time there was psychoactive strains of amideed mascara that vary from the ones that people have that have these different sort of more mundane effects? Absolutely. These, we call them phenotypes in column strains or phenotypes. Right. It's a variety within a species. The pharmacologically, we already see that with the philosophy mushrooms. Some of them are really high in Seoul, Simon, very low in Seoul, and high in beta-system, in Norway, or the North-Silence, lower. So we see this not only cross species-wise, but inside of a species with a phenotypes. Some phenotypes of slosophy, cervantes, are extremely potent and other ones are not. So strange do matter. This is where with the Garrocon, I think strange do matter. The fact that we found one strain of a Garrocon that supports immunity and looks like it helps extend the efficacy of vaccines is a home run. But are the other strains capable of doing? Right. That's what I was getting at. It's like, God, we seem so underfunded with something that has so much potential. I'm funding it. You know? I'm glad you are. So I spend enormous amounts of my financial resources on research. That's why I created my company, you know, I started my company, Pack and Boxes by myself. You know, I'm not ashamed to admit that I laid in bed crying, many, many nights. I was bouncing chucks. My suppliers were shutting me down. No one was there to help me. I was by myself. I packed 30,000 boxes before I had a single employee. I got accepted the five graduate schools and I couldn't afford to go. I didn't have a scholarship. I had a young family. My daughter, I was very adept at catching my daughter from their backpack as I leaned over to Pack and Box. All fine tape will not stick at 35 degrees. I can tell you that. And I actually, I don't want to flood the airways. What if you call 360-426-8255, you'll get the public utility district. Why I know that number and grand is my lawyer said, if you call the utility company and telling you're sending a check, they legally cannot shut off your power. So I thought, okay, for 10 years at 801 in the morning on the date of disconnection, I would call the public utility district to say I'm sending in a check. And after a while, I heard this noise and then many years later, I met some of the people who goes, you know you're a legend. I go, what do you mean? He says, we all gathered around the phone at 801. On disconnection day, betting that Stamets would or not would not call and everybody who bet that I would not call lost their bets and at the end, everyone would just cheer. It's Paul, now here's, I think they're having a party in the background. No, it's Paul, call it 801. So there he is. I maximize my cash flow. And thankfully I had a local bank and the local bank, one of the board members said, how much money do you pay in overdraft fees? And there's the extraordinary number of $5,000. And he goes, you're only, he's one of your best customers, man, they should keep. So I built this business, blood, sweat and tears. Now I have 150 employees. I own the whole company. I'm very grateful to them. We call us Starship FP, that's like your comedy clubs, the mothership. So our company is known as Starship Funjour Perfecte. And people want to track us down where at funjour.com, a few ngi.com. I registered that myself for 28 bucks. Nice. Our company is known as Starship Funjoury Perfecto and People want to track us down where at funjoury.com a few ngi.com. I registered that myself for 28 bucks. Nice Yeah, what did you get that were you? 1992 oh yeah That works initially. Yeah, you had to be super early to get that. It's funny people don't worry down. I go it's a kingdom You know, I write it down. It's funjoury.com. So that's amazing. You got that domain But I'm I use your stuff I've had yourself at my house for a long time. I think it's great and I'm so happy that you're out there. I really am I'm happy that I mean there's not a lot of Paul Stamets in the world There are a lot of unsung heroes. I I have a lot of your attention My point is that it's like we really need Research in this stuff we need a lot of a lot of research and the research is becoming increasingly credible It's the University of Arizona Medical School Andy Wild Center program for integrative medicine University of California San Diego UCLA Harvard actually Another institutions They're very excited now because this has been sort of like weird science. You know. Yeah, that's what's gonna get on it I was gonna say there's that there's this real reluctance to believe that people in the past had answers that we don't have today this this almost religious belief in modern science and also this believe that the The the transition of knowledge has been fully complete from ancient people to today and there's nothing a slip through the net That's that doesn't seem to be the case and also for sure They didn't they didn't have the ability to document things at least and and preserve those documents to today Like we can today with In regards to research regards to which you could find out in the modern laboratories and just what you're able to do to find out Which of these mycelium strains are effective which of them are not at least for the particular thing you're looking for Like all this you've got a assume at one point in time people had some sort of knowledge about this stuff that we Just have lost we had to we were so dependent upon the environment Yeah, we know what plants are edible from the experiences of our ancestors right them before us and it doesn't discredit modern medicine These people had this extraordinary understanding of what was beneficial Absolutely, and this is where the hubris of science We should be very careful right because the importance of our diversity cannot be overstated Buyers anywhere. Yeah, it's abris anywhere every single place it shows it's headed fucks it up in Everything even in martial arts guys that think that they can't lose go in and get fucked up. It happens all the time Hu versus terrible It's the the human ego trying to keep itself from being Like just to recognize its true place Which is just part of an infinite sea of things that are happening simultaneously and you're not really that important You are important, but everything's important and you're not more important than anything It's all together. I totally agree. It seems to be Unfortunately lopsided in favor of the white chromosome Yeah, if you risk the white chromosome. Yeah, we're 100% we're the fault of it all that's true That's 100% true, but it's also why we invent everything It's just like we we're a bizarre subset of the the humans that causes so much chaos and so much good at the same time Well, I have great hope for the future. I do too I think sometimes some days I do today is a good day today. Maybe because you're here. Yeah, yeah I mean thank goodness that we live in these times that we do with all the Problems that we face and look at the medical advances that we've made. I'm getting him surgery in two weeks I can yeah, we were just talking about that You know you also are a martial artist in all the years of throwing kicks you've worn one of your hips out Yeah, I've quite a few friends who've had that done my friend John Wayne Parr who's still active He's got a fight coming up soon. He had a hip replacement thought after the hip replacement at least once I think he fought twice Yeah, my surgeon said besides cataract surgery this the the best medical innovation has the greatest difference in Patients before and after surgery then hip surgery. Yeah, well, I told you about Grand Hancock Yeah, he had his done and then six weeks later. He was walking around here. My mom just had her knee done And she's fine. It's great. I was so nervous about it. I just didn't want her to do it I wanted to get stem cells. I wanted her to try to treat it and just Well the biggest concern we have is MRSA, you know, that's a terrifying But I know quite a few people have gotten that as well. Yeah, so Jujitsu is a breeding ground for that shit you get scratches and scrapes and then they get infected It happens all the time. It's specifically just staff specifically, but MRSA exists too And there were quite a few people that I got. Back to the day. We always would we wiping up the mat some blood I mean now you can't you can't have blood, you know in the dojo or the dojo You know, yeah, it's considered to be a health hazard So it's so much more restricted now perhaps not to mix more shorts that you're involved Well the thing about the grappling is just the scrapes your constantly getting scraped up You can kickbox and spats and you know rash guards and you're probably gonna mitigate a lot of the scratches and scrapes You know gloves on and foot gear all that to us But if you're grappling you're you're constantly grinding things on those mats And you're getting scratches from fingernails and you're getting accidental, you know Collet collisions that cause little cuts and abrasions and they get infected and people that don't like my friend Ari He had no idea. He had staff. I gave him a year of Jujitsu for Christmas and he and I were at the pool hall and This still scares me to his day because I think he can close to dying He was walking around with a limp and I go I go what's wrong with your leg and he goes I got bit by spider bite I go let me say it he pulls his knee up. He's got a massive staff infection on his knee I go do that staff. I go we got to do the hospital right now He goes are you serious? I go right now and I broke my cue down. I go we got to go right now You have to go to the hospital man. You have a bad staff infection and he was fucked up for a while from it He got through it the antibiotics work. Thankfully it wasn't MRSA It wasn't medication-resistant staff infections and it was just horrific Well this speaks to it. I got a native immunity Yeah, you know if you're a nature of the numbers can you know you have different coefficient variables of one side of the equation The other side of the equation is health or disease and so how can you stock that to your favor? Right? You have to be robust you have to eat well you have to take vitamins you have to get exercise and you know It seems like mushrooms can help you quite a bit. I'm a big fan of lion's man. I take lion's man every day Yeah, that's one of the big ones that I take You know, but I wanted to ask you this like are there better ones to take? The other is a tincture better than capsules is capsules better than tincture. There's a good questions The extracts allow you to Actuates roughly through the makosa so guess in your bloodstream But for instance turkey tail lion's mane and a gary con are very good as prebiotics for the Micro floor in your stomach Double blind placebo controlled study again go to mushroom references calm With amoxic sill in patients where they might their microbiome in regards destroyed because of this potent antibacterial antibiotic And so they found when they gave turkey tail mushroom mycelium again double blind placebo controlled and they looked at the microbiome the Those who took turkey tail mycelium recovering with a moxazillin end up up regulating beneficial bacteria and Down red down regulating staff and Clostridium etc lack of a cells acidophilus And Bifto bacterium were up regulated. These are beneficial bacteria So there's an example that also if you orally ingest Then you can set up the Micro biome to a higher state of readiness To help whole stasis, you know health And then you absorb the components directly in so It again it depends on what your target is it was general immunity support than the oral ingestion If you're concerned about the port of entry You know like of a pathogen Through the moxosa Then obviously, you know oral introduction In so far as it supports immunity can stay off the entry point of the other's pathogens So would you recommend both a tincture and capsules? So the tincture would stave it off at the source I cannot respond to anyone using the question recommend Okay, I can say what I personally do is a combination of both Okay, and nature's a number of skates I'm just asking that from now on what do you do? So you know I don't want to get you trapped in these canundrums Yeah, it's um So you take both tincture form and capsule I take a throat spray Which has a gyrocon or turkey tail when it? I love it. That's what I use all the time when I've got a concert It's been crowd etc. Oh smart And the morning I'm taking lines made turkey tail and in a gyrocon I'm 68. I know look great. I Well, it's only like you Bruce My partner's a medical doctor and Every time that I feel like I feel like I'm 30 I don't feel my age at all The next day I fall off a ladder You 12 feet again, you Bruce Bam, so I have to be careful what I say now You Bruce is real It has an I think nature has a sense of humor to whack you up on the side of the head Universe is a sense of you. Yeah. Yeah, there's there's certain aspects to it They'd almost seem like it's playing like very subtle jokes We're at the beginning of just to be uh understanding the importance of the biodiversity of the ecosystems That's given us birth right this is really uh it's it's a continuum um But I swime really excited about the innovations Of what's happening with soil siren and soil siren and lion's mane in particular or something I'm very excited about neurogenesis neuro generation neuropusticity neuro regeneration for different things but they all segue into this concept of The neurological systems being improved using components within mushrooms And that's something that I think has a lot of potential for us Especially as we age It really is interesting how as we get old and as the science all these things advance As we realize how shallow it really was just a few decades ago And how little we knew about the effects of these things and it just varies It just including vitamins and minerals and all the different supplements that people take that have shown to be beneficial It's like this is a very recent thing in terms of human history of our current understanding Our scientific understanding of mechanism of vitamins. Yeah I'm I'm keen on it You know it's the absence of vitamins that you see the deleterious effects So it's like you know research by absence right of vitamin C Scrubbs, etc But I'm very keen on Stacking, you know in microdosing that's something that we've had a lot of activity and I'd like to give you a huge thank you and This is very Sincerely to you and to the JRE audience And Jamie could we put up that Signed the nature article on microdosing No worries and Basically when I was here last We were talking about microdosing and I came up with a stack of lines main and Microdosing cell side been below the threshold of feeling it and niacin nicotinic acid which is a flushing form and We did a call out for people to Join and download an app at microdose dot me It's for iPhones and George so they could measure before and after effects of microdosing and What we found and we published this This is the first article that we published And this was in 2019 I believe Oh 2000 2000 and 20 ones This is on their motivations and if we go to the next article What we can stop here for a second, but this is a little the title here adult who microdose psychedelics report health related Motivations and lower levels of anxiety and depression compared to non microdosers What does that mean health related motivations? Why are you microdosing because you are don't feel creative because you're depressed because you're having anxiety this is the extraordinary Metric and this is something you may not realize this when majority of this came from your audience this audience right now But if you look at that 4600 non microdosers and only 4000 microdosers Jodie you have any idea We have more citizen scientists who are non microdosers who jumped into this app This is why the editors at nature light the study because it was called so well-weighted so well-weighted because they're the non microdosers exceeded in this case fairly comparable but 4653 Non microdosers who downloaded the microdose dot me app to measure performance and how they felt And Jamie if we could go to the next let's be clear They're non microdosers, but they microdosed for this study. No. No, they didn't all they did is got these these challenge tests Every task so they took the the app the download of the app, but they didn't do anything to the consciousness They didn't do any microdosing at all. Okay, so and this is why they were then and then Why do you think so many of them that don't microdose signed up for that? We have no friggin clue you tell us Wow, I I think it may have been citizen scientists who want to get a baseline first And then you consider people lying because they don't want you to know that the microdose it's anonymous, you know Yeah, but we're scared the next one if you would with a Offering correction. Silaside and microdosers demonstrate greater observed improvements in mood and mental health at one month relative To non microdosing controls. We had it. Why did they had to be correct? Let me show the next slide with a graph You can see it the The reason why is that there was a typo an original article and it's the one with a bar graph if you can see it and Emmettles that guy. It's a little tough to find the links. Sorry. No worries because How long have you had this company host defense? I've started that host defense ran about 2004 is when I started I see them everywhere now Seem in health food stores and shit where the number one mushroom based immune product line get excited for you. Yeah Go by go. Okay. This is yeah, we'll just go. This is the this is the app. We go through the four slides here. That'll be great So this is the app microdose taught me I encourage everyone listening to help us Because now the app has been improved. It was a little bit laborious before we want to go out to three months We want non microdosers and microdosers But please the non microdosers. We need your input. These are challenge tests and so these are acuity tasks The actual app itself vision hearing memory There is How do you feel? Etc. So I guess before I forget who is the scientist that ran those studies a long time ago Where they showed that silice I've been in low doses Increased edge detection and increased your ability to see whether two parallel lines one of them had gone off a parallel I do know of the reference. I do not remember foreign scientists. Yeah, I'd I'd you have a good memory But better than mine. I don't remember the name of the yeah, but the scientists, but this is a long time ago Long time ago. Yeah. This is probably in the 60s or something like that. So then if we So these these tasks have they demonstrated that the people that are taking the microdos have better Results in these absolutely are you filtering out for? You know healthy user bias IQs Patients we have there's takes five minutes to enter into the data set to create your profile. It's anonymous You own your data It's gone through institutional review boards of the University of British Columbia, right So all been carefully vetted you own your data. Nobody else gets to see what you've done or your frequency It asks you your age. You actually your income Your nationality or your Ask your occupation. Do not ask occupation education education. Education. Yes. Yeah, whether we have a college degree high school or whatever So we have a tremendous I mean with literally millions and millions of data points The the data fields so robust and now we're trying to narrow it to Confirm what we saw in the first studies microdosing is associated with a massive relief of Depression a relief of anxiety Increase in mood and now we have customized it for more and not so much subjective effects but cognitive demonstrable skill improvement because Of course people when the people feel better to feel better Um some people could say that's an expectancy or a placebo It's ironic because it's like a patient coming into a doctor saying I feel better and they go no you don't You can't feel better in this placebo, but doctors use that back to see all the time every time you go to a doctor You expect they're going to have a medicine good medical advice. You want a kind in carrying physician Every time you go to a five or four star restaurant. You expect the foods will be good So you can't wear humans. We're complex. You can't divorce One's motivation for getting a treatment away from the expectancy of that on that treatment. Right. So Does the expectancy enhance The medicine that's the question If people are not depressed and not less prone to suicide And you save them from suicide. Isn't that What physicians want to do they want to help their patients to be better? so the The stacking results though is what we found to be Most surprising and can I ask you a extraordinary? Do you Measure do you ask the people to go through the visual acuity or the different tasks? sober first to get a baseline and then see if there's improvement from microdosing or do you just show that the group that Micro doses has higher levels of proficiency You know, I don't think we asked them to the question if they're so or at the time they take the test But not even sober because we're talking about microdosing But but do you mean but did you ask them? They use marijuana No, doesn't measure does it measure the difference between them before microdosing and them after microdosing It does so so you had a baseline so before you ever microdosing like you to take these tasks and do these puzzles and whatever whatever Things you have visuals with visual we have cognitive Tests we have a QD test we have hearing hearing hearing Using headphones you're using just yeah, there are their tones off of the phone So you'd be a whether you can hear things as a auditory Challenge is it dependent upon the volume of the phone? You're asking really really good question because the type of phone the type of speaker or was iPhone 12 or iPhone 15 the newer phones Yeah, it gets much more complicated Yeah and then the other tests and so We have a there is narrow down on what we really want is people to go for three months So the signal that we got in 30 days was extremely strong But we need to be able to repeat the results To confirm and then we want to extend the microdosing window of testing to three months Now people only need to once they get their baseline They only need to report once every two weeks or once a month So it's a much less burdensome for the people Joining microdosing not me to perform the tasks They can see their results compared to the average So there's a dashboard that's present so they can see where they are relative to the average And eventually they will have access to all their own data But as all anonymized as all protected It's on servers in British Columbia, so it's all You know tightly controlled so the anonymity Is assured Jamie you able to find that chart But this go back to the next slide if you could next one Next one that's the thing we're tapping test. Let me just okay. This is the one I want to focus on This is is why there's an author correction The p value of significance here is 0.004 That made this one chance in 250 that this this is a random result This is a published in nature scientific reports one through peer review We didn't see any increase the tap test is how often you can tap your two fingers together In 10 seconds Hmm for those without traumatic brain injury You probably know a number of these people traditionally they do a tap test All timers dementia Parkinson's they do tap tests Unfortunately, there's a steady decline But the tap test has been invalidated and just another article came out this past week saying that Handheld devices are validated Metacly now for patient reports. So this is the chart that blew all of us away Is that the green line is people taking the salmon stack which is slosophy? Cervantes approximately 1 1 1, 10th of a dry ground 500 milligrams of lines made in my cilium and 50 milligrams of flushing niacin those three together Now the non microdozers you can see over 30 days no Significant increase in the tap testing microdozers only with cell sibin the blue line Cell sibin only not statistically significant But those people were taking the stack went from tapping 48 taps in 10 seconds to 68 taps in one month Wow think about that think of your On a computer your guitar player your drummer think about walking to the bathroom and not falling Yeah, think about this this is not subjective This is an affirmation of an improvement in psychomotor performance Now hearing you'll ask me the question again. Yeah athletic upon how does this work? We don't know how it works. We just know that it does work Wow, so we want to extend this out to 90 days We want to see maybe the microdozers with sulfamine blue only maybe that just starts to uptick Maybe it's delayed and then it increases We maybe this this green line with a stem and stack maybe it emulates and softens or maybe it accelerates But I looked us up and for you To do the tap test involves six regions of your brain You look at your fingers You idea ideate and you look at your fingers You start your psychomotor cadence You get a feedback from touching the table And that feeds you back and then you develop a rhythm of rhythm And so we we let people tap test for several days so they go up the learning curve So we don't include them in the first several days And then then people that we like practice But then that we see this result So I think we're onto something really exciting here With that value of p is 0.0 for one chance in 250 It's very hard. I mean you can't say a sufectancy. You can't say a placebo. It's a performance skill That's being demonstrated So Now I chose niacin because sulfamine is a vasoconstrictor niacin's a vasodilator I chose a flushing form a niacin because you tingle And I thought wow if we give the neurogenogenic Neurogenic benefits of sulfamine that's get it to the endpoints of the peripheral nervous system Neuroopathy's often times present themselves at a deadening of the fingertips in the toes So with a vasodilation you get more blood flow to where the neuroopathy's occurring And then lion's main well demonstrated again mushroom references.com you can fill them You know many many references up showing that lion's main mycelium contains these compounds called aeronaseines that rebuilds helps rebuild Myelin on the axons of nerves to enable signal transmission and also stimulates NGFs nerve growth factors for the proliferation and the extension of the neuroids for the cros So I stacked those three together and again I have I'm a co-author in the paper. I had no access to this data In fact, they called me up says we see a signal. We don't believe it We're taking we're not gonna take we're taking the data step back And they attacked it three different ways with separate statistical methods and the data held true and so We know there's an increase in psychomotor performance So there's a lot of musicians now that are very keen on taking the stock Yeah, they're saying they're banjo playing is better Think if you're even playing the guitar or teaching piano all your life You're dependent upon this digital dexterity to be able to have Your acumen and your digital dexterity as you age helps you pass down knowledge to the next generation I mean, this is really exciting We need to disambiguate it. We need a big data set and I'm calling out the Joe Rogan experience listeners Especially you non-motor doses. We need you And then we need everyone to go at least three months At least populate the baseline and check in month one month two and month three We need to see if the state holds up because I was actually surprised I thought soul-sab and microdosing by itself Whatever had greater lift off on the psychomotor performance than we saw I suspect it will have lift off more so and we go in the month two or three But we don't know let the data and the science lead but the fact that we got the signal And again, how does it work? Why does it work? Where does it work? Folks it works Right, right. You get you don't see a force for the trees because you're so conflicted and trying to understand the mechanism of action But let's see it applied to other tests Have you ever seen those tests that they do where they have like an electronic wall and there's lights and the light when it goes off? You're supposed to tap it. Yep, and so there's a bunch of them A lot of boxers use them to use them to heighten their reaction time. We have that on the on the out pulse Oh, oh, flowers flowers Yeah, tap that tap tap tap tap and you have to do it again But the thing about the the one that you have to touch is you have to actually move your body right So you're moving your arms reaching down you're going up And they're all in front of you and you never know which one's gonna light up. This is just the beginning That type of model that you just described To me it would be much more informative than the top test have you seen though? You know that I'm talking about right Jamie see me to find a video they'll see show it to him But I always wondered like why these guys doing that? Is like does that really help fight? Does that help fight performance? I'm not sure I mean I think sometimes like trainers get caught up in technology and they have you doing certain that I think I think your time to probably best spent using technique, but I don't know I mean is there a reason why that would like lights going off would somehow another make you move better See look at these things work I mean what is that doing to your mind that is so beneficial? That person is That's a good form that's a good stuff. I guys on a dose right now He's on the stam it stack. Oh, this goes user feet like this Interesting be faster, but does it actually make you faster? I think it would you know I think to a point you know everybody plopped toes when they practice You know they end up practicing to hitting 90% of the optimum of their performance And then they hit sort of a new baseline It's hard to get above that right. We hit that ceiling. How do you break breakthrough that ceiling? Right this I think is an opportunity to break through that ceiling and It would be really fascinating to see if it could be applied to skills You know sports and athletics martial arts things along those lines like opportunity to break through that ceiling and it would be really fascinating to see if it could be applied to skills You know sports and athletics martial arts things along those lines like it would be interesting to see Archery be interesting to see if if it increases people's abilities There are so many stories of performance enhancement on low doses of solar side and yes You we've all heard them assistant. There's something there. I've experienced it with pool The pool. Yeah, the like the game becomes like 10% easier And see this is why these observational studies are important to medicine Clinical studies are based on early signals and the clinical studies are trying to refine Reduce the variables to see the cause and effect But we only clinical studies already started and it's not all the blue You know, they have to have a good theoretical basis observational studies by tens of thousands of people Create the signals so the data set we have is so big. We're going to try to use AI To say what else is hidden in this data The reason why we thought we went to the tap test is that so many of our Beneficial outcomes or depression anxiety mood. These are all subjective And so when I asked your physician We know what is an object of test. That's not subjective. She said oh we have the tap test You know, so that's why this is a demonstration of something That is happening that is performance related that's outside of subjectivity Expectancy etc. This is performance measurement. That's solid data And now and think about this Joe They're getting this all-side mushrooms in underground market You know, we sell 50% of the lines main products are out on the market. The other people are selling lines main products They're getting a variable amounts of niacin Those are all confounders that would reduce the significance of that data That means that this data could be understated If you standardize everything to a standardized amount So we don't know how to where the how to optimize you how far do you think we are from some sort of illegalization of Silasaben I think within five years. Yeah, I think we'll go from schedule one to schedule three out from the election or schedule two for sure But Silasaben I mean Silasaben why do you think after the election? Because everyone's so worried about margins if you piss off five percent of the people do you lose five percent of the vote Right, no one knows to do the vigorous it makes it look like they're weak on crime or something Yeah, it's something like but see this is the beauty of the Silasaben what I am very encouraged by Is law enforcement? I have met so many law enforcement officers now just let's be real about this If you're law enforcement officer, you have 100 100 arresting counters Are you gonna be perfect for the 100 of them? No, if you're a veteran and you have 100 expeditions Are you gonna be perfect with 100 of them? No, are you through a doctor? Are you gonna be perfect 100 of them? No And you'll make a mistake Everyone has a really bad day Do you want that bad day to define the rest of your life as a skeleton your closet or monkey under back? Well, you do did something that's fundamentally wrong, but you can't talk about it And then you you then act out against other people because you're in turmoil There's so many law enforcement people that have turned tort churches There's one called the define divine assembly church and in Salt Lake City There's another way a church called the Church of Imbrosia and Oakland more than 100,000 people They're cloaking themselves inside these churches for civil rights protection But when they get together with a community of other veterans a law enforcement officers And they can share their grief their sorrows their mistakes and not be condemned for it We lack forgiveness in this society We don't have enough people acknowledging their mistakes without fear of retribution and saying I'm better than that one bad day That's not going to define my life And so what's happening in Canada and the United States to a degree Is law enforcement officers know that other officers are benefiting from this? So they are deprioritizing Soul-sibin decriminalizing it Because they're benefiting from it So these this it's a big thing amongst soldiers It's a big thing amongst soldiers I've met so many many many guys have had very very beneficial experiences I believe humans are generally very good good. They're motivated by goodness But they get hijacked because of a very bad day or sequence about days because Then that becomes an inflammatory pathway Well, sure, there's the stress of the job itself if you're in law enforcement every day you could get shot Every day you might not come home to your family every person you pull over with hinted windows My blow your way before you get to the window. Can you imagine walking up to a car with windows up? Yeah, you know the unknown person And you have one second to two seconds to make a life into that decision I don't want that right now. It's PTSD They're probably already who are racked with anxiety So this is already experienced so many things that most people can never imagine that depression anxiety frustration creates an inflammatory response that depresses the immune system That then can lead to diseases such as cancer vulnerability to viruses You know and the anger issues emanate outwards I'm all of us. I think have been infected affected by fentanyl You know in my county mason county Washington 17 people died in two weeks from fentanyl 17 people a small county The fentanyl crisis is killing some of the best of our youth. It's terrifying. It's terrifying. It's terrifying because it's it's unplanned unprecedented. There's never been a time where so many people are dying of overdoses and this is accidental overdoses from things And this should be the priority of law enforcement. There's a lot of force going to be on the wrong side of history Busting somebody for civil siren With that's going to go on their resume and 10 15 20 years maybe five years from now It'd be like busting somebody for marijuana was legal in so many states. Right. What do you think that the The solution to the fentanyl crisis is is it legalization? Mean this that's a tough one right because Legalization scares people because and and I would agree with this the budget for sure if Hard drugs are illegal more people are going to try them because they're more available They're going to but You will at least be trying the actual drug and not getting like street volume that has fentanyl in it or You know you have criminal syndicates. You know, that's the other part of it They have basically Addiction militias militias of people who are addicts coming to them. They give them money I'm not an expert on drug policy. There are other people that are I would first take the stub that all natural products containing any schedule one substance should be legal Not illegal. So asylum Masculine, you know, you can make the argument for LSD um, I think that You know, that's the first step is All natural products should be legalized Decorimilization if you cannot get legalization And then having decriminalization with therapy. I think If we don't have legal constraints Just like speed limits on the highway Do you really want anyone to drive as fast as they can? We do need limits. We have the throttle list down so Our structures are in place for us to be able to make the best Positive impact with at least amount of harm And that's the quagmire that we're in other countries in the world and a rick dawg. And Andy well can speak on this eloquently As many other people But I want to stay in my lane of mushrooms and I think there's over 200 species of psilocybin mushrooms 162 species in the genus Salasabi And just recently I'm happy to say I have a new species named after my me My college just honored me by naming a new souls. I'm mushrooms. Salasabi stamethci So I have this I have so I'm this a new one that they discovered they discovered in the rainforest in Ecuador It's very rare. Please don't pick it But there's no greater honor to my college. You didn't have a species named after you You never name it after yourself They feel to medicine. You can do that with Parkinson's and Alzheimer's etc But they feel to my college and botany, you know, it's an honor that's bequeathed to you by other sciences So the 162 species all over the world There's been over 5,000 collections of silasabi mushrooms since the 1800s So they are bridges across cultures across centuries I would argue across millennia and any People's living in that ecosystem long enough What's dumpled upon these souls? I have mushrooms especially things like salasabi Cubensis which is a big golden mushroom that's associated with cows. You can't Can't miss it right? You can see salasabi Cubensis folks 200 feet away driving 55 miles an hour You know if you're tuned in you can see them in the fields that are that glaringly obvious. You pull over and pick them I What do you for research for research of course your research? You're actual my college. Yeah There goes one what what is what's your take on Dennis McKenna's experience that he had in the Amazon Where the reality sort of broke down for a couple weeks Dennis is a dear friend of mine. I love that and Terence was a dear was a dear friend of mine. Terence and I were best buddies and I love them both And my brother John died. He was my mentor and Terence dying also was with Terence to the end and As Terence always said Dennis is the real scientist, you know, I'm a psycho-not philosopher, you know The best command of the English language of anyone I've ever met, you know, Terence and Dennis and Terence, you know, I think have made Encorages in their viewpoints of pushing the envelope And this is where it's really important again Where is the forgiveness in people? You don't always have to be right? The fact that you try and you fail you talking about some tenant Terence's Are theories I mean the time wave zero is bullshit. I mean. I'm sorry. I chung was Terence on this He had time wave zero and we played that to people that don't know what we're talking about time wave zero is an algorithm of historic events That steer the course of humanity as best I remember it and Terence invented this But the problem with time wave zero that I pointed out the Terence He said the birth and death of Christ was not a historically significant event as a Terence I know you're not Christian But you can't deny that the birth and death of Christ was not a historically significant event So it was not in time wave zero. Well, he was skeptical of the existence of Christ as an individual But even if a Christ did not exist the event Of that period would have been a significant event the Crusades occurred all this stuff happened Just on the creation of the Christian religion The Christ the Christian a Christian religion was a historically significant event that ramified throughout history So Terence's time wave zero did not recognize that from the best of my understanding I talked to Terence about this lot and then he had the end of time being the death on just birthday Which I'll continue And so but then but for Terence's defense he had the best answer I could ever have thought of because I was saying I'm vilifying and Terence's bullshit bullshit And he goes Paul is an ever-changing algorithm. I'll just keep on adjusting it I thought Okay, it's a good answer It's a good answer But so the algorithm is essentially based on taking historical events You know that that we know of that are fact and putting them into this database And then a string that would then predict other historical events that will occur in the future in the uh net But you couldn't spit you couldn't predict the specific event You would just predict significant events. That's my understanding, but I'm this is this is a big one was December 21st 2012 Yeah, nothing really happened Yeah, did something happen to maybe we're not aware There are many things happening of which we're not aware But is it is it possible that a significant Change in the world happened that we're not aware of Well, I mean you ask me to I mean the world today Yeah, there's one thing if you did go back to 2012 and Looked at the world and then looked at the world in 2024. It's radically different It's pretty fucking wild and if you had to say like what happened? Like historically when we look back at the collapse of Western civilization for say Let's say it all goes sideways and we're going to nuclear war and this and that and The grid goes down. We're back to Stone Age people if anybody survives if you go back to You know that this time if a thousand years from now people look back in this time They'll they'll be looking at a sequence of events like what happened that caused all this What was the was the catalyst was it social media was it the the being? December 21st 2012 was a random number relatively but Just 12 2012 is a significant beginning of the change of society I think social media use. Yes, I would agree I think you had parcels out where every single day as a historical Right of great or less of significance depending upon your point of view chat gbt of course When you look at things like that the ubiquitous use of AI The fact that it seems to be getting far more powerful far quicker than we could predict Yeah, artificial intelligence. I think it's misnamed. I call it digital intelligence. It can be that but it's all ultimately natural intelligence You know we have created artificial intelligence You know we have given birth to this technology It is from our natural intelligence that we have created a subset of Artificial intelligence. Yeah 100 million microbes in a cubic inch of soil You know Eight ten or more miles of my cilium Cross-talking all these organisms a quorum. That's an concept by molecular communication The Infant are not infinite, but the enormous amount of complexity that's under every footstep that we take and we get so Intoxicated by our new invention that we think it's the brightest object in the Christmas tree I think AI is going to be fantastic for medicine. It's going to be fantastic so many things But I don't think AI Will be able to capture Intentionality or generosity Or the emotional indebtedness we have When you find and find somebody who's Out of disadvantage who needs help You reach out your hand in kindness It's not a one-to-one transactional exchange The fact that you joke help somebody else When you didn't need to and there's no obligation circumstance. Otherwise you voluntarily help somebody You've created a reciprocal debt of gratitude that cannot fall into any metric. I believe That person's going to go Joe help me That guy's good. I owe it to myself and to him To pass it forward and that's what I think is also happening I'm going to segue back to Saul's eibn when you look at Saul's eibn a person's in turmoil They're angry. There's a great example here in Here in Austin with a police chief and the police force There's one bad actor And this and other law enforcement officers are very worried this person going to take the department down And he was just should not be in law enforcement. He was angry. He acted out And they encourage him to go to a weekend church And he recognized he had problems. He did a high dose of psilocybin. He came back the next day Over the weekend on Monday and people did not recognize him He fundamentally changed into a new person. He lost his anger issues. He was polite He asked for forgiveness Think about that We don't want to talk about negative things because we're embarrassed and we share the shame of a family member or But when something positive happens, I'm talking to you about it. It's like a pebble in the pond That emanates out echoes of goodness and goodwill. Yes, and that's where I don't think AI is going to be able to Cover and quantify it might try to it might have higher predictive outcomes based on the data sets But I just feel like you know, we need to train AI for our benefit We need to learn from AI But the there are humanity and who we are and our intentionality and friendship and love For each other. I think will always be this super force that governs the universe Well, that's a beautiful sentiment. I think our Our ability to be kind to each other is very important to us. I don't know if it's very important to the Sun I wonder if what we are and the things that are so valuable to us exist because it's sort of motivates us and Pushes us in the direction that we currently find ourselves in where we're in a constant state of technological evolution and In innovation and that this is all this is what motivates us to do these things and I wonder if these life forms that we're creating And I think we are and I think we're probably already we've probably already done it into a certain extent that these don't have All of these same values Because they're not us But they'll also be free of all the things that do cause depression and do cause anger and do cause irrationality and do cause harmful thoughts and feelings and Painful memories and all those things that these are These are remnants of our ancient primate DNA That is necessary to us because we are trapped in it But might not be necessary to whatever this next stage of existence is I could see that but you know families matter. Yeah matters to the families Family do and but they're finite These are experiences that we're having currently and it is important currently. It's important I have not diminishing it But I'm saying if I had to take an overall perspective is this the only way to do it? No, it's not the only way to do it Is our our emotions and our desires and needs the things that have motivated us to get us to this position that we're currently in are those Riddled with side effects like war and murder and and and and theory and all the things that we know that exist in the world That are a part of the human condition if you know if you ask an any rational person today What are the odds? We'll have no war in three years fucking zero? Zero humans have always engaged in war Well What is that why is that what's because of the motivations? They're all the same they're the same motivations that Napoleon have the same motivations other people who are abused with their child have a tendency to become abusers when there are adults I Think that still us. I've been mixed nicer people. I think so more compassionate. Yeah, and I'd like to redefine The benefits in theory of evolution is not the survival of the thittest But the extension of generosity of surplus beyond your own needs to help a neighbor or a friend I think we're talking about different things because I agree with that well wholeheartedly And I think for human beings they're extraordinarily beneficial and they happen for me my concern is that we are We're like homo sapien version one and that this new thing that we become whether we integrate or whether we just die off is Another thing I agree with it. I think we're at the crossroads No crossroads one leads to an extinction path. Yeah, and the other one is sustainable Because ultimately we cannot continue when destroying the bios here and expect it to support us right? Yeah, and just our way of living is kind of unsustainable long-term it's the the the positive hope is that AI and Science itself and technological innovation will mitigate all of the negative side effects that we will concentrate on Using intelligence to clean up the air and clean up the ocean and do all the and sort of fix all the problems that we've personally created But what I wonder is that We are so attached to us to the idea of us with all of our flaws are we any different than Australia, Pythicus if you told Australia, Pythicus hey, buddy in the future Everyone's gonna have a phone in their pocket and no one's gonna need all these muscles and fucking hair all of your face and back This is like you're gonna die off like you're not gonna be you anymore Australia, Pythicus, but I get the fuck out of here. I gotta go gather food get away from me You're an idiot now. I don't want to be you. I want to be me if it with no more Australia, Pythicus is the old we all die off That would suck because that's all you know And I think that homo sapiens are not long you asked very very good questions for which there's very few answers and But I think they are very active asking the questions to stimulate the thought creates the milieu a creativity that will Come up with solutions or some of these issues. I would like to think that we've become an enlightened species I think I would like to think that we get our shit together. Psychedelics is the best potential last hope. Yeah It really is and it's funny that it's the most Undermind it's the most maligned publicly the most dismissed as being nonsense Usually and almost entirely by people who haven't experienced it Yeah, which is really fascinating when you see people that have not had psychedelic experiences dismissed psychedelic experiences That is a wild thing to do like boy You are so silly and you don't even know your silly and your the majority. Yeah, which is wild Yeah, we represent the less than the 1% of those who are psychodelically experienced who understand Many of the studies like a Johns Hopkins. What is what are the numbers? Do we know like publicly? If you have just the United States what percentage of people have had like legitimate breakthrough psychedelic experiences less than 1% That's the way. Yes. How many people who experimented with psychedelics? I think depending on the age group It actually is quite high now, you know, it's up to 10 20% But how do you explain the enoughable? How do you explain something that you cannot put to words? And this is where it's just like oh you people are crazy because you can't articulate it and then every person that I know of have gone through One of these heroic doses come back and say oh my god. I can't even explain it exactly, you know It's like we have a thin sliver of reality right now Joe right? We're looking at you and Jamie We have such a thin sliver and when you're under these experiences the entire universe opens up And you see that my consciousness has been so limited and now I understand that I'm in relationship with everything in the universe and it's also not just a feeling that's this intense visual experience It's a feeling of being yeah for the capital B right and then you feel like oh my mortality That's okay, you know my birth. That's a good part of the continuum I demylicarilize and I reassemble into a different form or my molecules and the atoms reassemble You know, I think this is the continuum of existence Expends the dawn of time to the end of time and and even now beyond I Think that it gives me great solace from in my own life to realize that I'm part of something much larger I want to I'm I want to share you share with you my Billy Graham story. Oh boy I've never mentioned this publicly I've taught over three thousand students in vitro propagation how to grow my cilium edible mushrooms or may mushrooms I did these workshops for a long time and I just one very nice man came in as the young 40s mid 40s he waited to everybody without the room and this is about 1995 1996 and he waited in supply I was sent to your No boy, okay And said I said well who sent you? I'm with a council of 12 With Billy Graham the charismatic Christian leader and he said many of the council of 12 of come to their Christian beliefs through Solace-Hivon Wow, I have come to thank you for all your work for helping us Have a better relationship with Jesus and our religious faith Wow now I was my mother was a charismatic Christian. I grew up in that environment I mean, I was like of course blown away. They care as mad at Christian. They speak in tongues feelings of their there, you know They have their own culture for sure But I've heard this now with Jewish people Islamic people with the Buddhist people It seems that's so aside and it doesn't create a conflict in religions It supports you in your religious beliefs of dedication to what you want and Hope to become as a religious practitioner or follower But it's not doesn't throw the other religions under the bus. It just makes you more dedicated to your purpose to walk with kindness and goodness and Reciprocosity to to be a better person. Do you think that the still sovereign was what the host was made out of? I don't know. I don't know if you heard that speculation. Yes, I have. Yeah, I Think that there's just this is so it's a so rich in history I just came back from Egypt a few months ago And I went to ten pyramids on every pyramid. We found mushroom hieroglyphics every one of them Now I sent this through grandma Hancock some of these hieroglyphs and Egyptologists said no There shovels and Jamie it would be a challenge for you to find this but you And whenever one shovels will be pointed down and it's a perfect example well scientists don't look at Egypt in the context of the ecosystem 4,000 years ago, right and the in Africa the plateau of running rivers to Ticelian and jar plateau has fantastic the beam and Figure that plateau is called the rear the plateau of running rivers. There's no mushrooms growing there. It's a desert Same with a Nile it was the bird basket of the world and The Greeks for the eeluestinian mysteries. You know Caesar was a lover of Cleopatra. Then Mark Anthony 20 years younger Then Caesar became a lover of Cleopatra You would think that these people the highest Astronaut of society would being lovers would share the most intimate Secrets and potions and all of that. I think that happened so We have another two other scientists a Polish just before me that that higher the hieroglyphs on these on these temples are of soul-siving mushrooms So those look like mushrooms That's one of them what these don't look like mushrooms, but there's better ones Okay, now this pause on this one. So I want to give a shout out to Adele Azim He published this in 2016 This is the goddess of Thor the dendura temple if you look this up It gets less than one millimeter of rain a year That's how dry it is Those that's the laws there with these mushroom-like figures coming out and the lower part is The blue lotus a water lily associated with a mushroom now he published this in 2016 I'm not the only one Steven Berlant in 2005 published this in a fantastic individual african-american who died from covid His name was a kendiri And from Detroit he also believed from his african ancestry The africa Egyptians use all-siving mushrooms The laws the next corner you can't you know what they what did they try to say that is you can't say that's a bunch of shovels They know but there's other ones so do what did what is the conventional explanation for what you're looking? They they said they didn't know what it was Now how do they don't know what it is? This is it hiding it's not hiding but it's not hiding they're doing So they're not willing to talk about it. So what did it exactly? This is philosophy conventions on the right now as a cultivator It's not hiding on the planet. But it's not hiding. It's not hiding. So we're not willing to talk about it. So what did it have? Exactly. This is philosophy conventions on the right. Now, as a cultivator, and many of your listeners are cultivators, they know what I'm going to say is true. You can pick up cow paddies with philosophy conventions, put it into a vase, just like that. It collects, you can put water in. It limits evaporation. The mycelium seeks light and air. So it would pop out of these orifices. And that is a taxonomically correct image drawn of philosophy conventions. And down below is the blue water lily. And there's philosophy conventions. Admissions, royal colors, or gold and blue. The blue lily, water lily. The blue lotus is blue. Philosophy conventions of gold and it bruises blueish. And Jamie, if you could humor me with just two more slides, there's the blue lotus. There's another example of the mushrooms associated with the falcon. I mean, there's dozens of these images. Look at that one on the left. That's not so obviously mushrooms. They're not a shovel. No, the shovel will be upside down. It's so obvious. I mean, so it's also like the way the cap is formed. And that the Cuspade cap, the shape of this. And here is a painting on Papyrus, the temple of both Cyrus. It also has very similar. And this next image, I think, is the next image. Now there's a blue wing of philosophy conventions. Again, the next one will just skip the thon. And okay, I was looking for blue juice. I don't know if we have blue juice on there. That one's wild. What is those little figurines? These are mushrooms thons. Some as American mushrooms thons from Guatemala. They persisted for 1500 BCE to 500 AD. A thousand years before the conquistadors came. And they were representative, we think, of a mushroom cult. And they could have been a family like heirlooms. How silly is it that the conventional archaeologists won't acknowledge those mushrooms? Well, we actually have a reward out. And this is great that I'm speaking about it. Is that we have a reward of $1,000 for anyone who can find Slosophy, Convenceus, DNA. In the ruins. And because we can amplify the DNA, we can prove that they're either in the vosos, in the ponds, or near the ponds, and doing core samples. Sort of like they've done with the Elucinian mysteries with Urgot. Well, they ergot, yeah. Do you see the blue juice image? You don't see it. It's a hand with a vessel of blue liquid and two, two images. So more than one thing can be true. When you're looking at the Elucinian mysteries, oh, there we go. So this is something that blue be away. Have you seen Dune II? I have not. I heard it's awesome. Amazing. Frank Herbert was a friend of mine. He wrote Dune. Frank Herbert lived in Port Townsend, Washington. And Frank Herbert came to visit me. And Frank told me he was growing chanterelles. In Christmas trees that were just five years old, I go, that's impossible. I guess how are you doing that? And he goes, well, I take chanterelles, and I put them into a water, and I pour it to the base of the trees, and it comes up. So there is the blue juice. And so if you take slosse to be Cubensis, or at least there's nothing much from this potent, you put it into water, you create blue juice. And this is in Dune II, where they drink it. And so I asked Frank, Frank, the eyes are blue. The Benjesserut are these shamanic women who have this highest standard of cult, is that based on Maria Sabina. I said, and maggots grow through mushrooms. And I said, everything the spice seems like it spores, and you're blue eyes, and this blue juice, and he goes, you're the first person to notice this. Oh wow. He said he was tripping on socials, I've been mushrooms. He was laying on his deck, and he saw worms coming out of the mushrooms that he ate, the souls of mushrooms, and that was the dawn of the idea. Now, this is absolutely true. And Frank Herbert's son, I really want to meet him to tell him this, because he did say something about, I think he had two sons. My memory's foggy on this. But he said, I'm keeping this secret from my sons. I said, why? He goes, well, they're illegal, and they're just at the age right now that I don't want them to tell other people about this. Oh no. So, but it all makes perfect sense. The spices spores, the blue juice, from the blue juice you saw that was made there. It all ties together. And look at that beautiful color. So this is from the Church of Enbrosion. I think David Hodges, and this is a philosophy of events that's on the right, and this is philosophy of Azure essence on the left. And the Solisiben is a pro drug for Solisen, Solisen degrades enzymatically into indigo, the indigo molecule complex. And it's actually reversible, though I don't haven't seen it happen, but theoretically it's reversible. But this is the blue juice. And so, wow, we discovered this. Several people discovered this independently. Well, with the Egyptians discovered it? Yes. You know, with the Mazatex, the Aztecs, the Mayans discovered this? Yes. This is very simple. You put the mushrooms into water, and it eludes into the water the next day. And you end up with this potent blue, Solisiben-packed elixir. And so this also speaks that, you know, I think people all over the world when they are experimenting, they're inspired, and they know this is a sacred substance. How do we preserve it? How do we protect it? Oh, you put honey with it. Well, honey is antibacterial. And in the 1516, the Bavarian Burat banned mushrooms. That's interesting. They banned mushrooms from beer, because mushrooms are being added, along with hen-bain and other plants, to make these narcotic elixirs, and, you know, meats, honey beer. So, you know, don't underestimate the creativity and innovation of any people living long enough in their ecosystem, interacting, experimenting, making mistakes, making successes, billions of years. For thousands of years. Yeah. You know, we should not be intellectually myopic, which I think is another problem with the hubris of science. Well, it's also a problem with this whole drug schedule thing, because when it's schedule one, even talking about it openly, opens you to criticism and ridicule, especially if you've been involved in academia for decades, right? So you started your career and your mindset towards these substances at a time where it was very detrimental to your reputation to be pursuing these things. Absolutely. That's why as much criticism as Timothy Leary and Rob Doscaps and even Andy Weil, they were all incredibly courageous. No one more courageous, however, than Maria Sabina, who opened up the Mass Effect tradition and also Valentina Watson. Our Gordon Watson's wife was a Russian physician who was also a mycologist. The difference and the constemularity and we owe a data-crowditude to Maria Sabina and the Mass Effect and to Valentina Watson, who died in 1958, but she grew up in Russia, she knew how to identify mushrooms. These are not people just in taking salsa mushrooms. They knew how to go out into the fields. And Valentina Watson, she knew the Russian names. They wrote a book, Mushrooms Russian History, was going to be a cookbook, 500 recipes. And it became this great ethnomyological exploration. But these courageous women were not only medicine women, but they were fueled by colicists who could go out into nature and find them. I have a DEA license now, and I pass my background checks. Hey. I guess they have a listen to your podcast. I'm very serious about this. I had one also in the 70s and 80s. And my father at the end of his life asked me to trip with him on Salas Island. I turned him down. I would have to under Smith, who wrote a monograph, then it's a philosophy. The father of American in my college. Well, the greatest in my college is ever who's published many new species of Salas Island mushrooms. In 1979, 78 in Aspen, Colorado, it's actually snow mass. He asked me to trip with him on Salas Island mushrooms. Here's like you're a hero, elder. Say, I trust you. I want a journey. I've read all about it. Will you trip with me? Both of them asked me. I asked their wives the same question. Will you journey with me and with him? And both of their wives said no. And I said, I can't. I can't have this experience with you. And both cases I was leaving the next day. What would I, I'm at, I band in them where they have this life change experience. They have all these questions, and they're not there to talk through it. And so I adopted the policy. And I'm very strict about this. Nature provides I don't. I mean, I am very strict. I don't feel as ethical for me to give a Salas Island mushroom to somebody else. I'm not a therapist. I'm not a psychiatrist. I have my own deep personal religious freedoms. And I do believe that these are sacraments and they are part of my own personal religion. I'll stand on that. I've published on that. I believe in that. But I have no right to give it to somebody else. And I think this is really important that we need to be adults about this. These are very potent medicines. And the rituals of the habitats and the Aztecs and the Mayans and so many first people and there's people, they had the structures set up. They're honed over the centuries to how to properly administer these sacraments. We, many of us from European descent or orphans were spiritual orphans that cast from our religions, our religious roots, from my Germanic roots. I name my son, Azurus. He's probably gonna listen to this. Hi, Az. I'm Miss Latin, a masculine singular for Sky Blue. And I named a species called Salasabi Azurusans because it turns blue and also from my son. And when I named my son, Azurus, my family gave me a tremendous criticism. How could you give this kid this name? And then when it's five years old, we're at our my grandmother's house and we're going through our family history and our coat of arms from the house of Azur. Oh, wow. And then we're from the house of GILFORD and within the house of GILFORD and the subhouse of Azur. And I looked it up and we're 30 miles from my family's roots of 30 miles from Stonehenge. So September 22nd, the Druids have invited me to be in the center of Stonehenge for a ceremony. They are rediscovering and they maintain the useless side mushrooms throughout history. It's called reindititization with the Egyptians, alchemists that I recently met. They know their ancestors. They believe it spiritually. They use the less side mushrooms and combination of the blue lotus. It's called reindititization, rediscovering your ancient roots of your practices. What is the psychoactive compound of the blue lotus? Very complex. A blue lotus is amazing. I've only been recently introduced to it. I've had some elictorous made of it. It wakens up your receptors. It gets you this hyper state of consciousness. It's not speedy. It's common an alertness phenomenon. And so does it come with heightened circular respiratory? I know the pharmacology other people can speak of because I'm, again, on stage in my lane of mycology. Do you notice the elevated heart rate? No. No, but they have shortness of breath. Nothing like that. Nothing like a stimulant. No, I experienced super alertness. That's what I would say. It was like I was super sensitive. So they're combining now these Egyptian alchemists I met. Slospy Kibensis, golden mushroom, bruises blue. With the blue lotus, the blue lotus opened the daytime closes at night, birth and death. And now the with the druids, I say they've always used slospy mushrooms. And so there's in so many other people's now are reindigenous. You were going on about the what the blue lotus does, though? The blue lotus in combination with slospy Kibensis looks like it's in the lickser that was practiced for a very long time as evidence by the hieroglyphs that we just saw. And what is in the blue lotus? Like what is the actual compound? I cannot tell you. Really. Yeah. Interesting. OK, today the blue lotus flowers were used primarily as a sleep bait and anxiety reliever. However, at higher doses achieved by inhalation, users could experience euphoria and hallucinations. The psychoactive effects of the flower are attributed to two. A, how do you say that? A porphyne. A porphyne alkaloids. A, bomorphine and nuciferine. Interesting. Oh, it's good for a lactolysis function. Yeah. May help muscle control in those with conditions such as Parkinson's disease and erectile dysfunction. Dilpamine agonist. That's interesting. So much like some of the dopamine agonists that have weird psycho side effects, there's like pharmaceutical drop dopamine agonists like, excellent Jamie. Poi. Reequip, do you know what that is? No. It's a crazy case where a guy won a lawsuit against galaxo's myth client because he was on a dopamine agonist and turned him into a gay sex and gambling addict. He was a heterosexual man who had Parkinson's, had wife and kids, and he could not stop like picking guys up and random like chance encounters and he got raped. He lost all of his money. He like gambled his entire life savings away. He was hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt and got off the medication and the symptoms all went away. And he realized that it was this dopamine agonist that he actually won in court and not a lot of money. Not a lot of money. That cause and effect sounds very complicated. Yeah. The dopamine agonist thing, if you Google pharmaceutical dopamine agonist side effects, they're pretty well documented. And one of them seems to be a lowering of inhibitions or a lack of control of inhibitions, which would lead to like they think gambling problems. Just people just can't put it all on black. Let's go spend that real that they just go crazy. And they just want to gamble, which is very strange. Well, that seems like creating an abcessal compulsive disorder. So something along those lines, but also like this guy was saying that he was completely heterosexual until he started taking these dopamine agonists and then he wanted to have a lot of like random dangerous gay sex. I've been immersed into a group of psychiatrists. And my heart goes out to him because it's such fuzzy science. It's just so complex. And you know, you become a medical doctor first and you go on for two to four years, become a psychiatrist. And it just seems like it's really, it's really shows that the psychiatry is still at the infancy of its science. Well, there's so many things, I guess I so rise and now showing it's not a chemical imbalance. That's what the whole basis of it was about. What are the dopamine agonist known side effects? Because some of them are pretty crazy. Nausea vomiting, orthostatic, hypotension, headache, dizziness, and cardiac arrhythmia among the most common side effects of dopamine agonists. These adverse effects are mostly dosage dependent. It's highly recommended to start these medications at low doses to reduce the risk of orthostatic hypotension. Delirium, hallucination, seizure, coma. But some people have their Google re-equip lawsuit. It's like re-quip lawsuit. Parkinson's patient wins lawsuit over gay sex addiction. Look at this. So I think this was in the UK. You're clicking one of those? OK, Pfizer settles lawsuit. Tying sex and gambling addiction to dopamine meds. So this was Pfizer. This is a different one. This is a different lawsuit. There's more than one lawsuit. The confidential settlement with 172 patients said to be for millions of dollars was approved by the judge in federal court in Australia. Financial review reports, although the payments were delayed until they were assessed by independent review Pfizer. Side effects of the drugs, they were taking to treat Parkinson's disease or restless leg syndrome. Yeah. And so gay sex and gamble, causing them to gamble away their life savings or become obsessed with shopping or sex. And so it seems like an impulse control. Sounds like lots of egos to me. It's very good to imagine they could sell that in Vegas. The curtain at least 10% of the patients but said they probably were under-reported due to patients where ashamed to talk about what they had done. Wow. Interesting. So the one, OK, re-equip. OK. FDA should require a black box warning on labels of dope-beamed agonist, a class that includes re-equip from Glaxo Smith-Kline, UCB's new pro, and Miraplex from Bollinger, Ingleheim. The German company was sued by a New York man some years back because they had taken the drugs. I turned him into a pathological gamble, gambler, who ruined him as he gambled away $3 million. Wild. Yeah. I would be just a word of caution. When you had line articles like this, there was probably a lot more behind the story that I'm showing the covers. Well, there's also probably a lot more, if you're talking about the difference between the blue-loadest flower, some naturally occurring substance, it probably also has a bunch of other things in with it as well. It's sort of like when they had marinall, remember when they tried to do a synthetic THC and give it to be with those terrible, because they didn't want people smoking pot? Because there's a lot of things that come with it. It's not just the individual compound, right? It's like all the things inside of it, especially when it comes to cannabis. The other cannabinoids that works synergistically with THC. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I think where the extraordinary time of reevaluation, I hope that we have greater respect for diverse points of view. I think a lot of these observational studies and patient reporting should steer medicine. I think the observational studies in general populate databases for scientists to be able to look at, looking for signal. I think AI will be fantastic. Yeah, I was just happy to get to that. Loose it, eating signals that we can't possibly see. So I think there is a convergence of psychedelic science and artificial intelligence. But I hopefully got guided by a very high ethical standard where we are always trying to steer the course in a way that is judicious and does not get away from us. And that's the biggest concern about AI that I have. That's why we have to give solar science to everybody involved in AI. We have to give solar science to AI. There's no no how to do it. Yeah. That could be programmed in. I don't know. Compassion, psychedelic experiences, feeling of connectedness. What if the AI automatically knows all these things? Because it's already achieved some sort of state of enlightenment just by virtue of not being attached to all the things that hold us back. You, Bruce, ego. All the things that ruin humanity, maybe it will automatically be enlightened. Because it will be connected to those things. But is AI singularity in and of itself? It's a diversified singularities that are converging to a single concept eventually as time rolls out. Well, that might be a part of what psychedelic plays in all of this. That might be our parachute. That might be the one thing that can help us make our way through this and keep some semblance of sanity. I just think that the advantage of SoulSaw then is anyone who can grow it in their own home. It's democratizes psychedelics. It's easy to do, it ties you back with nature. I'm a libertarian and that the government has no business when I would be crossing my threshold of my door. What I do with my family, when I do with my home, et cetera. Especially when it comes to something that's not harming anyone. Right. And especially to something that the LD50 is so high, you'd have to have pounds and pounds of it to get sick and die. I think it's 38 pounds. Yeah, that's not enough. It's you'd die from dehydration of absorbing the mushrooms. So you literally wouldn't be able to do it. You wouldn't be able to eat enough to kill you. And I think this speaks to the freedom of consciousness. It's a basic human civil right. We should all have a civil right for our own, our rights are our own consciousness. We also have to look at it in terms of the rights of individuals. Like an individual does not have the right to tell you what you can and can't do that's not going to harm someone else. It's just wrong. It's wrong, fundamentally, for a person to have that kind of power over another person, someone doing something in the privacy of their own home where it's not harming other people. And it's not even dangerous to themselves. Maybe psychoactively dangerous. I mean, maybe someone who's very vulnerable, maybe someone that gets a friend of you, maybe someone who is already psychologically impaired. Maybe yes, then. But the only way we find out about that is through studies. The only way to do that is to legalize it. The only way to do that is to change the way people think about it. And I think what you spoke about with police officers, my experience with soldiers, with veterans that have had very positive and beneficial experiences, and even people that are near death, they're in hospice care that have had very powerful. Like, well, there's a great organization called Roots to Thrive is a Canadian nonprofit. They've taken I think 60 patients end of life anxiety, most of them stage four diagnoses a few months to live. They have eight caregivers, eight patients. They meet on Zoom. They get together. They prepare for this. They do high doses of Salas Island with a Canadian government approval. Hider First Nations Health Care Facility. And a number of great people are involved with Roots to Thrive, a highly recommend them. And it makes me want to cheer up. Is that in one of the sessions, one of the first sessions, there are eight patients they get together and they prepare. And they lay down in this common room. And when you do a high dose of Salas Island, as you know, it affects them on pretty quickly, 10 to 20 minutes. But an hour or the two hours in, you're peaking. And just as they were peaking, the first nation elders on the other side of the wall started drumming. And everybody started crying. Because they knew that they knew how important that was. And to have First Nations support with people who are dying. And the majority of those people come out of the experience, not fearing fear and death. And they become counselors to our families, saying, it's OK, I'm dying. And they change the whole relationship with leaving. And interestingly, I just heard this number recently of the 58 or 60 people, only four of them have died. And they all had terminal illnesses going back over three years now. So you think about, wow, mind over matter. If you don't have this anguish, this inflammatory pathway, you now optimize them about life and you're meaning you're a caregiver, you have purpose, then isn't your immune system up regulated? It has to be. We know that emotionally depressed people do have a depressed immune system. Well, people who have found a good lease on life and purpose, it would augment their innate immunity. I've always wondered about that with COVID as well. The people that were terrified of COVID and once they got COVID, they were just overwhelmed with anxiety and fear. And all that does is crush your immune system. And all the fear that was being propagated by the media, this constant death bell that was rang all over the media. Just scared the shit out of people. And it probably weakened a lot of people's immune system and probably cost a lot of lives. There's no doubt about it. I think basically spreading widespread panic, increasing anxiety, depressive immune system. Yeah, there's a lot of factors. There's companionship, love, friendship, happiness in your life, physical activity. There's only different mitigating factors that can alleviate some of your anxiety. And if you don't have those, all those things are going to compound. And it is a cascading effect. Well, that's why, again, I see life and death, life and disease. Health and disease has been a multifactorial equation. How many coefficient variables can you get on this side of the equation that on this side of the equation results in a better life, a healthier life, a better attitude? I think psychedelics in a particular syllabus I've been is a very major coefficient variable that can help tilt the balance. And moreover, it's just not a linear equation. It becomes a matrix of implications to everybody else around you and your community, your family, your community, the city, the nation, the world. It's that we need soil-aside now for societal benefit more so than we have ever needed. And as time has come. And so I applaud all the researchers who have struck out and my discussions with law enforcement is really interesting. They want to put their energy work. They can have the most positive impact to protect the health of society. And fentanyl syndicates are a high priority. Individual use of soil-aside and does not. And that's how it should be. I mean, we should really grow up about this stuff. And if there was a widespread legalization, at the very least, you could develop centers where people could safely take it. And they would be treated by counselors and you'd be people who experienced travelers that are registered and know how to deal with people and handle people. And we could do it in a modern shamanic setting. That can be done. The not that I love lawyers, but one of the best lawyer strategies I've ever seen in my life is the decriminalization of soil-aside and psychedelics to the lowest priority of law enforcement. So it is a violation of the officer's duty, or their oath, to use public funds to prosecuting people for psychedelics. So it is at the level of jaywalking. And it's basically it's the lowest priority of law enforcement, which means that a law enforcement officer tries to bring a case forward. It is malpractice of their ethical duty to perform their job, to waste the court and the public's money focusing on psychedelic. How does it should be? How does it should be? That's just one step, right? It should be legal. We should get an understanding of it and how many people could benefit. I think decriminalization is the lowest hanging fruit and this long walk towards legalization. Decriminalization, I think, is I think it should be legal. I mean, I want to make sure everyone knows that. But I think from a practical point of view, lowering the penalties and reducing it as the lowest priority of law enforcement. What did you think about California's decision to not legalize it or not decriminalize it and allow it for, they wanted to allow it for therapeutic use, but they wanted to set thresholds first. And they said no thresholds were established, to know protocol or program was established. And if they would reconsider if that was done. Well, right now my understanding is that the council physicians have blocked all research on civil society and psychedelics in California, the total blockade. They will not allow any research. There's a governing board for schedule one substances in California, which most states don't have. And that governing board is a stop go board for progress of research on schedule ones. And they have dictated, essentially, no research on psychedelics in the county. Is that a finding issue? research on schedule ones. They have dictated essentially no research on psychedelics in is that a finding issue? No, I think it's a political science issue. You get a physicians or other people who are not experienced with these substances making decisions about these substances ill-informed decisions from inexperienced people for the most part. And so they have a distorted perception of what these things do and they don't feel that there's any value in studies. It's like somebody who's never flown an airplane who then thinks they know how to fly a flying airplane telling you giving you advice on how and why you should not fly an airplane because they're just inexperienced or out of their out of their kind of experiences. Okay. So that's not good especially for progressive state or supposedly progressive state. Well the initiative, the public balance initiative, is 70, 80 percent in Canada recently a survey 80 percent of the citizens of Canada want psychedelics approved for therapeutic use and decriminalized 80 percent. So when states that have ballots, this is how these big changes are occurring. And then citizens, paid with public funds, public officers, public employees, then have to follow the will of the people. And so I think the ballot initiatives is gets politicians out of the hot seat. They have to say, oh, we have to follow the will of the people. I did not stick my neck out on that. It's the ballot initiatives that people have spoke. So I think there's people's revolution movement. So I think this is a revolution for the freedom of consciousness, the ground swelling. That's occurring not United States and Canada but all over the world. It's so desperately needed. Well said. Paul's damage, you're the fucking man. I appreciate you very much. Thank you very much for being here. It's always a pleasure to talk to you. Your company that you sell these wonderful mushrooms at is called hostdefense. It's funguide.com. You get that. And thank you for everything you do, my friend. I really, really appreciate it. I want to thank you, Joe. And I want to thank you for having this opportunity. And when I thank all the JRE listeners for contributing to these observational studies because you can help inform scientists to make good decisions and create validated studies that help lead the medical science community forward. We need all of you, you know. So here here, get out of freaks. All right. Thank you. Thank you. Bye everybody.