The Jerogan experience. And it's not just China. And this is the theory about the thing about the lab leak. And why I actually want to decultry. You had Josh Rogan on him. He did some excellent trial. It's really good. That guy's amazing. What he expertly shows is if this is true, the lab leak hypothesis is true. Yes, the Chinese covered up. Guess what? The Chinese are liars and they covered up sars and they've covered up basically everything that's come out of their country for the last 30 years. That's not a shocker. The shocker is Dr. Anthony Fauci 2017 reverses the ban on gain of function research. directs this funding to eco-health alliance, Dr. Peter Dazzak, who then gives it to the Wuhan Institute of Virology for the study of novel bat coronaviruses. And then when the pandemic turns around, we take Dr. Peter Dazzak as the only American to join the World Health Organization's investigations into weather coronavirus leak from a lab. And on 60 minutes, I forget who it was interviewing him. She goes, well wait. So how did you verify it? Did you just ask them? And he goes, well what else can we do? Because he's also half British. And that's why he goes, well what else can we do? Oh, we could read emails. We could also see that deep Peter Dazzak as of two days ago has been caught lying. He said there were no live bats inside of the Wuhan Institute of Virology. Sky News, Australia just revealed 2017 video that bats were present inside the Wuhan Institute of Virology and the deputy director says before this, China had no experience in BSL for labored. That's the highest level safety for a laboratory. But we have been here and I don't forget, I don't want to misquote him, but he said something along the lines of creating new viruses, synthesizing new viruses. And with Fauci and Dr. She, who's the head of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, they're playing fucking games. Fauci and Rand Paul, when Rand Paul was pressing him, he was like, we did not fund gain of function research. He's trying to define it as explicitly what is on the record as him funding. Dr. She is the same thing. We were not doing gain of function research. So this is actually, this is actually, this is amazing. I don't know if you caught. She did an email interview with the New York Times, which was mostly, I mean, it was just you know, the standard like state party line from China. But they asked her about gain of function research. And I'm sure your listeners mostly know that gain of function research is basically modifying these to see what, how can we make these pathogens more dangerous, right? And it's very, it's in and of itself very dangerous because these things do leak from labs. Relatively routinely. And she says, we were not doing gain of function research because what we were doing wasn't making it more virulent or dangerous. It was seeing if it could jump from species to species. I'm sorry. Isn't that like the definition of making it more dangerous for us seeing if you can make it jump into our species? Like that seems like that's pretty dangerous. So generally these gain, it's not technically gain of function. How does Fauci get away with standing there under oath and saying media, right? It's all media pressure, which is he's the God. It's the, it's the anti Trump derangements syndrome, right? Fauci was put up as like the anti Trump guy and he became this liberal icon. I mean, there are these signs in Washington, DC of people's yards. I don't know if you have them here, but it's literally his face on a sign and like, thank you, Dr. Fauci. This is what we're doing. That's what we're doing. We're doing a whole terrible. You're a worship, right? And again, no one is above reproach. Every human being is flawed and especially when you're in that kind of position of power and you have certain incentives, like you have to ask questions about these things, but there was another element too. And this was frankly in an ingenious play by the media and the scientific community is not only was it, oh, Trump and his band of wackos are the ones that are promoting this theory, but also this theory is somehow racist. And the moment that the lab leak theory was pegged as racist, that's when it really became toxic for anyone in the mainstream to ask questions about because you don't want to be pegged as like, oh, well, you're just pursuing this racist conspiracy theory. And my thought has always been from the beginning. Like, first of all, we just need the answer, like, neutrally to look at what actually happened here. But second of all, if we're playing them, which is more racist game, it seemed way worse to me when people were like, oh, Chinese people eat bats and then disgusting and they're so weird. And that's how we all got this pandemic. That seemed to me way more problematic than the idea that a lab that, by the way, the USA is funding that something leaked accidentally from that lab. So that was really the thing that put this all off the table was this strategic weaponization of, you know, what is a very real problem of alleging racism. It's the scientific community teamed up with them. Well, basically they got the luckiest fucking break of their lives at Trump was president because they teamed up with them. And they made it so that it was racist to question even recently, then lead New York Times reporter on COVID tweeted and then deleted. Are we ever going, was on day we will acknowledge the racist origins of the lab leak theory. New York Times reporter who was in charge of COVID. This is still in their, in their brains. They have brain worms because of Trump and I was telling Crystal because of Trump, 35% of this popular, you could have smoking gun proof. They're lab leak theory was true. 35% of the population hardcore Democrats who watch MSNBC, they'll never believe it. They'll always say that it's racist. And here's the problem, which this is the same problem with all Trump stuff. If this is true, we should be having a national conversation around gain of function research. We should have a Wuhan commission around gain of function research. Instead, they want to do a January 6th commission in order to reconstruct the events of a day where we all fucking know what happened. Okay, it's over. We know I'm not saying it wasn't terrible, but that is not what the driving, what is it? It's June 15th. Why are we still talking about, about January 6th? We should be talking right now. Did US government funds explicitly directed towards it? Novel coronavirus research was led to the worst pandemic in a century and cost the global economy trillions of dollars. And as Josh is the first one to point out, the response from the scientific community has been we need more gain of function research, $1.2 billion to the global viral project. And so once again, the scientific community wanted all of this covered up. They teamed up with the media to protect their funding resources because what people forget, Fauci is actually the king of funding, the national Institute of Infectious Disease. I believe that's NIAD, that's what he's in charge of. They are the primary funding authority for huge amounts of the scientific community. We had Dr. Brett Weinstein on our show and he was explaining this to us, which is that if you're inside of that research system, you need access to those dollars to keep your lab afloat. Like my dad is a professor at Texas A&M. And so I know a little bit about funding and like the way that you keep your tenure positions and a lot of these universities is you have to like continually bring funding in. So both my parents are professors there. And so like a lot of the professorial game is getting money from granting institutions. Now in the science community, it's from the National Science Foundation, it's from the National Institute or whatever Fauci is ahead of the National Institute of Health. They have to keep the dollars flowing. So if you admit this is gain of function research, you start asking questions. NIAD's in Fauci can fucking cut you off. Like this is a whole business. It's a multi billion dollar, I mean it's an industry because it's about research. And look, the core theme of our show is like follow the money, right? So follow the money, where's the money lead? At least Fauci, Peter Dazzack. And it's like, look, I don't sound crazy, but this is basically like a global conspiracy in terms of the Chinese government. It's a total cover up of the Chinese government, the US government, the guy who was on the fucking TV and we were all supposed to trust this entire time. And it turns out like he's the guy who reversed the ban in the first place in order to take advantage of the chaos under Trump. And I know it's so complicated. Regular people, this is what bothers me most about the mainstream media. People want to live their lives and they want answers. And increasingly they know they are being lied to, but they do not have the time. Chris, it's our job in order to explain all this about Peter Dazzack and the World Health Organization, what is gain of function research, how Washington actually works, the global funding structures, et cetera. People are being lied to. They have been completely lied to on the story. I think I do think this is the biggest failure since Iraq, WMD. I think this is WMD 2.0. Catch new episodes of the Joe Rogan experience for free only on Spotify. Watch back catalog JRE videos on Spotify, including clips easily seamlessly switch between video and audio experience on Spotify. You can listen to the JRE in the background while using other apps and can download episodes to save on data costs all for free. Spotify is absolutely free. You don't have to have a premium account to watch new JRE episodes. You just need to search for the JRE on your Spotify app. Go to Spotify now to get this full episode of the Joe Rogan experience.