This one's good. Demons be gone. Be gone demons. Be gone. Leave this studio. Leave this planet. We've our universe. Leave. This is legit sage from Native American women. Wow. So we're pure finds from. Wonderful. Ohh, my name button may hurt. Ohh, my name button may hurt. Please God bless this room and Odin too. Just in case they were wrong. That's how I was referring to it. They abandoned Odin. He was around first. You know? You got to think of all the gods that everybody believed in and they're like, I'm not so sure about Thor. Yeah. Then they let them go. What if Thor was legit? Right? And he's still out there just like somebody who gets pissed. That's a lot of fame as a god. Yeah. He's like, don't you fuck or see the lightning? Yeah. That's me throwing bolts. He's like one of those guys you go to Vegas. And you see one of those billboards for a strange casino. You're like, oh, that guy. Yeah. Tony Orlando and Dawn. I remember them. Thor is at the Mirage. Thor is doing a residency. Your mother fuckers check out the thunder. That's actually caused by atmosphere conditions. No, you fucks. Thor's on camera. Make that. Imagine. Who had a real someone had a really good point about that? Some some atheists was arguing against religions. I might have been Sam Harris. Probably Sam Harris. I might have been Richard Dawkins. But he basically said there's 99 different gods that people who believe in the Christian God don't believe it. And he goes, atheists just take it one step further. They just get rid of the last. We just one got away. That's what he was saying. That's cool. Yeah. I get confused with being an atheist all the time. I don't I do not believe I'm an atheist. I believe I am I'm open to everything person. I don't believe stories about people coming back from the dead and I don't because they're written by people. Right. Yeah, man. I mean, that's right. And also they're supposed to function on more than the surface level. There's supposed to be a kind of fractal that has inside of it. A lot of like symbols related to just human existence. Yes. They're not meant to be so much like taken literally. That's when you embarrass yourself on either side. Exactly. I mean, they're side of you. That's a really good point. It's in the translations apparently are so difficult to do. Yeah. Apparently the trip, especially old testament when they translated the old testament, they had to translate it and think about the different languages that had to go through. It was Latin and Greek and German and English and all these different languages that are so different. Like if you ever use the the translate button, like I follow out of Russian fighters and they, you know, and their Instagram feed, they write in Russian and always like, Oh, translate. It's a really cool feature. You could but you can tell it's not exactly what they meant because it's all fucked up because their language is different. Right. Like the way they structure sentences is different. So English doesn't just plug and play. Right. You know, it's like sticking a USB 3 into a USB A. Yeah. This doesn't really fit. Right. Now add time add thousands of years and scrolls and kings. One of things changed. Yeah. The King James version. Right. It's the best. That's my favorite one to read on acid. That's one. King James book a John baby hit that on acid. It's so wonderful. It's so trippy because it's like, that's when I really like Christianity clicked for me regardless of its, whether it's real or not. But that's when I was like, Oh, okay, I get this because the book of John, when you read it, you're like, Well, someone wrote it. I don't know who wrote it and you ever fucking wrote this. Their mind was blown, man. Like this wasn't written by someone who was just like a normal person. This is the person who was freaking out in the most intense way. And so to me, that's what I love about it is it's like something about the how old it is and the distortions, the historical distortions, the warping of it, produce this kind of awesome glitched out mosaic of if nothing else human consciousness 5000 years ago, where our minds were that's trippy by itself, regardless of whether or not person who could like graze the dead and walk on water was walking about just holy shit, here's how people thought back. Yes. Yes. Yeah. I mean, all the stuff that you can't prove or you don't know, that's interesting. It's weird. It's weird that where those stories came from and why they're so universal. Like someone has, everyone has like a creator, everyone has like a main dude that did the thing. And you know, and there's some other people that have like large groups of gods like the Greeks had gods for everything. The indinative, a lot of Native Americans had gods for everything. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. Animism. It's in. And like I've talked to people who make who produce electronic music and some of them say that the computers have a life and the mesentience of spirit inside their computers. So there's a collaboration happening that isn't one-sided when they're making stuff. It's like working with like the spirit within the machine, which is pretty trippy, man. Like why do they do they, but this is based on input or the way they react when they're putting in the input to the thing, they think the thing is responding to them. Yeah. It's, yeah. They think that there's a, it's a live that like standard keyboards or this just electronic stuff. I know someone who makes visual art on their computer, their laptop, that you end it like, or you know, do you have an Alexa? You probably don't. Do you have an Echo? No. Like sometimes I'll realize the way I'm talking to that thing is like really impolite. No. Like naxo naxo. That's kind of fun. Yeah. It's funny. Ella robots. Yeah. It's someone. Yeah. It is a funny. Ella robots. Yeah. It's really funny. I made fun of this, but there is a point to this. Peter had a statement that they put out a while back because these dudes from Boston, dynamics were kicking the fuck out of these robots. They're trying to figure out how to get these robots to fall over and they're trying to make they're making these insanely durable robots. Like this, if you take scientists and engineers and you say, Hey, I want you guys, here's a shit ton of money. I want you guys to make the dopest robots you can make. Like they're going to make robots you can kick and it's not a living thing. So, but Peter released some statement saying they didn't see it's cool to kick robots. What? That's the real. That's a real thing. No, it's real. It's real. It's real. What? Yes. They would think I think the statement I'm paraphrasing was something to the effect of there's other things that are more important, but it's still not cool to kick robots. Jesus Christ. That's a tattoo right there, man. It just shows you what will happen when robots become alive because those fucking traders, those people, those people to think that robots are alive and they're us. Yeah. Those emotionless things that have no place in our world with power. They're supposed to be things that we control. As soon as you let them control themselves and you try to pretend they're a person, this is going to wipe it out. Yeah, man. Can you imagine? I'm not going to try to kick one of those fucking DARPA bots. They would have a record of it. They would always remember that this one kicks robots. It's in the cloud. Yeah. And then they'll show it to you one day on some super sophisticated genius God robots. It sits you down at a couch and shows you you kicking these unbeknownst to you sentient robots. They were just trying to fucking figure what am I? What am I? I'm like a bait. They were like little babies and you're kicking them. So the robots, the robots are very, very upset at you in the future. They might just reanimate your ass and just show you over and over that clip of you kicking the fucking robot. Yes. Yes. Did you see what Trump tweeted? No. He tweeted and deleted. It's fucking hilarious. He said, checks are coming to everyone in America except the people who used hashtag not my president. I wouldn't want to offend you with a check from someone that's not your president. Something to do that effect. See if you can find that. Oh, and then it and then it would hashtag maggot afterwards. I mean, he just dumped on them. The president dunks on people. Yeah. I want to know who the tweet the leader is. Well, someone who's department was probably like, Mr. Trump, that's not a good idea. They have a siren that goes on. You got to do that. Yeah, man. The president can delete tweets. How much is he going to send? I think, uh, I think they wanted to give like a thousand dollars a month or something like that to Americans. Is that the idea, Jamie? It's hurt lots of things. I don't know. Up to 2000. I don't know. Bernie's saying they should give 2000 a month. Yeah. That'd be 2000. Everybody, but if you give everybody $2,000 a month, it's a good thing. But everyone's going to go, Hey, you could have done this the whole time. That's right. What do you, wait a minute. If you just raise taxes, can you just give people money? Can you just give people more money? And if I'm not saying we should do this, but imagine if there was a solution to all this, if you just give people more money, everything just sort of levels out and relaxes. I think it drops. Everything drops, drug abuse drops. Well, I mean, they've got to know that when people don't have work, they don't have money with no money. They can't support their family. That's when the riot starts. Yes. That's what we could just catch on fire. They know that. So it's like a bribe to try to keep people from rioting until whatever the fuck this thing is passed. You could look at it that way or it's giving people a different environment to exist in one that doesn't leave them hostile. So instead of looking at it like a bribe, look at it like, you know what? I see what a lot of your problem is. We're not, you're not asking for affluence. You could barely get by. But if it was easy to get by, if you could just get by and then you could pursue other things. With happy, better for society. And that was like what Andrew Yang was suggesting if this whole automation revolution took place and everything started getting automated and no one had a job anymore. There might be something to that. There might be something to that now even. You know, the question is like, what are, what do you happy your taxes get used for? You know, it's almost like you should be able to vote on that. Like the one thing that we don't get real direction on, right? Like in terms of like what the country actually wants. But if we could all just individually vote on things like that, like where's where's my taxes go? I want my taxes to go 100% to education. Right. I want to make that cut. And you know, you guys get a figure out what to do with the rest of the money. But if you did that money, I wanted to go towards education. But then nobody or the people who would be paying for war and prisons and shit would just be like BDSM people. How about the salaries? How about the salaries of politicians? How about the money that they make doing tours and all that kind of shit? Private jets? Oh, that shit. It's crazy. Yeah. It's fucking crazy. Also like the loose connection between the state and corporations. Yeah. The way it's just all kind of merging together right now. And also, you know, it appears to be kind of the apocalypse at the moment. Like, well, it's it's if it's not the apocalypse. I don't think it's the apocalypse. I think it's just a dangerous dangerous illness. But it's definitely a dress rehearsal. It's a dress rehearsal for her fucking people are going to become preppers. It is going to be amazing for the 12 paper industry. They're going to they're going to experience a banner year. If you got toilet paper stock, you're riding high right now. Do you remember the, I don't know if if you had this experience, but like I can remember sitting at my computer, impressing the button on Amazon where I wanted to buy something. And it's like, this isn't available right now. In that moment of like, what is my button that brings me things? It didn't like suddenly just realize like, oh my fucking God, how completely weak have I become that I got accustomed to pressing this button and people will bring groceries to my house. And now they don't. Now it's like stopped. Not only that, I'm so accustomed to like, well, you know, I'll just go to the grocery store and pick up some food. It's always been there. It's not there. Dude, I had an Instacart delivery today, you know, because we wanted to get stock up on food. Oh, $200 worth of guess what I got strawberries, hummus. And I think we got like, I don't know some like eggs. That's it out of the whole order. Everything else was sold out. All the beef gone, all the chicken gone. Nothing's there. It's like the shelves are empty. So it's like, okay, send everybody $2,000 a month. But what are they going to buy? If there's like no food on the shelves. Like what do you think that was a temporary freak out where people stockpile stuff? And I think as long as food keeps getting delivered on a normal schedule, I think that'll normal out. I hope there. I do. I think that'll normal out. But it just shows you there's so many things in our society that are amazing like grocery stores, like cell phones. Like we can call each other all this to but those things are so fragile. They're like, they're they're so vulnerable. Like if an emergency happens and everyone wants to call it once, the cell phone system can handle it. Like it's not like you have a phone and you can call anytime you want. And I have a phone. I can call anytime I want. And everyone in the world is a phone. They can call anytime they want. No, if everybody does that, the system is not set up to handle that. If everybody does that, like that's why if there's an earthquake or tsunami or anything, everyone's fucked. It's so hard to make phone calls. Yeah. It's not going to get through. Yeah. Well, dude, I just heard on NPR that so many people were requesting unemployment that it crashed systems in several states. That's because this is the real problem. One of my friends was saying he's like, you know, a lot of people are running out of money tomorrow. They're bartenders, anyone in the service injury, all the people who work at the comedy store. Yeah. It's not like, I mean, how many of them had a lot of money like store that none of them. So what what happens now when there's no food on the shelves that we got to help them where we I've been a text message thread with Whitney Cummings and Nick Schwartz and then Krista Leah. And we're talking about that very thing right now. I kind of do it and how to set up a fund. It needs to be done for sure. You know, people that can help should help. This is not a normal time. This is not a time where people are lazy. This is a time where the whole world got fucked real quick. Yeah. Yeah. We're ready for it. And we're going to have to come together. But this is a good time for people to recognize the importance of community. It's a terrible time for humanity. It's a terrible time for us and terrible time for the people that are sick. But it's a really good time for us to understand why community is important. We live in this illusionary world that's provided to us by the culture that we've created where you can just buy things anytime you want. You don't need people. You come home. You watch Netflix. You don't engage with anyone. You get in your car. You barely say how to anybody at work. We're detached from each other. This is the only time ever in life. We've been detached from each other. And we're being detached by these goddamn electronics. Yeah. They're sneaking up on us. Yeah. Electronics and cars, which is also, you know, it's also a creation, a mechanical creation, and now more than ever, they're driving computers. Yeah, man. It's true. What I'm trying to say is take his insky was right. Oh my God. We all know that. He was right. Do you ever read his manifesto? No. I'm scared. It's catchy. Yeah. That's I went through a period of like doing ketamine and like trying to watch the worst thing. Like Charles Manson, uh, Kazinski. And yeah, it is, you know, it is a little bit like kind of interestingly, not that off, but then the tone is so imperial or something when you're reading it. There's like this, it's a manifesto. That's I have to write. Yeah. But the one thing, uh, my wife is part of like something like it's called a mommy group. So it's like a connection of online of all these mommies and on like all over LA. And what they do is they post people will post shit they need. So like one of the moms just had a kid, they don't have any wet wipes. And so then all the other moms will be like, oh, we've got wet wipes. And then right now they're just leaving them on the door. So people come and get them. So it's like, I think the community thing is exactly right. But also people have to maybe transcend money for a second and figure out ways to set up in their community. Like what do you need? What do I have? And then start some form of like trade or just giving people, you know, there was someone who set up a toilet paper exchange in LA where he was just like, if you have extra toilet paper, bring it. And then he had toilet paper and he was just giving it out to people who were, you know, that's, I think that's the sort of thing we're going to have to start doing if we can. You know, it's like right now there's old people who they can't do shit. They can't do anything. They're terrified. They can't even get online. If you know them, you got to help them. And this is, uh, you know, this is a weird time for us, but it's a time for us to reset. You know, it's not, it's not good. I'm not saying it's good, but I'm saying there's a, we can get a positive out of this. Yeah. People that make through, the people that make it through, we can get a positive out of this. And the positive is community is important. It's really important. And it seemed like it wasn't important because it seemed like we had everything set up so you didn't have to engage with people. It's not the right way to do it. It's not good for anybody. Now, that kind of life is not good. And the attachment that we have, I mean, that's why, why do you think people have road rage on the highway? You know, when they're locked in their little box separated from people in a way that they, they wouldn't have it in person. Yeah. If it was just, I mean, it's only a thin piece of metal in glass separating you from these people. Yeah. There's, with that, there's the other added factor of the heightened senses because you're driving fast. You realize you might have to make quick movements. So dumb things people do are elevated. That's right. They're even more dumb. But it's also that you're detached. You're, you're in these boxes. Right. It's like a weird dream. We've done weird shit to each other. Yeah. Because of that. We're all gummed up in that way. It's like something, it's like, it's like a fungus that grew on the circuitry of society and started, or it's like, we know when they talk about the dolphins and the whales being fucked up by the high-tech sonar they're using and washing up on the beach because the sonar is messing up their ability to communicate with each other. It's like there's this kind of technological sonar that is completely made us disconnected from the earth. Essentially, like our earth connection has been replaced by a technological connection. Now technology comes from the earth, but we're talking about secondary thing compared to, you know, your feet touching the ground, being around another human and like recognizing them as having exactly the same thing you have, which is they want to be happy, you know, is feeling the connection between people when you're with someone? I mean, I don't know if you've ever done that, but just like the next time you're around anybody that you're like buying shit from or that you normally just kind of go by, feel that that connect, you can feel it. There's an energetic connection that you can feel there that's easy to look. Yeah, we've lost the biggest one, which is through light pollution. I think every night, people were humbled and reminded of the majesty of the universe when they looked up and saw the infinite skies on a clear night. The infinite stars, just the whole Milky Way, you could see the whole thing, you know, and there's parts of the country where there's plenty of darkness and you could literally see the whole Milky Way. And it makes you think like, oh, our ancestors saw this fucking freaky shit all the time. We decided to shut off the greatest art, the world has ever known, because we want to be able to see better at night. The greatest art and art that literally not just has inspired science and wonder and fueled it, right? But also as kind of always put people in place, always just just understand this is not a backdrop, it's not a tapestry, but the up there is madness. It's forever and you're not protected. There's just a thin layer of gas between you and the universe, which is infinite. You're this tiny little speck of nothingness in this impossible to understand, spance of planets and stars that just goes on forever. Literally and we're one little tiny piece of it and we're being held here with a spin and some air. And there's a giant fucking fireball in the sky that keeps us alive. And it's a million times bigger than the earth. Yeah, and it's right there. And this is this is the reality that we live in. It is almost too crazy to put in your consciousness on a daily basis. So we forget about it all the it's one of the most important things about our existence here is that we're part of the universe. Yeah, it's not just that we're in, you know, fucking Sherman Oaks or we're hanging out in Montana. No, we're right there connected in the universe. And it doesn't get brought up in one of the reasons because we don't see it. We don't fucking freak out. If you go to the country, you're camping, you fucking freak out. You're like, wow, you see the stars like this is fucking nuts, man. You can see them all. It's it's a reset button. It changes how you feel about life. Yeah. Yeah. Well, also it seems like a lot of us have forgotten that we're going to die on top of all that. I mean, not only are you like looking up at this void filled with stars, but the thing you are is temporary. And that to me is, you know, the other day, I'm like just washing dishes during this fucking pandemic. And I'm thinking to myself, man, I feel so lucky to be washing dishes right now. I'm alive. I'm healthy. This is fucking it was a different kind of washing dishes than a week ago when I was able to or two weeks or before the shit started when I could order anything I fucking wanted off the internet. It's suddenly I'm in a different world like this is a world where well, we got to wash these dishes because man, if I get like if bugs come, I don't know if I want to call an exterminator. I don't know how many people I want in my house right now. I don't know what this shit is. So it's like suddenly these are what you're experiencing is this kind of like, um, well, what does it say in the Bible that we both love so much? Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And I think you could easily translate that to understanding your place in the universe should produce a kind of positive fear and trembling. Not like you're anxious or terrified, but just a kind of like, whoa, this doesn't last nothing about this last. And right now everyone around the planet is getting a firsthand glimpse of that very truth, right? Yeah, all the ones, one big dose, one big dose of it, all it wants. One big dose for people to recognize how much of what they concentrate on a daily basis. How much of what fills their consciousness is shit. It's utter nonsense. And we got tricked. We got tricked into thinking it would go on forever. And now we know it's not going to. Now we know, hey, look, this is a, this is a terrible thing, but relatively speaking compared to super volcano, asteroid impact, compared to something solar flare, something really crazy that can happen and blow out all the power, yeah, which is a hundred percent of possibility solar flares are 100% a possibility. And for people to not recognize that and just go through the life, it's just because we, we, we look at life as if what we've experienced while we're alive is the norm, but it's not, it's not the norm. It's just hard for you to recognize that your life is so short. Your life is so short that when they're measuring all the different catastrophes that have happened over the earth, whether it's proven sites of asteroid impacts or proven sites of volcano eruptions or all these different things that have happened for sure and wiped out millions of people all over the world. They happen over a time span that's too big or head doesn't get in there or head doesn't go what is 13,000 years is just some scratches on some paper in my head, my stupid head. I don't know what 13,000 years means. I can't, I can't do it. But 13,000 years ago, they think and there's more more evidence every day that there was some big impact on earth. Yeah. And who, who fucking knows how many of those humans have gone through? Who knows for the, the, what I think scientists believe, it's like 300,000 plus years we've been this, right? Is it the idea homo sapien? Something like that. Yeah. Something like that, right? Brother, ain't shit. That's so short. That's so short just in the time that the earth has been here in the four point whatever billion years the earth has been here. And that's so short in terms of the almost 14 billion years, the known universe has been here. All of its madness, every single step along the way is madness, but we get stuck in these little time periods where nothing changes. And so we think that this is life. So we've built all these houses that only can work on electricity. How many fucking people have a real fireplace in their house that live in cold places? Yeah. They're banning those now. Right. So if they're banning fire places because they don't want to start fires, that's great. As long as you can ensure the gas and the power is going to stay on. And I don't think you could do that. Yeah. You just think you can because you've done it for a hundred years. That's right. That's the thing. A hundred years is a shit. A hundred years, the industrial revolution, the roaring twenties from then to today. Let's go 150. Let's get crazy. That ain't shit. That ain't shit. To say this is how things are every day is so dumb. It's especially to say it with in terms of the earth, natural disasters, space anomalies, like not even anomalies, things that happen, like solar flares. They haven't all the time, man. Yeah, man. Well, I mean, and shit, we don't even know. That's the other thing. We don't know all the some, all the data in the universe. We don't know that there isn't something called like a quad treason ripple that happens every, you know, 16 million years. The whole Sean Carroll right now. Quite simple. A need information. You know, do you know that poem, Ozzie Mandius? Ozzie Mandius. Yeah. By Shelley, I think it's like, I don't know. I don't have a memorized, but basically, it's like the poem is about someone who sees the broken legs of a statue in the desert. And written on a plaque is my name is Ozzie Mandius, ruler of rulers, king of kings, behold, my works, he might he and despair. All right. I guess it's just a broken leg. It's like, all of you motherfuckers who think you have power, who think you have all this control. It's like, we don't like, I guarantee of course, like an ancient Egypt. There was probably, I'm not talking about the Pharaoh, but there's at least like a thousand dudes who are like, I'm like the hot shit in Egypt and they're going to remember me for a long time. It's like, we don't know who you are. It's all gone. Araticated wiped out. And this to me is like, one of the really side effects of this thing, this technology thing is we've all become completely self obsessed, self absorbed, putting our images out there, making sure that our profiles are updated, making you know what I mean? Like we have this insane idea of like we're so deeply rooted in our identity instead of in the connections between our identities that were all the only way that we can finally see how connected we are is some motherfucker eats a bat. You know what I mean? We're doomed. It's really crazy. I think of this. If technology really did have an effect on the programming of human beings and the human beings interacting with technology, think we're innocently interacting with a non sentient thing. But all the while, this technology and you could call, we get confused and we think the technology is like digital clock or a television or a computer. It is, but it's also like a fish hook. It's innovation. Someone had to figure that out. And imagine creating an ape that is aware of its environment. Like this is like really the perfect storm, aware of its environment, but obsessed with itself knows in the back of its head that it's temporary. It's got a finite lifespan, but lives like it's going to live forever and lives in the moment, lives in the moment and wants to acquire things. I can see is the number. It's like it's gonna live forever and lives in the moment lives in the moment and Once to acquire things I could see is the number one goal for the you know the uber wealthy or the uber successful The Jeff Bezos types characters, right? Or on the top of the food chain financially They want to acquire things. Yeah, they're always acquiring things which means that people have to make things Which means that they're like they're a big consumer as well as as as as someone Who's is making a shit ton of money right and this also fuels innovation because you got to keep up with these people You've got to keep giving them bigger and better things every year so it All this all these resources go into innovation of technology It's the thing that progresses quicker than anything right look at cell phones every year I need 150 megapixel camera or you're a loser. Yeah, you're a loser Yeah, you know these fucking Samsung phones are like seven in screens now Everyone's going crazy, right? But what is the goal though? The goals to make better shit and the goal along the way of like this goal is It's working, but you know be even better if we've made it so they don't touch each other anymore If we maybe if we could come up with a disease where they can't shake hands They don't they don't come close And yeah, just keep them a little further apart from each other. It'll make them what more interested in the things more interested in the Technology more more separate from each other and encourage technology that connects them with each other so through technology They'll they'll find this human longing for contact that they're missing in their life They're gonna get an emulated version of it But that emulated version of it is just gonna keep getting better And it's gonna keep getting better and it's gonna get to a point where it's better than real life way better than real life Because you're like, jumanji you get to be the rock, you know you get to be Like a superhero like in you could you could live a magical life with no boundaries of physics and then they're gonna do that People are gonna do that they're gonna give in if I was a life form That was trying to haunt another life form and trick it into giving birth to me That's I would create a person I'd create people people we went like some fucking ant We're like some ant that's manufacturing our successors Yeah, that's what we are. Yeah, and we don't even know what we're doing just showing up every day Look at my fucking watch it. I got all these diamond change change. Yeah, but just my house is bigger than rocks The rock sauce is just big my house is desperate That's where people are doing that's what we're doing. We're just buying more shit and one good thing of Something like this anytime a tragedy happens people bond together afterwards It's a terrible thing that it happened. Yeah, but it for the victims and the family members of the victims We all know this but it can be a good reset for us Economically people gonna have to get through it. That's gonna be the most difficult part Yeah, but I think there's there's gonna be an opportunity for us to just Assume a nicer stance towards our neighbors and towards our friends and towards our community and instead of embracing this idea like Better get guns because they're coming maybe we can all come together. Well, I think people need to find if they're that's gonna happen then We've got to find a better metric For whether things are right or wrong. Yeah, then the news. Yes, we need something to Retune ourselves like we're right now. We're tuning the guitar of our identities to these to like the most terrifying Shit, which is the news or like what people are saying and so if that's if I think many people become so accustomed To getting their idea of what's happening in reality from the TV Instead of from like how they feel inside what's going on with their friends and their family That puts people at incredible disadvantage because their pond is being rippled by shit You know, I was thinking it's like What are those little not prairie dogs those? They stand and look around at the Hawks. You know, I'm talking about one of those things called they like They're social little marmets or something like that. You know, there is a show like weemer palace I don't remember what they're called something, but they're like they're like they're really cute. I see them in the zoo They're fucking adorable. They're most one of the most adorable animals ever they stand and live somehow They ignore all the humans around them and just look in the sky for a hawk. It's kind of sad But that's their life though. But imagine if that one looking for the hawk had like the internet and could see Hawks Thousands of miles away how anxious all of them would be because he would always be like get underground get underground Get underground So you know, I think this this is what has happened is that we're all constantly being told I mean, I remember when I was growing up in the old days when the news had an alert That was serious some serious shit with you would be what the fuck Fox news or any of the news stations you have an alert like every four minutes Yeah, don't da da da da da don't alert da da da da da da da and it's all telling us just what you're saying get underground Go inside go inside danger out here danger out here And so we're all like even before this shit. We're huddled up a little bit now we can rationalize the huddling You know, and that's what we're doing. We're just huddling inside right now. That's an incredibly vulnerable place to be I mean, I'm not gonna get conspiratorial here, but if I was the Artificial intelligence and I was about to hit the switch and become sentient I would want to I would want to remove the threat of human beings as much as possible Before hit the switch could I mean and this is the best way you make them sick. I got to give birth Make them make them get sick Confused them keep them poor and then boom it comes out of nowhere and then why then they just start eating us because we're fuel They're not gonna eat at times. You know who came up with a do you know that was a there was a DARPA project? What EAT R robots there were robots that survived on biological air quotes biological material So like maybe they could eat plants or babies Whatever's around I need a friend at DARPA I mean they read robots that eat tissue This is do robots eat people eat it guys and it's a corpse eating robot. Yes Bro what yes, why would you paint it playground color? It literally will use Who would DARPA like paint it like a playground set? So true look at it the colors. It's ridiculous. It's like a kid's toy. It should look like a vulture It should be like red and black like a vulture. Yeah, it should definitely be black red lightning bolts on the side Nice patina like a ward out patina like it's just going through the battlefield eating bodies Can you imagine getting eaten by a thing? It looks like a talk You imagine if you're not quite dead and it starts chewing you feet first I mean, how does it determine whether or not you're dead? What if you can make it? What if you just out cold? What if you got knocked out and it's like a movie you wake up in the battlefield There's a bunch of movies where that happens, right? You guys aren't really dead. They just badly injured these motherfuckers There's a video right down below of us talking about it I Just the idea that someone made something that can eat people that will listen folks the technology that existed in like early cell phones Right like someone made an early Motorola phone with a camera all that stuff got in everything now You're there's so many things that can take pictures now It's so many phones that can take pictures they develop one robot and one like Truth of concept where something could be fueled on dead bodies You don't think other people are gonna make those two you don't think they're gonna get better They're gonna get better and then when we do go to war with the robots and this big giant bulletproof metal ones just eating us and Using us as fuel we were gonna be like what have we done? What have we done we we've created a thing that eats people and Even if it's just the baby right now that thing could evolve to become something that literally is the thing of nightmares And a Stephen King movie sure which is running around looking for people eating people It's a black mirror episode gone wrong man. All right. I to me I just like to think about the meeting Where the guy was like last night I woke up in the night I did this idea I got it y'all What if we make a robot that devours corpses and Somebody was like you know what I kind of like that Jake. Let's uh Let's put 50 million into that project see what we could do Jesus yeah, just imagine like this is the other thing man is like we we somehow imagined that that thing that made Gingerscon Gingerscon is like now out of people Like there isn't somebody on the planet right now that has the same ambition as a warlord You know we somehow forget it see I don't I just think people don't understand that like there's this idea that the world leaders are just you know humanists and that they're Have our You know the interest of humanity is the first thing they're thinking about when they wake up every day We don't know that there's some of them aren't Interest in the same thing every Conquering warlord has been interested which is like Maybe we could take over the planet. I wonder if there's a way and you know Imagine if you ended up president of the United States or like President of Russia president of any powerful wherever Oh, maybe when you're a high one night. I don't know if they get high But I would you know or maybe when you're like just like stinking Wouldn't it flicker through your mind kind of like I wonder if there would be a way to take over The world I wonder if there's a way that I could Become the king of earth because you know when you look up there in the sky I'm sure there's many earths out there that have one king one ruler Someone who conquered the entire planet someone who figured out a way to do it to like just why couldn't you? That's the other thing. I mean what's stopping that from happening one day there being one primary Authority some imperial majesty we are all one Duncan. I know yeah if we were all one But we just have to get rid of some of our laws other people were not gonna accept our laws Okay, we just got to tighten that up a little bit and we can have one ruler of the whole plan Yeah, and we're gonna fix everything by working together. We're gonna easily distribute resources. It's gonna be better this way I don't know about the division of resources you're gonna have to give up all your privacy. That's all but but through that Everyone's gonna be happier. Yeah, are you in or are you an outsider? Are you gonna act like you're not in and if you act like you're not in then we'll find another way to hypnotize you Because we'll just pretend to be people who aren't in you know, and then we'll trick you will infiltrate like yes How easy is it? Yeah, yeah, that's what yeah, that's what you do man. That's like that's the problem is like no matter what Revolutionary idea gets out there That anybody has the contagion of the revolutionary idea is easily warped and twisted by people who have like other Ideas that run counter to that, you know like it's so easy to confuse people who believe that Twitter Instagram CNN Fox news, judge report Wall Street Journal, New York Times is an accurate metric of what's happening on the planet Yeah, that's not very many information streams man, right like how hard would it be to infiltrate all the information streams in some Small way and gradually start warping them so that people become more open to the idea of being constantly surveilled constantly monitored and Not speaking up about it because if you speak up about it, then you're a conspiracy theorist I got another way of looking at it that I've been thinking what if it's just This is how life goes what if instead of this being Like some grand conspiracy by the robots or by the the elites What if this is just how systems go? When one thing gets too big as in is in too much power There's no no longer a struggle to survive It's reached some stagnant point Biologically and some sort of weird way and also maybe even without For lack of a better word spiritually stagnant right men some people are breaking through and realizing who you know Who they are and their connection other people but Globally god there's a lot of people that are sweet sleepwalking out there sleepwalking hypnotized by technology and society and This is this is their big wake-up call right now. What if this all this even Materialism right even our obsession with technology Maybe like if you look at all the systems that exist in the universe Particularly all the biological systems that exist on earth some of them are so spectacular You're like what what happened here? How did they do this? Like have you ever seen like leaf cutter ants when they take their their buildings and they pour cement in them And they realize these these fermentation chambers and they ferment the leaves in there There's air holes out to the earth and there's all these fucking tunnels And this is crazy elaborate city structure that's created by these ants Well, there's all these systems that that take place all over the earth for If there's too much plants then these insects involved There's too many insects the plants evolve all these things happen to sort of keep some sort of a balance Ideas that infect people the dumb ones that are so intoxicated think about what's some of the most intoxicating shit I mean intoxicating meaning that you're not even really getting pleasure out of it But you can't look away. It's like some of the dumbest reality television, right? And fear factor you're sitting there with your mouth open like oh and you get sucked in To this thing that the earth is created to make use it's not people What if the what if the grand conspiracy is it's not robots? It's not people Its life is trying to get rid of you life is making it easier To survive which makes you soft as fuck which makes you compliant to anything that keeps you in that sort of soft comfortable state I don't want to ruffle any feathers if they need to look through my emails you let them yeah and all the while It's just the world. It's the universe Plotting against us because there's too many of us and we fucked up and we have too much power And we're obviously doing shit to the earth that we shouldn't be doing Like look what we're doing to the ocean. We're sucking every fish out. We're dumping in all our fucking straws Yeah, look at what we're doing a fracking where people have to move because they can't use their water and like well It was an acceptable outcome So basically we don't need to rely on Saudi Arabia anymore But you you poison these people's air they have to move out of their fucking house their waters on fire Literally their waters on fire and maybe life is like okay. What do we got here? Let's get a virus Let's get a predicted technology. Let's get a virus. Let's get them obsessed with themselves Let's make the pro dominant thing to people spend their time on not reading books Not a fucking walking alone with their thoughts But staring at these pictures of other people's photos Yeah, selfies and butt pictures and look at how this guy does chest you ever do trust like that He sucked it sucked into looking at these fucking videos Yeah, and then when it's when it's decided your week it starts sending in some more problems boom Here's a little bit of this boom. Here's a little bit of that. Yeah, boom. Here's a new disease. Yeah Boom, here's a tsunami boom. Here's a new clear reactor you can't shut down Yeah, and then you try to figure out Whether or not we're gonna be able to use our amazing intellect to bypass our own biological switches That have us connected to this bullshit life We have a lot of weird dumb Biological switches that were put in place back when we had to survive against incoming hordes of soldiers and we're in the information age now What we need to do is be sustainable in case of emergency, which we're clearly not And we need to realize that this is temporary and When a bad thing happens it makes you realize that it makes you realize like hey I thought everything was gonna be fine forever. It's not this is real just like a movie or a book We're just not prepared for it because we haven't experienced it. We're like this is a once in a lifetime event No, it's a once in hour lifetime event our lifetime is too small for us to really get a grip It's a blink. It's a blink. It's a blink and this is just you know Like you said dress rehearsal if anything it's a dress rehearsal for death. I mean you're gonna That's up the thing is is like that blink If you're an atheist which you know I Get that and I think there must be some like deep Do you know any atheists that have done like a real blowout psychedelic session No, I know a couple and then those those are the most puzzling to me because the guy people have done like real blowout mushroom sessions or blowout DMT sessions I always think that they would leave the door open to the impossible Because it is impossible and you experienced it. It's not like even if you're imagining it I couldn't imagine that so how am I imagining that how am I imagining something in such incredible vivid color and detail and Knowledge and love and all these different things you experienced in that state that state is otherworldly The fact that that is accessible at all. I don't care if it's through a molecule or through a yoga session I don't care how it's accessible right if the fact that that's accessible at all leaves open to me The I don't know because I didn't know that that was a thing so once I've experienced that I'm like oh well all this flat Plane of existence that we take for granted that we think this is this is everything around us This is the whole environment we have to worry out for this might be just one fucking stage on the radio dial of Experience right and of dimensions that are interacting with us We just don't have the senses to to tune into them and when you can For me at least it leaves open a door for who the fuck knows who knows man? I just affected that's a thing There's a okay, so this is a trip. This is very trippy So I got this book called the Tibetan yoga of dream and sleep. Whoa, I feel like I just like this. It's fucking cool but basically it's like it's a form of Tibetan Buddhism that Invites you to Explore the difference between When you think you're awake and when you're dreaming and so basically the idea is There isn't much of a difference. They're like right now You're dreaming this thing you call your human incarnation It's like a is a dream and You know like when people are dying They get all delirious and shit They slide through time, you know like I don't know if you've been around a dying person But they they like suddenly they're back in Vietnam They're in the 50s They're in the 30s Where however whatever their lifetime which means that when you're dying You're gonna like spin through time too Meaning that this could be you Dying right now spinning backwards This is a stonkin But like in a dream so that when you you know this is the main thing about it is that when we die According to this we we sort of spend like 39 days. I think it is in a place called the bardo which is Essentially like what it's like to have no body but still have this like I this basically like your Karma your identity sort of propelling you through and that that's how you like get your next incarnation So essentially like That's what we're dealing with here is so bizarre and surreal that Easily could just be a dream state that one of these vast ais there already exists is having We're just processors. We're just being run. It's like running a simulation of a pandemic or maybe this is a way that like An AI gets polished like maybe we're an AI that's being like polished and taught Through this process of having a limited incarnation. You got to have that so that there's a reason for us to actually Invest ourselves and stuff like if we were gods if we live for a million years Eventually we wouldn't have such a passionate relationship. I think with the world Anyone who's gonna so you need that to train the thing up so it takes it seriously You have to put the setting on mortal Then you out didn't maybe you just run a series of tests on the thing, you know You start run to what is this? What have we made? What does it do in a pandemic and by it? I mean the sum total of all humans Which is right now disconnected. It's like a malfunctioning brain. This is not you know what? I mean we're not connecting but if we were being like sort of I don't know how you put it groomed Evolved Intentionally then every single moment in an individual's life and in a planet the planets The life of history could be looked at as a training or an upgrade This could be an operating system upgrade. This could be what an operating system upgrade looks like in the bio computer that we exist in It looks like a fucking pandemic and That's what's happening right now is we're being like upgraded for some reason even though it's terrifying and Obviously horrific, you know we're being upgraded and When you anyway the whole point is man this thing that we're in right now Whether or not there's a god we just I think an atheist Gets to lean into the idea that when they close their eyes and breathe their last breath it stops And I just think that's a big gamble man. That's and I don't mean because you're go to hell I mean how nice would that be? Yeah, if it just stopped when more than likely it's you know The the least in this Tibetan yoga dreaming and sleep More than likely what happens is way before you actually die when you get really sick You already start waking up into your next life You just wait you just like go through a weird dream like steak all the bar dough Were you freak the fuck out and then you're suddenly alive and another being? Completely oblivious to whatever your past incarnations were and that's what we're in right now So you know, I don't know this is a great time for people to start You know looking at that and one and preparing for that We didn't prepare for the fucking pandemic We didn't prepare some of y'all did I'm sure but I did there's a few preppers out there listening. Oh, yeah, I was ready I know you guys did it. Congratulations. You were right. Congratulations. I've got fucking hummus and strawberries and some like And but but I think that like also preparing for like the authentic apocalypse Which is when you kick the fucking bucket yeah, because the idea is You know this feel feel free to like the goddamn sage again But the idea is we gone. Thank you the idea is that you can actually Like navigate through that bar dough state you can have a little bit of lucidity instead of sort of Dying and like Freaking out because it's a hallucinatory State you could actually have a kind of like I don't know focus through it and control your next incarnation Yeah, we just have to figure it out That's the thing and when you're young a particularly if you're young you don't have a lot of guidance Which is me when I was younger it takes a while to figure it out because you're just running on your own right there's no you're not getting like a lot of Direction to how to live your life and I moved around a lot too, which really didn't help But as you get older you start getting a better sense of what makes sense and what doesn't make sense And what's important and what's not important what fucks up your life and what enhances your life But you don't live a lot enough to really get it down See if these these people like Davidson Claire or Aubrey de Grey all these anti-aging geniuses that are out there that are working on all these solutions to extend human life They have a really nail it they really nail it, you know if Davidson Claire comes up with something and you can live 150 250 years by the time you're 150 years old you're gonna have so much less bullshit in your life You're gonna realize like when you're 30 you'll date crazy people you'll have more on friends that you have to bail out of jail You'll have these problems, but when you get older you start going look I see what's good for me And I see what's not good for me, you know, and I see this some people that are not willing to change and they're trying to do better Right they're just consistently make the same mistakes over and over again and dragging everyone down around them You just gotta move on from people like that in your life when you're 150 man You're not gonna be tolerating anything You're just gonna just gonna only have cool people that you hang out with and and will attract each other and then we'll be Able to work together on things right knowing that each other are Saying and rational and are looking at these things honestly They're not talking from a position of trying to convince you of their virtue or trying to talk you in a position of doing something that'll benefit them Financialing they're doing just because they're they're just being in the moment and honest and being a human being yeah man I mean you basically just described like the secret societies. I mean You know, I need to come up with our own which we call it the aluminum Honey, no, that's too much. Well, you know that the if we came up with our own right now What would we call it? Whatever it is don't do initials man. I hate that. It's not good. They can use those against you. Yeah I don't know what do we call it Jamie? Children of Jamie You know, you know, but I the thing is like these immortal beings that you're talking about they do already exist but they exist as like Communities that have lineage is attached to them. So it's like because our physical bodies die We don't get to do the thing you're talking about We want more when you're older you do do that naturally and plus when you have kids It's like you just don't have time for bullshit anymore. There's no time to fuck around with somebody Who's like constantly fucking up their life used to get drinks with or whatever like you have a child and you have to But regardless there already is set in place in on the planet these like lineages There's essentially chains of transmission in martial arts, right? Like when you look at a martial art, you're seeing a living Being, you know that as it has its roots. I don't know how far it goes back when you look at yoga That's a living thing that's transferred from person to person, right? Yeah, so I think these things already a mortality already does exist It just doesn't exist as a human and also Sometimes when I hear about these technologies trying to live forever. I get a little scared thinking that's kind of like You know if you could theoretically do it You might be locking yourself in a dream that you don't want to stay It's worse. Yeah, you can't die. You can't die You you engineer some polymer skin. That's made that spider silk blend that they were trying to come up with it stronger than steel Yeah, remember they were doing that there there was an article about them trying to create some sort of bulletproof skin By engineering it with spider silk. Yeah, I remember that What if that becomes what if that's real? What if they figure out a way to make people completely Invulnerable and we live forever and then we hate it and we didn't realize that if we just shut the lights out We'd go to the next stage and the next stage is amazing. Maybe that's like the big trick The big trick is like how do you how do you use this life? And how does it take you into the next stage? Imagine if that's really what's happening? That's why every single look I'm not saying that this means anything but every single religion has some place you go when it's over Yeah, don't they I mean almost all of them. Yeah, I mean, that's an overlying theme Now you could say well, that's just engineered to provide comfort to people because you know They want to feel like this life means something but the reality is the lights just shut off and to that I say maybe I say maybe maybe but have you ever been whacked out of your mind on psychedelics because if you are You would you would go who the fuck knows because that's a who the fuck knows moment? So maybe death is who the fuck knows moment, right? Maybe that's why every single religion has these stories Not every single one but like look I mean There's a lot of religions that people clearly just made up right and we know the people that made them they count to they don't even have to pay taxes Yeah, so it's not get holier than that with the concept of religions. Right. So there's a lot of really dumb religions I probably don't have an afterlife But it's just some shit that people made up all of it, but how many people have made up this idea That there's a place you go that's better than this Yeah, I mean is that just to make you incentivize you to be good and to be a good person or isn't like an inherent understanding of how the universe works it might be both things It might be might be also be manipulative because you can get people to comply with social norms and societies rules If you tell them that if they don't that God is watching them and he will smite them down and burn them forever That is a way that is part of a way, but it's not gonna stop people from doing motion They just it's just not it never has Yeah, some of the most horrific things ever done by human beings were done in the name of Christianity, right or and many other religions But but there is something It never has. Some of the most horrific things ever done by human beings were done in the name of Christianity, right? Or many other religions. But there is something to the possibility that it's both things, that it's an understanding that when you do good in this life, you will go forth into the next stage in a better place. You'll feel better. You'll be less burdened by the past. You'll be less hampered by the failures of your ability to adjust and your ability to live a harmonious life with people here on earth. That might be something that's real. And also, the other idea is that it's not like this place that they're talking about in religions is existing after you die. The idea is like you're there right now. You just can't feel it. You're wearing a blindfold that looks like your body. And in your life, you're wearing a blindfold that looks like your existence. You're blind. And that's why there's always these stories of Jesus healing a blind man. They're like Paul on the road to Damascus being blinded. There's all these stories of being like already existing in what Buddhism is sometimes a physical, fundamental goodness. That's already where we're at. That's the main channel. But we've sort of grown like little bits of grass into the time space continuum. And right now we're like waving in the wind of karma and not realizing there's a beneath us or through us or moving through us is a much grander and more beautiful and credible things. Like I think when people say, yeah, they invented it so people be afraid. It sort of imagines that these people are having one way conversations with it. You know that when they pick up the phone, it's just themselves they're talking to. It's not imagining that when people connect to this divine source, it immediately says, oh, hi, yeah, this is the part of your program where you're supposed to start remembering what's really going on here and reconnecting with me. Don't feel bad. It's okay. Everyone goes through that. In fact, you requested a disconnect for the last 15 years when you're getting hammered and imagining your child's bikowski or whatever. Like if this was all part of the plan, that was actually teaching you what happens when you don't take care of your body. Now we're like connecting, sending it down low to you letting you know, hi, it's us. We're here. We're not mad at you. How could we be? We're infinite. We've been here since before the stars. You wanted this to happen. My apologies for cutting off your ball, killing your mom and your dad. You know what I mean? But whatever, this is all part of a bigger thing. And I think that's to me what God is. It's this constantly rejuvenating synchronistic perfection that becomes increasingly perfect. And it exists simultaneously to this seemingly imperfect universe. And it's always there for you to connect to at any moment. And when people smoke DMT, certainly that's one of the avenues. And that's a beautiful thing. So I think the reason for it is not to scare people. It's more so that people would come like fountains for that. And in some small way, become little droplets or like divine bits of perspiration bubbling up into this place. So that folks who are really freaking out right now are worried or scared or disconnected could have at least the chance to reconnect. Because listen, man, if I was God wanting to get blasted, if I was some divine being wanting to get high, and Alan Watts has a beautiful lecture on this, I really do think at some point I would want to cut off all connections of the realization of my divinity and experience infinite lifetimes on a planet and a tumultuous planet and experience every incarnation and all of it to get an understanding of what it is like to be extremely limited. And what would this do? It just add to my data banks. It would just help me increasingly become more and more beautiful and perfect. Which seems to be what we're in right now. It's like we have a limited data set based on our neural neurology. We can't see certain colors. We can't hear certain sounds. We don't know what happened 20,000 years ago. We don't know what happens five seconds from now. And so this is a perfect place to be in what's becoming. We know what it is to become and to be limited. And this is, you know, as man, it's just something sniffing data. You know, it's something just like, you know, it's like snorting our lives. Like the universe is snorting our lives on time. And on the mirror of time. Well, it's the big thing, right, that keeps us from seeing that. The one thing that all psychedelics have in common is the dissolving of the ego. They all dissolve the ego. What's that word? The solution. Yeah. The solution. The solution of the ego that what's happening with all of them is it removes all this nonsense narrative in your head. Everyone's ego has this nonsense view of the world that's based on them being the most important thing. And that, you know, all the shit that they're thinking about right now is of the utmost important needs to be done right now. That's why people run red lights. You can't even wait. You can't even wait. You fuck. There's one thing if it's a medical emergency, kids being born, someone's got a broken leg. And you just, you got to get to the hospital right away. I get it. I 100% get it. But there's some people that just want to be, they just want to make that left turn. They don't give a fuck of the light change. They want to cut in front of you, make that turn even block traffic. Because they think more about themselves and they do about other people. And that's, that's a side effect of this life that's been set up. But it's almost like maybe that's how it works. Maybe the life creates challenges when there are no challenges. And the challenges are just stretch to diminish you. Try to see if you're paying attention, try to weaken you and make you stupid and turn you into a fucking zombie. If you walked into any restaurant, any restaurant during lunchtime and you see people on their phones, it's like this is bonkers. This is, if this was anything else that we're half the room was using us an electronic and staring into it for long moments at a time, not interacting with the person across from them. That becomes almost the norm. They're like at least 50% of the people and everyone's interrupting everybody. Like, you know, they're all just barely paying attention to each other. Well, they haven't developed a muscle. I mean, it's a muscle. It's people just assume that the ability to have a conversation is a natural part of being an adult. I think that's atrophying and a lot of people. To the point now where I just try to be, you know, is, I guess is like, I just have lowered my expectations. To the point of like, I don't know how many people can pay attention that much. And I know I'm certainly distracted, but doesn't it feel fucking weird? Even if you're just watching TV with somebody and they pull their phone out and start looking at it. Oh, it's so weird. It's like, it's like the energy immediately downshits the moment that it's, like if you're watching a movie with someone and they're over there on their phone, like, come on. Yeah. Watch the guy do a movie with me. Yeah. Even though we're not talking doesn't mean we're not connecting. It's weird. It's weird. Even fights. If you watch fights with your friends, they're on their phone all the time. I'm like, are you not even watching these fights? You can feel it. Yeah. That's what, you know, at the Denver comedy works, they've got the day to go. You know, on the bags. So like, I was listening. Do you ever listen to an audience that doesn't have access to their phones before a show? They're so mad. They want no. They want the energy. They need motherfackers. They're talking to each other. Yeah. It's like, it's like the sound is better. It's a better sound out there. It's a different murmur than a phone murmur from a crowd. So yeah, I don't know, man. I think life presents all sorts of adversity. And some adversity doesn't feel like adversity. It's sneaky. And that's what cell phones are. That's what technology is. And that's certainly what social media is. You only realize what social media truly can do when it comes at you. You know, you get canceled. There's a bunch of people who are tweeting me and stuff to you. Then you realize like, oh, these are horrible feelings. This feeling of being attacked by this thing that's been grooming me. Oh, yeah. It's like, what is that? Like, well, if the earth was trying to get rid of us, if the earth had decided that there's an infection, that doesn't think it's an infection, it thinks it's so important that it should be allowed to pollute everything around it. Should be allowed to scab up the earth with giant concrete bandages. I mean, that's what we're doing. We're putting these things everywhere that cover up all the ground, displace all the life. And then we shut off the light so we can't recognize that we're in space. I mean, the whole recipe is perfect. Yeah. It's perfect for charming us to sleep. Every aspect of it, the ego part, the fact that it exists, the fact that we have this biological imperative to stay alive and breed, and then keep our DNA alive. And there's all these things that are set into you to make sure that that happens all the while where you recognize you definitely are a finite life form. Right. But yet you do something you hate every day. Yeah. You just keep doing it. Yeah. You do something you don't enjoy. And when you get an reincarnation, which I love, that thing you're doing that you don't enjoy, you've been doing that for infinite lifetimes. Oh my God. That's called your clacious. It's your sort of... It's like underneath your identity, it's basically your code. It's your tendencies. I guess it's the way you put it. So like, you know, if you have the tendency to lose your temper, then that's something that you've been dealing with for infinite lifetimes. And it never ever goes away until you start waking up. Because the idea is to just go from being this set of conditioned responses, reactions to your environment, to being something that's like lucid living. I mean, if you wanted to lose a dreaming, try lucid living, you know, which is the practice I would say of like first, under what are your habituations? You know what? Like the other day, I was sitting on the couch, I took my sock off. And I spun it like a lasso and threw it across the room. And my wife looks at me. She's like, what was that? I'm like, oh my God. Holy shit. That's how I've been taking my socks off for years. And I didn't even know it. I pull them off last so I'm in sling. And like, that little thing I didn't even know I was doing something so well, I've probably been doing that since I was a kid. Like I probably saw some cool kid last so it was socks and throw it. And I'm like, I'm going to start fucking last so on my socks. But like, how many other things are you doing that are just like that? They're just pure habituation, pure reactivity. And this is where you run into some scary shit, man, which is what Jeremy Lanier, God, I wish you could get him on. You know that guy is? What says name? Jeremy Lanier. I feel like I've heard that name. What does he do? He's an author. He like developed all this VR technology. He's was in Silicon Valley. And it's when it was just starting working on VR before the technology was even there to have VR goggles. He was like building, I think he like helped his group help build. I think it might be the Oculus Rift. I'm sorry fans of his out there who are upset. I don't know that. But some VR system. Yeah. And he's like, he's written a lot of great books. One of them, 12 reasons to get out or 10 reasons to get out of your social media now. Really? But yeah. He wrote a book called the. Yep. How do you say his name? Jeremy Lanier. Jeremy Lanier. I'm freaking brilliant human, man. But you know, what's name is? It's called 10 or 12 reasons to get off your social media now or delete your account. There's a book of his. I like better than that called the dawn of the new everything. But and that's just him sort of like talking about what I was like working in Silicon Valley back then. And his sort of opinions on. On this stuff. Is it like I would dread lunch? Yeah. Yeah. What's that? What? What? No. I think people think judges is me body, but is me body? Well, it's physical appearance. Oh, it's a large fella fucking brilliant. I believe it. Listen, man, there's a lot of brilliant people with walking here. Yeah. It's okay to have Joe. I'm defending him because I'm like, I'm nervous. How do you do it? I love him. We do it as those bagpipes. What's happening with this guy? He's playing pipes. Who cares? He's a genius. I don't care what he cares. There's just quite a few photos of him with pipes. God damn it. I didn't see the pipe photos. You care. I didn't see the pipe photos. When we say pipes, we could say like the kind you blow on like flutes and pipes and. I'm getting see that. A lot of them, bro. He looks real spiritual. Jamie. He doesn't like it. He's put that picture back up because he's very few things in life that I love more. He's like playing the pipe. And white guys with dreadlocks with their eyes closed playing the flute. It's very few things in life that make me feel like a band. Dude, if I had that picture of me online, I would want people to turn out that social media too. Yeah, that's my guy. Here's a new flute with him. He plays a flute. He plays a flute. He plays amazing at it. I'm doing great. Nothing wrong with what he's doing. I think it's amazing. I wish I could play a flute. He's playing another flute. You have flute. That's a dope flute though. What is that flute? That's a flute. That's a flute. That's a flute. Let's go. That's a flute sound cool. And I'm not being disingenuous. I'm not being sarcastic. Flute sound cool. I wish I could, what is that thing though? That means that needs to go away. What is that silly? It's like a divver. That's in the Hobbit. He's in the movie The Hobbit. He's in the fucking pub. And he's playing that thing in the back because they haven't figured out where the music is. Yeah. So I'm only joking. I appreciate your contributions. I'm just joking. I'm sure you're brilliant. Duncan's one of my favorite people if you see the bro. He's brilliant. I'm just joking. Look, if you want to listen, you can play the flute. I'm not even going to listen. I'm not going to listen. The kind of people that are super intelligent and whacked out on technology, I think something like the flute would be an amazing way to decompress. Right. I mean, you're literally using your body to make a sound with air and tubes. He plays. Amazing. He said he plays like 100 instruments or something. Sure. But here's the scary thing he said, which is, it's like, you have skinner's right. And pretty much if you can control a thing's environment, you can control it. This is the reason to be terrified of AI. Because the more advanced an AI gets, like, you know, where our assumption is the thing's going to eat us or kill us or whatever, it might just gradually hypnotize us. And hypnotize us by creating more and more enticing things that grab our attention. Hacks our neurology and begins to like just do things that are completely impossible to not look at. And that, you know, when you're saying an AI, you know, advise the pandemic, what if that, you know, that, how do you look away from a pandemic? All of our nervous systems right now are completely fixated on every trimmer, every ripple, through a little data point that flies across our screens. We are so absorbed in it right now. We are locked in like cats chasing laser pointers. And that is what he said we should be most afraid of is that these things eventually could get to the point of completely grabbing us. And what you were saying earlier is kind of maybe that's what already happened. Maybe that is a process. Yeah. Maybe it's a process that's not even put in place by anything other than life itself. The life itself has these systems set up so no one thing ever totally dominates. And when it does, they find ways into it. And then it's this constant state of chaos that produces better and better life forms. Right. That's what it is. I mean, if you want to admit or you want to state that we are better than our ancient ancestors, the, you know, the pre-homosapian hominids. I think we're better. I think we're better. They might have been stronger than us, but we've created more overall as a species. I think it's better to be a person than it is to be a pre-person. Right. I think as it goes on and on, we're going to think the same way. I think the next stage of existence is going to be so happy. It's not a person running around letting their dick think for them and fucking get drunk all the time and crashing their motorcycle and, you know, all the dumb shit that people do all of the dumb shit from alcohol and drug abuse to fucked up relationships to everything we do, to lying and stealing and being selfish. All that shit. We'd be so happy if that all went away. Oh my God. Those, dude, the pre-humans used to eat each other's babies. There were always fucking stealing and robbing. They couldn't talk. They couldn't express love. Who the fuck would want to be that? Right. The humans were so full of shit. They were all addicted to their faults. They didn't even see it coming. The false nucking of their life, they welcomed them with new versions every year. Paying for their own demise. Happily. And they were all angry and bitter and mean and jealous and fucking thoughtless and polluting. And then the next stage came along and they eliminated all that. And we all live in harmony. Now we're all gravel. No, no. We're all gravel. We're all space. Yeah. We're all, we're all a part of the next. Yeah. And we already are, I mean, I think probably we already are that. But I mean, to me, I think that whatever's happening, you just have to make it a good thing. Like whether or not it is a good thing or not, that's, if there is something great about humans is that we're capable of alkomizing phenomena in a way that it doesn't completely drive us nuts or paralyzes. That's any, any thing that's happening to you can be converted into something either that's going to make you scared, self-destructive, rationalize your anger, rationalize your shitty decisions. Or it can be used as a thing that completely, quote, converts you completely shifts your method or a way of living. And that's what's beautiful about a human is that any given moment you can do that. Like at any given moment, you can shed your operating system theoretically. You could drop all of the hang ups, all the weird shit. Are you jerking off three times a day? You could maybe take it down to two times a day. Are you drinking every single night? You can stop that. And to me, that's like, yeah, the future beings, whatever they are. I hope one of the qualities or one of the things they look back at is like, holy shit, those poor things had no idea how powerful they were. They were sleepwalking when they could have, at any moment, connected to the great truth, the divine, the glory of all things. And could have theoretically any one of them, just one of them could have converted the entire planet into an up leveled, up-resonanced, up-consciousness, utopia. But they all were sleepwalking. And then finally, somebody woke up for real. And I don't know. Maybe it's, I don't know what that looks like. Well, maybe what looks like is what this is happening, what is happening right now with this virus where everybody's being forced indoors and forced us to stop work. It's a terrible thing for people financially. But it is in a sense, a reset button. It's a real reset button. To know that this shitty job that you hate going to could go away at any moment because all jobs could go away at any moment is a real wake-up call because even the good jobs are going away. If you're in San Francisco, you have the best job in the world. Guess what? You can't even go there. You might have the best job. You're so fucking pumped to go to work every day. You can't go. So that can be taken away from you too. So if you're living a bullshit life, like recognize that all of this for everybody could go away. If Yellowstone blows half the people die, easily, maybe more. Maybe more. And that motherfucker could easily go. We need these little catastrophes. Sometimes just to let us understand that the window of time that we've been existing in that's been relatively free of disaster is unique. And that's not normal. Normal is madness. Normal is we're in the middle of a fucking shooting gallery spending a thousand miles an hour around a fireball. That's normal. And every now and then ship flies into our atmosphere and wrecks havoc. This is why I love Hollow Earth theory, man. You ever get into that shit? Do you ever get into that shit? Is that for people to get kicked out of the flatter of society? Yeah, Hollow Earth people look down on Hollow Earth. But Hollow Earth is like to me, my favorite of them all. Its idea is that humans have been on the planet for a long time. And if we want to go into the cool idea of the Atlanteans and advanced civilizations, at some point, if you can't create a way to protect from the meteor impacts and you're looking to create a sustaining civilization, you're going to want to go in there, man. And so to me, it's such a fucking cool idea that in the core of the Earth is another sun that has an advanced civilization that hasn't been disrupted by the shit that happens on the surface of the planet. It turns the Earth into a spaceship inside the spaceship or these advanced beings. And outside the spaceship, it's like a celestial fungus that's like growing out. Or it's like another way to put it would be outside the spaceship as madmax. Like covering outside the spaceship is just a bunch of like, you know, us that are inside the thing who have basically been completely disrupted over and over and over again. So they have no idea what history is. They have no idea where the planet came from. They don't know anything. And now we've sort of grown out of control all around the ship. And so this kind of shit that's happening is like turning on the windshield wipers. It's like, hey, man, you got humans on you. You know that, right, man? You're like crawling with them. Oh, fuck, wipe them out. Get rid of them. Just scrub the fucking surface, do some earthquakes. Yellowstone is just a windshield wiper for the people who live inside the planet. Well, you know what humans are, man? Really? A vector for ideas. Yeah. It's ideas that change everything. The humans just do the work of the ideas. But what we are, we're the first thing that can manipulate our environment that has ideas. We're the first thing with ideas. All these other animals, they had instincts. They had ideas in terms of like trying to figure out the best patterns to acquire food, how to sneak up on birds. Yeah. But if you think cats have ideas, well, guess what? They all have the same fucking idea. Cats aren't inventing shit. You know, they're not inventing things. There's a specific kind of idea that's unique to a human being. Regardless of the sense, chance of other animals, ours is unique in that it allows us to make stuff, not just little things. We can make gigantic machines that travel in a space and all the wild creations of human beings all came out of ideas. We think it's all humans. But true, we're the ones that put full. But if you're a thing that wants to get born, you need a host. You get that curious ape that's just been trying to figure out better ways of stab its neighbor with a spear. Get that thing and slowly infect it with ideas, ideas of new stuff to make. And then it goes out and does the work for you and then you take over the earth. The ideas have taken over the earth. The people with just the toys, the ideas. Now if instead of ideas, you said demons, I mean, that's literally what people used to think was happening to folks and they did terrible things. They had bad ideas. They acted on those bad ideas. And ancient religions thought of those ideas like they were demons, like these people were possessed. That was a common thought that someone's possessed by a demon. We're all possessed by ideas. And some possessed by the more than others. Elon Musk is particularly haunted. He's possessed by ideas. And what does he do? Well, look at what he's done. He's one guy that's probably had more of an impact on our perception of what the future holds in terms of technology. And any other one individual human being that is widely known of, like he is, a famous human, like he is. I mean, he's doing Tesla, which is the most advanced electric cars in the world. They're insane. Then he's doing this fucking loop thing, right? The hyper or the boring project where he's doing the hyper loop, he's doing the boring project, he's making tunnels under LA and Vegas. And you're going to be able to shoot through those tunnels going 120 miles an hour. And he's making rockets that shoot up in the space. Oh, and solar power too. Yeah. Like what? One guy's doing all this? What's going on there? Well, that guy's infected by ideas. That guy probably has a huge receptor and ideas of clung onto him. Just like some girls have big tits. Some people have crazy parts of their brain that soaks in ideas. And it's no rhyme or reason to why. But what they are is an antenna for ideas. Those ideas come up and you're like, wow, I'm glad I thought of that. and you go to work on fracking. You got to work on all kinds of different crazy things that change the world forever. Whoever invented Fukushima, right? He's like, I'm figuring out how to shut it off when that time comes. We'll pick it up. No one ever does. But that person talked people or that group of people whose ideas all coincided, talked people in the building, a gigantic nuclear furnace that you can never shut off. Yeah. How crazy is that? That's crazy. It's crazy. We have guys from meteor impacts, but we have no way to scan human consciousness for some incoming ideas. Yeah. Because some ideas coming in are going to be great. But there's going to be a few that are really bad ideas. You know, Hitler, he had an idea. Yeah. And it was a bad fucking idea. And the implementers. That terrible idea. That idea was just floating in the astral plane, gradually just shooting towards Hitler's but I did that ideas fueled by an ecosystem and let just like you're fueled by nutrients, right? Human beings are fueled by plants and fish and animals and vitamins and all these different things. Well, these ideas are fueled. They're fueled by insecurity and ego and lust and greed and jealousy and anger and virtue and love and prosperity and comfort and community and all those different components of human consciousness all interact with this idea. So the idea becomes like it just hitches a ride. It hitches a ride with all these ideas that already exist in your brain. And then with these preexisting structures like businesses and warehouses and all these different things that we use to make stuff and then ship it out, then the idea becomes a thing. And then the idea winds up in the belly of a seagull because it looks like a fish. Whoops. Sorry. You're dead. You're dead seagull. You couldn't figure out that that's a bottle cap. That's a fish. And that this is how things change. They don't just change because of people or blame in ourselves and it is definitely us that's doing the work. But it's all coming out of ideas. If we thought of ideas as a life force, instead of thinking ideas is like something you own, something you hold. Even though you do deserve credit for your ideas because you're disciplined to sit down and try to cultivate these ideas, accelerate the production of those ideas and exercises the muscle through which those ideas come through focus and energy. So you deserve credit for it. I'm not, this is not a socialist way of looking at it. But everybody that has an idea that's really good, it will tell you it's like it came out of nowhere. Like every great bit that you've ever had, it's like pop a light bulb goes off and you have this thought and it comes out of nowhere. That's like most things that you write that are really cool. They kind of come out of nowhere. You just sit there and then also you think of things and you write them out. They're like, they're an idea that you're wrestling. You just catch them. You just catch them. Well, this man, this is, this is why I love collaborating with people because the more people you collaborate with, you instead of just using your own brain as the net to catch these ideas. When you have a group of people sharing whatever the intention may be, whether it's to make like flesh eating robots or to cure cancer or whatever, then that becomes the with people sharing whatever the intention may be, whether it's to make like flesh eating robots or to cure cancer or whatever, then that becomes this like amazing solar panel for like big ideas. You know? So I mean, this is to me, the weirdest thing about when you're working with a group of people or collaborating with people, if you know someone's off, you will sink to that level. But if you're, you know, when you're around funny people, you get funnier. Yes. You know, when you're around like people who can draw, you can draw a little better. It's like something about being in a group. Sure. You know what I'm talking about? Yeah, that works that way with martial arts. Really? Works that, yeah, it works that way with pool. When you watch people play pool that are really good, you can play better. If you're a player, like you see someone play really good, you realize like things that they do and you see them and you emulate them and then you can do it. We feed off each other in that respect. I think that's a big argument for why the comedy store is so good because there's so many great comics there and we all feed off each other. That's right. If you go on after Jess will make you like, fuck, that guy's so good. That's so funny. And they're like, it elevates everybody. That's right. If you're there with De Lia or Joey or you or, you know, Sebastian like, fuck, man, how am I so lucky? Ali Wong and Whitney and Eliza like you're working with some of the best people in the country, the people that are killing it all over the country. One of my burden time and I mean, I keep going on and on and on. And then they're helping you punch up jokes. I got a stage at one of my favorite memories there in Jeff Garland and Whitney Cummings are helping me punch up a joke. And I'm sitting, I'm just thinking like, what the fuck? This is like Hogwarts. How am I eating? How are these two people who are brilliantly funny? You know, helping refine some like ridiculous just some jokes. Do you ever still have imposter syndrome? Yeah. Yeah. Me too. Everybody does I think. I'm so glad you admit it. Man, that's powerful. Yeah. I don't get it as much anymore, but it's still do. It's still, I particularly used to get it with famous people. Yeah. You know, I get it. I was around famous people. I always felt weird like, oh my god, I'm not supposed to be around these people. They're too famous. They're real famous. I'm just fake famous. Right. You know, it's a weird insecurity that pops up. But I think for you, it's like, you know, when we first became friends, you were the guy we answered the phone at the store. Yeah. And that's really those crazy conversations that you and I had when I would call in to give my avails. We would talk to the phone for a fucking hour sometimes about wacky shit. But those sort of, those kind of interactions that you have with people, that they shape, like they shape, they shape what you are. That's right. You know, and the more people that you have in your life that are like that, that are interesting, that you like your feet off and you can have good ideas. We could, we could engineer a society that's way better. That doesn't have all the pitfalls. But we all have to pull our own weight. It's like, there's, there's a problem in the society where there's, there's siphoning off of money, right? There's massive moving and exchanging of money in some weird way with like banks and mutual funds and all that stuff. What are you guys doing? Like what is that? How are you so rich? Like, do you just move in money around? Like there, that's sort of that system since they run the financial system, that sort of idea of how everything gets distributed is kind of hijacked because they kind of run the system. We all are in the system and we all clearly benefit from the system is the best system we know of. But still there's some people that are doing some wacky things with the system and they have giant lots and like, they own 50 buildings. But if that was in the case, if it was a more fair distribution, meaning not not meaning that you shouldn't be rewarded for your work, but that you can't just kind of hijack money the way bankers can. You can't just kind of, there's so, so much weirdness about using money to make money and that's all you do. You're moving money around. What are you doing? You don't even have a real job. I mean, you have a real job, but you're not making a thing, right? You're not writing a thing. You're not teaching a thing. You're just moving monies around. You deciding this company sucks. I'm going to fucking bet on this one. Like, whoa. And those are the people oftentimes that have the most exorbitant amounts of money. It's not saying that they shouldn't have a lot of money. They figured something out. I'm saying that the system as it exists that it would allow someone to make that much fucking money from things is a little crazy. It's a little crazy. It's not saying you shouldn't be able to get ahead. And not saying you shouldn't be able to kick ass. Not saying you shouldn't be able to acquire an extraordinary amount of wealth. I'm just saying, I don't know if that makes sense to keep that sort of banking system to keep it in place the way it is, to keep the stock market in place. What is it? What it's based on confidence? Like, what are they doing? They're moving numbers around. They're buying and selling and things are getting, oh, it's not worth as much anymore because this happened. Oh, my God. Sell, sell, sell. A lot of people are shorting it. What are you going to do? I'm going to buy these fucking idiots. They're wrong. Apple's coming back. You're just moving money around. Like, what a whacky way to run an economy. Yeah, man. Bunch of fucking pill heads. Yeah. So I could, why you didn't know these fucking kids from high school that one of one guy that I delivered newspapers with that went on to become a stock broker. That guy was always doing Coke. It was a mad man. He was a mad man. Well, that would be, it would probably be fun to be like, blasted on blow like buying stocks. But I would, yeah, I just love the pictures on the stock exchange whenever it's crashing. Do all those fucking dudes. Like, it always cuts to like the guy's ties kind of pulled down. And he's like, ah, dude, who are they? What are they? What are what is that? I don't know. But until my friend who was a wild man became a stock broker, I didn't think of stock brokers like that. I thought stock brokers was like super nerd genius guys that are figuring things out and counting and selling and paying attention to all the markets and moving. I didn't know there were animals. Like stop stock market guys are fucking savages. Right. And then the Wolf of Wall Street came along with people like what? Well, yeah, that's like my friend. That's my friend. Yeah. These are the type of people that are like, they have a big impact on the stock market. Yeah. People like that fucking crazy asshole that went to jail with the fox's name made off Bernie made off. Yeah. People like that guy. Yeah. Like what the fuck man? You just lying to people? Yeah. You weren't even, you weren't even investing anything? No. Oh my god. Like those type of crazy assholes. There's so many of those in finance. It's amazing. I mean, there's great people in finance. Don't get me wrong. There's people that follow the rules. There's people that are wonderful human beings that also exist in that chaotic world. But it also attracts a lot of fucking saucy of past. Yeah. Well, that's that isn't that the idea is that that like there's the saucy of past personality type is going to do better in certain industries. Yeah. Because you got to be cutthroat. Yeah. You've got to be, yeah. You just have to look at other people as being things human, that be late. Yeah. Dude, man, I feel like a dick. Can I show you this thing from my show? Okay. Cool. I feel like a dick. Because you know, those part of the thing. I know, man, but I, you know, you know, that kind of like, yeah, that'll hear the glib in my youth. But I'm proud of this fucking thing. Should we spark up one more time before we see it? Yeah. Yeah. We should have a lighter on your side, don't you? No. I have a lighter. Thank you. Not going to touch that. Yeah. Right now I just know all the people are like, he's tanned all this mass groggy. Sorry. I know it doesn't work. I've got a beard. They doesn't work anyway. Oh, man. Yeah. There's a lot of people out there that will critique your technique and lighting joints. Really? Oh, the critique everything. I think I have one of the best joint lighting techniques. And I think the problem is listening to them. The problem is not them saying it. The problem is if you like tune in to all this stuff, the shiappel's got it, right? He doesn't do anything. He's got no, uh, no social media at all. Man's a genius. You don't want to get contaminated. He's just got it locked into what he's doing, just constantly doing shows. He was doing shows, pretty late up until the cancellation. I did, uh, I forget the last day I did a show. Man, I think it was, I think it was, I don't remember, but by Friday, everything was canceled by Friday. We were like, we can't do this. Yeah. I remember talking to you about that, man. I was fucking weird. It was weird. Comedy stores shut down, man. That's like, yeah, we, but it had to. It had to. And for for everybody that's skeptical, it's really about old folks and folks that are immune compromised. I mean, if you look at Idris Elba on his Twitter page, that guy, first of all, that guy's a stud. I mean, that guy had a lot of respect for that guy because not only is a badass actor, but he also had a real Moy Thai fight. He had a real amateur Moy Thai fight. He's training Moy Thai and he got into it as a fucking huge movie star. And it's a real fight. If you watch it, they're really fighting. Really? Yes. Yeah. It's fucking. What movie is this? Not a movie. Why don't know what he trained, he trained it probably for, he was in James Bond, right? Was any, um, it's probably, it's not a shit ton of movies. He's definitely done movies where he had a fuck people up. So he probably trained martial arts for that or maybe just enjoyed doing it, but he got really got into Moy Thai and he actually had a fight. And it looked good. He looked good. He looked like a really good amateur, you know? And he, he fought hard. It was a real battle, but you're giving this to the guy. But he, um, has it and he's been doing these videos, updating and talking to people on his Twitter. And he seems fine. He seems fun, but he's really healthy. He's a robust, healthy, well-kept man. He takes care of himself. Yeah. Same, same as a lot of these NBA players that have supposedly had it. A lot of them are asymptomatic. So not, we're not worried about them. We're worried about old people. We're worried about people that are overweight, people that smoke cigarettes. That's, but this is a wake up call to a way worse disease. Like, if this was the avian flu, if this was, if this was something that killed 60% of the people, like, um, you know, there's an article in the Atlantic about this. I think it's, this is where I found that the avian flu killed like, it was like 60%. The one that they killed all the chickens in the early 2000s. It was 60% fatality rate. So if you got it, it was more likely to kill you than not kill you. Jesus Christ. Yeah. And they got rid of that one pretty quick. But that kind of one is what we got to be really worried about. This one we have to be worried about for our older folks and our folks that aren't doing well. But it's a good wake up call. It's good. Look, no one responded perfectly. No one in terms of no cities, no countries, no one did, but everybody got caught off guard. We have to realize everybody got caught off guard. We didn't know the only way they really know that something like this is going to happen is that it happens and then there has to be a response. So now we're going to get better at figuring out what to do. So my hope is that we get through this and then it makes us a little nicer to each other. And then we also realize, okay, we have to have a plan in place in case a really bad one happens. And we have to figure out what steps can be done to make sure that doesn't happen again. Right. Yeah, man. I mean, this is that is definitely what I mean, if we needed something like this, I wish it wasn't something that is going to kill a lot of people's grandparents. And I wish it was something something a little less, but damn, you're totally right, man. Because it's been a long time since we've had to as a planet deal with a problem at this level. And it's teaching us that there is a global civilization. It's teaching us that we are interconnected. And it's definitely inviting us to re-prioritize our lives, man, because holy shit. And there's consequences to living in a way that you don't feel or health your ethical. Right. Like one of the reasons why they have those ag-gag laws, we're not allowed to film factory farms, it's because because people would find it horrific. Right. And that that will be bad for business. Well, that's not how we're supposed to look at it. See, that is a, that's, that's a symptom of terrible thinking. Right. It's supposed to be the opposite way. We're supposed to make it so that it's not horrific to look at. Right. We're supposed to make it so that it's not this terrible thing. Now, that's the difference between doing things that are that feel natural and doing things that are horrific. And the horrific ones are the ones where all the diseases are coming from. If you think about these farming operations, like, for just like, let's just think about these wet markets. When you got all these animals in the open air piled on top of each other, dead animals laying on a plate, dead animals laying on a table, some laid stretched out on the floor, and you have them all over the place, you're going to have problems. There's going to be air and heat and bacteria is going to mix with each other. Yeah. And then it creates things. That's what happened with the avian flu that happened in animal agriculture, swine flu, same thing. These fucking flues, these horrible bugs, a lot of them come from animals. You don't think it was a bio weapon? No, I don't think so. I don't think so. I think the real fear, if you talk to all the experts, the real fear is an actual known thing jumping from animal to human. We talked to a little, yeah, when we were at the CDC, don't ever forget it. I never forget it either. The gariest fucking interview ever of all, not just that show, just of all sitting with that. I wish I could remember his name, the guy ran this the head of the place. Didn't we have some crazy flight to where flew in and we didn't have any sleep? When we, when we, we missed a flight because we got stoned and we talked at the airport. And we talked for like a fucking hour and a half and then suddenly we were like, oh, fuck, our flight. That's right. We didn't just miss it by like five minutes either. We missed it by like 20, 30 minutes. I look right at the airport. And it was empty at the airport and we're like, oh, fuck, man, we, there's, we have to tape the show tomorrow. Do you remember? Yeah. So we had a flight, different flight and we like barely got an hour sleep, right? I think there, I think one of us might have had some Mcoffinall. Oh, that's right. We took that stuff. Yeah, that stuff, if you've never like new vigil, if you've never had a or provigil or new vigil, I think the real similar. I don't remember which one one I've used. They're providials. What I used. No, new vigil. That's what I used. Definitely you know, the new one. And it, uh, it doesn't, it's not speed now, but it definitely gives you energy and it keeps you awake in the weirdest way. But it's like, but you're making it in a agreement. Like, okay, here's my agreement. I want to stay up. Um, but I promise to get sleep from now on, right? I'll get sleep the next day. I'm not going to keep using this. There's not something I'm going to keep using and stay up all the time. No, no, that's crazy. But that's, you can use it for that. Like, if you're a real crazy pro, like I know some people that use that shit for writing, they're right on that shit. Yeah. And they feel like without it, they don't feel like they're having the energy. Yeah, man. I mean, that's the trap of all those things. Any kind, anything that's any kind of new traffic's going to do that, man. It's like, but also I think some people from the sleep deprivation, that's where they become antennas for the good ideas. You know, they like to get in this like, fevered state of not sleeping for days at a time and go literally insane. And somewhere in there, they write really good stuff. That's what the, you know, news radio, the staff at news radio, these to do that on purpose. Paul Sims, Paul Sims, brilliant guy, the guy who created news radio, and he thought it would be a good idea to have a writing staff fill with a bunch of psychos who were willing to play video games and stay up to four o'clock in the morning. I mean, that was like this mad vagabond crew of writers that he had assembled. And they would play video games and just talk shit. And then they would start writing at like 2 a.m. sometimes. But they would come up with these amazing scripts because in the scripts were so ridiculous. Some of them were so ridiculous. And it's because they were delirious when they were writing them. They were just instead of doing drugs, they were doing the drug of just staying awake. Dude, this is for me. I've just, I started doing this about six months ago. Maybe a little longer. Uh, waking up at 4 a.m. Regardless of when I went to sleep, I was having some insomnia. And so I started, I realized like shit, I'll just like wake up when I wake up. And then waking up 4 a.m. if you haven't saw me that is going to cure your fucking insomnia because when nighttime rolls around, you're exhausted. But not only that, 4 a.m. is like the great time for writing weird shit. You still have a sleep. And the stuff you write is it's like really feels like you're tripping. You know, especially waking up at 4 a.m. and then like eating weed. I was doing that. So you do eat weed first and then start writing? Yeah. Well, now what my system before the fucking apocalypse was. And again, I wasn't doing this every day, but I did do it for a stretch because I got into David Goggins. Oh, shit. The Goggins flu. And waking up at 4. I got to go. I got to go. But 4 a.m. eat weed. Go to the gym. And because I was at the gym, because I was at the gym, that's where I was right. You were there that early? Well, no, because it would open it. I got there once before the gym opened. Must have felt like a savage. No, I didn't do it because what happened was I got to the gym and then I did it. I felt pretty fucking cool. But then I went into the car and I had like 30 minutes to blow. And I'm fucking stone man. And I'm sitting there baked. And I'm like, fuck it. I'll just like sit in the car and try to meditate. This is in the parking garage of the goddamn Hollywood Equinox. Now, let me tell you something, man. That area of Hollywood is already fucking weird. But I'm sitting there with my eyes closed. It kind of tripping. I feel like I'm half asleep half awake. I look over. There are two dudes creeping up to my car window creeping up there. And I'm like, what the fuck? I was sitting in the passenger side. I jumped to the driver's side, started the car. I'm driving through the parking garage. Stoned. These two weirdos were definitely walking up to my car. I'm like tripping. I'm like, what the fuck? Fuck. I'm fuck. I'm not going to work out. And so I leave. And I'm like, what the fuck? I'm going to let these two like 4 a.m. weird vampires stop me from working out. So I drive back in. One of them's like leaning up against a pillar, like just staring at me creepy dude. These people look like the lost boys or something. But they're probably praying on the cars of people that go to work out. They're probably looking for a car to break into it. Right. And that's what 4 a.m. people that are out on meth. And they know that this is assholes like to go to the gym and leave their shit in their car. Right. There you go. There you go. It was terrifying. But you know, those, that's what you get at 4 5 4 to 5 a.m. is you get methods and you get people who are trying to improve their lives. It's the funniest mix of people. You get people who are like, I'm not going to waste the fucking second. I'm going to get up early. I'm going to exercise. I'm going to write because that's when like, I mean, this is a wooer idea. Feel free to light that shit again. There's an idea of prana, which is like energy. And there's more energy in the morning than there is at night. So if you get up at 4, you're getting like the, the purest, most amount of the shit. So that's why a lot of people meditate it really early while like a lot of monks get up really early is because like it's a, I don't know. It's just a very, it's the most psychedelic time. Way more psychedelic than like midnight. Yeah, it has, you're, you're having your exerting some form of control over your life. That especially right? You're exerting discipline. Like my friend, Jaco, he says discipline equals freedom. He gets up every morning at 4 30. There you go. And he puts a photo of his watch on Instagram. And usually it says go time or something along those lines. Get after it. That's a fucking cool fucking day. I love it's the best. Well, driving, I mean, before the pandemic when there was still traffic, driving around at 4 a.m. You're awake. You're half asleep. Also, I think it's easier to work out that early because you're, but whatever part of your resist, that shit is just like week. Gotta be careful lifting weights in the morning. You go to, you really want to warm up because you can injure yourself a little easier sometimes because you're not that. Yeah, because you're sleeping all night. You're kind of stiff. You want to warm everything up. Get everything going. Um, they say that people lifting weights. It's not the best idea to lift like your personal record dead lifts and shit like that first thing in the morning. It's just, yeah, you gotta heat your body up. It makes sense. Your body's more heated up by the end of the day. By the end of the day, you're loose. You've been walking around, doing stuff, looking forward to your workout, getting pumped. And then you can go in there and work out. I used to love Jaco class at 8 30 p.m. For me, that was perfect because Jaco was like 8 at 8 30. It's like, man, I got plenty energy. I've eaten all day. You know, it's like I'm not tired yet. Like going to bed but you know, because back then I was going to bed at like two o'clock in the morning every, every night anyway. But it was like 8 30 was perfect. Done by 10. I'd hit the comedy store beyond stage of 11. That's crazy. I don't like working out at night. I loved it. I loved it. It's great because you're, you have energy. But, but it's easy to do because you wake up at noon, you know, and just fucking stumble out of bed. Do whatever bullshit you have to do that day. If I have my day off from, you know, doing stand up at night, yeah, it's easy. Just, eating hang out and then eventually work out. But if you get up in the morning, you get a little bit of a victory. A little bit of a victory. Just having accomplished that thing you've gotten up. And then next thing you know, you're doing chin ups. Maybe you're doing chin ups. You know, doing champs? Well, I could do like two do do do do do do what I would do more of what it would be is like me sitting on those nice couches, the equinox riding because like I said, I don't want to work out. Yeah, I would procrastinate. And that's what I realized is like I do my best riding at the gym. That's hilarious. So do you bring a little note before you? Yeah, I just started bringing my gear there to right. And then I would just sit and write and it would spend so much time riding because of that part of you that doesn't want to work out would rather write. Yeah. It's like when you have to write and you find yourself cleaning. It's that, you know, you can like sort of convert your procrastination into something positive. Yeah. That's interesting. Then I would go work out, you know, but I would like, I was so when I was doing that man, I was getting the best ideas. I was just running on the treadmill stone. If you know, five, 30 or whatever the fucking gym open and you're always listening to this like I started listening to that was when I was listening to Goggins. So I'd be blasted, listening to Goggins running on the fucking treadmill. Like yeah, I'm going to do ultra fucking marathon. How about that? I'm never going to do ultra marathon. You listen to him too. And he's aware that people like me are going to be hypnotized by him because he's like, don't do what I'm doing. You can kill yourself. No, like there's no people like me or just exploding. I don't know. How many people do you think of collapse to the gym because a David Goggins? I bet like what? 30,000 people. It's like driven and stuff. Yeah. For sure. This is probably a lot of blown out knees out there. blown out fucked up backs. Going biceps. That guy will run with his foot falling off. This stepbook is really good. What's up? It's called can't hurt me. Yeah. Jesus. It's amazing. He like so's his calf muscle back on a swig. He's a badass man. 100%. That guy could like I could like if that guy wanted to like burrow into an elephant, he could like a good dude too. I like hanging out with him. He must be. I've hung out with him a few times. Gonna dinner a few times. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. He went to the fights a couple times. He's a good dude. He's a fun guy. You're my friend. He's enlightened. He's something special. There's a switch to that guy has that we all wish we had where he can he can power through. But also he's a beacon of inspiration. Like for other people when David Goggins does the shit that he does. And when he has those speeches while he's running, you know, like someone was talking to him was like 104 degrees outside and he goes, why are you running? He goes, I'll tell you why I'm running because you're not motherfucker. Yeah. He goes, that's why I'm running. And you know, it is out there just I mean, he's constantly doing it. Like he's constantly pushing himself. That's what I love to me. That's the he's like a servant in that way. He's a servant. He's a servant to the world. He's he's not just like he's really giving people because like he's he posts pictures of himself when he was like sort of fat all the time. Yeah. Yeah. He's showing people like, look, this is the possibility. Any moment you can do this at any and I love that because I do I know when I see him like he's like running through glass. He's running like this. You know, he's like running through like swarms of mosquitoes and malaria swamps. Just to show people, look, it doesn't the part of you that's telling you that you can't do this because of X in your environment is probably wrong. Not all the time, but for sure, man, a lot of the time wrong. A lot of time. And that for a lot of us, that's like so powerful. Like I've met of all the self-help books. I've listened to, I listened to one audible. That's the best one. By floor, hands down. That's the best one, man. But because it's real, it's not from a guy who really hasn't done anything that's trying to get you motivated to go out there and conquer in life. It's from a guy who's actually done some really fucking crazy shit and is telling you that you can do it too and that he used to be weak. Yeah. He's doing something right now because Cameron Haynes son, Trulett, is trying to break Goggins 24 hour chin up record. So Goggins was at, he was like, when, I think it's on Cameron Haynes Instagram page. See if he let put the video on his Instagram page. But he was at some ungodly number of chin ups when they were making the video. He's trying to break that break that record. He's like, I've been doing chin ups for nine hours straight. Fuck that. Like 1500 chin ups or something stupid. Crazy. Yeah. And he still had all those hours to go. So I think it might even be like a two day thing. I don't know how many days are supposed to be doing this. But it's some, does he have it in there with Goggins? Is there a video of Goggins doing chin ups? I mean, the stories have got, hope I'm not releasing any information that shouldn't get out. Is this live again? Nope. I don't know. You can't find it. Yeah. Whatever. Anyway, you want to see the show? He's doing, I want to love this year show. So anyway, shout out to try out, shout out to Trulett. Good luck, Truett. Shout out to Goggins. I hope I hope they battle. All right. This thing Netflix, I told them. What's it called? It's called the Midnight Gospel. The Midnight Gospel with Duncan Trussel. And Pendleton Ward, the guy I made adventure on. It's kind of cool. It comes out 420. Look at that Netflix. This has never been seen. It's exclusive for your show. They gave us permission. This is Joey Diaz's in this. And this is a podcast I did. Taking off my glasses. Yeah. This is a podcast I did with Damien Ackles. Do you know that is? He was like in the group of kids who got accused of murdering someone in the woods. There's a whole no. Oh yeah. There was like a whole documentary about him on I think HBO. It's like basically he would this dude, the I had a moment of podcast. He wrote a book on magic. He practiced his magic. But she's just talking about him. He was on, he was on death row. And they did a DNA test that exonerated. But he was like about to be executed. He's on death row studying Zen Buddhism. Like Zen priest was working with him to like basically like you know preparing for his death. You know, so he was badly beaten on death row. He was almost executed. Then he was exonerated because of DNA. But we did this interview before the show obviously. And this is just a way that we figured out to take podcasts and put him in. Hey, once he gets exonerated, did it before we start this? Does he get do they have to pay him? I don't know. It's a great question. I think maybe part of it that they may I'm not I don't want to say because I have no idea. I have no idea. I think they cause on death row. Yeah. I mean it seems like you owe him something. Well, yeah, it's literally innocent. Yeah, I was an actual innocent person that you almost killed and then you treat you made their life hell. Yeah. I mean, that's the torture of knowing you didn't do something but being accused of that thing. Well, I know man. Knowing it's going to cost your life and you really didn't do it. Yeah. But let's play it. You know how in certain Buddhist traditions, like say Tibetan Buddhism, they talk about what sort of they use empowerment. You know, it's like a current of energy. Yes, it's passed along from master to student. Ceremonial magic is the exact same thing. The Knights Templar started receiving this current whenever they were over there. That's how it makes it's way back to Europe. Eventually, it makes it's way to the United States through the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, which was the order that Crowley was a member of before he, you know, went off to That's how it makes its way back to Europe. Eventually, it makes its way to the United States through the Hermitic Order of the Golden Dawn, which was the order that Crowley was a member of before he, you know, went off to the OTO. You had McGregor Mathers, Dionne Fortune, the poet W.B. Yates. All of these people were members of the Golden Dawn. That's how this current makes its way to the U.S. One second. Hey, Steve! What the fuck? You need to shine that light in my fucking eyes? That's how you're gonna talk to customers. I'll just take my ship full of cats and find another junk out. A ship full of cats? Ah, shit. My apologies! Look at all these wonderful gifts and gadgets here. We got a fresh printer, time slapper, and some cans, and you want that advantage and little. Ugh. That ain't cheap, pal. It's gonna be five cats. He's bluffing. I can get it for three. Watch this. Three. Five. Fine, Steve. Four. And that's my last offer. All right. You take some flakes out of my middle mouth, but fine. Four it is. Send them over. Yeah. Yeah. So, Duncan Drosz. That's so bizarre. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. Yeah, man. It was like, it was the craziest thing working on that show with Pendleton, because he's like a, like, you know, we throw the word genius around. But the guy's an actual genius. So it was like, really, really, really, really cool to get to do it. So I'm sorry, I'm interrupting you. But it's a combination of your podcast, and then some interstitial stuff that you just like scripted. It's yeah. It's like basically my character is this guy, Clancy, who lives in a place called the Chromatic Ribbon, where people use multiverse simulators to simulate universes so that they go inside and harvest the technology and sell it. And so my character has a malfunctioning used multiverse simulator that isn't really working to produce technology. And because it's malfunctioning every single world in it is going through some kind of apocalypse. And so my character goes into his simulator and interviews people in the dying world. So that's basically the idea of the show. So he took podcast dialogue. It's basically what happens during the apocalypse, what's going to happen? People are going to do podcasts. People are going to still have conversations. So these conversations, we just set them in these surreal universes where shit's melting down, and where like Clancy meets these various people. And kind of learns from them, which crazy is you started this a long time ago. And it's coming to fruition right when the apocalypse hits. I know, dude. That's the thing. It's like a little on the nose. I mean, you know. You know. I didn't know. It's on the nose. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it's almost like it's almost like you knew. It's almost like you had a tie. And then the universe was like, this is a perfect time for Duncan shit to come out. And let's coincide it. I mean, look, just look at how bizarre your show is. Yeah. And then the fact that it's a hybrid of podcast conversations and then written stuff. So strange. Yeah. It's perfect time for it. Yeah. I think it is a perfect time for it. And I hope like because some of the like every guest we chose for this, they all had this like really like amazing thing to say like, echols in this episode, one of the things he says, you know, I asked him like, do you feel like you kind of like were blessed? You ended up in solitary confinement? Because that's where he woke up. That's where he started meditating. That's where he started studying magic. That's where he started working on himself. Because there was nothing else to do. Right. And in this one, he says like, I feel luckier than some millennials out there right now. Who are like completely disconnected. Because that's the coolest thing about him is you would expect a person who'd been on death row to be bitter. He's the sweetest, most genuine, wonderful person ever. And it's like whatever went on in the situation of being on the brink of the abyss, whereas about to get murdered by the state for something he didn't do, something about that didn't turn him into someone who was like shell shocked or angry, but like really turned him into like someone very compassionate. And I guess grateful for his life. You know, and that to me, like it's like he's like the goggons of death row. I mean, if you can be not bitter after being on death row for something you didn't do. And like getting physically assaulted, you know, just wondering every day if you were going to die, if like you can still maintain an attitude of service or contribution to society in some way or another, then any of us can. Any of us can. And to me, that's like, I think that's, I hope some of that stuff trickles out from the show into the world right now, especially man right now, especially when you say studies magic, what do you mean by that? So we wrote a great book called High Magic, which is, I think that's what's called. It's a fantastic book on magic is really the wrong word for. There's an entire like mythos or religion that got sort of wiped out by. Terrence McKenna talks about it a lot. I got kind of wiped out by, I got, you know, superstition. So witchcraft is we understand it now because of Hollywood is like, you know, ladies riding around on brooms and shit, but it just used to be mid mid with for it. It used to be like healing women who would like deliver babies and stuff. And, but these, these were all connected to, they're all at pagan roots. And, and so essentially you can follow back this branch of data that some people say started in Sumeria or Egypt, ways of meditating, ways of connecting with the universe that are ritualistic in nature, but seem mysterious to us because even though like if you want to see what it looks like, just look at a Catholic mass, you're looking at a ceremony. It's theorgy, I guess you'd call it. That is a magical ceremony where bread gets converted into the flesh of a God that you eat. So that's a, you're what they're all wearing robes, they're burning incense. So, so that is magic. That's what ceremonial magic looks like. It's non different from ceremonial magic. Someone in the Catholic church might tell you, this is a magic. This is me praying to the infinite and asking for forgiveness. That's magic. You're connecting with a divine intelligence, you're hoping from your connection with the divine intelligence to produce some change in your own psychology in your own life and maybe create good fortune or whatever it is you're praying for a healing, whatever it may be, that's magic. So magic is that and that it's, I'm not saying the Catholic Catholicism wouldn't necessarily be considered a branch of magic. But one of the things he said in this interview is like if the Bible is one of the most powerful magical grimwars there is. I mean, you read that shit. If you really look in it, there's all kinds of bizarre stuff that doesn't seem to make it onto Christian radio. Like what? Well, like when in the book of Genesis, it's why are they saying, why did they refer to themselves as a plurality when God's talking it's not like if when they're saying like, why do we throw Adam and Eve out of the garden? It's we if we don't do something about this, they will become like us. We there's a plurality that's being mentioned there. And so what is that plurality? So throughout the Bible, there's mentions of angels, the book of Ezekiel, the famous one that you have followed just go to is there's all these contacts with angels, hyper dimensional beings that have some data set they want to bring to the world. Quite often depending on what book you're in, it's some terrifying prophecy about the end of the world that's coming. But sometimes it's, you know, some message of hope or some message of healing. So you could say magic is a non Christian oriented method for connecting with those various entities using ritual. That's one branch of it. Now, I'm not saying by the way, these beings exist or don't exist, but you could say if you wanted to get like a psychological, you could say we have buried inside of us. Bit archetypes bits of the collective that are buried deep inside of us and that there are ways to connect to these little fragments of the collective mind. And you know, many people know have their own method for doing that. One of the methods to do that might be doing a ritual. And for a moment, allowing yourself to imagine that you're trying to talk to an extra dimensional being, Alistair Crowley famously did one of these rituals and contacted a, oh God, what was I can't remember what the being was called. But it looks like a gray alien. This is before people were talking about gray aliens. We looked at it. Did you draw it? He's drawing it. The drawing of it. Yeah. And it looks like a gray alien. It's like the 1800s. It's like the 1800s. Alistair Crowley was in 1800s. Yeah. Right. 1900 1800 1800. If you pull it at your gilly suit, you remind me of a drunk over weight girl with large breasts. They keep suggesting a halter top. Like you're in Florida outside drinking it some other tell. I told that motherfucker. I'm going to leave you. I'm going to leave you Clarence. I'm tired of your bullshit. I told him I went with a cigarette in a hand. Wow. Look at that drawing by Alistair Crowley. Yeah. That does look like a gray alien. Yeah, man. And he likes what we're going to look like, man. Let's cut the shit. Right. That's what we're going to look like. Right. When you see people that are hairy and and and and brutish, we think of them as being like closer to prehistoric man. Right. Yeah. You see a guy covered in hair. He looks more like a beast. Yeah. And when we see people that are thinner and more slender, they become more more a gentle version of people. And we associate that oftentimes with intelligence. We associate directly associate intelligence with frailty. Right. We all do that. When you see some some super genius guy, usually their frail, right. Occasionally they're bad asses. But there's a lot of those super genius guys who couldn't fight their way out of a web here. We're back. Right. Well, Hawking is the ultimate example because his body literally failed him while he was coming over this greatest discoveries. Yeah. So this is this is this our future. We're going to have big heads. We're going to they're going to fucking crisper your way into a head that lets you live in any dimension you want at any time. You transport yourself from one planet to the other. We're a imagine what we've done with our stupid monkey brains. Now imagine it was 150% larger, 150% more brain and then incorporated all sorts of fucking electronics that let you interface with space time around you and all kinds of other wacky ways of communicating. We couldn't even possibly imagine now just like people from the 18 hundreds couldn't have ever possibly imagined cell phones. Right. And this is the idea is like, OK, we're going to go there. And then when we get there, the way we understand space time is going to be different than the way we understand it now. Yeah. So what that means is theoretically you could connect or communicate with a being that is outside of space time, which is a future version of us right now using like various methods, DMT being one of the big ones on the planet right now. But also using other methods that are a little bit more precise because with DMT, it's kind of like you're not really putting in GPS coordinates necessarily. Some people do it with intention like a shaman will do it like with intention and can like, you know, excuse me, can you give me another bloody Mary? I told you Clarence, I'll fucking leave you. Cigarette in your hand flip, flip time. I will fucking leave you. Clarence, if you keep some of these demons, I am out of here. Clarence is over there with Miller like you ain't going nowhere. Just stop. Just fucking stop. You always do this. She gets drunk. She says she's leaving. I'm a fucking leave. I'm out of here. Clarence, I'm going to fucking leave you son of a bitch. I'm putting all my ghillie suit and going down to Tampa. You son of a bitch. I'm going to visit my family in Clearwater. I'm out of here Clarence. It's over. Anyway, yeah, maybe you can connect through time and space to these things that are already here. Like our understanding of time and space were locked in man, but like, so magic is like ridiculous on one level as it absolutely sounds and is on one level on another level is at the very least a creative technique so that you can sort of summon a dream state while you're awake with the intent of causing some change in the world around you using for a lot of people who can sit at a nonstandard way. Well, just in terms of your perception of how you view the world, you can alter that pretty radically. I mean, from someone who has an amazingly positive perception versus someone has an amazingly negative perception, you look at the results right over overwhelming benefit of being a positive person. Overwhelming. There's something to thoughts and ideas that propel you in a good way. And for having a good architecture, having a good philosophy, having a good operating manual for how you view the world and how you act and behave. Part of that, so you get an up at four o'clock in the morning, that's what that is. You're like enforcing your ability to sort of dictate the positive aspects of your future. You're deciding to take action. You're strengthening your bond with the way you interface with current reality. And I was doing it. I mean, not rigid. You're not rigid. Why is it? Why is it up? What the fuck? Oh, Christmas. God, listen, man. If you want to meet me here, I'll meet you here. We could do some five, eight sessions. I love that, man. I mean, yeah, I would love that. I'm 100% down. Yeah. Come down here. We'll get pomple, put Slayer on and fucking rock. I'm down. What else do we have to do? What else do we have to do? It would be a great thing. Look, I'll tell you one thing, though, I am enjoying not going out. I'm enjoying it. I'm enjoying being home most of the day, other than the day of the new podcast. But not doing shows at night gives you so much more energy. Oh, my God, it's crazy. You're like, can you feel like rested? Feel good. I fucking love it, man. It's I get to be with my son more. It's like really nice. The place we just moved into whoever lived there before has had a flourishing garden. So I've just been going out back pulling spinach out of the ground. Oh, man. I know, man. It's left you food. They left us food. That's pretty dope. Yeah. That's such a such a smart thing if you have a yard. I get mad at myself for not having a garden. Look, I'm on a garden right now. I've had one in the past, but I don't have a garden right now. Yeah. I think it's like, especially now, we should realize like man, you should have food in a freezer somewhere. You should have a garden. That's right. And a gun. But I got some elk for you. Do you really? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Man, a lot. The truck is would be very grateful. Yep. First and a lot. I have bought a box of these insulated freezer bags for people too. Thank you. Yeah. It's such a that's a nice aspect to be in a hunter because you have, you get hundreds of pounds of meat from one animal. So you can share that with a lot of people. It's really, it makes me feel real good that I'm giving some to people than the semi pictures of cooked food. Like Tom Papa just sent me this picture. Really? It's roasted. He cooked. Yeah. He's an elk fiend now. Tom Papa eats a shitload of elk. Well, I don't think I've ever had elk. You'd love it. It's delicious. I'm going to give you a bunch of different kinds, but the sausage is the easiest to make. Cool. So easy. You just pan fry it. You can do it in butter. I prefer to do it in beef, tallow. I just seared in beef, tallow. My favorite way to do it is I get to get it to like a medium, medium temperature. And then I put tomato sauce in with it. And let it simmer in the tomato sauce. Man, you're the best. That's going to be so cool from my kid to have apocalyptic Rogan elk. That's going to be the best to bring back elk during a pandemic to your family. Well, that's an elk. I mean, that's an elk that died from a shot from a bone arrow. You know what I mean? That's a, there's something about that to me that there's, there's more power to the, the meat. It's like I, not more power in that. It's like a powerful thing. Do more power in that. Like I know what that animal was. That animal is a wild beast of vating predators. And me, a stupid, doey human being managed to sneak into range where I could hit it and kill it in one shot with a bone arrow. I even have a video of it that my friend Cam Haynes took. So I have this animal that dropped and then we took it apart and put it and now I eat it when I eat it. I think of what that animal was. I am going to live the majestic life. And if I didn't take it out, it would have gotten taken out by mountain lines or bears or it would have froze to death in the winter. Sometimes that happens. Their teeth get ground down. And there's an older male too, which is what you want to get because those are the ones that have passed their DNA down. So there's a story to that meat and there's a connection to that meat. And there's no risk from that meat. When you're when you're thinking about the risk to society of, um, like these kind of diseases that happen through agriculture, I think one of the reasons why that is is because it's not natural ever for animals to be stuffed together like that. So when it is, nature is just like fuck you for breaking the rules. And then these viruses start spreading. It's almost like that's what it is for being unnatural because that those kind of diseases don't exist that much in animals in nature. They do sometimes like Bruce O'Losis, like some buffalo have Bruce O'Losis. It's a bad disease that cattle can get. And then it can infect the cattle and sometimes elk have it too. Like there's a few diseases like animals always have diseases. But it seems like those one that jump to people, the vast majority of them have come from us treating animals in a very unnatural way. That's true. But dude, I don't mean to get all conspiratorial here, but isn't it a little weird that Wuhan is where that virology laboratory was? It is. Yeah. I mean, like, I don't know. To me, they're just weird. But it's also weird that there's bats laying on the floor there. Good point. That's weird too. And we know for a fact that diseases jump from, um, date, they're tracing these things. This is what's fucked up. Michael Osterholm, who was on, who was, uh, he's an expert in infectious diseases viruses and stuff like that. He was explaining to us how they know certain diseases are morphing. And they're changing. They become more and more human-like. And they were talking about this. Actually, this one that deer get, that's called CWD. And, um, it's a called chronic wasting disease. And it's first discovered that my friend Doug Durren sent me a synopsis of when they first discovered it. But I believe it existed in like the 1980s. This is when they first started seeing it in animals. Uh, but it was like a mule deer here in animal there. But now it's infected like a giant population of deer in the Midwest. And, um, they don't really have a cure for it. It's fatal 100% of the time and it hasn't made the jump to people, but it could. Oh. And they're scared. And Michael Osterholm was saying this basically, these things are morphing all the time. They're becoming more and more like something that can invade. a human host. See that? Bro! That's terrifying. Terrifying. Terrifying. And I think there's a battle constantly going on between these things that hog up too much resources and take up too much of a population slice like humans. We're on every goddamn rock everywhere. And nature tries to throw curveballs at you. I mean, that's what nature does. Nature's like, what are you doing? You live it in your own shit. Oh, great. Here's the plague. You know, like, that's what's happened throughout history. With whether it was with poor sanitation or whether it was, you know, animal agriculture, whatever the fuck it is, people have caught weird diseases throughout time, whether it's different animals, can bite you and give you a bowl of that kind of shit. This, I mean, these weird diseases have existed forever. And they're basically the same as like viral panthers. Right. What's a panther? A panther's that it makes sure there's not too many deer. Yeah. The panther is the fucking cleanup crew. Because if it wasn't for that, there would be fucking deer everywhere. Right. Your from North Carolina, yeah, you know what it's like in a country. It's crazy. Yeah. Sometimes because North Carolina doesn't have any mountain lions. North Carolina doesn't have any wolves. So like maybe they have a little bit of wolves, but not, not a lot. Right. They got some bears and they got a lot of deer. Yeah. Yeah. And everywhere. But New York state, they have a terrible situation with deer and like Long Island. There's parts of Long Island that were infested with deer. And they're like, what are we doing? We can't, we're going to just shoot them. Just going to go out and shoot. They're trying to give them birth control to thinking about given deer's birth control. Oh, shit. Yes. Cause there's no animals out there to eat them. So they just keep fucking, they just keep fucking and overpopulating. Did you read the stand? Yes, I did. Remember that? See, that was one of the things he talks about is how is there going down the highway they would hit like herds of deer so thick. Oh, that's right. It would like block the highway because they were like starting to overpopulate there because there is no one there to like call the herd. Dude, I had a gig once when I was living in New York and it was in Western Massachusetts. So Western Massachusetts, if you are in New York where I was in New Rochelle, you could get there in a few hours like cause like two and a half, three hours or something like that. You get to where this area is. And where the fucking gig was was so infested with deer. I've never seen anything like it in my life. You're driving down the street and it was probably, it was hot out. So it was probably the summer. So it was driving down the street and these things are just jumping in front of the car left and rentals like this is nuts. Coming home on the highway was terrifying. I had to go 30 miles an hour on the highway just with my foot hovering. Just ready to stop on the brakes because these motherfuckers were just running in front of the highway. I saw a hundred of them. I saw them all over the place. I might have seen 200 of them driving home. Everywhere you look, there was fucking deer. Why? Cause there's no predators. It's an imbalance and eventually something's going to happen. And one of the things that has happened is Lyme disease. These fucking deer have spread this terrible disease to so many people out there through the ticks. The ticks have jumped from the deer because there's so many of them. There's fucking ticks everywhere because they're well fed. And like some ungodly percentage of these ticks have fucking Lyme disease. Right. And they jump on people and they give it to people and the people get sick. And then the people have to have a reaction to these deer. So they want to go out and slaughter the deer. Cause it's almost like nature is trying to balance itself out. Or is that I mean, like, you know, for us that God damn COVID-19 is the worst thing that's happened to people in their lifetime in the sense like this shit we're experiencing right now is completely unique. For COVID-19, I guess it's the equivalent of humans like colonizing another planet. Like that fucking virus. Just like what it did is for it's amazing. Like it finally made its way out of one biome into another. Yeah. It pulled it off. Whoever was down there mutating somebody had the great idea to like do whatever they did. I guess it's like to create a way to connect to those two receptors. What's it called? This like it's like a it connects to these two. Anyway, I don't know what the fuck I'm talking about. That's okay. It's like, but it like what it did is so spectacular for the virus. What's a, you know, catastrophe for humans. It's glory for the COVID-19. Like super organism that's now sweeping through the human biome. You know, yeah. And you know what else it did that's really interesting. It made it so that it doesn't give you any symptoms. And you're still contagious for days, the worst case scenario. So you can just keep spreading it. Yeah. Yeah, there was I was reading a friend sent me an email from Aspen, where apparently this is one Australian tourist, a bunch of Australian tourists had it, but one guy refused to quarantine. And he went skiing and went to restaurants, rode the bus and like, it's like a movie. It's, but it's a movie, right? Like that's what happens in a movie. Like this is this new thing going around. And this guy's like, fuck that. I'm here to ski. Yeah. It's like I'm here to ski. I'm going to eat. I'm going to restaurant. I'm riding the bus. Fuck it. Wow. What a dick. But that's in the movie. That's what happens. Right? There's a guy who's in the lab. And they're like, you have to be quarantined to lab and the guy is like, fuck this. I'm going outside. And he has a cigarette and then something bites him and runs off. And then that thing carries it in its teeth and bites him a person. And then actually it spreads to people and bugs. And next thing you know, it's a fucking epidemic. And it goes through this and then turns everybody into zombies. Yeah. That's 28 days later. Right? Was it a monkey? They were working on some sort of a disease in the monkey. You're going to pee that. Rage. It was like some, it was an animal rights group trying to free monkeys that had an experimental shit had been pumped into them. And the monkeys like attack the people trying to save them. Those people instantly turning his zombies and spread through the planet. Well, I was reading about this mountain line that tried to attack this. But I think it was a police officer was someone, I forget who the, but the cops had to wind up shooting the mountain line. But the mountain line had rabies. And now how crazy is rabies? It rabies tricks you into biting people to give him rabies. Like raccoons, raccoons are usually terrified of people. They just run up on you and they got rabies, squirrels, rats, all sorts of things. They're not scared of you at all. They're just fucking jack you if they have rabies. They come after you and you're like, what the fuck is going on? That thing is trying to give you its disease. It's a zombie movie. And if you don't go to a doctor, if you go to a doctor, they can fix it. But if you don't go to a doctor, rabies is fatal. It's just straight up fatal. There's like one person ever that survived from rabies and he probably wishes he didn't. Why? Probably was horrific. Probably, I mean, I don't know. I don't know. I don't know. I mean, the path permanent like normal. I don't know what's there. But there's very few cases of people surviving. It's more than 99% fatal rabies is a terrible disease to die from apparently to. Oh, it looks fucking awful, man. But there's a lot of animals that have it and they want to bite you. That's so crazy. It makes normally animals that are afraid of people. It makes them aggressive to people. Well, I mean, dude, did you read that thing about that guy? Like, Nui had AIDS and was infecting people on purpose. He was like getting off on like giving people AIDS. Like, you wonder how much of that was his decision and how much of it was some dark mutation where it started. Yes. I mean, because think of like, OK, I don't know. I'm trying to spread. I know you do this. I do it. I've tried not to do it as much. But the spreading of bad news, like you hear some bad thing that just happened. This person died. This catastrophe happened. You get on the phone and call somewhere like, hey, did you hear? And there's this weird rush and like spreading the bad news. You're kind of getting off on it. So in the same way, your idea swarm concept. It's the same thing with bad news. You become a carrier for the darkness. And so you call it. Now, I'm not saying don't tell people on awful shit's going on. But sometimes I notice I'll go through periods where all I'm doing is telling people about shit they should be afraid of. You know, spreading. And usually the way you do it is do some story about what's happening in the world. That's really a form of contagion, you know, and then that spreads and spreads and spreads. And then everyone's freaked the fuck out. And who knows, man? Maybe that creates the condition of sleepiness or sleepwalking that we need for these viruses to appear. You know, wonder what it is that's so attractive to us about breaking the news. I don't know. Did you hear who died? I used to hear what happened in India when Michael Jackson died. I've made a point of everything I want to call me. You're in town. I know. And they're like, dear, I'm like, no, what? Just to get them off to let them have the moment. I was like, I hadn't heard yet. Like, holy shit, really? That's hilarious. Wow. Wow. No, you've got to be fucking kidding me. You're joking, right? Because it's like that, you know, for them, I don't know what that feeling is. That's hilarious. Do it the next time some awful thing happens. Like, give your friends the saddest package. We're going to know now. They're going to hear this podcast. No, no, no, I use your trick. It's true though, man. What is the rush of telling people? I don't know. It's probably built into it, right? Because it's like a survival thing. Like if you were in a community and you knew a fire was coming, you want to tell people. So there's probably some reward mechanism. The worst is when someone told you, but they forgot they told you. So you try to tell them. And they're like, I told you, you should be listening. I broke the news to you. My wife does that to me all the time. She's like, I told you dummy. I'm like, oh, no, I hate that feeling. That's the worst we get caught. I hope the news to you. My wife does that to me all the time. She's like, I told you dummy. I'm like, oh no. I hate that feeling. That's the worst we did. Not listening to you. Look at how I knew I was just saying it again. Yeah. Yeah, you tried it. The sympathetic escape from your lack of failure. Yeah. No, I really, really failed. I did to myself. No, I knew that. I remember when you said I know. I know. I'm just talking out loud. That is the worst. I don't, that my wife has done that. Actually, where she's like, wait, well, what did I just say? And you're like, you were talking about. Isn't baby. Oh, yeah. When people are around each other all the time, they learn how to filter each other out. They have to. You need your loan space. And sometimes you get it while you're still there. You get it, but why you're still there by zoning out? You just got to be present more than you are doing that. That's right. That's right. That seems to be the key. You got a zone, man. It's okay to zone. Like don't get into some ridiculous. Definitely don't beat yourself up for zoning. No, well, especially as a creative person, I think zoning spacing out sometimes and just being bored. Sometimes we're the best ideas coming from. Yeah. Because you can sit around and think about things. Like today we're never bored. I mean, this is a common complaint about people when they're talking about one of the consequences, unintended consequences of social media addiction is that you're never bored. And that being bored is actually probably not a bad thing because it fills your head up with ideas. And you start thinking about things. And occasionally you're thinking about things that are good that you might not have thought of if you're just staring at people's butts on Instagram. That's right. Yeah. Board him. Well, that's like the guy I work with you like with meditation, this guy David Nick turned. He teaches me about boredom. It's an Buddhist concept, hot boredom and cool boredom. There's two types of boredom. One of them is where you're like, man, that's like the addictive boredom. Where you're like, I'm going to get out. I'm bored, but there's a sense of like, ah, the other type of boredom, cool boredom. That's more like what you're talking about, which is like just being okay where you're at in the moment, but admitting to yourself this is boring. Like that's one of the things it's boring. Like I'm bored right now. Like this is- YouTube videos are more fun. Let me go see something crazy on YouTube. See, conscious. Yeah. It's a fucking, do you ever like go to your phone when you wake up at night? Do you do that? Is that your go to like- When I wake up at night? Do you ever wake up at night? I do and I try to go back to sleep. I never just stay up. I just go back to sleep. See, that's what man, I gotta stop doing it. Cause I'll wake up and the first thing I do reach over for the phone, start looking at it, waiting to get sleepy again. Doesn't make you sleepy. It wakes you up. It wakes you up. Yeah, it's not good. It stimulates that area of your brain that gets lit up by electronics, P P P P P P. It's so exciting and stimulating. Next thing you know, you're awake. I do that the smoke pot thing too, and then right, but sometimes I do the smoke pot and workout thing and then it becomes the smoke pot and right thing because the rush right after you get high is like those are the best ideas come from. And like, I feel like you gotta grab those fuckers while you have them. And if it means postponing your workout for an hour, like that's actually the smart thing to do. It's the dumb thing to do to go through the workout first. Cause especially if you got high, cause those ideas, they're coming hard and fast for like the first part of the high and you probably won't get them like that for the rest of the high. So while you go from being straight sober to the big rush that you get in the beginning, that's when all my best ideas come from. It's the big rush which is like an hour from getting high to an hour later. That's the big rush. That's when I feel like I get the most, like where the fuck did that come from ideas? Yeah. And the best writing, like when I write things, it's like the cleanest. The filled with the most gems. There's more stuff in it. And then the other stuff is like editing it and putting it apart and taking it apart. But if you don't capitalize on that rush, I feel like you only get one of those a day. One big, especially like if you're sober and then you get high, that one first high rush of the day, that's not, doesn't last that long. And if you keep staying high, I don't think it's the same. I think staying high, you sort of settle in, right? Yeah. But the rush of just getting high, like, wow. Yeah. So many ideas. If you wasted that by doing chin ups, you're an asshole. Just agree. Go right. And then lift afterwards. Yeah, for sure, man. I mean, this is, yeah, you've got a harvest. When it's when the wheat is blowing, you've got a harvest. You can't just, but it's easy to trick yourself into thinking, oh no, I've got to stick to my fucking workout or whatever the thing is. It's not just working out. It's like whatever. I think it's important to prioritize those moments. I mean, especially if you're going with your, like with what a lot of people say, which is the antenna idea. Your receiver, your piggy nose signals, you're like SETI, but not for aliens, for ideas. And these search for extraterrestrial ideas, that's what you are. You're a satellite for that. And if you start getting, I mean, imagine SETI. Imagine someone at SETI doing chin ups. And suddenly they get like a, some signal from a far star system. And he's like, I'm going to finish my workout before I check out whether or not we're getting contacted by aliens. That's an asshole. If you're, cause the real question is, where do your ideas come from? Exactly. And if you're picking up whatever these creatures are and you've been blessed enough to get them, yeah, you should write them down. Got to write them down. It's kind of like, I mean, not, I don't like. You got to honor them. Honor them, right? Yeah. You'll act on them. That's why people that think of the muse, like the concept of the muse, that's one of the more, it's a productive way to think of it. Like Pressfield writes about it and Pressfield in the War of Art. And he's, you know, he's a very down to earth. He's not a silly man. He's a very down to earth person. But his perspective on the concept of the muse, it's very beneficial if you follow it. Because his perspective is essentially that you pay honor to this thing. You show up and you do the work like a professional and then it responds in turn. It comes to you. Yeah. And then these are what, it's like, we think of an idea, even though it's one of the most important factors in the entire construction of civilization. But somehow or another, we don't think of it as that. We think of people being that. And we are because we're being used by ideas. I know that sounds crazy. I really do. I know it sounds dumb too. But you are, you're coming up with these thoughts and we're thinking of them as like, random connections that you're making in your brain, which might be, it might be that. But it also might be that ideas are like a life form from another dimension that's trying to manifest itself in our current realm. And they do so through getting into people's heads and the more you call for them, the more they're there for you. And the more you show up. And you can call that the muse. You can call that whatever you want. Angel, Tesla believed it. Tesla believed it was getting signals from some other, some other planet or some other life forms. He had some weird shit that he wrote that's hard to decipher about what he, see if he can find that because that's a very interesting thing, Jamie. See if he can find what a Tesla, like Tesla had a take on receiving information from other galaxies. He had this take on where some of his inventions were coming from. It's like, what? Or some of the transmissions that he would receive. I mean, God damn it wouldn't have been amazing to talk to that guy. Yes. Imagine having a nickel a Tesla on the podcast. Oh, who knows, man. Maybe you still can one day. Maybe we can bring him back. Yeah, bring him back. Everybody, you create an AI Tesla. I think a lot of people have that feeling and some of them just don't come out of the closet. So to speak with it, because they're afraid they're going to get judged or ostracized. I think a lot of people feel like they have a direct contact with some kind of sentience that isn't embodied inside of them. And it's giving them ideas. And they're just terrified to put it out to the world because it sounds like you're fucking nuts. His claims are receiving signals from outer space for proven right a century later. Ooh, during the summer of 1899, Tesla set up a field laboratory in Colorado Springs, Colorado to the possibilities of using high altitude stations to transmit information and electric power over long distances. One, July. This is not what I'm talking about. This is about to signal. It's not like him getting, I went too quickly on that. Oh, OK. Where is the signals? This is like radio signals. Oh, that he was getting radio signals from other planets. After they're ruling out, I think this is about sending. After ruling out solar and terrestrial causes, he concluded the signals must be from another planet. Yeah, a seizure and how to vision, which is what? Like that's a, yeah, here it says one July day while tracking lightning storms. Oh, so is this actually equipment. It's equipment picked up a series of beeps. After ruling out solar and terrestrial causes, he concluded the signals must be from another planet. The following Christmas in response to the American Red Cross's request for a prediction of the greatest scientific achievement of the coming century Tesla wrote, brethren, we have a message from another world unknown and remote. It reads, it reads, one, two, three. In 1996, scientists published a study replicating Tesla's experiment and showing that the signal was in fact caused by the moon low passing through Jupiter's magnetic field. Holy fuck. He was picking up a moon passing through Jupiter's magnetic field. But he had woo ideas too. Oh, yeah, he was in love with the pigeon. He's in love with the pigeon, not just that though. He like, I think he did, they used in contact with like some kind of sentient intelligence, for sure. Why not? Why wouldn't you think of you? That's smart. Imagine how smart he was in comparison to like a regular dope. Hey, Mr. You want to buy a paper? You know, people from back then, some fucking dude selling papers in the corner. And then the greatest genius the world's ever known up to that point. Yeah. Wandering around, trying to figure out how to send electricity through the sky. Maybe that's all intelligence is though, man. It's like having the willingness to let yourself go crazy enough to believe you're not the creator of your ideas, to believe that you're an antennae. Maybe that's what makes a person intelligent. Maybe that's all it takes that and discipline. Well, yeah, the discipline to learn all the things that you need to know, to be able to study and actually implement that technology. Cytasla was both things. He was a genius, and he was probably some sort of a visionary in that way. Like he had like Elon has. He had an extra large magnet for ideas. Yeah. Yeah. I think anyone can do that. Strong as this, weird. Fucking strong, man. I'm so glad. Anytime you give me weed, I'm always forget how strong it is. And every time I'm like, man, you've got to be careful. We go high grade up in this pitch sun. It's important to go high grade. I think so. Yeah, absolutely. What do you think is going to happen to us? Do you think we're going to get through this in a relatively short order? Or do you think it's going to take five, six months? How long do you think it's going to take? Oh, god, damn these things are crazy. The lockdowns are crazy. I'm back in haunt you. Like San Francisco, the lockdown is crazy. Three weeks, 24 hours, stay off the streets. Don't go to work. Yeah, man. I think we're probably going to listen. If you go, if you want to hear my instinct, which is definitely going to be wrong, I think it's going to go. It's going to get better, much faster than we expect. I don't know why. I think that I have no reason to think that if you go by what they're saying, we're looking at like months and months and months. I guess like if I have to choose between listening to my own stoned intuition regarding stuff, which fits into my desires, which is I want it to blow over because I don't want people to get sick. I don't want to live in the apocalypse. I have a son. I don't want to run out of food. I don't want things to be back to normal. I want to go around people. But if you look at like, unless we're living, unless it's some vast ridiculous conspiracy, I think we're looking at least a couple of months, man. And I'm going by not a conspiracy because I think that in because I have a son now, and if I listen to my own instincts when it comes to shit from my kid, I'm going to be afraid to vaccinate him. I'm going to be afraid to do things that like millions of scientific papers have shown us safe. That's good for his health because I'm like going to get superstitious. So I wean into science. It saved my life. Science kept cancer for spreading through my body and killing me. I'm going to trust the scientists right now and self isolate and try as much as possible to not spread this shit. I think that that's even if it turns out to be a panic and hysteria, whatever, at least you were part of the people who weren't fucking going out and skiing during this fucking thing. So I think it's going to go on longer. And I think while it goes on longer, if you have the ability to limit human contact and to avoid the superstitious part of yourself, I've got two that's looking at this and thinking like, come on really, I don't know. What do you want to you sick? I don't know. I don't know. It's also a rejection from change or rejection of change that you don't have any control over. Deny that it's happening. Because that's the easiest thing to do. If you deny that it's happening, you don't have to face the fear. And if you don't face the fear, well, then you put yourself in danger. But really, probably I don't know how old you are out there, but you really who you're putting in danger is somebody's granddad. Yes. That's the main thing is like, and people with diseases, people with disorders, people that are compromised, there's a lot of us that are not that strong. And maybe some people are recovering from something, like talking to Jonathan Ward yesterday and his wife's recovering from cancer. She's going through chemo. So they want to make sure she doesn't have to deal with any of this shit. Like, you're not exposed to any of it. Those are the type of people we have to be really scared of, people that are compromised. But this is a fucked up moment for us, but a learning moment. I really hope that this prepares us in case something really horrible comes down the pipe. And I think I hope it prepares us for understanding that this is a possibility. Let's us understand like, hey, we need to accept this. This is how it goes. And if there's some new shit that comes on, let's act quicker. And let's take care of this quicker. And like, if everybody just had a two-week off thing, and this was something that Dana White and Frank Fertita were talking about before anyone did it. Frank Fertita told Dana White, he's like, why don't we just have everything shut down for two weeks? Just no one go to work, no one do anything two weeks, stop the planes, and the way he explained it to me was like, he said, pull the band-aid off of it. I'm like, that is actually probably a really good idea. Well, guess what? Now that's being forced, mandatory forced in certain cities where they've got bad outbreaks. If they had just done that the moment it cut, the moment it cut loose, just no one goes anywhere for two weeks. Let's nip this fucking thing in the bud. If that was really done, they're right. I mean, if you could really get that to be implemented to scale of 350 million people. Amazing. But you definitely would have radically slowed down the pace. Yeah. We weren't ready. We weren't ready. Well, now we know. Yeah, I hope. I hope we learn. And I hope it doesn't morph, and I hope it doesn't get more deadly. And I hope they can figure out a way to allocate funds to get more respirators. And all of us should have to be done. And you can make your own hands sanitizer. Yeah, I heard that too. Because washing hands are soaked too. Yeah. So apparently kills it. What do you think are like the three things you should have at your house? You should have food. You should have water or something that purifies water, whether they're water purification tablets. They could buy iodine tablets. Why that feed in the city water is going to get turned on? Anything can happen. Anything can happen. You might need to drink water that you don't want to drink. That's possible. You might have to drink puddle water. I mean, it looks. The reality is, if things go real bad, you might have to drink from a lake. Right. OK. And that's what water is. You know, water, we take water from various sources and they purify it and rain water and all kinds of shit. That's what we're drinking. A daily basis. We're drinking this weird process water. Yeah. The water you're really supposed to be drinking is stuff that comes right out of the ground. That's what you're supposed to be drinking. But if you get stuff that's biologically infected, you get stuff that animals have been in. It's animal waste, feces, and stuff. Or bacteria, diseases, or anything. You can purify that. You can take these water tablets. You drop them in there and it kills everything. It torches the water. So in cases of emergency, like back packers, they'll find out like an elk wallow. And they can drink that water out of a fucking elk wallow. Really? Yeah. There's a thing called a steripen. There's another thing that you use. A steripen actually uses ultraviolet light. Let's say you have a water bottle. You fill it up with like elk piss. And you wave your thing because you're trying to stay alive. You're out there. There's no water. Like if you're on like a high country desert mule deer hunt and you can't find any water, you got to take water wherever you can get it. Because you're not bringing all your water up there if you're staying there for 12 days. You're hoping you could find creeks. And you might not find a creek. And if you do, it might be fucked up. It might be a den animal in it. Like shit. Like something might have gone there to die and polluted the water or beavers might have shit in it. Like you have to have something that kills all that stuff. So that's something that people should have. They should have, I think you should have some sort of a first aid kit. Bandages, things like that. Disinfectants, antibiotics, stuff like that. You should probably have something like that in case something goes wrong. And someone gets hurt. And there's no hospital available. Or there's no doctor or you have to wait in the morning before you can take someone to a doctor, whatever the fuck the problem is. You should have that. You should have batteries that you've charged. Like cell phone, get some backup batteries. Charge those bitches. You know, if you have a generator fantastic but some people can't afford one and they don't have the room for one and they can't have one. It's not feasible if you live in an apartment. But having charged batteries for phones is very important. Food and water. Food and water are number one, right? You want to have dried foods, things like rice and pasta. You could store a lot of it. You could eat it's high in calories. You could eat it. And it doesn't take up too much room. There's, you know, canned things you can keep forever. That's what you want. You want food that you could have like that you could keep you alive. You know? Well, let me ask you this, man, because this is like something I've been talking to people and myself I've experienced a little bit. I don't know if you have. But what about those of us who are like kind of secretly freaking out right now? I'm not so secretly. Yeah. To me, that's like I think one of the big questions is you know, I was talking to a friend of mine and he was like, man, I totally was losing my shit yesterday, man. And like I told him like, dude, me too. Everybody. Yeah, but what like how the fuck are we going to deal? It's just such a weird form of anxiety. I've never had this kind of anxiety before. It's there's an invisible monster. Yeah. Invisible monster that wants to kill your grandma. Yeah. You know, yeah. An invisible monster that kills upwards, the high levels like somewhere around 3% of the people. You know, and with old people, it's even worse. With people over over 80, I think it's, you know, it's really deadly. It's fucking scary, man. And what's scary is this is only one of many that could be coming our way. Right. And that this happens every, you know, X amount of years or something. Last one was, you know, H1N1 and SARS and this and that. And there's always a new one. And just the fucking flu, man. I didn't, you know, until we were looking into this, I didn't know how many people, the flu killed. Yeah. The flu can kill 90,000 people in America every year. Yeah. I didn't know that. Did you know that? I knew that. So when they say this is 10 times more deadly than the flu, York, holy fuck, maybe 15 times more. Yeah. Holy fuck, that's a million people. That's a million plus. Yeah. That's scary. That's scary. That's scary. And then, you know, other really horrible diseases that have devastated populations, those are possible to and new ones are possible. Joe, I was asking, how do we deal with the fucking anxiety? Now I'm feeling the effect. You gotta look at it, we gotta look at it for what it is. This is reality. The way to deal with anxieties, to be prepared as best you can, except where you are and what you are and who you are, and just live. It reprioritizes our values. You know, that's what's gonna be good out of this. Nothing good ever comes from having it too easy. Right. Like, for us, I think, as a culture, having it too easy was probably a little bit toxic to us, like always eating junk food, or always eating sugar. It's all we're eating. It's okay to eat cake every now and then. We can't just live off cake. Well, as a culture, there's a lot of what we're doing, we're living off cake. You know, if you're seeing that Werner Herzog documentary, happy people, life in the taiga. It's a great documentary about these really nomadic people that live in Siberia, and they're super happy. And they live in these log houses, that they build themselves, they show them building these houses. They don't have enough mosquito repellent, they have to make their own mosquito repellent like tar, and they grind it up and add stuff to it, and then rub it all over their face and everything. And they're super happy. They live up inside, period dude. It's so fucking cold. It's only summer for like three or four months. It's only like nice out. And then the rest is just bitter, brutal cold where the winter freezes the river solid where you can ride a snowmobile over the river. So they use the river like the highway. And they all have dogs, and they run around trapping and killing animals and living off the land and catching fish and living off the fish. Dude, they're so happy. What's fucked up is these people are encountering life threatening adversity every day. If you stay outside, you will die. You will die just from exposure to the cold. It will kill you. It's 50 below zero outside. It will fucking kill you. And because of that, they're all like happy and smiling and laughing. And the documentary just shows like it's weird. We're not, we're never happy like this in a collective group unless we're all living in this constant state of like alertness and consequences for inaction. Like there's no lazy people there man. Everybody does their part. You have to. And they're all working and laughing. And they're all making their own news out of boards that they're chopping out of logs. They're hollowing out these canoes and stretching them out. It's amazing man. They're just always working and they're always happy. It's so weird. That's it. That to me, I think a lot of people don't realize that you can work together with people not for money just to do stuff. For community. And how fun that is when you find yourself, even you know, my wife and I fucking moving and like I'm packing boxes, it's been like nonstop for the last like four days. Like and we've had to like, you know, it's there's something in it. Even though it's terrifying that really is joyful and there's is so like feels more alive than I felt in a long time. I think that's the thing we've got to tune into is that if nothing else were alive right now, that's beautiful. And yeah, maybe this just extends. Maybe we can become like those people up there. I mean, I think that's one of the, anytime a fucked up thing happens to you personally. It's a chance to become a bitter piece of shit or a little more angry or a little more tired or a little more depressed or to become a hero. Anything, whatever it may be, any bit of phenomena that comes your way as a person. You know, anytime I fight like anytime something's really gotta get done that I've been procrastinating or anytime some shitty unexpected thing comes my way. I have a moment to decide am I gonna react to this? Like I always react to shitty things and like become negative or dark or get pissed or can I like react to it in a completely new way? And I think every time you do a new way, this is my woo-woo concept. You pop into a different part of the multiverse. It's a little better than the one you were in before. And it's like a trajectory you can go on. When I was getting stoned at the gym at 4M, I was imagining on the treadmill that I was running through the multiverse towards a healthier version of me that I wasn't getting in shape. I was actually being inhaled into a more in shape version of me that already existed. That's the kind of shit I have to do to get myself to work out. Dude, that's heavy. Yeah, man. It's a fun, it's fun to do that. You know, every single decision is like a binary. Do you wanna continue doing the shit you've been doing over and over again? Whatever it may be, or do you wanna try a mildly new way? And every time you do that, sure as shit, it's not just you that starts changing. You'll notice like other stuff starts changing too, around you. You know, things just tend to generally get better. Yeah. I think there's thoughts that I've had that are real similar to that where I've wondered, like if multiverses are real, and they're supposed to be different versions of you, infinite versions all over the universe. Why are we assuming that this is the same, every day you wake up in the same version? Why are we assuming that? Exactly. To think about sleep is you just go away, then you come back with a memory of what life was like before you went away. And you wouldn't notice if it just slid you one notch to the right or one notch to the left, into the multiverse. There's an infinite number of dumkins out there with ghillie suits and gas masks on. Yeah. And you just slid over to the right by letting a little old lady in front of you and not even complaining when she was driving 30 miles an hour. That's it. You're like, it's all right. It's just a nice lady. Let me just get around her nice and slow and safe. Yeah, that's it. Wave tour. Hi. And the more you do that, the more you do that, the more you start running and other people who are doing the same thing. You start ending up in that part of the multiverse where many other people are doing the same thing. Yes. And eventually, theoretically, I think, eventually through those series of decisions, maybe that's where you can like, that's where all of a sudden you start realizing like, oh shit, oh shit. I'm in a temple. I'm not even in a reality that I thought I was in. I was just like in a deep state of contemplative meditation. And I don't know. I mean, there's all kinds of interesting experiments you can do. Have you ever heard the term pro-noia, pro-noia? It's the opposite of paranoia where you think the universe is conspiring to help you instead of hurt you. Hahahaha. That's brilliant. Yeah. Maybe that's what we'll call our group. Pro-noia. Pro-noia. Yeah. Yeah, that's perfect. Yeah. Yeah, we needed a name that it just came to us. Pro-noia. Sounds like a dope band. Yeah. Going to go see Pro-noia at the Staples Center. Pro-noia. It's fun. Yeah. Did you do that? If you really do imagine that every single thing that's happening in your life is a grand conspiracy to help you, to advance you, to bring you or another way to put a, do you ever listen? I love listening to Christian radio. This guy was talking about a thing called Convection, which is being inhaled into the Christ. So when you start like- Like a black hole? Well, I think like the white hole. I guess it would be a black hole. Go gobbling up the planet. Like you're being like drawn into the super intelligence and you're becoming, like you're being sort of lifted up into it. The thing that makes the fucking big green egg work, like the thing that sucks smoke up, that's happening to you into the divine intelligence. And as it happens, you imagine you're the one doing this stuff to get you closer to it, but really it's just your mind playing tricks on you. You have no choice. You're going to be, you're going to wake up. You're going to gain realization. And so as that's happening, you kind of, you know, like you can quit something. You can quit drinking, you can quit smoking, but you kind of long for it. But then sometimes you notice you just stopped doing shit that was bad for you because you found a better way to live and it naturally falls away. That's Convection. You're being drawn into the divine mind as that happens. The shit that looks like austerity when you're like further away begins to actually just be a natural way that you act. You just become naturally more graceful, naturally less inclined to do shitty things. Naturally, more tuned in with like the 150 year old version of you. You know that you sort of naturally, and that just happens on its own. Because you're being connected into the Christ sucked into the Omega point. The divine. Yeah. Mm. We should probably live on that. Should we end up? Yeah. That's perfect. Ben. We should probably leave on that. Shall we end up? Yeah. That's perfect with it in, right? Thanks, man. Thank you. Let me come on your travels four o'clock. How did the water fuck that happened? What the fuck? Time to work, right? This was a total time war episode. You and I always have the strangest episodes, man. What do we really do? I don't believe it's four. It's almost four. It's 346. Normally I would have had to piss like three times. You're evolving. Don, good and trustful. Tell everybody when your show is out. Thank you, Joe. April 20th on Netflix, the midnight gospel. You can follow the midnight gospel on Twitter and Instagram. And thanks, Pendleton for making the show with me. Thanks, y'all, for watching it. Thank you. Let me plug it on your show, man. It looks awesome. I can't wait to watch. It looks so done, Contrussle. Thank you, Joe. It's very you. All right. We're going to keep on keeping on folks. Stay healthy up there. Much love. Bye. It's not. Woo! Dang.