What's up brother? How are you Joe? How are you hanging in there? I have not been off of my Property more or less in two weeks, so it's crazy to see another human being. Yeah, I don't think this is healthy for us I know this lockdown shit everybody's so weirded out He want to run into people walking dogs like they don't want the dogs to get close to each other like hi Everyone's across the street. Hi, and I'm a hugger, right? And we're in California So I'm a hugger in California and all of my instincts are wrong everything's all messed up Everyone's confused that here's the big question. How long does it take before we normalize and go back? Like let's say the end of July Everyone announces we got this thing locked down. We have a viable treatment It's no different than the flu they get you this chloroquine with the z-pack or whatever the current Treatment is yeah when do people start hugging again? What do you mean? It's not it's gonna be crazy I mean I think that the ideas were also starved for touch. Yeah, like we're gonna have a Jubilee like you've never seen people are gonna greet each other with tongues who are almost like just a queen since I don't think that's a good idea There's still cold and coudays and all that other stuff. I know but I think I think everybody's losing their shit They definitely are I've been talking to a lot of friends that are on the Extremely cautious side. Let's say that and you know, they're not going anywhere and they're wearing gloves and masks when they step outside their house to go Do something the backyard and they put the glove and mask down and they spray it with Lysol on the coming side and It's not healthy and it is also healthy. I mean the idea that we have not been tested and so long It's good to remember also that this stuff is live and real and it has always been live and real and You know if it was possible to live without this stuff that would be one thing But this 75 year nap that we've been in since 1945 is itself the greatest threat to all of us right and in our Preparedness is just a wonderful indicator Where you actually get to see this is the quality of your experts. This is the quality of your leadership This is what they look like when put under stress That's true right that is a good that's a good thing and I'm impressed with the medical community I'm impressed with the people that are recognizing that this is a huge problem not so impressed with the administration of a lot of these hospitals that haven't prepared in terms of like masks and ventilators and a lot of these other things Not so impressed with politicians, but also it just seems like everyone like you said was in this nap state and hadn't really been tested and really Globally no one had been tested since the pandemic of 1918 like this right 68 Which I had I had the Hong Kong flu and 57 Were sort of the best parallels to this you got the Hong Kong flu and 16 I had the Hong Kong flu and was sick as a dog I was like three two I mean it's three four So I think it went from 68 to 78 you remember it. Oh, yeah, I was in San Francisco my grandma had to come up from LA to care for me It was it was bad It's like one of my earliest memories. Yeah, and so 68 and 57 I think are the best comparables to this go before we go back to 1918 and Almost nobody remembers these things like it's very weird Did many people that never heard of the Hong Kong flu when I started talking about the fact that I had yeah I vaguely remembered it until you just said it and I'm like I'm slightly older than you, right? Yeah, I'm 52 I'm 54 yeah Don't remember the Hong Kong flu, but I do you know what I mean like I don't remember it personally no, but but you as a health geek Are up on these sorts of things and so you understand the ways in which you know for example? You can have a flu where the I guess the cytokine storm You know is you're either the threat from your immunity your immune system is like bigger than the virus itself They're all these various weird things that happen, but I think that the little let's call it the big nap the big nap is itself The greatest threat to us and this is this is bad But it is also a shot across our bow and you know this is what was happening in my mind when I was on here talking about the twin nuclear I problem of selling at him We didn't stop history. It's not like we're past atomic war like we figured that out We just we just hit the pause button for a little while we hit stews. Yeah, the fear is also that nefarious players will take this opportunity to erode civil civil rights to erode civil liberties and then China to gain power in the US market to gobble up a lot of stocks While everything is down and try to increase their stake in our economy and try to push You know China's got its hands lovingly around our throat because our elite have been moving into greater and greater states of China Dependence right and so I think this is what the BDSM community refers to his breath play and I don't like it I do plays like you kind of like have choke somebody. Yeah. How do you know that? What? I don't like the fact You know I went I went to MIT MIT is wildly a 2 BDSM somebody why why are geeks and An Aspies into BDSM somebody said lots of rules. What's an aspie? various people right lots of rules. They like that. They like they love rules They're home because to do all the stuff safely you would have to have a huge hierarchy Right of rules and my claim is is that China is They supply so much of our stuff. We've moved all of our yeah You know manufacturing base into these crazy supply chains and we are completely dependent on a strategic rival and You know China is very careful if you remember when they when they hosted the Olympics to have these amazingly impressive displays that are always friendly But what they're really saying is we have our shit together and and our system was hackable it was open is long for example if you have a company that has Duty to its shareholders that the directors of the company must do what is ever whatever is in the best interest of the shareholders and everything else Doesn't matter Then you can have a situation where a director has to move things to China because that is in the best interest of the shareholders Even if it's an absolutely Not in the best interest of the United States. This is what Ralph Garmory who used to head the Sloan Foundation Once said it in an address. I was at at the National Academy of Sciences He just said as a director I am incentivized to do exactly the wrong thing for the United States of America So I'm gonna put one hat on and tell you as an American We must not move all of this over to China and Then I'm gonna put my directors hat on and I'm gonna vote to move everything over to China because I have no choice and So you know in essence the smart good people all 11 of them We're always fighting this thing about You cannot become China dependent and in it during the big nap There was no way to make this argument convincing you couldn't say look We have a serious strategic problem by your continuing moves to bring China in as the solution To every equation we can't balance and that that is really the problem is that there wasn't any ability to say We are way too dependent on a strategic rival. You saw this at the beginning of the pandemic. Everyone was afraid of what? I don't want to be a pure xenophobic. I don't want to appear like chicken little Right and so all of our friends the net case is the marginal weirdos the supposed grifters and gadflies Are the people who most got this one right and early and All the respectable people like Nancy Pelosi telling people please go to Chinatown to celebrate the Chinese New Year build a Blasio of New York saying despite coronavirus get out there let you know don't lead your lives don't don't let this thing hold you back these people Need to resign Nancy Pelosi should resign It's one thing to say we don't have enough information about this. It's another thing to say Take the information that's coming in disregard it and get back in there and keep fueling the Economy this is exactly our leadership class their problem They think about this in short-term economics the the long-term implications of us all sheltering in place Nobody can compute the consequences of not one person in the world knows what happens when you run this experiment Yeah, it's a new thing, right? The Made in America argument was always like sort of frivolous almost xenophobic Like why do you want things made in America? What do you care? Do you not do not like people from other countries? Do you not want to buy things from other countries? It was like this made of it made in America thing was like People disregarded it in a lot of ways But when you realize that all of our medical supplies like so much of our electronics so much of all the stuff that you need to kind of keep Things exactly the way they are it's cheap to make it over there because they will Like what we saw with Foxconn where they put nets around the building to keep people from jumping off and And the weirdest thing was people trying to Argue that the suicide rate at Foxconn was essentially the same as a suicide rate in the general population Well, do you ever heard that argument? Yeah, I think what the fuck are you talking about? That's where they work There's nets around where they work because so many people where they work jump off the building to end their life because their life sucks that bad That they kill themselves at work. Do you know where it is to kill yourself at work? Probably pretty fucking rare. You know how common it is where you have to put nets around the building You're like look we're getting really tired of people going to the roof and jumping off because it's the easiest way to kill yourself They're gonna get more creative Yeah, the problem is we are all hooked up to this need for Cheap products. Yeah profits when we can't figure out how to innovate enough to actually create the juice in our own system and therefore we have to Rational you're gonna say no, I was just gonna say I mean also we've gotten into this idea of every year We have to have a newer better peaceful electronics like if you had to go the rest of your life with an iPhone 11 How much would you suffer? Not that much although I would say that many of us are not that excited about the next phone that that itself is an antiquated thing Right, but what I'm saying is like why can't they make it so that you can just fix this? Yeah You know, I mean like who the fuck fixes their phone you don't fix your phone you bring it You're going back to like depression air. Well not depression air thinking it's like Why can't things be sustainable? No, no, I the plans obsolescence and the need to kind of delete update so that you you never It's a tricky problem if you need growth to power your system Then in a weird way It makes sense not to build the optimal phone Right because if you were to build the optimal phone and then people stopped renewing everything your system's far Then your system weirdly breaks down so it makes sense that the level of the phone that you wouldn't want to do that But weirdly in aggregate if you can't start innovate if you can't figure out a restart innovation in a big way Now you're stuck with either having to live learn to live in steady state which none of us Americans have no program for living in steady state We we need growth that was the whole point of the embedded growth obligation idea that it's suffused throughout every institution every pension plan assumes growth right All right, so now we have this problem where we don't have the growth and we need the growth and then in a weird way the planned obsolescence is Like fake growth it means that we're gonna rebuy our phones even as if they were now highly innovative So there's like a weird way in which we become dependent on nonsense You know dependent on nonsense is a great way to put it This is really highlighting that for a lot of people when people are home and they're with their families and they're not traveling Especially people like me and my peers like a lot of my comedian friends who travel constantly We're like it's kind of nice to be home You know everyone's sort of really looking at this like what it is this life that we've sort of Accepted as this is the way things are is this really the way things should be or is this just We just got caught in a pattern and we're operating on momentum if the comedian Our comedian force becomes non dysfunctional. We are screwed. Well, that's not gonna happen That was a quiet so many cycles almost No, good. This is far away from normal is Canadian. I know that's why I get along with them So well, it's so hard for me to hang out with regular folk You know that's that would be rough like if I had to live in a community of regular people That just work every day what if you had like a community of only comedians? What would that look like? Oh? It'd be fun. Really? Yeah. Yeah. We'd be fun. We have that. That's the comedy store The comedy store and yeah if the comedy store was just locked down on like a 500 acre piece of property and there's a bunch of houses on there We could only do it to each other. Who just entertained each other well half the fun of comedians is just us hanging out We would just get together in laugh. Well, by the way, I should just say one of the great Things about moving back to LA has been your invitations to come hang with the comedians at the store What a great scene I mean you made this point to me about a renaissance and then I think I sent you David Burns Book about music the chapter on CBGB and it's almost an exact map of what CBGB did as the Harvard of punk To the comedy stores Oxford of comedy. Yeah. Yeah. You've been to the back bar Well, that's the spot you got me hammered two times ago, and I was just a double out of that thing That was the best time I couldn't remember anything well You know what it's great to even when non-commadians like yourself and you know Melissa and Matt and you know some of their friends and all these other people come There and they're around these people they act freer their laughing louder They're making you know more off-color jokes and everyone's just laughing. Oh having fun I mean that's the worst you have to be very careful. Oh, she's hilarious. She's very funny. Yeah, Melissa Chen by the way shout out shout out to Melissa By what great stuff she's doing on masks. Yeah, explain that Well, she's just she just takes it on herself to ask the question Why don't why don't our doctors and nurses have masks and so she's running around trying to figure out? How to connect donors flights product? Whatever she's doing she's she's heroically like taking a ton of this on her shoulders and not I'm a hesitating because I don't even know what I'm allowed to say right yeah We don't have to talk you should she's a very interesting person. I'm really glad you introduced me to her. She's fascinating This like this is a great time to see what people are actually made out of Yeah, who's heroic the heroic impulse sure and and who can keep their shit together? When things go sideways when things get Western as it were well Let me ask you a question of all of the presidential candidates that were in the race like everybody's dropped out in as well Which of them would you want in a COVID situation? Talsy Talsy that's by the way, that was my answer as well. That's definitely I didn't want her fault foreign policies That's one of the reason there wasn't like Gung Ho and Talsy didn't like some of the stuff about In India there's some issues about Modi and I don't want to get into that But if you asked like who would you want to like who has that kind of lockdown? Military we have to make sense the bullshit needs to leave the room The odd thing is it's a millennial female of color that I would immediately want to subordinate to Well, she's because she would also be no bullshit. She she had the strength to call out all of the nonsense She I'm positive she would just say this is unacceptable. What are we doing? This is emergency times we had to suspend these issues. We have to get these things to our Doctors nurses emergency technicians. I mean look I should say that I'm trying to be like smiley and positive But I am just burning with rage. I Cannot believe we're set up correctly The scale of the screw up and trying to even understand the government that I cannot trust as far as I can throw it to To feel contempt for the surgeon general of the United States To say that the World Health Organization is a danger to World Health To say that the CDC is lying. I hate being in a position where I believe these Yeah What about Tulsi she's she's a person of real character, you know, I don't see her like I see a lot of these people that are running for president I see them wearing masks You know, I mean, I don't even need to name names, but they're they're doing their best impression of A politician like a shitty comedian will do their best impression of David Tell, you know, that's the best example that someone gave me of Like the comparison there's there's there's a style of Communicating that a lot of them have adopted to try to appear and you can tell that they're coached They're trying to appear presidential She's just that's who she is man. I've hung out with her off camera on camera I've seen her just the way she communicates with people and I don't know her down to the bone But what I see I'm very impressed with and she's developed her character over two tours of duty overseas Again who who volunteers who takes this stuff on? This is the weird thing because you know, I really before COVID I was in this Bernie Yang Tulsi mindset, which is just what is the furball that I can shove down the throat of the DNC to make the party fall apart under that Hillary Clinton overhang The weird thing is in an actual pandemic. I am almost positive that She has the stuff. Yeah, it may not be her year right. She's only 38 He's only 38 it might not be her year, but but she'll get there, but but how interesting that like When the shit hit the fan the person with the highest number of intersectional points maybe Is actually the person that you want to lead on merit right? But they don't want her which is even more But it has ridiculous. They don't want her because she can't be bought and sold. Well, that's it's really simple I think that you know we need to revisit some stuff which all of this anger and ferocity that we were using to stand up to Social engineering invading the mainstream conversation. I believe that COVID proves that it is deadly Hmm that if your top concern is not appearing xenophobic people will die because you are functionally incompetent You've just lost 40 IQ points for nothing. Well, that was the initial response to Trump's Idea of shutting down flights from China people were furious and they were calling it racist Well, the idea that you can put a negative sign in front of Donald Trump and form an opinion that if he's stupid then Whatever the reverse of what he does is smart right is itself moronic. It's dangerous. It's it's It's completely irresponsible And here's the weird thing I said this to you on the phone the other day when we were talking The weird thing Joe is is that we are the actual adults in the room Tulsi you me That's a huge problem. Well, that's what I'm trying to say but you but this is the problem which I think I get this actually better than you which is you have a beautiful life and You recognize that part of it comes with humility of not thinking too much of yourself being self-deprecating all these things I think that those are all to your credit It is also time to lead and if you believe that you having to break out of whatever mindset you're in Could be the difference between you know saving physicians lives and nurses lives you do it You would do it for sure for sure. Okay. Well, this thing is the flagship of pirate radio I mean this is somes dot for the world and The concept of somes dot that that you would have truth that would circulate underground in the Soviet Union that would not be Like you were seldom re broadcast inside of like MSNBC or CNN except when they're like going after you well What's weird is Fox News re broadcast me all the time? Well because Fox there two sort of dominant narratives Fox news is the flagship inside the right of center Gated institutional narrative and then you have all the other organs like MSNBC CNN NPR Buzzfeed, you know, whatever these things are in the left of Center Gated institutional narrative Very often Fox will pick up on things that we do if they stick it in the eye of the left Yeah, that's exactly and so the point is is that they selectively amplify us and that process of selective amplification is itself dangerous lot like I get invited more frequently by Fox and people and I turn them down Because the narrative inside of like the New York Times is well He's part of that right-wing thing frequent Fox news you contribute Eric Weinstein. Oh, that's the adjective adjective occupation name. Yes, frequent adjective Fox News contributor my occupation And in my name that game Like if NPR would call and put me on I would go on Fox But the their very clever game is to make it sound like well, you're choosing to go no You guys are choosing to ignore a lot of what's changing the culture and there Therefore the only people who are willing to ask us on and rebroadcast us are the people who are angry at the NPR's CNN MSNBC's well I think they realized the limitations of their medium. I really do. I think that C NBC and MSNBC and CBS and NBC and ABC they all realized that they're in this really weird situation where they have to do these seven-minute segments interrupted by commercials They they have a restriction they can only air at you know Whatever time of night the show is supposed to be scheduled and you know They rely on these internet clips to sort of carry the show I mean the the YouTube clips are probably far more popular than anything they have a release that's on the air What that that I mean that their distribution thing is fucked. It's very it's very bizarre and it was very interesting watching Bill Moore sit down here He's like I guess this is it the man cave Yeah, good to see you Bill. He's like I'm here to grovel and ask whether you'll come on my show Now he was trying to force me on a show. I know very little groveling. He's not a grower. No, but he's What he is is he's caught and he's caught between two tectonic plates He is the closest thing we have inside of the beast in some sense to what we're doing maybe yeah, he's comic he is a comic, but he's also You know he's a guy with real courage. Yes, and he's in a very tough I think he's in weirdly the toughest spot of us all well He's a guy who's on the left also who thinks that a lot of the stuff as do as I do and as you do as well a lot of stuff that's perpetrated by the people on the left is not just dangerous, but it's it Empowers the right and empowers Trump supporters It gets people on the fence to give up and jump right and and get welcome. Yeah, I've stopped being Nice to these people. Hey camping. No, it's just so much buffoonery. It's and it's like it's It's psychotically dangerous to watch people continue the buffoonery in life and death situations. Yeah Yeah, no, I agree and Bills there on are you gonna do a shot have you done? I'll do it eventually I'm sure yeah, the only options that he gave me already had gigs booked. I see I think that it's really important to use I mean, I don't know them at all, but To the extent that that was a beachhead to connect these two universes My model of this is that we've got this traditional legacy world and we've got this sort of internet world that hovers above it and in general The insulating layer between them is astounding at this late date The number of things that happen on the internet that don't really have any echo inside of the mainstream is astounding in 2020 And then you get these arcs that happen between the two so for example the famous Sam Harris interaction with Ben Affleck on Bill Marsha was an arcing between these two universe was also a guy on steroids It was Royed raging at a guy who actually knows what he's talking about What's going on? I mean, he was preparing for Batman. Okay, he did the math on that. All right But then that's why he was so angry, but then Cathy Newman and Jordan Peterson was another arcing where Kathy was playing the role of Ben Affleck Jordan Peterson not really no she what she was doing She was trying to get away with this same strategy that she has lazy in a gen Lloyd exactly for this sort of general Boxing and categorizing of someone's opinions that don't really represent their represent their actual opinions So what you're trying to say so what you're saying to me Joe is that I have absolutely no point in my worth This human being I should never visit your shows that we're saying What you're trying to say so what what I am trying to say is that in a generalized sense She was just doing that same old same old thing with with a person who is not Participating I sort of liken that it's also that these people That they would victimize by putting them into these narratives, right? And then they're accustomed to using these patterns these people traditionally did not have any other way to respond Right there was no internet clips that were released No, it was to the editor. Well. Yeah, right page 27. Yeah, and maybe they were trying to retraction You know, and they will know what the oxygen to it I mean that this is standard standard behavior for some newspapers and some journalists, right? The unscrupulous ones unfortunately but this this model doesn't work anymore because anyone can go on YouTube and Instantly say my time on the Kathy Newman show. Yeah, this is what went wrong This is why she did this and this is what they told me in the green room And this is what blah blah blah, and then you lay it out sort of sort of now here's I mean, let's play with me Maybe you're right. Maybe you're wrong. I don't know My take on it is that the great thing about We have we have an ability to do almost anything we want on YouTube so long as we don't get shut down Let's say however, you also have this concern that as long as this world remains gated If for example you have a closed world of people who are pretending to have conversations amongst themselves discussing the issues And then you have the institutions say we're only going to deal with the authoritative sources Then the problem is is that if you have a state of pretend You know, larping or K-fabe whatever you want to call it. Yeah, it's taking place inside the gated institutional narrative The institutions are going to predicate their actions on the official nonsense and whatever we do on YouTube as long as there is an Insulating layer unless we can actually lob something into the wall you know over the walls of the Citadel They will continue to actually act as if we'd never said anything we never pointed it out It's like you're at this kids magic show which the musician the magician is completely incompetent and the lights are on And you can see all the wires and trap doors and the magic show continues to go on and so you may make the point Well everybody can see that it's bullshit But as long as the institutions agree to pretend that they believe the bullshit we have a real problem in the internet that didn't solve that It's like you get it might not have solved it. Sorry to interrupt you know I think what it has done is severely erode the foundation of it to the point where the trust in it is just There's no real mainstream anymore like this idea that the mainstream news is the mainstream Well, how is that real if YouTube videos get more views? Like if if you if you make a YouTube video and it gets five million views But then something goes on MSNBC and it gets 500,000 views. Yeah, what's mainstream? Well, what is mainstream now? We're talking about instead of mainstream media. I think the term traditional media is the best way the same way the term My legacy but keep going you legacy is good. Okay. Well look For the longest time people had to use Morse code Right, and they figured out phones and those Morris code guys were fucked right? What did you do what it would you know and then phones were attached to chords? Yeah, but they're still fun. No, no There is there's still phone but there's still a function Unfortunately to the so I love the point that you're making. I'm just trying to figure out play with it Let's assume that there is no mainstream left what we're really talking about is legacy institutional media I love the point that you're making. I'm just trying to figure out play with it. Let's assume that there is no mainstream left. What we're really talking about is legacy institutional media. And the great danger is that, assume that the mainstream completely exits the building. And it's only, you know, 10,000 people trading bullshit amongst themselves, but they also control all the institutions. So like, you, the world gets to keep reality. And we, the institutions, agreed to traffic in bullshit. You can make lots of jokes that are expense, but we're also going to be figuring out whether we're going to stock masks, or what our farming policy is, or how the US military should be deployed, and where we should send troops to protect oil fields and all these kinds of things. And that that's what's concerning me is that a lot of us are settling for being right and having them look like idiots. And their point is, okay, fine. We'll continue on. We'll look like idiots, but we also still control the levers. So with legacy media, your, your assertion is that legacy media has a much more impactful presence in terms of foreign policy, in terms of dealing with pandemic, the response, things along those lines. So let's play with it and see where it goes. Okay. If you think about Wikipedia, Wikipedia might have a rule that says we allow, we don't do original research. So please link to authoritative sources. And you say, okay, great. What are authoritative sources? So now the authoritative sources, the CDC, or the WHO, or the Surgeon General, or the New York Times, or CNN, or MSNBC, like if you have this. But is MSNBC, like if someone just goes on the air and does it have a list? Well, let's have a list. Is that an authoritative source? Or is it wouldn't it be like an expert in health, like someone who's gone over peer-reviewed studies, someone who is well, who's the Surgeon General right now? I don't know. CDC, is that redfield? I don't know. I'm sure he's a competent physician. I also think that there's a whole thing about pretending that masks don't work. Masks don't work in the general population. Please don't buy them our healthcare people need them. Is that what they're saying? Well, that's what they've been saying, right? And so the issue is that you have some piece of nonsense. So the issue is a piece of nonsense because the California is now changing their recommendation saying if you're going out in public, you should. It's not just nonsense. It's deadly nonsense. It's deadly physician killing nonsense. I mean, I'm trying to smile every once in a while. Yeah, I mean, what we have is a situation in which we knew that the mask and personal protective equipment supplies are wildly off to say nothing of ventilators and I see you beds. And now what do we do about it? So we have rules like please don't bring masks to work because it scares the patients or please don't wear homemade masks because they might actually be more germ filled or virus filled. So you're back propagating what you wish to be true to get the action that you're looking for. prisoners dilemma where if everybody runs and buys up masks, who like the people we need to be protected most are the heroes who are actually dealing with, you know, multiple COVID patients and taking huge amounts of viral load. So there's no question in my mind that those those are the people that is a society if you would level with us like there is a speech to give, which would go like this. You know, my fellow Americans as readiness are I am forced to tender my resignation effective Friday this week. I have failed to heed many of the warnings in our academic literature. Because our reserves are severely depleted, it is imperative that we not suffer further loss of life and therefore I am forced to make an unusual request. Having failed you, I'm asking everyone who stockpiled masks for personal use to think about doing something sacrificial for the good of us all. Our heroes are currently exposed to the coronavirus and taking huge amounts of viral load. And I'm asking you to donate any unused masks that you have to this population as we are desperately trying to replenish our stocks. Please continue to shelter in place and recognize that the benefit to you is minor and the benefit to us all as major. And this will be following your heroic impulse to bring us back together as a nation. First of all, is there a readiness is our? No. Second of all, no one's going to say that they're never going to say we are no adjusting our violations based on the new Joe. I'm going to be completely unreasonable. I know I have this mode where I just become completely unreasonable. This is if that's where we are, then it's time to revolt. Revolt how? I don't know. Well, we need people to civil civil disobedience like to put our healthcare people. I have not been off my property for weeks. The reason I'm here in part is to do what little I can and it's very little to support the people who are our literal heroes, our life and death, putting themselves and harms with the idea of our hospital administrators, abusing our physicians and nurses makes me apoplectic with rage. They fact that these people are told that they can't talk to the press and they write to me and their family and their children write to me. My mother was asked to do this. My uncle works in a prison. He's not allowed to wear a mask. He's not allowed to bring a mask. I send a mask. Bob, Bob, Bob, Bob. Yeah, there's a lot of those stories. Okay. What the hell is wrong? It is time for these people to resign and it is time for us to remember that we have the ability to turn over our own government. This is, we are so unprepared as a nation and we have been sold out for so long by our self appointed leadership class who nobody wants that we either remember who we are and how this game is played. I mean, this is like, this is a pre war footing and this can easily lead to war. The transmission mechanism is you have everybody stay indoors because you're worried about deaths of accountability, which is, you know, I don't think they're worried about the number of deaths. I think they're worried about deaths that result from triage and that would result in career ending action. Yeah, this is what you were saying on the phone. You think that's really what's bothering them. Yes. And then, but if we all have to stay home while they replenish our supplies, then the economy goes into recession recession can become depression depressions lead to our conflict and our armed conflict leads to war. That would be a transmission mechanism from these stupid masks to stop something that nobody can handle. And my, here's the thing, we're coming up on Passover and we Jews have a tradition that I wish everybody had, which is that we read one stupid story every goddamn year just to drill it into your head to make sure it's always fresh. And this is when it's time to leave, when it's time to change, don't wait for the bread to rise. This is what I say to every Jewish person like you're sitting around waiting for the bread to rise because they all know the story, which is you eat the goddamn matza because the people who waited for the bread to rise are no longer with us and their descendants are no longer with us. And it is time to revolt. This leadership class is unworkable. The reason that you and I both came to the word Tulsi instantly, I don't think you took much deliberation, is because Tulsi would know what to do. Well, she's also the least encumbered. Yeah, she's the least burdened by everybody in the system. Hates her. Yeah. You know, and the whole point is she would put heads on pikes. This is the moment for heads on pikes. It's important. It's not a vengeance thing. The importance is what is the cost to you killing people by failing to heed the academic literature if a supply was depleted and you didn't replenish it? What is the cost to you? Well, there's lessons in how other countries have viewed this and how they chose to act, particularly South Korea, right? South Korea acted quicker. Smaller population than us, but much more impact to the virus. They shut things down very quickly. Yeah. Singapore. I don't know how Singapore is. Very, very exciting. I think that they use surveillance and tracking and making sure that they visited anybody who was known. They had a different system. As people like you and me who love our civil liberties, I believe that in part Singapore's draconian society lives off of things that only we can do due to our freedom. So you have to realize that freedom is itself an export. One of the great dangers is that China has been exporting the benefits of freedom from the United States into an authoritarian system so that they get the benefits of both worlds. They get the benefits of our middle finger, which I think is the secret of American innovation. And they get the benefits of authoritarianism where they can do things that we can't because they can order people to do the unconscionable. So my feeling is I'm on teams of liberties and teams of liberties has to be somewhat nationalistic, more militaristic, more commanding control. Who would you take orders from? So in a lot of fields, I'd take orders from you. You're the big dog in this space. And to the extent that you wanted to coordinate something, I would use my channel. I would subordinate to you. And I would want sometimes people to subordinate to me if I was taking a lead on something important. And we have this fear of leadership because we're all so individualistic that we never want to take an order. Like whenever I'm training a new assistant or something, one of my best practices is, can I get you coffee? You know, it's very important to show that the ability to ask to serve somebody else in the ability to lead are tied. You have to be a follower to be a leader and a leader to be a follower. You shouldn't be one of the other. We need right now a more war, we need more of a war footing. We need a war president. We need war senators. We need people of this mentality because the nap is coming to an end. And I do think Nancy Pelosi needs to resign and build the blazia needs to resign. I think that this administration made some good moves and fumbled the ball. And I believe that past administrations made some good moves and fumbled the ball. And the imperative is to stop back propagating what you want to do, like defeat a prisoner's dilemma, and come up with a lie that would cause us to act selfishly rationally. Like if you tell me that a mask is actually more dangerous in my hands because it becomes germ filled, then the idea is like, oh, okay, so I guess I won't use the mask. Well, yeah, because you lied to me and the idea is that that's what you're trying to do. And I say, what would need to be true to get you to do what I want? I don't understand what you're saying about these masks. What are you saying? So if I say, for example, let's imagine that I don't want to put seat belts in cars. Okay. And I say, you know, Joe, a seat belt could trap you. Should your car go into the water off of a bridge, you could infect die from the seat belt because you'd become entangled and would not be able to save yourself. The problem with that analogy is seat belts actually do say lives. But is it possible that they're just acting poorly with this mask thing, but that masks actually can contain a lot of viruses and they can hold on to the mask? Seat belts can kill you, but do you believe that's what I'm trying to do? I'm trying to say it as a related break problem. Let's talk about everybody who gets sick and dies from contaminated masks. Everybody who gets sick and dies from a false feeling of safety. Let's just go through a huge list of every bad thing. I see the analogy. And now the idea is think about all the lives saved because of masks, both in terms of transmission, which I don't cough on you. I cough into the mask or in terms of I don't breathe in either aerosolized or droplets, whatever, blah, blah, blah. Now the two are real, but you're focusing on like the seat belt deaths of entanglement because you actually have a covert agenda. And like, and you're going to think they're covert agendas. Oh, I don't know exactly. But if you if I had to speculate, I go like, go like this one, we're terrified of triage deaths. Deaths that occurred simply because we didn't have enough resources that were mandated to be stockpiled or talked about in the literature. That's one thing there's liability. Then there's liability, which is we were following the surgeon general's recommendation at the time. Now if somebody suddenly found, you know, like all the masks in the world, I think that the surgeon general would suddenly say the science has become conclusive. Because there would no longer be a worry about liability. You would just get those masks that people. You'd get the masks to the people who need them and then you'd stop transmission, slow transitions, transmissions by you. Do you think there's also a lot of just figuring it out as they go along? No. It's going on with that. There is figuring this out as it goes along. As regards to the masks, I believe that everybody knows that masks save lives on balance. They know that the people who need the most have very weird rules. There's this whole thing about the states versus the federal government. There's this issue about price gouging and price mechanisms. There are all sorts of things stopping the mask problem from being sorted out. One of which is the number of masks that are produced in China. In the fact that we may have sent masks and personal protective equipment to China. So there's a huge issue of accountability and responsibility and that we're back propagating our response. How much are we quarantined and how much are we locked down? What are we saying about why the physicians are being told not to wear masks when they're seeing patients? I mean, I'm talking about deadly nonsense, deadly structural nonsense. If people like you and me don't call this out using these crazy channels that we have, then the narrative just stands. But partially what we're doing is a parallel sense making operation to the standard media, which is Twitter said, we will now be removing tweets if you contradict official authoritative health sources. So that's just what I did. Search and general's lying, CDC's lying, WHO's lying. Come at me. Do you think they're lying? Yes. Why do you think they're lying? Give me a specific example of why you feel like they're lying. So for example, you saw this interaction with the, was it Hong Kong TV asking about the WHO about time? Taiwan. Yeah, that was insane. We'll explain that because it's fucking insane. It was insane to watch. First of all, he pretended that the head of the WHO pretended he didn't hear them. Then he had them say it again. The first of all, he moves like, you can see his hand, go to cut off the connection. You said, I couldn't hear. Oh, I'll repeat the question. He's like, no, let's go on to the next one. Why would he want to go on to the next one if he didn't hear it? Come on. I don't even have, here's the point. We are so afraid. He's explained what he did to people that don't know because people are listening here and they're a little confused. He was asked about the Taiwanese response to the COVID epidemic. And he didn't want to say Taiwan because China claims that Taiwan is part of China. And because China exercises so much influence over the WHO, he wanted to say some very general thing, which is like, I think, all provinces of China have been doing an excellent job. That's a different country, Taiwan, because there's a dispute. So what do you think China is most interested in? China, the people's Republic of China, the Communist China, Communist Chinese want no recognition of their existing something called Taiwan. And why does the World Health Organization given to that? How do different nations get control of things? We have influence at the UN and we've caused the UN to do things that are America-centric. Other countries have influence. And you do this by being on particular committees, rotating directorships, who pays the cost. I don't know how the WHO seems to be so enmeshed with China. And I don't want to opine about these things because I want to keep my voice. But it spoke volumes to watch that guy do that and do that little dance. To me, I don't want to say Taiwan. My entire life looks like that interview. I hate to say it this way, but my relationship with authority and my big critique is that this is the generic expectation across almost all institutions. They are all serving bizarre goals because growth is what gave us our independence. And when we became less innovative and we are the innovation dried up and we couldn't grow our way into new things. The number of people who could use their middle finger effectively and say, I'm steering this organization to do the right thing and this is my bet and we're going to go forward. Those people as a class were removed. If you think about like, what do you do with Churchill when there isn't a World War two to win? It's very uncomfortable. Like, what do you open a dry cleaner? We don't know. You have special people who really only shine when there's an emergency. There's a guy named J. Perkosh Narayan in India is very important. He was one of the founding fathers of modern India. And after Indian independence was achieved, lots of the people who had been founding fathers went to the next phase where they became like, they enriched themselves, they did standard political things to getting power in the system. He was the one guy who sort of stayed true to the revolutionary spirit and bizarrely when Indira Gandhi created a state of emergency, which was a disaster in India. The people said, well, who can we turn to in a dark time? And oddly, I guess Perkosh means light. So there's this phrase like in the darkness, there is one light, J. Perkosh, J. Perkosh, J. Perkosh. They turned to the one guy who'd become the patron saint of lost causes because he never broke faith with the revolutionary spirit. And he gets called up once, but he's incredibly important because everybody knows in a dark time who they can trust. That's a very important parallel to where we are now. Who are the break glass in case of emergency people? Yeah. When you watch the people that are talking in these presidential addresses, there's none of those. I don't see any break glass. I mean, this fauci guy is obviously an expert in diseases and he's a doctor and he's trying to do his best to lay out the ground rules of what we need to do and what this looks like over the next couple of months. But it's like Jaco Willink, you know, like Jaco is not telling you, don't worry. You don't have to change your routine. You can get up at 930. Just do a little bit, just a little bit. And he's like, does the clinic will freeze to my mother at 430? What are you doing in bed? It's time for discipline. Well, because he's a military guy and military people don't have any room for bullshit. They don't have any room for people to do. Some military people do. Right. But people like seals, they don't have any room for fluff. Well, because you have to be able to perform. Well, okay. So then in that situation, fuck your feelings. Get up at 430. That's how they feel. That's what I'm trying to say. Those, you can just do a little bit and that's great. That's great. You guys are enforcing mediocrity. Congratulations. And that's what I'm trying to get at, which is we have a situation where we know, if you have two trainers and one of them is doing, don't worry. And the other one is saying, not going to lie to you. You're going to be sore. You're going to be miserable. This isn't going to be fun. Which do you choose? Some people will go with the former. Yeah. They like to stay fat. It's a lot of that out there. Okay. mediocrity is a very comforting thing. I hear you. Yeah. It's fucking, it's hard. It's hard to be that 430 in the morning guy. Well. Some days that alarm goes off, he's got to be like, fuck this man. Well, you know that Jaco doesn't live that 24 seven. He does. No, he may live it. He may live it, uh, 18 six. No, but he lives it 20. You remember that thing he did about the cake? I was at a birthday party. There was a delicious piece of cake in front of me. I struggled eventually. I succumb to, I succumb to temptation. Yeah, but I'm telling you man, that doesn't even mean anything. That goes through that fucking blast furnace of a body. Well, I'm just telling, but I'm saying nobody's 24 seven on the staff show is a fake weakness. We said to a form of a weakness. He's a caring mortal like there. He's appearing to make you sort of commiserate with him. He's appearing that, uh, oh, I have some failings to I hate cake. Yeah, what it doesn't tell you is he probably went down to his fucking dungeon basement after he had cake and did squats for an hour. I believe that. There's people that are really that guy. Yeah. And he's one of those, those people. He's really that guy. He's that guy all the time. I spent a lot of time with Jaco. Okay. But that's because he's a great seal. I want, but I want one of those people. Right now. Right now. Those guys are important. And we have to clean out these, this class of people that put up with each other. It's like the reason they put up with each other and they don't like indict each other or sue each other. And they're all the same. Yeah. And that was the key skill for between 35 and 50 years, which is knowing what not to say to upset the institutional apple. Well, that is politics. And that's one of the things that discuss people about it. That's one of the things that one of the reasons why Donald Trump actually got into office is people looked at him as an antidote. I mean, that's right. Clean up the swamp, drain the swamp. That's him. That's what they thought. They thought this was the solution. He might be, you might bring in his own swamp, but he was against their swamp. Exactly. Yeah. Exactly. And then Bernie Sanders has his own kind of swamp. He's got a different kind of swamp. You know, everyone's got their own swamp. Like, what is your particular pattern that you would like to push? What has got you to the dams? You know? Sorry, I'm laughing. But Barry Weiss was sitting here and she's just like, Kat, so Joe, who do you think he'll vote for? And then he's like, it's like Bernie Sanders. And then you called me up. You're like, Eric, what did I just do? He's a Joe. I think you might have just swung the election. Well, the wrong way or the right way. The whole thing, look, Joe Biden being the main guy is the only reason why they went after Bernie Sanders and went after me. I mean, the whole idea was just to reinforce the idea that Bernie Sanders is making poor choices by connecting to him to someone who says, fucked up things when he's trying to be funny. Yeah. And you put it in print with some quotations behind it and like, wow, this guy's awful. You know, everything out of context is awful. And what they're trying to do without a doubt is the same thing we're talking about, the guy who's willing to dance with them, which is Joe Biden, the guy who's the professional politician, which they don't give a fuck if he can barely talk. They don't give a fuck if he forgets what he's saying halfway into conversation. But this is the whole thing about the gated institutional narrative. Yeah, the key issue. And I learned this when I used to do immigration stuff and Washington during the 90s. I learned this concept of steady hands. This is like one of the most terrifying phrases ever. So I told you, I think at some point that in New York, whenever people are deciding to do a bad thing to screw people over, they always use the phrase, it's a beautiful thing. Meaning that you can extract money from people who have no, no say in the matter. In Washington, this is financial circles are talking about. Yeah, New York finance. So whenever you hear the phrase, it's a beautiful thing. It means that somebody is being raped. Right. In Washington, the phrase that I learned to fear is steady hands. He's a pair of steady hands. That means you can count on him to do the wrong thing in an emergency to keep everybody on the inside. Okay. And there's like a separate system for promoting the people who do the wrong thing and making sure because everybody inside is super dependent on somebody burning all of their credibility in public. Steady hands. Oh. Yeah, I mean, that's the main hope of this free information society that all of these disgusting practices, these legacy practices can't be exposed. Well, here's the weird thing. When Amy Klobuchard dropped out, I was like a baby boomer born in the, let me say 61 something like that. Everyone remaining was born in the 1940s. Elizabeth Warren was the youngest. Then you had like Mike Bloomberg, Bernie Sanders, Joe Biden and Donald Trump. So everyone was like born between 41 and 49. Now all of those people would be the oldest president, all of them, the oldest president at an inauguration. Like we've lost our mind. This is normal to us. This isn't really commented upon that you would have five for five septicinarians vying for the presidency of the United States. It's pretty crazy. We just, I mean, the evidence is the clearest with Joe Biden, right? Yeah. Because he's showing actual real deterioration, but we've seen deterioration from Trump particularly earlier in the first year or two of his term and some spectacular videos of him falling apart where he couldn't enunciate words. He couldn't say words correctly while he's speaking to the country. The deal with his tongue was like swollen and his throat. It was very strange, right? But people think of that as maybe a substance issue. Like he goes up and he goes down and sometimes he catches it on the wrong part of the wave. And that's when he's in front of the camera. And he, you know, he struggles through it, but he literally can't pronounce words. But then he'll bounce back and he'll be fine. Joe Biden's not bouncing back. You know, whether he has an aversion to the same sort of supplements that Donald do's him, I don't know. I don't know what's going on. Yes, he's he's he's he's he's inconsistent. Sometimes he seems fine. And then sometimes he seems like he's completely lost. And you know, I learned about this. It was very uncomfortable for me. I was watching Stefan, Mala knew and Mike Cernovich going on and on about Hillary's health. And I was just thinking these guys are actually weirdly making sense on this topic. And I've never really interacted with Stefan, Mala knew it all and it sort of scares me. I don't really want him in my life. But didn't mean that he wasn't right and he wasn't being courageous and saying it. And then when Donna Brazil, I think came out later and said, yeah, there were real concerns about Hillary's health all along. Well, she was fainting. Yes, whenever you lose consciousness, that's we don't we don't know what it was that she was doing. But what I'm trying to get at would be that we are dependent on these people that we are told or trolls as the free people. And I remember Orwell talking about the proletariat or the proletariat was weirdly free and the central people were the ones who had no freedom. And I saw this also in the fall of the Soviet Union. I had a family in Moscow and Kiev and in Chernoff's Sea that we discovered right at the end of the Soviet Union. And I went over the visit. And I remember preparing for that visit. I called up these people in Chernoff to right near Moldova in the extreme west of the Ukraine. And I said, you know, is it the Rajdui? And I said, hello. And I hear the voice on the other end of the phone. It was like the time when long distance phone calls were still romantic. And I hear shalomalakum. And I'm realizing that these are young people are still speaking Yiddish. They don't give a shit about anything because they're not important. They're not in Moscow. They're not in St. Petersburg. They're on the periphery. And there's a measure of freedom that comes from just not being central. Right. You can communicate freely. And you can think freely. Is anyone in legacy media talking openly on any of these shows about Biden's deterioration? I don't know. You know, Tucker Carlson is another person to watch who is freer. He's free of Fox. He's able to go against Fox. Yeah. I'm looking at Greg Gutfield. I don't know what Greg has been saying. But there are a small number of interesting people who are still housed inside of the of the belly of the beast. And I don't know if you've heard my theory about the rebel end of corporate and the corporate end of rebel. No. So you and I, I think, would be sort of, well, at least I'm wearing a jacket. I would be the corporate end of rebel. Okay. What am I? You might be the rebel end of rebel. I don't know. You're faking being the rebel in the, you're pretty. Yeah. What am I faking? What? Well, look at all of you being the rebel in a rebel? Those tattoos obviously wash after you put you just apply the very day. But the core, the, the rebel end of corporate would be like Barry Weiss. Okay. Yeah. Right. So she's, she's in the belly of the beast, but she's pushing the edge. Bill Maher would, would, would straddle corporate end of rebel rebel end of corporate. Unclear. Right. And so there is an important partnership across this. If you think about, um, would straddle corporate and a rebel rebel end of corporate, unclear. Right. Right. And so there is an important partnership across this. If you think about, um, you remember the filming glorious bastards that do like that. Sure. Love. Okay. Lieutenant Aldo Ray is this interface between regular army and the psychotic Jews who will kill Nazis given any opportunity. And you need people who interface between like the bad boys and the regular units. And these are incredibly important. Um, what is the plural of Nexus? Next I don't know. We got into trouble the first time with octopus octopois. No, it's actually octopus. The recommended one is octopodis spelled octopodes. Really? Yeah. Wow. But I've seen octopi. Yeah. Well, people people use octopuses, octopi. There it is. Plural form of Nexus is Nexus or Nexus. Okay. Oh boy. Jamie with the win. How weird that it's either or that it could just be Nexus. The plural form of Nexus. Well, that makes sense. I guess. So these Nexus. Yes. Uh, are you. Okay. Just do it. Uh, are incredibly important. And we have to keep them up. And I'm worried about the, um, corporate, the rebel end of corporate because these corporations are starting to realize that their need for K-Fabe is just far exceeding, um, K-Fabe. K-Fabe. K-Fabe is carnival speak for the word fake. And when catch wrestling devolved into professional wrestling, you know about all that, that's very interesting. Yeah. That's a weird, that's obscure. The catch wrestling kind of a wrestling. Actually, Jamie, could you bring up the word K-Fabe in Weinstein? Can you name any people that were involved in catch wrestling? The real catch wrestling? How far do you go with this? Well, the, you know, farmer burns was farmer burns. No. Famous catch wrestling guy used to do a hangman's drop. His neck was so strong. He tied news around it and dropped six feet and hang there. So when, um, by the way, if you want to read a great book on professional wrestling, I would highly recommend the book Ring Side, which talks about the evolution. And so what I call K-Fabrication, okay, is the transition of something that is usually has twin attributes is very dangerous and very boring. Um, so old style wrestling was incredibly dangerous and people would, you know, be crippled from about. So as a result, they would often just like circle each other and not really engage and like war is like this. Mostly war is extremely boring and then, you know, obviously can be quite deadly. So in order to rootenize these things, we create K-Fabe, which is the system of stratified lies that professional wrestling is undergirded by. Okay. So you know what a, do you know what a work to shoot is? Yes. Okay. What's a work to shoot? Well, a shoot is an actual fight and a worked shoot like a work is a fake fight. Right. So like if two guys were pretending to fight and there was, there's actually, there was an issue. I should, so just to lay this all out in Japan, there, there's an extreme admiration for professional wrestling and professional wrestlers would get into mixed martial arts and they would get into mixed martial arts with varying levels of actual commitment. So some of them would get into mixed martial arts and have fake fights. This is like pride or yes. Exactly pride. And some of pride actually was founded by Hicks and Gracie who is, as legit as it, man has ever lived and Takata who was a famous professional wrestler and Hicks and fucked up Takata in a real fight. He only would have real fights. Who was the Gracie killer who came out of Japan? That's Sakaraba. Oh, sorry. Yeah. Sakaraba, he, well, he's a phenomenal cat wrestler. Right. I don't want to blow you off course. His, his, he came from, I believe Carl Gotch and Billy Costello and I think that's the name of the gentleman. There was a bunch of people who taught him, uh, catch wrestling. So his style was submission-oriented cat wrestling. He had, he had like the both. Like he, you know, he was involved in professional wrestling as well, but he was a legit fighter. Anyway, the point was there was a weird blurring of the lines and there were some fights like Mark Coleman had a fight with Takata where it was really clear that Mark Coleman got paid to take a dive because Mark Coleman should have smashed that dude and he gets caught in his heel hook and he doesn't tap and he's going to tap and then he winds up to tap and everybody's like, whoa, and he, he, but everyone watching that nose fighting was like, get the fuck out of here. What is happening here? Oh my God, it's a fake fight. And it could have been a contender. So there was fake fights mixed in with real fights. Right. And it was pretty common, pretty common. This is what happened in the transition in the early 20th century between catch wrestling and professional wrestling. Yeah. This is that you, you start doping reality with fakeness. And the thing I was asking about, at the work shoot, it has to do with the layering of nonsense and reality. So the idea is that you have something which is ostensibly fake. Then you have a breaking of K-Fabe ostensibly, which is the shoot on top of the expected work. But a work shoot is tertiary and that the shoot is in self fake. And so a work shoot is a tertiary deception. It's a fake fight that appears real. It's a fake real fight that appears to break out of a fake thing that is pretending to him. Maybe it's quaternary. The brain can't go much beyond four levels of lies. Right. And so you had a famous storyline, I can't remember who it was, where a wrestler was apparently supposedly having an affair with another wrestler's wife. And that was the storyline. So the people who write these things are called bookers. The bookers had come up with this storyline. And then the affair became real. Because the brain couldn't sort of manage all of the deception. Sometimes you get the two people actually got together. Because they were supposed to hang out and pretend. Right. And they're like, let's just do this shit. Right. And so oddly, I was fascinated by the moment where Vince McMahon declared, I think, to the New Jersey sporting commission. He made this unbelievable. It's like one of the great moments in the 20th century, I think. He realized that he was going to be taxed into oblivion. And so he had a choice. Should he get, should he pay this tax or do something really bold? And he went in front of them. He said, you realize that everything we do is fake. Now that could have completely toppled the wrestling world. The admission that there was no reality to this was a potential death blow. So he said, this is all staged. All the fights are not the winners are known in advance. You can't tax this because we aren't actually a sport and you don't have any jurisdiction over us. And then it turned out nobody cared. Right. And so the interesting thing is that you used to have this concept of a smart, a mark is somebody who doesn't know they're being conned, a smart mark or smart is somebody who knows that they're being conned and still continues to play. So in some sense, it was the bet that you could take all the marks and turn them into smarts and the business empire would continue. And you wouldn't have to pay the tax. So I was hanging out as what does with Hulk Hogan and I was trying to check whether or not this was true. And he said to me, Eric, you realize who came up with that strategy? Me. So I was like, what? So he said, yeah, I was the one who said that we should do believe him. I don't know. It's hard to tell. Well, that's the whole point of the K-Fave. Yeah, that's where it gets weird. Did you ever see the interview where John Stostle is accusing a professional wrestler of it being fake? So he decided to smack when the head and asking if that was fake. It's really horrific because he dropped. He ruptured his eardrum. Means this is an enormous man. I forget the guy. It ruined the guy's career. The guy who is the wrestler, but he hits him with an open hand. I mean, it's an enormous, full blast. Hit some on the head with this open hand and drops him. He goes, was that fake? Was that fake get up pussy? And he goes, is that fake? And he hits him again and drops him again. Was that fake? Well, okay. Let's talk about this. I don't think professional wrestling is fake. What the fuck are you saying? Well, I know what you're saying. Yeah. I mean, these guys here it is. This is the guy. We'll play it so we can hear what he's saying. Okay, we'll get we're getting the trouble here with you too, but he hits him in the side of the head and then he hits him again. It's Dr. D. I think Dr. Death or something. That fucked him up, right? Is that him right there? Is that the guy now? Jesus Christ time is a cruel bitch. Is that the same guy? Is that him? Jesus Christ. Yeah. Legendary wrestler bounty hunter and author of Don't Call Me Fake. Dr. David Schultz goes into detail about his. Professional wrestling. 2020 incident where he slapped John Stossel. Look, he's got a t-shirt on it about it and everything. Jesus Christ. It's his whole life now. Yeah. Well, that's his moment. Wow. It's not fake. No, I mean, orchestrated. It's the results are known in advance. The death rate of those guys is like nothing else. You'd have to look like wingsuit flyers to see people who die at the level that professional wrestlers do the punishment that they take. And weirdly, the skill level. I, Hulk Hogan put me in a headlock. Why did you let him do that? Did you ever see what he did to Richard Bell's? I'm sorry. I know that he's said and done bad things, but there is so much love that comes pouring out of Hulk Hogan and I agree, brother. No, anyway, he's a great guy, but he put bells or sleep on his television show and bells are fell and bounced his head off the ground. Hulk, Hulk had me in a headlock. Why did you tell that? I know that if that guy had so much as sneezed my head would have just popped off of my trunk. That guy's a beast. He's a huge man. He's a huge man. He's lost like four inches of height because of all his back surgeries. Yeah. It was even, yeah. I first met him like way, way, way back in the day. I ran into him. I didn't meet him. I just ran into him on a street in Beverly Hills. Holy fuck. Then I interviewed him for Spike TV back in the day when Spike TV was, they were doing professional wrestling on Spike TV and they wanted to meet to interview him while I was doing the UFC. So I interviewed him. We had a fun time together, but he was considerably smaller. It was really interesting. It's like that was just, oh, there's Bells. So he put bells there and what we would call a power guillotine and let Bellsers out cold right here. Watch the left arm. There it is. I'll call swatch. You just drop some. That could have killed them. That part right there where he falls and he bangs his head off the ground. Like he just dropped him like he was on a padded mat or something like that. You really should never do that to someone. But they don't worry about their self because they put themselves into so much danger. Just the thing. Yeah. I mean, these guys are the punishment kings of the world. And their extremophiles in that sense. Now, what my belief is is that we are it's real in the sense that the injuries, the death rate, skill levels. And most of those guys could really fight. They may not be UFC level fighters, but they, a lot of them come out of, you know, wrestling backgrounds. Yeah. It's like legitimate. A lot of them are very, very tough. So I think what was it in 2013 or 11, John Brockman asked the question, what's the scientific theory that nobody knows that would make the biggest impact in people's cognitive toolkit. And I'd just been allowed to answer this question along with like actual legitimate people. And so I was kind of like being very protective. And my wife said, you know, you could give a lot of answers that question, but that's not the one you want to give. Do K-Fabe like I this theory that K-Fabe was the most important psychological theory that nobody really appreciated that in some sense professional wrestling is light years ahead and understanding how the human mind actually works because of the issues of deception. And so I wrote up K-Fabe, which is going to determine wars and presidential elections and then sure enough Donald Trump comes directly out of WWE. Like he really understands if you look at that fight with Vince McMahon. Yeah. Donald Trump into its professional wrestling and it is a superpower. Jamie, can I ask you to bring up Weinstein and K-Fabe and see if 2011 what scientific concept would improve everybody's cognitive toolkit Eric Weinstein. So I thought it was going to be thrown out and in fact that turned out to be a very prophetic prophetic essay. Well for sure once Trump got into office, I mean that is an excellent point of what he does is that there's a part of his appeal is that he's speaking in he's like he's hitting a certain frequency that provides comfort and it narrows the boundaries of what's possible and puts things into some very digestible form that morons love. Do you know what I'm talking about? I'm not saying that all people that are Trump supporters are morons or people that support him economically. But there's a lot of people that are morons that like him because he's talking in this frequency. He's there's a narrow band. He's not going to say anything crazy that's like self deprecating or introspective or he's not going to prepare you for the great beyond or you know include you in his concerns for the demise of civilization and western that's not in him. Right. He's got a bandwidth. He's got a very narrow band and inside that band he's the king. Ratings are tremendous, tremendous. Everyone's doing a great job. We're doing a great job. He says these things that they reinforce this sort of pro wrestling sort of vibration. Somewhat. I have to admit that I don't meet many morons at all. Just come to comment storm more often. When it's back up, I'll bring you around some morons. No, sure. You don't even believe that. I think that in general people when they are given no choice at all, express themselves more honestly. When they give no choice at all. Yeah. I want a choice of an actual president that's viable. I don't have one. So then you're going to ask me what which of the non viable people do you like best? Well, this is the this is the real issue with the Democratic Party. They've essentially made us all morons. Yeah. With this Joe Biden thing. They really have. Give me a little more ons. Who do we need? I mean, I can't vote for that guy. I can't vote for him. I can't vote for Trump. I'd rather vote for Trump than him. I don't think he could handle anything. I mean, you're relying entirely on his cabinet. Like we want to talk about an individual leader that can communicate. He can't do that. And we don't even know what the fuck he's going to be like after a year in office. The pressure of being the president of the United States is something that no one has ever prepared for. Right. The only one who seems to be fine with it is Trump. Oddly enough. I mean, he hasn't seemed to be aging at all or any sort of decline. You know, Obama like almost immediately started looking older. Yeah. George W. Almost immediately started looking old. I think that this is not a change in Trump. Like Trump in a weird way has just always been this right performative, you know, like a fake alpha. Right. And he still plays golf all the time like he hasn't switched up. Must I mean, I'm sure he switched it up a little bit because of the pandemic because he's apparently a germaphobe, which is hilarious. But this could be his demise. You know, isn't that kind of hilarious? Yeah. That might be what does him in. The guy's always been worried about germs apparently. How does that work with his active extracurricular life? I don't know. I guess he wears condoms. I wouldn't have. I wouldn't have imagined stormy Daniels would be the person that he would have chosen first. Then it's just it's very strange. She was a hot lady back in the day. Well, it's not a question of that. It's just that she was also an active one. Yeah. If you're if your issue is transmission, I mean, I'm not judging anybody. I'm just saying as a as a vector of communication. Yeah, that's true. That's a good question. And of course, the porn industry weirdly has very high health standards at one level because it would have to. Right. Maybe that's his rationale that they're tested. Yeah, it's interesting. So I had Ashley Matthews on my program and I and she was, you know, talking to me about who's that? Who's that? Who's that? The woman behind Riley Reid. Oh, okay. And how hilarious is that? That's like that's her pro wrestling name. Yeah. Well, and I don't know that she'd used her name fully until we were talking. And I said that I really wanted, I didn't want to interview Riley Reid. I wanted to interview Ashley Matthews. Hello. How'd that go? She was good. I mean, she, she, it was a bit of a mismatch in, but she is polite and sweet to a fault. She's trying to be thoughtful. I had really admire her courage. She doesn't want body body augmentation. So she's got a non classical porn body. She, you know, chose to do a trans scene because it was erotically interesting to her, even though she was told that it would kill her brand. She doesn't necessarily sometimes she shaves her body here. Sometimes she doesn't. Hey. So there's a lot of what she does that I think is incredibly admirable. And I got to know of her because she came to a show that I did with Ben Shapiro and Sam Harris and Sam Francisco. And she was tweeting out that she was a huge Sam Harris fan. And then I saw something she did where she was talking about it was impossible for her to get banking and regular services as a pornographic actress. And yeah, there's like a remember Operation choke point. No, Operation choke point was I think in an Obama era department of justice initiative to try make it very difficult to engage in legal occupations like payday lending and things or porn. And so they were. Yeah. And so they would I think they use the FDIC to harass credit card companies and banks into not making it easy for these people to gain access to ordinary services. So I've been very concerned about the ways in which the authoritarians attempt to regulate who can do what who can say what say what where you get banking be hey, you know, but so that's still going on to this day. Yeah, but she's a difficulty getting banking. She can't get I think male chimp won't work with her because she's a pornographic actress. Oh, in terms of mailing lists. And then there's like chargeback issues where marginal businesses you know, people will cancel their credit cards. But in fact, if you're doing a business where very few people are canceling the credit cards, they'll still claim that they won't work with you because of the risk of cancellation. So there's this whole thing where we harass and tax. PayPal payouts no longer supported. What is this Jamie? What's this from? Pornhub's blog. Yeah. We're all devastated by PayPal's decision to stop payouts to over 100,000 performers who rely on them for their livelihoods. If you have PayPal as your payout option, please select a new method and update your information in your model settings tab. If you have a pending payment for October blah blah blah blah blah. So this is because of porn Canadian. Okay. So this is but what's going to say is this prostitution? Is that why this payout thing? I believe that once upon a time, the San Fernando Valley was the head of prostitution. It's ahead of pornographic acting and movie production because it couldn't be charged as prosecution. Now, as prostitution now Ashley makes the point that she's comfortable being called a commercial sex worker. So in some sense, prostitution is adjacent, but not prostitution. And then to your question about how did that go, I was quite nervous about having a pornographic actress as a guest. I did it in fact right after Sir Roger Penrose. So it was one of the better transition. I like it. Thank you for my extra. I think it's important that we talk about porn. And I think it's important that if this is going to have a huge effect, like dark matter, you know, you feel its gravitational effect, but nobody can actually see it because we can't talk about it. I think that it's absolutely imperative that we make more connection to planet porn and talk about what's going on. What does it say about us and the ways in which, you know, they've got great data. The way OK Cupid has great data on what's going on in the world of courtship. Porn has great data on what's going on in the world of kink of kink and eroticism. And, you know, for example, she pointed out that incest porn surges around the holidays when people are spending time with their families. Wow. And incest porn is that it's a cancer that I don't think we're even talking about that's gotten really, really pronounced. Yeah. Well, all taboo porn's step mom porn, you know, that kind of stuff. Step sister. Yeah, there's something about I hear, you know, but there's something about those things that for people, it's like there's so much porn that this is the last taboo. The last taboo is your dad marries this hot lady and then your dad likes taboo. I want you to have a good time with your mom. I'm going to go off golf in the holidays and stop. Yeah. You know, I think it was your line. You could do one eyebrow, right? You just did two at me. What's that? The Sean Connery one eyebrow lift. Yeah, I can do one eyebrow. Yeah. Um, focus something about a line, uh, porn crossing of lines. Don't remember it's in the sorry. It's that neuro. You don't even smoke pot. What? I wanted to I said you don't even smoke pot. Harley. I wanted to talk to you about one of your podcasts. I listened to Lisa recently. You listen to a podcast. Yeah, controversial. Um, the Okeef podcast. Oh, Project Veritas. Yeah, that's a, that's an interesting one because you had a really good point in that people when they hear that this is a project Veritas thing and for people who don't know who he is, James O'Keefe from Project Veritas, they've, uh, they've done a lot of work exposing some biases that are held by some of the people that work in these social media groups, social media corporations like Twitter and Facebook and things like that. Yeah. But the way they've done it is all through hidden camera type stuff. And there's a narrative that people love to use where they go, Oh, that guy, he uses selective editing or that guy. You can't believe anything they say everything he says is wrong. But that is impossible. Impossible. Because you're listening to these people talking and they're talking about how they marginalized right wing viewpoints. They look for people who have like manga and their headline and they put them in certain categories where we could make it very difficult for people to get their, their stuff that the algorithm supports, you know, that they know how to marginalized these perspectives and these points of view. And it's really weird that no one, they've found this strange way of describing it where even though you see it on video, you hear people say things that should be outrageous to anyone who believes in objective reality. And yet people love to say that's just a project, very fascinating that guy's full of shit and they always full of shit good. And then they cast it aside. Well, thank you for bringing that up. The another look I want to take risk. And that was a huge risk. Yeah. Part of the thing is that if you touch these worlds, by the way, can I turn one of these CBD things? Yeah, they're not in the fridge. This is the last one. Can you get one? Tell Jeff to get some of the CBD kill cliffs. They're very addictive. I'm going to warn you right now. All right. 25 milligrams CBD. Okay. I have a friend who cannot come to the United States ever because he attempted to come in with some CBD, which is not so I shot the fuck off from the UK. Come on. He can't come in the US ever. I believe they cannot peel that. Now the CBD is legal here. His mom is a man to field. Do you know who a man to field. Yes. Do you love a man to field? No. Explain who a man to field. A man to field. The countest man to field is the head of the Beckley Foundation for the scientific study of psychedelic and related substances in the UK who I think believe works with Imperial College. She's an older lady, right? Oh, yeah. And she's a, she's self-trepened. Right. So she's right. She told me about that. She's put two holes in her skull and her husband, Lord Jamie. Is the Earl Jamie? Maybe he's Earl Jamie. I'm sorry. I don't know these things. Okay. He's trippened as well. Oh, great. And they're two of the most lovely, learned, wonderful people in the world. What's the benefit of self-trepination? Her trepination in general. Oh, Jesus Christ, there's a video of her doing it. Yeah. I think it's called something like a hole in my head. What is that? He looks like she did it with a stick. Yeah, or something. She did it herself. She had her own tools. Why did she do that? First of all, when you are British aristocracy, this is what you do. Oh, no, you don't. Yes, you do. Do you go on vacation? No, no, no, no. This is just a lady crazy. This is crazy. Look at that fucking hole she put in her head. So she drilled right through her skull. Yeah. All right. Now, the reason she did it, and I think it's an interesting one, please. Joe, come on. Don't be judgmental. The belief that she had was is that her brain expands to fill your brain case and that when it runs into a hard stop, that the blood circulation has changed and that when the blood circulation changes, you lose that sparkling clarity that comes from your sort of childhood. And so if you remember how clear the world was when you were a kid, her belief was by relieving the pressure from the brain case that you actually get a kind of permanent upgrade in your cognition and the level at which you're experiencing all of reality. Is that true? I don't know. I'm not self-dripened. I have not. Well, drill the hole in my head. Did she say that this was like an effective method? I think both she and Jamie say that it's been very positive. It's a fuck out of here with that. Wow, this is a difference flavor. We got a great flavor here. 25 milligrams CBD. That's crazy though. So this guy is permanently barrechier, sir. Without how many? Yeah. Yeah. Permonately, permanently barred from the United States because of that CBD. Yeah. On psychoactive. Right. Maybe they just knew his mom was a nut job that drills holes. She's not a nut job. She was the type of they had to be one who changed my mind about psychedelics. She changed them? Yeah. I was a total the I was totally opposed to wish I was there. Show you it could be dumbed out. I haven't a hole in your head. I said, I said, you've been taking LSD regularly? Yes. Since the late 60s, I said, well, how is it that you seem to be completely all there? So it really doesn't have any negative effects. And well, I'm trying to race through the story rather than being perfectly accurate. I said, then what did we get wrong in the 60s? And she said, Oh, dosages. I said, what do you mean? This dosage is what a moronic. And so people are just putting huge amounts of LSD and things and having terrible experiences. And I thought, well, okay, this is completely, she's crazy because I know it's acid. And so I just had this image that you poor acid on a brain and it turns it into emin tholar cheese with all that's the holes. And sure enough, like we don't even know what the lethal dosage of LSD is at a physiological rather than at a software level. It seems to be incredibly well tolerated because it's the only thing that has this effect in such tiny trace amounts. Yeah, the same is a cell assignment. LD50s outrageous. You have to be pounds of it. And so she changed my mind where I realized that I'd been thoroughly propagandized and that I had never examined my beliefs around these chemicals. And that in fact, many of the most powerful been thoroughly propagandized and that I had never examined my beliefs around these chemicals. And that in fact many of the most powerful appear to be very well tolerated. Yes, yeah. The most powerful ones in fact, but they're also the ones that most closely resemble human neurochemistry. Which is weird too. So I think that, look, I'm a fan of eccentrics. As are you. Yeah, for sure. And I don't think Amanda's crazy. Oh, she's definitely crazy. No, she showed holes in her head. Oh, it gets weirder than that. What else? She had a pet bird called birdie and she built a mausoleum to her pet bird in the form of some sort of a conical earth outcropping that in order to reach it, I think you have to walk over dork columns. That's cross. Like, you know, these old columns from Greek temples. Oh, okay. And so the tops of them form steps across a moat and it's guarded by a tax ones. So like you can take nothing at all psychoactive and then you're visiting this woman, visiting her bird's mausoleum being attacked by swans walking over Greek columns to cross a moat. Yeah, but that's just fun. Drillin holes in your head is really really where I draw the one. Cheers to that. That just seems, I mean, I don't think there's any real science to relieving pressure by drilling a fucking hole in your head. I think you just relieved by the fact that you've taken this really radical step outside the norm and decided you're going to be the person who goes to fucking. I'm sorry. I'm team Amanda fielding. She may have made a crazy decision in her life, but they're just keep doing it every now and then. No, real new holes. Like, you know, it's like plastic surgery. You get addicted to it. Pretty soon there's nothing but the just holes. Yeah, Swiss cheese head. No, these, these are two of the most lovely and cerebral people around. And she's an acid when she drilled the hole. I doubt it. I mean, I don't think she's, sorry, I just, I, I think she's as eccentric as the day is long, but I'm, I'm such an admire of people who are willing to try to cross the adaptive valley and do it and fund their own expedition. Yeah. Right. So this is like a giant risk. It's just crazy that so was her son that was barred from coming in this country. No, filmmaker. Just imagine if you had a can of this 25 milligram CBD kill cliff. And then like you fucking criminal get out of our country. For a bit, but we're using these things as excuses. Yeah. Like I desperately need to have Douglas Murray come to the US, but people don't like Douglas because of some of his opinions. But he's been here. I don't think he can come now. Why? I don't know. There's some issue. Was this recent? He was on the podcast. When was he last year? When was that? Two years ago? Two, maybe two years ago? Was he here in the old spot or the new spot? I feel like it was the newsbot. It was here. Yeah. So it's within two years. He can't come to the United States. I think he can't come to the United States. And I'm very angry about that. And I'll tell you another one that I'm really angry about is Alex Green, the CEO of Symmetry Labs. Do you want to bring up the tree of Tenere T-E-N-E-R-E from Burning Man? Oh boy. You said Burning Man. What's wrong with, have you been? Too many feet. Too many feet. Too many people. Okay. If you can find a video of this. There's where all the masks are. They're fucking hoarding them for Burning Man. So, like maybe the third one, 2017. Okay. So the guy. Oh, that's beautiful. So this is a tree in Burning Man. They've got all these people. Yeah. And the guy who came up with this is rotting right now in federal prison. The guy who came up with this tree? Yeah. For what? He's a physicist musician, a very good friend of mine. Somebody I leave my children with. Great family friend, wonderful Passover and Shabbat dinner guest and currently in jail for weed. What? Weed. Yeah, but like I want you to think about, and there are much better videos than this where these giant waves and things go through. The people who are bringing transcendence and grace and beauty to our lives when they're hounded because of like what language they've used. Things that like self-experimentation, advocacy for psychedelics. I'm very, it's very important that we have rule breakers, Mavericks, people that you might call crazy or lunatics, and that we be very gentle and celebratory. What is this gentleman's name again? Alex Green. Alex Green. And Alex Green was he arrested for distribution? Yep. I think so. How much did he have? I don't know. Where was he arrested? I think it was New York. New York is still illegal as weird as I mentioned. It may well be, but my point is I want Alex. I want, yeah, he's in federal prison. I don't know. A couple of few years, I don't know with parole. He's in a treatment facility. But you know, I just, I get a call for my, the person I lead my children with when I go out of town sitting in federal prison. You know, it's like this call originates from the US correctional. And this guy said, you know, he's a genius CEO of a beautiful mathematical art company. And I just feel so powerless to figure out how to move people along. Was he targeted or did he just fuck up and try to buy a large number of it, a large quantity of it, so that he didn't have to go to the agenda that he was involved in some. I don't know the specifics of his plea. And I don't want to say anything that could screw him up. But I imagine that, you know, the issue was something to do with a large cannabis business. Okay. So he had some sort of distribution business in New York. I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not opening that he didn't break the law, but I also think at some level, when you go back, I mean, you know, when you see cannabis being advertised everywhere and you grew up in a world in which like only bad people did that, yeah. Um, it's pretty infuriating. Yeah, it is. You know, and at some point, I was so angry about Alex that I started talking about coffee and wine as drugs. Would you like red drugs or white drugs today? Yeah. You know, hey, should we get, go get some drugs down at Starbucks and people would be like very weirded out. But like, tell me those things aren't drugs. They're drugs. They're drugs. They're drugs. Oh, that's happened. I only smoked cigarettes for one weekend and turkey years ago. Man, did I not know cigarettes are a drug. I was underlying. I don't smoke, but I have smoked before shows. Okay. Which, well, he's given me cigarettes and Tony Hinchcliff. He's given me cigarettes before shows and I'm smoked a cigarette and then gone on stage and it's like, you're, you're on a drug. It's a cognitive enhancing drug, by the way, if I was to a point. And then you're, I'm so jittery. I can't even be. I can't even be. I can do that. Yeah. Yeah. If you do a bunch of them, it, uh, there's society has accepted a bunch of drugs and a lot of them that'll fucking kill you. And then they've made some drugs that are some of the most powerful drugs in terms of their force on creativity to make cannabis is one of the most amazing drugs ever. Do you find terms of creativity? Do you, do you believe that's as true of indica as it is of satia? Yeah, indica definitely gives you some pretty wild thoughts. It's, it's really, it perturbs normal consciousness, right? And in that, that perturbation that, if that's words that word, that's word. In that, uh, adjusting of your normal perceptions, that's where these new ideas come come in. That's where these new, it's almost like you get a little, a little, a chance to pop your head off the top of the clouds and look around and go, oh, this is not what I think it this is some weird thing. You know, and I got really high the other day and I made a post on Instagram about, um, uh, Joe exotic and John will trump. And then this, this thing, and I was like saying like here's what's weird. Like the thing that keeps coming to me when I get high is not, it's that this idea that one day thing is going to get back to normal. And the idea is that there was never really was a normal that it was just an attractive illusion. And then it's a comforting and attractive illusion. And I use a photo of Joe exotic and one of Donald Trump's most ridiculous tweets. We were always talking about the coronavirus and how he's a huge hit and how Joe is doing some ratings. Joe exotic from the new Netflix documentary series called Tiger King, which must be a part of your life. Get on board right? I don't know any of that. And then the other one is, uh, look at this. That's Joe exotic. It's amazing. He's a guy who smokes meth. He's married two different guys at the same time. They all live together. It's great. I don't want to tell you anymore. Spoiler alert. But Jimmy, Jimmy, go to my, um, Instagram so you could see the Trump tweet that I also included in this post with this image of Joe exotic. Because these, these two things together was just like I was stunned. And, uh, Tim Dylan actually had sent me this, this tweet by Trump. And I was like, it's the second image of the Joe exotic. It is like a double post. So if you click on the image, like, look at that. President Trump is a ratings hit since reviving the daily White House briefings, Mr. Trump and his coronavirus updates have attracted an average audience of 8.5 million on what am I using? Roughly the viewership of the season finale of the bachelor numbers continue to rise. He writes numbers continue to rise. What a very neat job. This is Donald Trump. The president of the United States makes a self-congratulatory tweet that his talking about a pandemic virus that could potentially kill as many as 200,000 American revolutions. Just guilt revolution Joe. Look at this. I want to revolt. I can't, I can't. I get, I get your, I get your wanting to revolt. I get that. But me as a high person in the valley sitting on my back porch while my kids are asleep looking at this tweet. I'm like, well, I don't anything. There is a normal. I don't think normal's real. I don't think normal's real. I think we've been, we've been hoodwinked. Normal's not real. I don't think it is. I don't think it's real. I think it's, that's one of the things that I love about nature. You know, we were watching a video yesterday of an owl eating the head off of a hawk because I was explaining there was sort of a hawk war that went on in my backyard. At one point in time, these owls killed these hawks. And I would find these headless hawks like owls are mean motherfuckers. Oh man, they're so mean. They look wise in the kind, but they are bad at it. It's so mean. I know. But they eat the hawks heads. That's like the way they do it. And I found this out by Google. And who the fuck he talks heads? I finally, I would find these hawks in the middle of my, my yard with no fucking head. I'm like, what is that? It's great owls man. They were these bad ass owls that would fuck these hawks. Great recommendation from you. What bunny UFC bunny. I had never seen rabbits fighting. Oh, yeah. There's so many. Oh my God. They're so mean. I tried to figure out which of the animals that I want to see fight the most. Yeah. So giraffes are way the hell up there. Oh, yeah. They fight wild. Giraffe battles are the best. One of UFC is so funny. It's like, it's like Kingaroo fighting for sure. Well, we didn't know how mean they were to each other until my daughters got two male bunnies. And we, we left them in a coop together. And they're like, oh, well, this is not good. And they grew up together. I mean, these weren't like bunnies that didn't know each other, but they would fight to the death. And they would fight all the time. Their ears were all torn apart. We had to separate them. Yeah. So this is, this is, they fight all the time. They're, they're rodents man. Have you seen penis fencing in flatworms? No. No, I have not penis focus, focus, focus, focus. Okay. Jamie, I learned so much from you about bizarre animal sexual behavior all the way back to the cuddle fish that pretend to be women. Yeah. Yeah. That was a good one. That's a really good one. Okay. There's a lot of men out there like that in society. So this is a penis fencing with flatworms. So this is like in terms of why do people who like social engineering, not like biology, flatworms have two different life cycles, a male and a female life cycle. And they don't know when they encounter each other and romance calls, whether or not they will be male or female. And it's decided by a violent contest. So they've got, I believe, two plural of penis. Do we die? Let's go with pina. I don't see one at any given moment. They have two penises and they attempt to stab each other and whoever penetrates the other succeeds in what might be termed traumatic insemination. And the loser is assigned the feminine gender. Right. So the idea is that it's more costly to bear the young than it is to pierce the opponent. So female is given to the loser. Whoa. So they just do battle until someone fucks the other one. Right. And that person becomes a check. Now, that thing. Now, there's a worse species. What? Bed bugs. Bed bugs have no vaginal opening. And so the only way that a female can bear young is if a male attacks her thorax and breaks it open in an act which is definitely called traumatic insemination. So, you know, you have a situation in which violent rape is the only method by which females can leave young. So what they do to you when you stay in a hotel is just child's play. Compared to what they do to you. My point is if you want to talk about eradicating bed bugs with DDT, I'm all for it. They are the feminist's worst nightmare species. And you know, you and I talk about the natural world. That's what it looked like. Well, they blow up like balloons, I think. So if you see one that's flat, it hasn't really gourged. So they're like ticks. Ish. Anyway, we had them under control. I believe due to DDT. But on my list of 10 nightmare species, bed bugs and flatworms for the twin traumatic insemination would be way up at the top. So it's like a needle. So they literally puncture through the thorax with another. There we go. Oh, Christ. Yeah. Now these are, if there is a good Lord boy, this, this here, she have a lot to answer for. Yeah. What did you do? You fuck. Why did you make bed bugs? And why'd you make it like that? Imagine what kind of natural selection takes place where the only way that you can reproduce is through violent rape. Well, it's interesting. There's a different system, which I think is fascinating, which is there's a conserved quantity in dung beetles, where they have weaponry on their heads in the form of antlers for fighting the males. And it turns out that there's an inverse relationship. So there's some resource that's allocated between the, uh, copulatory equipment and the, uh, weaponry that the, that the, that the bed, that the, um, dung beetle has. If they have a lot of weapon, there goes the Sean Connery. That's good. Uh, I'm a bro thing. Yeah. I love it. I've tried it for years. I can't do it. Is that's a good thing, right? I don't know if it's good. I just have failure. Okay. The larger the weaponry, the smaller the copulatory apparatus. Oh, so it's like a monster truck thing. Yeah. If you, if you don't have it going on, you gotta get yourself in lots to try. Um, I was like that tiny little gun invented. Anyway, um, so what happens is that the size of the copulatory apparatus may be the engine of speciation that when, uh, emails, uh, equipment no longer fits the female, that may be the cue that some dung beetles will speciate because they can't reproduce effectively. And we don't know why the conserved quantity would be spread between fighting equipment, which is used only to displace rivals and the, um, size of the package. When I went on a tour of the Vatican, I had a really great guide. It was really cool. He took my family through this thing and he was, um, he was a professor and he was, uh, really happy that I was so curious about things. So, uh, and I was on an animal. And, uh, so, one, one, one, one, one, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, two, one, one of the things I kept saying, I go, why are there penises so small? Like what's going on with that? And he was like, that's a really important question. And he's like, back then, the thought was that bigger penises were brutish and that they were, that these, you know, you gotta realize these are people that were fending off barbarians and the idea was that their gods would be beautifully proportioned, but they would have these small, sort of, uh, less dangerous penises. It's very interesting. Yeah. Yeah. And that they would, they would make them like that on purpose. They were all, they all had little dicks. All of them. And I'm like, these guys, like, if you looked at these guys, like just the way they're built, yeah, the reality is most of them would have hogs. Right. These are heavily muscled, thick, thick men with a lot of testosterone. They would have big dicks most likely. Right. That's the reason why women find that build attractive probably. Other than the fact that it's going to be the person who'd be more successful at protecting you from said barbarians. Well, I think that isn't true that the kastrati, um, of Italy were sought after as lovers. They could still perform. Really? Yeah, but then you didn't need to worry about pregnancy. How could they, they could get erect with when they were castorated? Does that mean any sense? Is that wrong? Yeah. I don't think that's correct. I think they're eunuchs. I think that's why they would do that to men. I mean, men who would work in castles and they would have eunuchs that would work with the queen because they could believe. Well, I don't know what, what the definite what uh, operation was performed on the kastrati. They would do it on the testosterone. Okay. But I believe that there was a way in which they were sought after as lovers. Maybe they did a lot of pussy. Maybe that's probably what it is. What? Just kind of lingus. Yeah. I actually think that they were able to set, I'm not sure what operation was done, but I believe that they were able to sexually perform in a conventional way. Jamie, and if you could find the plural for penis, it's got a pain. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Penis is just sounds so fucking crude. You said dicks. But dicks is real. That's the right way to say it. Cox. A lot of cocks. Yeah. You don't say cock. I might start. Um, do you know the, the Michael Jackson story? I know some. This is one of the Michael Jackson stories that I was promoting before it actually was confirmed by his doctor, the doctor that wound up killing him and went to jail. I was like the way that guy sings because I was aware of kastrati's. I'm like, he sounds like one of them. Yeah. He sounds like his as permanent female voice. Well, the doctor that went to jail for sedating him and when he wound up dying, Dr. Jackson, right? Whatever the guy's name was. That guy confirmed that Michael Jackson was chemical castrated by his father to preserve his voice. And they did it to him at a young age. Wow. Because when he makes sense, well, in retrospect, it's like the end of the usual suspects. Like, a hundred percent makes sense. If you look at the rest of his family, look at Tito or Jermaine, they look like men. Right? They're these thick men like a normal man. Yeah. And then you look at him. He's incredibly slender. Like he has no muscle at all. And he moves like he's got this, you know, this dance style that is like quasi feminine almost. Right? It's like he's singing like a woman. Like it's like, why, why tell him that it's human nature. Like what is that? That's not a male voice. Right? And it's incredible notes. Well, the idea was that his father wanted to preserve what got them to the dance. I mean, this is a performing, entertaining family. He was the number one guy. He was the genius. He was the genius. He was the genius. He was the genius. He was the genius. He was the genius. Yeah. You know what else? Do you know that? Okay. Here's what the rivalry between the Nicholas brothers and I think the Barry brothers? Do you know how you're here with the story? Who's the Barry brothers? They were two dancing groups. And the Nicholas brothers were just in terms of riffing off this. Michael Jackson brought back the Nicholas brothers. The Nicholas brothers, if you can find this, were maybe two of the greatest dancers ever. What year was this? They came out of probably like the 1930s and 40s. And like Fred Astaire and Nurea and all these people just thought, um, these are the guys? Oh, yeah. Oh, I am so, these, I think that may be kept Callaway even. Yeah, I believe that is. And just in terms of like the femininity, the elegant nature of these guys and both of them, geniuses, and they could do anything. Yeah, they're incredible. Look how great they dance. Oh my God. Look at, oh my God, the way he's moving his hips back and forth and his legs go sideways like what incredible control. I just say how much I love being an American. I love all the stuff that comes out of this country and we need to get back to being ourselves. What are you talking about? We're being ourselves right now. No, we're not. We're not. What are we doing? Well, right now we're looking at, uh, now if you check out, look at this, Kestrade, we're also supposed to be great lovers. They could last long since Thomas Sini, uh, to say that name, Monte Squee. How do you say that? Two Monte S Monte Squee, Monte Squee, they would have inspired a taste for Gamora in people whose taste is the least deprived. What? And when Casanova fell in love with a Kestrade, who conveniently turned out to be a woman in drag, he asked her to dress as a Kestrade in bed. Okay. I'm done. Check please for those women, for those women who choose as dried and put it, uh, to, uh, in quotes in soft Unix, place their bliss and shun the scrubbing of a bearded kiss. Yeah, they wanted someone who eats a lot of pussy affairs were idolized and safe, but bed hopping could be risky for the Kestrade. One was assassinated by his lover's furious family and another who wrote to the Pope requesting permission to marry on the basis of that his castration had been ineffective, received the reply, let him be castrated better. The Pope said, no, you can't get married. We're going to cut your notes off better. We're going to do a better job. All mouth and no trousers. Kestrade had more fun than you could think. Hello, guardian. Great fucking Samantha Ellis meets a singer who wishes he'd had the chop. Oh, great. Yeah. There's a kid like, one. See, this might just be a story. You know, I mean, the guys says I regret not having been castrated. Go get castrated. But that's, that's one of those things where that's just, that might be a story, like a good way to write something, you know, and click, baby. And it's, it's an story's been around for a long time. Here's something you may not know. The last castrato was recorded. So there's actually a recording. We played it on those. You played it. It's about a dozen times. Yeah. Yeah. It's pretty gross. It's not, he wasn't a talented one. Well, that's not what's gross. What's gross is the thought that this was a child that was taken and castrated and then forced to live this life. Look, it's, it's absolutely ridiculous. But getting back to Michael Jackson, I think there is. Is that right? Yeah. Alessandro Moracechi Moracechi Moracechi Moracechi. Alessandro Moracechi. The last castrato Christ, the complete Vatican recordings. What did they do that man's mouth? They had him there. So what it was the very brothers is the very brothers were a rival team to the Nicholas brothers. We see with those guys the Barry brothers, the Nicholas brothers, nobody remembers the Barry brothers. If anybody remembers anything, they remember the Nicholas brothers. Okay. But the issue is that the Barry brothers were, there's the Barry brothers. Oh, this is that this is, you'll see that they're much more athletic in a certain sense and much less refined. So doing a lot of cane twirling. Yeah. But if you go to the end of this one, I believe, it's pretty awesome. Oh, look, I mean, there's a scene where they, you see those stairs? They're about to do some things. Christ, look at that. Yeah. Oh, spinning and then drop it into the splits. All right. Well, keep, keep, keep on this. So they're running up the stairs. And then, oh my God. Oh my God. They jumped off the top of the stairs, which we're talking about a good solid 10 feet and they landed into a split. All right. Now that's a nuts measure. Okay. These guys, look at that. Bam. That is insane. Right. Three of them. And then they did backflips. Right. Three of them. My God. That's a very impressive feat. That's like parkour. You never heard of these guys with a ball slam. No, but I mean, it's like the 1920s, right? Well, it's gonna be later than the 20th. Was it? Yeah. God, yeah, 30s, 40s. Amazing. The way they jumped off the top and land like that. Have you ever seen the hell's a boppin' sequence? No. What's that? Put in hell's a boppin'. This is just a little... Oh, it's a boppin'. Hell's a boppin'. And then dance. Hell's a boppin' dance. Hell's a boppin'. Yeah. Okay. Now, go into the middle of it because there's a bunch of setup here. No, farther. Okay. Jesus Christ. Oh my God. So this is a guy and a girl. And so he throws her over his bat. Oh my God. I mean, these people can do anything. But the amount of practice and how you would practice something like this, the real thing that would be insane to practice is that jump off the top into the split. What does... Man. It's athleticism, artistry, timing. And, you know, this is also... Wow. That's incredible. Oh my God, it's pro wrestling. Oh my God. I mean, what is the... Well, I wish we could listen to the music, but we would get... No, don't do that. But it's just... I want people to be aware of the level of artistry and skill that came out of places like Harlem. It's just... All of this is pure American ingenuity. And this is 41. And, you know, these are hard shoes with like slippery soles. That... Oh my God. What's amazing is that these guys can get any traction to do anything. And the girl just did that to him. Holy shit. This is the best, the best. This is like the only... Oh my God. Right? Oh my God. Amazing. You know what I love about this program show is I get to take stuff like this and blow it out to people at like millions at a time. Oh, well, that's what I love about having you on. I would love to learn something about this. This is amazing. How the f... Oh my God. I get to be in the balls and set them fly in. Oh my God. Oh my God. People on YouTube watching you have to google the show. Okay, please do. Yeah, please do. This is insane. And this is 1941. My God. Right. And if you want to think about like partnerships between men and women and the way and power is passed back and forth between people of equal abilities, just astounding. Well, yeah. I mean, there's no one person who... between men and women and the way in power is passed back and forth between people of equal abilities just astounding. Well yeah, I mean there's no one person who is the head of this. But like he's throwing her at the room and throwing him around the room and like oh my god, that's amazing. Oh they did it. Colorized. Wow. Wow. Wow. Wow. Oh my god. That's incredible that they can do that. Wow. That's one of the more amazing things about computer technology. Like the footage that they did with World War One, where they took some of that footage and colorized it and smoothed it out and used computers to sort of fill in the choppiness of it and some of those. Have you seen my friend, you should have Alicia Lee on the show. Rosebud AI is going to make models a thing of the past. You can generate like tens of thousands of people who have never existed and you can't tell the difference. Like you know how your optometry says is it better like this or like this? Right. They can't test it. Yeah. She could create for you you're absolutely perfect. You know visual mate and there's no way of having this person or asking them out because they don't exist and there's no way of telling whether they're real or fake. So it's increasingly I just can't. What is her name again? Alicia Lee. Yeah, she's a PhD in like math or statistics from Berkeley and again one of these people who can do absolutely anything. Art, dance, programming, high level theory and so her company is Rosebud AI. No. Okay. She's also an actress. Wonder Woman. Jesus, one of them huh? Yep. One of them confusing people. but it's unclear whether models will still have a job and good. Good. Good to work. Skinny Bitch. Um, become something more interesting than just a hanger. How about that? So what are the episodes of my, of my pocket? Because I launched it off of this one. Yes. I listened to Werner Herzog. Yeah. I thought that was interesting. And he's also been in some really terrible movies. Like he was in that Jack Reacher movie with Tom Cruise. The best part about that movie is that he drives a chivel 1970 chivel. Don't know about this. You don't know about 70 chivels. Did you listen to the bread episode? Bread. Wine sign. Oh, your brother. No, I did not listen to that one. Okay. So listen to five or six. If you listen to episode, you can't listen to the episode. Five or six. If you listen to episode 19, which is the bread episode, I think that's been the most important one and except for the one released today. That sounds like you're gearing me up for the one released today. Well, I would start with the, I would start with the bread one. What's so important about the bread one? The bread one is a story about his prediction that all the laboratory mice that we use from the major supplier, which is the Jackson laboratory in Bar Harbor, Maine may have been compromised by their breeding protocols, which allowed the telomeres to radically elongate and that we thought that these mice were representative of all mice and that they had radically elongated telomeres at the end of their chromosomes, which appear to mediate the level of mitosis that can happen during histological repair. So if you imagine that your cells can divide a certain number of times, if there isn't a counter that stops the number of divisions, everything can become tumors. And since you have like 30 trillion or 100 trillion cells in your body, I mean every cell almost can kill you. So it appears that the reason we may die from senescence that is aging is that that's our anti-cancer mechanisms. So if you eliminate infectious disease like viruses and insult from being hit by a car, the two things that you have it in the end is either you die from immortality, which is cancer, which where cells can divide an infinite number of times, or you die from the recursion limit, which is how many times the cell can divide called in biology, the hayflake limit. And Brett predicted from first principles that what we thought about mice, which is that they have radically elongated telomeres was only true for laboratory animals because all the laboratory animals in which we test things like drugs have been broken. They've been broken because of selective breeding? Yep. Because the breeding rotations privileged much younger mice and removed all sort of threats from the environment. And so because telomeres are not protein coding, there are sequences of nucleotides that repeat as a counter rather than coding for a translation in the ribosome into amino acid sequences. You have is that the body can mutate, if you will, to use the Jacksonville Laboratories concept of this very rapidly because it's not building something structural. Just a question of do we have 17 on the end or 170 on the end? Because it's acting, nucleic acid has multiple ways in which it can participate in regulating the body's responses. So in fact, the breeding protocols constituted a novel system of selective pressures that destroyed the efficacy of all of our laboratory animals potentially. Oh shit. So he predicted from first principles, he said, I bet if you test wild type mice rather than laboratory mice, you'll find that their telomeres are not long as you believe. And this was actually carried out by Carol Greider who did not acknowledge the prediction. She did acknowledge the prediction. You should listen to the show. Why did she not acknowledge the picture? You should listen to the show. Okay. It's okay. It's no, because it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's, it's complicated. And it's a Nobel laureate on the other side of this. So we're taking some risk over there at the portal. That's really interesting. So the consequences of this could be grave could be that so much of the studies that are predicated on these mice tests are they're useless. Well, I've called up the Jackson laboratory and asked them when did, have you had any changes in your breeding protocol? Are you, they said we don't even count the number of telomeres or the telomere link. And I say, do you have a history of when you've changed the breeding protocols? Are you aware of these articles? And she said like, what? I said, you know, these articles of Carol Greider. And they said, how do you spell glider like the plane? I said, Greider like the Nobel laureate. And how do you spell that? GREDR. And so, and then they said to me, well, we don't remember if we've changed the protocols. I said, you're producing laboratory animals. I would imagine you would have a documented history of every change in the time series of how these animals were prepared. Like, well, I don't know if there's anyone around from that time. Are you kidding? Were you absent the day they taught science? Who are you? You know, this is like a single point of failure if true. I can't even, we've been at for 20 years, we've been trying to get an answer as two years. No one will break the story. I mean, this episode, which is almost impossible to listen to because at the beginning of the episode, I'm absolutely insufferable to Brett because he won't tell the story. He's afraid to tell his own life story. Why won't he tell the story? Because in academics, the idea of some punk kid alleging that they predicted in a telephone call to a Nobel laureate that if they would test wild type mice, the telomeres would be radically shorter than the elongated telomeres of the laboratory test. And then the person refuses to acknowledge that such a prediction was made, even though we have emails from the lab. She refuses to acknowledge it or she does an account. I cannot find a single, I've been over the literature. There is no mention anywhere. I live this with Brett in real time. Sorry, I know the events were happening. We have communications with that lab since. I cannot find any acknowledgement from the Johns Hopkins University laboratory that this interaction ever took place and that because he called and wrote and did not write an email, he did not have a paper trail of that prediction. Now there's consequential, consequential emails that show the interaction between the labs. But how many times have you ever heard anyone predict a molecular result from first principles in evolutionary theory? This is what Brett was supposed to be famous for. And then he became like the obscure professor at some ridiculous college and then this thing happened to him. But that's not his origin story. His origin story is that he is the badass of biology who was able to make this prediction from first principles and may have advanced the theory of why we have to die balanced between deaths from immortality, that is tumors and deaths from recursion limits. That is telomere mediated hayflix, hayflix limits. So what if anything has been done since this information has gotten out? The world went crazy for the episode and there was silence everywhere inside of what I've called the Gated Institutional Narrative. Because technology. They really have to throw out how much research. We don't know. I don't know. But it puts the question out how much research is compromised by the laboratory breeding protocols and breeding rotations from a single point of failure at the Jackson laboratories in Bar Harbor, Maine. Wow. Episode 19. Oh, you know. And you will hear me in a way where you will just say, Eric is the biggest dick I've ever heard in my life. But it's all to push Brett to actually talk. You should have him back on the show to talk about it. It's killer. So he just wants to, he kind of wants a soft dance it. Is that what it is? Soft step step. He's just wrong. I mean, here's the problem. There's a point after which I'm not Mr. Nice guy and I'm just like adamant. Brett is simply wrong. It's a, it's a result and a story that needs to be told if there is another side of the story. We need to hear the other side of the story. Um, and my goal is to have Carol Grider say, you know what, this interaction did happen. And I probably could have handled this better because she has worked that she's done, which is beyond question. Some of the most important work that has nothing to do with anything Brett has done. But it does not give that laboratory the scientific right to deny the existence of this interaction, the importance of the interaction. And because there are potential downstream consequences in pharmaceuticals, we need to have an answer. And every answer is interesting. If the laboratory mice having radically elongated telomeres is not a problem in some way, that's fascinating. How could you have an animal that has this huge adaptation to the laboratory? Not, uh, affect things. That would be interesting. If it does affect things, that's fascinating. Well, especially if you're, if you're running tests on it, then have anything to do with hillomere. Right. Well, no, but if it doesn't have to do like for example, let's say you have a really toxic substance, right? And it causes a lot of cell death that requires histological repair. Well, if you have huge long telomeres, you're going to have an ability to metabolize that toxicity very much better. Right. Right. You'll be able to take the insult that comes from this. And so these mice are probably predorionally disposed towards radical histological repair. That's why they remain youthful and young. And if you test something that might be, you know, if you're doing toxicology studies, it could be that the telomeres, even though you're not testing the telomeres, what you're actually doing is picking up that these broken mice are like the world champs of repair, but they suck at cancer. They all die of cancer. All of them. Yeah. Almost if essentially all the mice that was radically elongated telomeres, let go long enough, all die of cancer because they're, they're tricked out for one special thing, which is we are the best repair. Oh, wow. Right. So think about it as the theory of death and clear away all of the noise, there are two ways that nature can't figure out an escape from. Either you dive in mortality, which is that you think all your cells want to, want to live forever. You know, and that's a huge death, a huge danger. Or we call it a resource like leak and computers or they die because the only thing nature can figure out to do is to say, you only get a finite number of cell divisions up front. Now that there's some adjustments to the theory, but if you only get it, like, if you look at the moles on my face, which are people love to comment on the comment section, they probably started as a runaway replicative process that arrested at the border of the mole in order to keep that from killing me. Right. So we have cells that go row all the time. But then what happens is that there's some means of making sure that the process doesn't take it down the entire organism. But think about 30 trillion assassins as the cells in your body, all of which might kill you at any moment. It's like terrifying. And today's podcast, today's podcast. So first of all, you can reach it now. I finally got a website, which is aricwinstein.org. And I told you that we have to leave this planet and that it's hard not to laugh. Sorry, it's just hard not to laugh. But you're serious. I'm definitely this planet. We have to leave this planet. Why? Well, because we can't all be just plans, the best beaches. This planet is China, Russia, Iran and the United States under ridiculous leadership. There's lots of reasons why we have to leave this planet. We're not good stewards. We're not wise enough to stay on this planet. We're too powerful. We went through this. And by the way, you pointed out this quote, which is, uh, we are now gods, but for the wisdom. And that became a meme. So it was very interesting. The, uh, I gave these lectures, um, I think in 2013 as well. Best quotes ever, isn't it? Don't know. And Oxford, who originated that quote? There was me. That was you. Yeah. When did you say it on your program? What day? Which one? Do you remember which one? You probably tried to do a clip. I'm trying to think about what, because it just came off my tongue and you, it's one of those ones where I'll drive down the street. And it'll pop on my head. Like the nicest person. No, no. No, it's, it's a fantastic quote, but it's so right. It's like every now and then someone can get the whole thing in a sentence. We now gods, but for the wisdom. So that's why we have to get off this planet diversify because there are too many people have God like powers. Like Donald Trump commands a tremendous amount of God like power. Thanks to our physics community. Well, his ratings. See how high they are. So hard to stay on focus. Sorry. Okay. Okay. So be so too much God like power. Right. So the best hope that I can come up with and it's a slim one is that if we could figure out what goes beyond Einstein's theory, the Einsteinian speed limit might be bendable or breakable because we would be in a framework that was larger than Einstein's people often interpret this as what they call FTL or faster than light travel. But that's not what I mean necessarily. What I mean is that the underlying source code gives us opportunities that we don't normally have. So seven years ago, I tried it really, I tried giving these lectures at Oxford, which is probably the university that is spiritually closest to what I care about because they care about geometry and physics and they end a relationship. They've kept the face with the faith with that tradition through people like Roger Penrose and Michael Atia. And I released this theory of geometric unity or rather I released the video of the lecture that introduces this theory. So this was the first time since 1983, 1984 that I talked in public. When I started this program, when I was 18, 19, something like that. And I just released the video today on our YouTube channel. And it's the video of you giving this discussion. Yeah. So it's introduced by Professor Marcus D'Sotoy who has Richard Dawkins old job as the Simone professor for the public understanding of science. And he just, he met me in a bar and he got me a little drunk and he said, okay, what are you really working on? And I told him and the first it sounded crazy. And then he started thinking about it. And he asked me more questions and he brought me over to Oxford. He got me an appointment, had me talk to their experts. And then he decided that he wanted me to give this what he called special Simone lectures. And they are an attempt to go beyond Einstein to look for a unified theory of physics between the two major branches that have resisted unification. Now that's usually in the modern era, confused with the idea of quantizing gravity, but the quantum gravity imperative is a, it's a political program that comes out of what would have been the quantum field theory community before it became the string theory community. Which the idea is we have to take Einstein and make him submit to the will of Bohr. And I don't think it's exactly like that. They're I think they got it wildly wrong. And they synchronize themselves and sort of took the field off the cliff. And they weren't able to ship a product that couldn't deliver on any of this promise. And so when I saw that they were about to go off a cliff, I switched fields as an undergraduate into mathematics and used mathematics as a stalking horse to study the same sort of underlying structures, but not to get swept up in the politics of physics. And I had this theory, which I can now talk about for the first time in like 37 years or whatever it is. And like today's the first day that I'm sort of free because I've kept this to myself. So if you want to ask me any question about geometric unity, but why? Why did you keep this to yourself? Because I don't trust these people. You don't trust these people in the same, like I know there was some people that have written some article. It wasn't Sean Carter. It doesn't matter. It's not them. It's an entire system that believes in peer review, it believes in forced citations. You have to be at a university. You have to get an endorsement to use their preprint server. It's too few resources. Too many sharp elbows. Do you think that there's there's a logic to that method? No, I think to preserve it from charlatans and you have to do crack pots that are yeah, that just want to publish stories. Yep. So this way you have to be sponsored. It makes sense, right? Yes, but it whatever I'm doing, whatever mistakes I'm making, so much, so what I'm wrong about it, about this theory, it's just fine. I'll find out that I'm wrong. Give me an olemmens version of the theory. All right. First time ever. Yeah. Do you know that let's start off with Escher's drawing hands? So do you Jamie, do you have a picture for that? The the key problem that we have in a fundamental theory that people don't think about is not why is there something rather than nothing. I don't think we can answer that. It's why is there so much that is that is rich out of almost nothing. And so this issue shows that if you had a piece of paper, could you will into being the hands holding pens using ink to draw each other? Right? That problem is akin to the problem that we face in a fundamental theory. If you had the canvas, how would the canvas bring all of the richness that you see around you into being? And what I did was I said, okay, we have to go below Einstein. So we have four degrees of freedom, but they're not yet space and time. It's protospaced time, but before. And then I said, okay, that those four degrees of freedom are like the stands in a stadium and the stands somehow need to build the pitch. And the pitch is a 14 dimensional space. So if let's imagine that you had, okay, we have got four objects here. Right? So the four degrees of freedom, of course, one of the four objects, then we need a ruler to measure how much of each of these four objects we have. So that would be four additional variables. And then you have angles, because length and angles, what Einstein gave us in space time. So the angles between any two objects are the same as the reverse of the angle. So then you can count it up and there are six angles to be had. So there's four degrees of freedom plus four rulers plus six protractors, which is 14. So there's a 14 dimensional auxiliary space in my estimation. You and I are in some ways potentially having this conversation in a 14 dimensional world that we perceive back in the stands rather than on the pitch as a four dimensional conversation. That is, we are in the three dimensional room going forward in time. So I've called this the observer. And the observer is two spaces rather than Einstein's one space. Can I stop you right there? Sure. Why 14 dimensions? Because I'm saying that the fields that is the stuff is dancing not mostly on the four dimensions that we think we perceive, but it's also dancing on the rulers and the protractors. So in other words, if I have x, y and z, I need rulers in the x direction, the y direction, the z turn to measure things. And I need a watch, which would be like a ruler in the time direction. So those four rulers are in fact in play as well. And the protractors, because like space time is four degrees of freedom plus rulers and protractors, I'm saying work over the space of all rulers and all protractors as part of where these particles and fields can dance. So the rulers and the protractors are part of the system, not just a choice of particular rulers and particular protractors. So by choosing particular rulers and particular protractors, Einstein is grabbing a tiny filament of the space of all possible rulers and protractors. So in effect, space time is recovered as the act of the observer's contemplating itself. That's a little bit poetic, but I mean that the choice of a space time metric inside of the space of all metrics is a section of a 14 dimensional bundle over a four dimensional space. Now, that's the first sort of mind bending weird thing is that this is not happening in one place, it's happening in two places in X and in Y, the stands and the pitch. There are things that are happening in the stands and the things that are happening in the pitch. So you know when a guy's like trying to make a free throw and everybody's waving their giant noodles trying to get them to miss, there's an interaction between what's happening in the stands and what's happening on the floor. And the observer is the bundling of two spaces and saying, hey, you're confused as to what's going on here, some fields are happening in the stands, some fields are happening on the floor. And there everything feels as if it's happening in the stands because that's where you're sitting in some weird way. Then you've got this really crazy stuff, which I think one aspect of it is everybody in theoretical physics is looking to figure out whether there are three or more generations that is copies of matter. Everything in this room is generation one. It's all made up of up quarks, down quarks and electrons. So that up quarks and down quarks give you protons and neutrons and electrons give you these sort of interesting personality of the various chemical elements. There are also neutrinos, but they're streaming through us. So I'm not going to count them. And that's all generation one of matter. So everything in that thing of that is like plastic Lego. And there's another Lego set made out of wood. And then there's another Lego set made out of like lead, you know, and we don't see those other two Lego sets except if we're doing very energetic experiments. So there were three copies of matter and everybody was trying to figure out three or more. And I thought maybe it's too or fewer. And so one of the aspects of this theory is that the third generation of matter is an imposter. It looks like this generation of matter in terms of its particle personalities. But if you were actually to heat up the system, it would unify with a bunch of particles nobody's ever seen before. And so there are predictions for what those new particle properties would be. There's also a fourth pseudo generation of what would be called spin three halves matter, which is not prohibited, but has never been seen as a fundamental. So it makes predictions for the particle properties of new spin half and new spin three halves particles. It attempts to say that there are sectors of matter that I think decoupled that the universe is not in fact left right asymmetric, which would be called chirality. And if you think about the weak force, so if you have a neutron on a table, it'll decay. And I think something like 17 minutes on average half life. When it decays, there's an asymmetry in that decay called beta decay. And that was found by a woman, bring up Madame Wu from Columbia and the Cobalt 60 experiment. So in the 50s, this gal, Madame Wu, who should have won a Nobel Prize, discovered that when Cobalt 60 decays through beta decay, the electrons come spin out one side and not the other, meaning that the universe is like Marilyn Monroe or Cindy Crawford having a birthmark that lets you tell the left from the right. So this is like the ultimate experimental badass who never got recognized fully. And she did an experiment based on work of Yang and Lee, that for the first time showed that the universe had a preference of one of its left over its right, if you will. I don't believe that preference is fundamental. I believe that there's another copy of matter that, so the analogy I give is that if you think, if you look at your three fingers in the center of your hand, your middle finger, which is my favorite, is obviously symmetrical by itself. Your digit ratio two and four is pretty close, but is determined by the amount of testosterone you're exposed to in utero. And then your thumb and your pinkier wildly off, but you could try to make it symmetric and say, well, pinkies like a lame thumb, which it isn't. If you're just looking at your hand, you're trying to figure, why is my hand asymmetrical? But you don't realize that you've got another hand and it's thumb to thumb, not thumb to pinkies, it is the symmetry. So when you place your fingertips together, you see that if you didn't know, if you were like all over, sexed out and you could only see part of your body, you would think about, oh, the world is asymmetric. Well, my belief is that in weak gravitational situations, this other matter decouples, so you only see one hand or the other, and we're all in one hand in this. So what I'm starting to do is that I'm terrified of talking about this stuff. I don't have the right credentials, not a physicist. I've been out of this game forever, so I often say the wrong things and break rules and who knows what. And I haven't really talked about it. This is like really a very low, I mean, I've been completely alone on this project. Don't want my life. What do you think to end result of this project potentially could be? Because you're saying we could get off this planet. What are you talking about in terms of the actual implementation of this theory of yours? So Jamie, if you could bring up my answer to the final edge question, which is what is the last question? John Brockman asked when the final year that he conducted the annual edge question. And that is the annual edge question. Yes. He would ask like 200 people, many of them physicists or biologists or mathematicians, he would ask a question and they'd write an essay. And then every year he'd publish it as a book. And so I did that for 10 years. Finally, he got tired of it. And he said mathematicians, you'd ask a question and they'd write an essay and then every year he'd publish it as a book. And so I did that for 10 years. Finally, he got tired of it and he said, okay, this is my final year. We've exhausted this. What is the last question? So this is the question that I asked. So does something unprecedented happen when we finally learn our own source code? And nobody picked up on this, but that's my concern is, which is what happens when the universe finally contemplates itself? When we are the first, we're always worried about the AI becoming self-aware, all-eschina. Okay, we are the AI and we're about to become self-aware if we can figure out what our own source code is. So we are a skynet. So you're talking about the source code of reality itself. And that our perceptive, our limited perceptions of reality are giving us a distorted view of what the landscape actually is. I'm trying to make sure I was somewhat holding this back because I'm afraid of what it unlocks. And now that I know that we're willing to elect Donald Trump, not store masks, play footsy with China, be Putin's bitch, all of this stuff. I tell what this, we're going to mis-manage this planet into our own, again, if we don't get some grownups into the room. And so I don't know that I'm a grownup, but I'm willing to vie for leadership by putting something up, having it investigated and seeing where it goes. What is your number one fear about this source code being I don't know what this would be. Well, the last time we gained some serious insight into the way nuclei worked, that with a little bit of geometry from Stanislu, Ulem, and Edward Teller gave us the namesake of the bikini. That was a terrifying moment. We changed everything changed in 19, I think that was 54. The namesake of the bikini? Yeah, bikini atoll was an island in the Pacific where we blew up a hydrogen device. Is that that in those insane images where you can see the water going a mile high into the sky? Gorgeous. Yeah, is that what that is? Yeah. But they did that a lot, right? Well, they did it for a period of time. Yeah. And so to your question, what if what so it's still expensive to create fusion devices. So we don't know of any individuals who own the ability to create fusion devices. If you recall at some point, somebody made a functioning nuclear reactor out of discarded smoke detectors. And we're in and got like 500 smoke detectors took out the radioactive element, created a reactor really? I think so. Probably kid, right? Yeah, probably kid who couldn't get into Harvard. So we have a situation in which we don't know when ordinary humans will gain limitless destructive power. You know, try to imagine the Columbine kids, um, weaponizing viruses or something like that. So one of the great dangers is that great power, I can't tell what the power would be if the theory is correct. It might give us the ability to escape. It might give us the escape though. Yeah. Why do we have to escape? This is what when I'm always so confused about like because even when Elon talks about going to Mars, yeah, like Mars sucks. Mars sucks. Can you fix here? Wouldn't that be the best approach? Well, you want to agree on that. Yeah. What we don't agree on, I think, is that I am convinced that we don't have the ability to store this place. Why? Don't you think we're better at the news than we were a thousand years ago? No, no, no, no. So Genghis Khan was doing a better job. Genghis Khan was doing a better job because he didn't have limitless power. Just try to imagine it. Try to imagine a full-on nuclear interchange and then we're having this conversation afterwards. So you're concerned that nuclear war is not just possible but inevitable. It's certainly inevitable given the long enough time series because all these weapons simply will become cheaper. There's no countermeasure that we, it's too easy to destroy things relative to do you think that when we're looking at the failure of leadership on the scale that we're seeing play out because of this pandemic that this is indicative of how it would go no matter what went wrong. Yes. Yeah. Like if this was an issue of forest fires, if it was an issue of climate destruction, if this was an issue. Volcanoes, hurricanes, nuclear war, same thing. Same thing. Like, you know, here's a weird one. Look at the history, Jamie, of the Suvia Serruptions by year since the 1800s. The bad night guesses that Wikipedia would probably have a list. And the last one was in 1944, 1945 during World War II, grounded a bunch of planes. And then Vesuvius stops erupting. Like, what, why are they overdue for Vesuvius eruption? And then when Ichaefellakul erupted in Iceland, like we hadn't realized that the era of jet travel in the developed world had happened during an incredibly quiet period of volcanic activity. So did we build any kind of volcanic sensitivity into these planes? No, we just grounded the fleet. Right? And there's a, there's a volcano not so far from Ichaefellakul called Kettla. Some makes Ichaefellakul look like a like child's play. So you have to look at the big nap as the greatest danger to all of us. And this point about about being Jewish is it, you know, to be really Jewish, venture pyro makes a point which is not very popular, which is a lot of people call themselves Jews aren't actually Jews. They're really Jews on the way out. People who can't figure out why they're keeping these traditions up, they sort of like to go three days a year, mumble a few words. There's something intrinsically Jewish about wanting gold bars someplace where you can grab them, you know, knowing where the exits are on a building. Like you have to be prepared because the problem of antisemitism to leave in a moment's notice. And Jews have always lived like this. And many of us have forgotten because we've gotten soft in a, in a world with, you know, knockwood antisemitism while prevalent has been under control in the US for a long time. And I think we've weirdly become denatured because we haven't been living with open antisemitism. You see it crop up in the comments section of every video. But it's incredibly important to stay in a state of readiness. And I've tried to keep that story about Passover and the exodus into Israel from what Jews call mitzvahim, which means the narrow places or Egypt. So my contention is the Jews had a great run in Egypt. And we are all the Jews. And earth is mitzvahim. And it's time to go. Where we going? We don't know that we can go anywhere. This is a recapitulation of our previous conversation. Right. We have to know whether exoplanets are viable, whether we can spread out. And whether or not they're in the middle of a big sleep. Well, they may be. But if we're running a million different experiments, it's different than if we're running one correlated experiment with Donald Trump at the helm of the most dangerous machine ever created in the world. Like, that was not my plan. So the formulation of this theory, what you're trying to do is revolutionize space travel. No, what you're trying to do is make it possible. We've been stalled out. We've been stalled out for almost 50 years in theoretical physics. So the simplest way of saying it is no one younger than Frank Wilchek, who was born in 1951, has gone to Stockholm for a discovery in theoretical fundamental physics made since like 1973. Physics effectively, the prestige part of physics came to an end in the early 70s when everything changed across the board. We had a broad economic change in our world. Jamie, do you want to bring up a GDP versus median male income? Something bizarre happened in the early 1970s that we should all be talking about that almost nobody knows about. And one of the things that happened was that physics effectively came to an end. A lot of physicists will, all right, you see that graph? So GDP into people that are just listening. So what it shows is from, what is it, 1947 till about 1973 GDP and median male income are going up in lockstep. They're almost perfectly correlated. And then abruptly, median male income flat lines from about 1973 to 2010, 2010 on this graph. And GDP keeps going up. Now that is, people always talk about the singularity when like we will become one with the robots and AI will take over. This was the actual singularity that happened. And it happened relatively unnoticed. And that's what began to derrain. Again, median male income is irrelevant. It's just one indicator that's particularly clean to show you that that's when the action happened. My belief is that since the early 70s, very little in our society has been progressing. That's not true for computers. That's been like the big bright spots. Not true for fracking. There's some innovations in imaging. But in general, in an average room, if you subtract off the screens, you can't definitely tell that that room didn't exist in 1973. Because we stopped growing, we got crazy. Because everything was built on growth. Everything was a scheme that became a Ponzi scheme when growth ran out. So we've sort of been hollowing ourselves out from that time and getting crazier and farther away from reality. And we have to actually figure out where we are. And my belief was that our economy was almost completely created by theoretical physics. Theoretical physics underlies chemistry. So the chemical revolutions, like plastics from the graduate, it gave us the semiconductor from which we do our computing. It gave us the worldwide web which came out of CERN. It gave us telecommunications, which used the electromagnetic spectrum. It gives us medical imaging from tomography. We don't really appreciate that theoretical physics has been the great success story of our time. And the theoretical physics community is the intellectual, sealed team six of the world. And we underpay them. They're under resource. They're now completely unethical because we've underpaid them. And so they won't talk about their failures. They don't talk about who did what. They're not fair and decent because there's not enough resources. And so when resources get scarce, people become psychopathic. And like string theory is just an utter failure that we can't discuss because the baby boomers use that as well, we're making huge progress while they're actually doing nothing. I mean, I don't say they're doing nothing. They weren't making contact with physics. They became mathematicians like a bunch of soldiers and generals who were playing war games during peacetime. It's related to what they're supposed to be doing, but there was nothing for them to do. So they sort of went to the gym and ran on a treadmill rather than actually running marathons. So we have a terrible situation in that the community that powered our economy and gave us this incredible power in the world through like nuclear weapons and the rad lab at MIT and whatnot has gone into decline. And it's very dangerous to restart theoretical physics. So it's been safe because there's been nothing new that we can use coming out of it. My belief now is that we have to talk about a thousand year solution to human life with weaponized viruses, with weaponized nuclei. I mean, the amount of damage we can do is astounding. And that's going to restart at some point since the nap is now coming to an end. Like we're living, this is the end of the nap. Three months ago, we were all just leading La La beautiful lives doing whatever. We were struggling. We were frustrated, but we weren't in war. But once you think this is not something that's going to we're going to overcome and we're going to get back to business as usual December 2019. So assume that we do. Okay. So we come up with a killer treatment. We replenish all the masks. We have vaccines. We all just spent how long watching our leaders tell us to shelter in place. Make, I mean, we all went through this movie. I don't think like I'm watching the conversations about open borders change. Do you want to, hey, should we talk about open borders today? Let's just keep going about escaping the planet and your theory. Well, okay, because we've taken many deviations in a pretty four 30. All right, visit. Yeah. Okay. So this theory geometric unity replaces space time. So think about a fundamental theory as a newspaper story. It's who what? Sorry, it's it's where when, which is space and time, who what? Who would be fermions that is matter electrons, quarks and what would be the force that pushes them around? How and why? How would be the equations? And why would be something called a Lagrangian? And what this does is to say that there used to be two origins for, um, for physics. There was space time, which Einstein gave us. And then there's this thing called SU three cross, you, SU two cross U one, which comes from nowhere that anyone knows. What is that? Well, you and I are seeing each other through photons, photons are scattering off us and being perceived in by our eyes. Photons are associated with electromagnetism. And there is actually a circle at every point in space time. So here we are in space. My fingers are up here between us. And I'm going to snap at a particular instant. At that point of the snap, there was a circle as there is a point circle in every other point space time that we do not perceive that generates all of electromagnetism. So call this the mysterious U one we don't know where this U one comes from. Why is there a hidden circle that generates the electromagnetism that you and I use to make visual contact that we use to send electronic signals like our Wi-Fi? Not only is there a circle, there's also a three dimensional object called SU two and an eight dimensional object called SU three. And effectively, uh, SU two generates the weak force. That's not quite right. It's called actually weak isospin. And SU three generates the strong force, which is sort of on the nose, which is why the protons in your body don't all push apart given that they're positively charged and like charges repel. So why don't you explode? That's the strong force and it comes out of something called SU three. We have two origin stories. One origin story is the story of space and time. The other origin story is the story of SU three crosses, SU two cross U one. And what I did was to get rid of the freedom to choose the symmetries that generate the personalities of the of the particles that make up this place. And then the question is, okay, I call it the magic beans trade because if you think about Jack and the beanstalk, Jack gives away the family cow to get beans, which seems like the worst trade of all time. But the beans actually had much more in them than was understood. And so Jack gets the better of the trade because the beans allow him to do something crazy. So that's what I did. I gave away the freedom to choose the symmetries to generate the particle properties. I tied my hands the way Einstein would tie his hands. And then I tried to show that you could recover these particle properties by trusting that the theory would self assemble. And that's the hands drawing hands. So the ideas that I generated the fermions on top of the space of all rulers and protractors on top of the four dimensions. And the natural object, which would be called spinners or chimeric spinners, when perceived on the four dimensional object, that is when you pull back the information from the second world that got created into the first from the pitch into the stands. The particle properties appear to be more or less the right particle properties of the particles that we see. Now when I started this in the early 80s, we didn't know that neutrinos had mass. And so we thought that there might be only 15 particles in a generation. And my stuff would only work if the number of particles in a generation was two to the end. So the joke when I was in college was I sure hope that two to the fourth equals 15. Now it can't be because two to the fourth is 16. But then luckily for me neutrinos were found to have mass and that sort of changed the probability that there are 16 particles. So this is some weird thing to deal with the fundamental incompatibility of the two theories, general relativity of Einstein and quantum theory of Bohr and Dirac. In the 70s we found out that there was a geometry that governed the Bohr Dirac part of the world called Erasmani and geometry from Charles Erasmani and Alization. And Einstein had used Bernard Riemann, a German mathematician, his geometries. So my gambit and what's called geometric unity is that the two branches of physics are derived from two geometries. So rather than saying it's about quantizing geometry, which is the quantum field theory and periodalist perspective, we, Einstein must submit to Bohr. The real issue is that there's a fight between the parents that is Bernard Riemann and Charles Erasmani. Now we don't know those names nearly as well. And so my goal was to say is there any world in which these two geometries and the advantages of these two geometries could be made to play together. And in general there isn't. But there is one case in which it works, which is this issue of natural spinners. And so the whole gambit was to say what if the the world is not a generic world, but a very natural and peculiar world where certain games work that would not work in a generic situation. So what I tried to do is to recover Einstein the way Einstein tried to recover Newton from a more fundamental theory. And the incompatibility is that Einstein had to compress something called the full Riemann curvature tensor, which is the sort of measure of how warped something is. So he broke that beast that tells you the warping of something into pieces. He threw one of them out called the vile curvature and then he adjusted the properties of the other two that were left to create general relativity. So my thing does that, but it also has another property called gauge invariance. Engage invariance is the sort of syniquon on of the particle theory. And this is only possible in very limited circumstances. And the gambit was what if the world is in that tiny class where this game can work. So it's sort of a career suicide theory because if it doesn't work this way, you don't really get anything in the end. So think about that exhaust vent in the Death Star. This tiny little vulnerability and man, you better hope that thing goes in. What are you trying to do with this? By releasing this with this discussion, this video that you're putting out, are you hoping that more people examine it and try to actually implement it? And then ultimately this would be something that allows people to do what, to revolutionize space trial? I don't know. I didn't know whether I wanted man to have his own source code. So I was divided. This is, you were serious about this. This is like very close to a lot. I love you. I came on this program and I said it's straight. We have to get off this planet. We made a joke about getting high and all this stuff. But I've always been dead serious about what I'm saying. Now, if you ask me at a personal level, I started this for lots of personal reasons. I always thought that the idea of wanting to go beyond Albert Einstein was something everybody we grow up wanting to do. It didn't occur to me that there was another thing that you would want to do with your life. Like that seemed like the most natural thing in the world. I want to understand why we're here. Well, that means you're doing what you're supposed to be doing. Yeah. You found your net. I found my niche. And then it started this kind of completely bizarre thing because I was not a good math student, but I had to go to the best place. And so how does a B minus math student in high school go to Harvard University with a master's degree at 19? You know, it's like just sheer will because I was not a good math guy. So I just willed it into being. I got myself there. I taught myself whatever it is that I do. I don't have an advisor, which is very unusual. And I became intertwined with this theory. And this theory has been separating me also from people I love in the world that I'm in. I've never known whether I'm crazy or whether or not I have something. I don't know whether it unleashes power. If it works or it only unleashes destructive power. Are you willing to have conversations like debates with detractors or critics of this? I'm willing to have discussions with constructive critics construct. And in fact, well, because publicly you have privately fact privately. Yeah. I mean, I've talked to people like Neema Arkani Ahmed at the Institute for Advanced Study, who I just think is fantastic. There's another guy named Louise Alvarez Gellme at the Simons Institute. This is not very hard for the average person to follow, but I think it's not about credit. I understand that. But I'm saying I think it would be incredibly valuable to just release it for the average. I'm starting to everybody. Yeah. But I mean, this conversation, I know you're saying it's not for the average person, but just to have it available to everyone. So if they want to, they could slowly go over it and try to understand it bit by bit and put it together. I should talk about this. I'm building, I shouldn't even say I'm building it. There is a fanatical community arising around the portal for what we're doing. That's different. And there's a 24 seven discord server where people are talking like if you're ever bored or lonely, these people are always on and always talk to you for that board or lonely. It's not for you, baby. But we've been trying to recruit a bunch of artists because I believe the art is part of the secret weaponry of pushing out. Like, I don't think you know how crazy was when we did the hop vibration up here. It was like close encounters, all these artists start creating hop vibrations. Like I went to Temecula in the sky, Nico, Nico Myers has a huge hop vibration is back yard coming off of this program. It's like what people tattoo your face on their arms, right? I'm aware of all this stuff. I just choose to shut the door. Oh, I'm in there with them. Yeah, you can do that. Good luck. Well, because we're smaller. That's true. It is that too. But it's also a lot of what I do requires me thinking on my own. I have to be by myself and spend a lot of time staring off into space. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, me too. But what I'm saying is that when it comes to people following the story, artists and computer people are going to help us push out AIDS to like, can you pull up Eric Weinstein dot org? There's a visualization that sketched in the door. There's a portal in the website. Okay. So go down. All right, you see that door? No. Yeah. I don't know why that's the clip Okay, beyond that, there should be something. Okay, right here. This is a picture of a fiber bundle and the path lifting property relative to a connection. So those floating planes, that was what generates electromagnetism called horizontal sub spaces. And you're actually looking at a gauge theory in that picture. And so what you're saying is that what's valuable about the artists getting on board with this is that they can make a visual interpretation of this that can be cartoons like there's a guy named if you had Grant Sanderson, no, he does a show called Three Blue, One Brown, which is some of the best math videos you've ever seen gorgeous stuff, just sucks people in. And you're like, you're learning relatively hard math that somebody has made visually beautiful. This guy is a national treasure. And I'm hoping to get Grant on the program. You know, we've been experimenting when we had Roger Penrose in the program. I said, I'm not going to talk to you about quantum consciousness. I'm going to talk to you about twisters and about your contributions to the field. And what my community did is they built something called like the portal dot wiki. So if you bring up the portal dot wiki, there's an entire ecosystem that's digesting what happens in our episodes for the lay public. That's not one of the more amazing things about the internet and about something like your podcast is if you build it, they will come. You know, you have a bigger audience. I will say that I think I have the world's best audience. These guys like go to go to go to go into episodes or how many episodes have you had so far? Is it 28? Yeah. Oh, Eric Lewis, by the way, you should have in the greatest pianist now playing in my opinion. So if you go to go to the graph wall. I love that you're doing all this and yet you're still interviewing porn stars and James will keep. Hey, we want everybody. Yes. I'd love to hell with this cancellation. Yes. Well, not just that. I just love that you're just a curious person that actually wants to communicate with people on top of being this space man. So for example, we have this graph wall tone project where we start off with this paragraph from Ed Whitten. If you go down, you'll see that they're figuring out how the paragraph from Ed Whitten fails over into this wall that was chiseled in Indiana limestone in Stony Brook, New York, which has all of these below that. So that's the paragraph that tries to sum up the universe as we understood it in the modern era in prose. And I recommend everyone read that. And then if you go down from that, there's this plant right right. Yeah, go go there's a clickable thing under that myth that graphic. So for example, this is the plan for this sculpture that Jim Simons, the world's greatest hedge fund manager paid for. And if you click on any one of these things, these ruins, so it's like the uncertainty, heisenberg's uncertainty principle. My people are digesting everything that we say everything that we point to and helping each other understand what goes on on my program so that I don't have to spend all the time in the shallow end. So like it's just this is heavy shit. Oh my God. But this is what's interesting is you're joining us from you actually. You said, because I didn't think this was a smart idea at all. And people are people are so eager to break into what's next. We want to spend our chrysalis and become the butterfly that we were meant for tired of being catapillers. Yes. I know you're hearing five M.E.O.D.M.T. but that wasn't what I was thinking. No, I just mean I really think that that what you're showing, that that is a branch of what humanity is trying to do with creativity, with curiosity, with the thirst for innovation. That's it. Well, it's time to go to the next level. And we are trying in the funniest part is like brought to you by athletic greens and their... With the thirst for innovation that's it well It's time to go to the next level and we are trying in the funniest part is like brought to you by athletic greens and therapy Both good products. Yeah, but this is the funny thing about sponsorship You see my grandfather was a salesman and so in a weird way I'm living a romantic dream of connecting to my grandfather who sold like used clothing and clothing door to door He was a schmott of salesman and I've been astounded at how much I enjoy all of the products that I'm advertising Like the sleep pad that cools you so you don't wake up and pool of your own sweat Unbelievable great. I've lost 17 pounds through athletic athletic greens Well, you've also stopped stuff in your face with stuff. You should need right now Only athletic greens. No the point you are you know You know your face looks there. Yeah, it is but in part It's because it I figured I had it integrated into a program where intermittent fasting started paying off This is man, we could talk forever, but I have to wrap this up unfortunately, but I'm gonna watch your video And then I'm gonna watch it high I'm gonna do two okay twice and I'm gonna try to figure it out and Joe at some point Let's just hang out and I'd love to like just show you exactly what it is tailor-made to whatever questions without any worry about Yes, about and Let's do that. I can't wait and I just wanted to say Thanks again for everything But you do now owe me two appearances on your show I haven't called either of them in and thanks for calling me on your show. Yeah, two on your show Yeah, my show. What's all right on my show on my show? Yes. Yes. Yeah, okay You got it all right. I owe you two you're the best. Thank you. Sorry. You're the best Bye everybody. We'll wait one thing but Eric Weinstein dot org, please sign up for our mailing list so we can find you after the fact Yeah, go get your mind fucked good luck good luck everybody Thank you brother. All right. Bye everybody. Stay safe