First message. I just wanted to let you guys know that consistency trauma symbolism That is what drives the world Next message. I think the world is in the craziest state. It's been in a long time And there seems to be a general disconnect Between people that are about like 20 now and people that are 60 and 50s and ever before Like the baby boomer generation Pretty oblivious to what's going on in most young people. I feel like it's tougher for young people now than ever One of those things is that college isn't a solution anymore and there's insurmountable debt Also, most people don't have faith in their country the same way they used to These are all things I feel Are just like pressing issues of what's going on there like are being talked about somewhat here and there, but I don't think People understand like quite how large Of a percentage of young people feel like this. I don't know man. I just think I think people just need to connect more Also, I don't think Trump is as bad as people make him out to be he's almost street with the way he moves like I kind of like it I also Feel we haven't had someone That speaks his plainly as him Uh, in a long time in the White House, so that's kind of cool to me too Uh, I don't necessarily dislike him, but I do think He's the optimist Next message Hi, I am Titan from Alabama and I would like to say that I'm a big fan of Donald Trump Has nothing to do with how my parents brought me up or what they told me to believe I truly believe that he is a Genuine man if you look at how Hollywood treated him before he was president It treated him with respect and dignity And if you look at how they treat him afterwards While he's president, they treated like dirt He hasn't changed one bit. He's the same man from the minute he made those interviews Until now and for them to do a complete 180 Makes zero sense He hasn't changed. He's the same man. They want to say he's a racist. He's hired more African-Americans Among other minorities. He hires minorities racist things out of the picture He's not a misogynist He's hired women. Women work at his White House Every single claim they make can be debunked. It makes zero sense Everything is about power and money. The Democrats, they don't like Donald Trump because he did exactly what they said they were going to do and I never did So right now When they think that Donald Trump is going to start war war three All about their power. They don't want to see him win with Iran because They never could and they never would what do because it was never about world peace It was always about money and power to them Heck, I mean we could go to world war three With Iran and as long as Democrats had power they would not care Senators in Congress and House of Representatives Would not go to war They all want power So will everyone Donald Trump has come to this country to make change I will gladly accept that so to everyone who wants to Attack Donald Trump It's a bunch of baloney. You have no evidence And you shouldn't have anything against Donald Trump Because if you do you've been lied to Next message Hey there, I just wanted to Take a quick minute to inform the people of a Little fact that I thought they might want to know and the fact goes as follows Not all P.P. Times are poopotimes But all poopotimes are P.P. Times Thank you Next message I think our country That states the command of the milk is going to trash And I don't think it's a and there's no reptilian But you know I'm not old. I'm 20 years old But at this state in life I've been to things. You know, I'm almost selling I've seen any Watson life and I can see what the system can do to somebody and I think we need to reform that and I think that's the biggest thing that our country needs to do because I understand why the golden rose and keep our people inside cages like Like animals man. There's many other ways that this there's many other ways that do things society and our mindset that we are Especially with everything going around with everything. I think it shouldn't be portraying with a picture Our president shouldn't be doing what they're what he's doing politician You know you're in good, but it's tough to live in Deciding to know that he's taken that I can just watch outside We're lot ordering a misdemeanor might my misdemeanor would turn into a felon or it just gets upgraded for no reason I can't get a job. I can't get an apartment Why why is it like why are these punishing us forever? Why is white? Why does he punish us? It's not real The patient is what you guys are doing. You know, you know if you guys are gonna put this on your thing, but I can't black I'm not gonna say anything because my way isn't gonna be heard Even without in the Anywhere, you know, I just didn't know that I'm a millennial and Next message. I'm actually in Pretty damn good mood. There's a lot of opportunity going on So I'm focusing on that Business is going to be booming for a lot of people who see the opportunity to Take life by the polls and just descriptive, but my main thing is without angry everybody is I'm focusing on the opportunity to grow Expand any balls sitting getting pissed off next message You know, I just thought from the night is you two about What your thoughts are on Trump and stuff man. He fucked us like he really fucked us. I'm 20 years old, right? And like he really just fucked everything like yeah, okay, I've been sitting everything right and he just passed the bill for 21 You know, it's not that crazy. No, it's only whatever, but like for all the people that have been doing it Just there were like were 18 17 this stuff like that like in the state like Texas and stuff like I know they have the grandfather bill, but like for him It's just randomly like one day. Yeah, you could be buying a pack of cigarettes the next day You like literally if you were buying a pack of cigarettes and 12 o'clock hits at night It would not let you bond like that's just ridiculous like he had we had no like fucking Transmission like nothing like like no one like was like oh, yeah, by the way This bill is gonna be passed in like 30 days. No, it was just what fucking day like are you serious? Like it's just insane like how he can just randomly do that like I just feel like it's not fair for everybody like You know, and then like the fact is that he just wants to go and bomb places like man He's going to start world war three and the draft is gonna come back and my uh My uh one of my family members really really like well No journalists and I'm not gonna say who it is so that they don't like you know, whatever Just don't get out to talk to them or whatever, but you know like it's It's insane like the fact is that he he's gonna start the draft up like World War three is gonna happen because of all his stupid and sexy. He's been doing and like yeah One house devoted him impeachment, but the other house after another house is not gonna do it It's just not gonna happen, and you know like if they want to say you not it's they They should do it, but they're not going to and you know, it's just really fucked up like I really really Really hate this guy and he just has like a psychotic Kids brain and you know like It doesn't it's not here to benefit us. It's here to benefit him It's like a gang friend like being the president. It's like playing a video game for him like he's like Oh, I wonder how many things I can fuck up this time like it's really not he's not doing his job Like correctly he's not taking the series and he's been doing it since he was bringing like, sorry Yeah, you have what one or two weeks is like being serious about it and now he's just like And we have to do this and we don't want these immigrant Mexican. What it's just stupid like He has no intelligence like his family gave him all his money All his wealth and everything and like it's just a stupid shit in the world like he's got to fuck us Just because it's fun to him like that's where he's basically just fucking us for fun next message penis Next message for a long time I was a Trump supporter because of our strong economy and his stance in the military increasing military strength of avoiding wars Wasn't really big on his immigration policy wasn't really big on his health care stances Definitely isn't a good guy But now that he's moving towards this forward with Iran I've affirmed stance against him I'm sure many people will agree with me I think that we need to build make America great again and make America strong again And that doesn't include going to war with other countries Next message I really feel that pretty much why people run the country No matter how much bullshit They don't it's Always why people running the country running everything And it's gonna keep Being like that for the next the next 100 200 300 years And that's just the way things are gonna be forever so minorities can charter best and Yeah, they will get I had in some parts but for the most parts always going to be why people in charge And that's the way it will be forever It's nothing wrong with that Why people run everything they They'll always be the doing People in this world No matter what it's gonna be the white in charge Next message You know I'm not scared about Iran The thought that Friends who are currently in the military are going to be deployed and could Down Next message What are the fuckers out there in concrete living the best life and some of you living your worst life I hope you all aspire to be great one day and hope you all have amazing dreams and few Crasprations Now my message is simple People need to get off their ass And start doing something with their fucking lives Whatever the fuck it is If you're not saying your money and lessening your future self or doing something for yourself Then what the fuck is the point of even living you're just living the that It makes no sense I just want to say shout out to team I love you guys you guys are amazing I hope I make it to the huge. Thank you. Goodbye. Next message Yeah, well, I'm thinking here right We think and You know these corporate big ways out here really think that they run away or if you look at it They pretty much do. I mean, what are we doing? What are we doing? All we're doing is just sitting around Better not big ghetto and pain taxes while fucking governments out there going ahead and starting these unjust wars Without consulting the American people And for me We still got people out here stressing over Pop ties trick and sandwiches And Instagram followers They won't even take a second to look at Australia A brother brother These are the issues that hand Not what goes on through your phone These these people nowadays they live in a In a microwave setting. You know they just move on to the next thing Close and it just it just goes it comes in those comes and goes this all of them These people have you They really don't have yourself awareness You could tell they haven't took no acid no shrooms No nothing They just out there Book can think in that they know how to live the world But they don't they don't they don't they're not self aware they can't read the energy of them No, no, no, they don't they don't they don't know they don't know they don't know fuck But you know, you know We're gonna be the bad people no matter what politically if you speak your opinion you're a bad person because no matter what you say they will always be in opposition People don't people don't want to see People talk they just want to talk everybody's selfish Everybody wants their opinion to be the one That's the fucking head line and that was some shit. No, bro. Your Facebook ain't fucking a blog Bro your Facebook is not the daily mail is not seeing it. It's not Fox news, but anything in Facebook is a piss down version of BuzzFeed You bro. You keep shit post-in shit, and then you try to act serious. What what kind of fucking message are you trying to say? Bro, you were stupid You look stupid Get off the Facebook Get off the whatever. Okay And fucking do something Don't just play with your dick on Repose some shit Next message you guys want to hear a joke about paper You're comparable Got him next message You should do a cover over somebody who's in The poker scheme Something and counting cards That'd be interesting to hear and Learn about next message The horror reason I ever wake up in this natural anymore is because my kid Maybe more people remember that we have kids or a good have kids Where that's a lot of good stuff or they just need some positive love Yeah, that's the way you should be Next message I just want to make this short and sweet So basically there's a lot of like arguing going on like in the government and like with like the American society everyone's on different sides of the spectrum whether it be like Republican Democrat or whatever it may be My viewpoint that kind of goes against us is that it kind of goes against the norm. It's the fact that we need to be We need to be happy about the diverse beliefs within our government because this is a good thing that representatives from our country Can do one thing and then publicly say that it's bad and doesn't that make us look better for our adversaries? Like as far as like Nancy Pelosi she says Attacking Solomoni's bad. She says she stands with Iran and while Trump says no, let's let's let's let's take him out It's kind of a positive that those two and two opposing ideas to come and neutralize each other and even though like where assaulting their country regardless of They're Them doing wrong or them doing good. It's good that we have the two opposing views because it cancels the neutralizes everything out Kind of like the dialectic process So that's just my viewpoint. I know that was a little bit haphazard and not really well rehearsed but The ultimate point is that just because our Country is divided doesn't mean that we're weak in division. There's strength and that's that's kind of a crazy Viewpoint at when you first look at it, but when you really take the time to examine it Having multiple opposing viewpoints It's beneficial because Well, I think I already stated what but all right See later next message Joe concrete Scress great show. I just filed the wrong number. What's someone a long-ass message, but anyway Oh, you know these things happen. Hey anyway, I wanted to call it get my two sets So my two sets of this I'm a business owner at Colorado. I do a lot of traveling lots traveling I don't know. We probably travel 70,000 miles here a lot. Maybe 70 But anyway, one of the things that I've noticed the most is Just the absolute Lack of infrastructure where you go the roads the conditions in America small towns Absolutely dwindling away Business is closing. You know, I know there's a lot of talk about how The economy is great this and that but you know, I think it's a lot of chum-bout bullshit to be honest with you You know Everywhere we go Cross aboard whether we're in Denver, which is a growing city or whether we go through Texas or we go through New Mexico Utah Anywhere if the same story There's no real manufacturing going on in America anymore because it's too expensive We can't do a manufacturing overseas Because now it's becoming too expensive You know, so I guess what I'm trying to say is originally my thoughts were Trump or positive Many respects now I'm starting to kind of change my mind. I'm still seeing the same old shit going on which it just depleted Gross neglect of everything from infrastructure to roads to the neighborhood community Once we're dwindling away. I think that's the reality. I really wish that the concrete You guys if you have any ideas for doing a documentary do a documentary on what what's going to some real towns across America Let's take a look at which what you can't you know, is it me? Are you really all doing well or Is it really all struggle? I think there's a real People around are seeing people you know do things, but I think a lot of it is you know face office debt But the reality is when it comes to real the road Real money growth. I don't know if it's necessarily there But anyway, not to get on too much My point is is I don't know if America's looking so great again yet and I'm trying to be really optimistic and also because of a fist donor and that's what we have to be But we've seen our expenses just go through the roof in the last two years and now I question more and more What are there's what are the chances of survival in other two three four five years? You know everything is becoming more and more expensive because things are as good as they say I see a lot of business closing up breweries out here and call a rather close up to back when close today next message So I'm just sitting here 29 So kind of what we are talking about the 1249, but I'm really just I'm wondering What is the over under our Michael penises and how do we feel about them? Is it a large clip or is it a Michael penis? I mean Biologically speaking we do know that it can be a male genitalia, but Is there really a difference when you really think about it? I'm not sure. It's really the bug in the early I know I should get maybe I could get some solace and finding Someone else might have the same questions burning at 1250 now. It's minutes gone by I do really appreciate the time and our Bubglass next message. Yeah, I think the world is actually super fucked up people need to open their eyes more They need to research more shit for themselves rather than take the word of others That's where a lot of people go wrong and then make sure that makes information and then everything gets fucked up That's like research your own shit Doubt people Do more things on your own. That's what more people need to do and it This government should want to be working out is you need to not trust the banks everyone needs to fucking just use cash Don't trust the banks don't feed them your money. That's what you need to do. That's you know like thing you could do, but Good luck next message Trump 2020 Um, yeah, that will be all thanks for calling your thoughts matter. Let's talk 727-222-0423