Hello freaks, that's right, we're back. Just when you thought you had had enough of us, you will listen to this one as well. Some of you out there will say this is the last one. Other ones, this would be a first one. So for you, one day you'll get sick of me, it happens. Everybody gets sick of everything folks, you know, eat meat low for every day. Fucking tastes like shit. But if you were lost in the woods and you hadn't seen meat low for months, you'd be living off frogs. Fucking pond water. Meat low for be awesome. This episode, that's not a good way to start a podcast. This episode is brought to you by stamps.com. Stamps.com is an awesome service that allows you to bypass the post office. What stamps.com is a service that allows you to print and buy US postage, print it on your home computer, and write there from your desk and then put it on packages and send them out. You don't have to go to the post office. You just hand them to the postman and say, here you go, dude. And that's it. You're done. Go to stamps.com. Click on the old schooly microphone in the upper right hand corner, enter in the code word JRE and get our $110 bonus offer. Which includes, what are you looking for, Aubrey? That room? There you go. Get in there. Includes a free digital scale and up to $55 of free postage. Stamps.com allows you to bypass the lines, get away from all the nonsense. And whenever postage rates change, they change automatically at stamps.com. It's a beautiful service to save time and money. Leasing a postage meter's expensive multi-year commitments and hidden fees. You don't have to do all that shit. Just go to stamps.com. It's a very sweet way to save time, very convenient way. We use stamps.com, Brian uses it for deskwad.tv. Our friends, Tom Seger and Christina Presitsky, they use it for your mom's house, for their podcast, and they send stuff out. Stamps.com is an absolutely wonderful service. Go to stamps.com before you do anything else. Click on the microphone at the top of the homepage and type in JRE. That's stamps.com. JRE and get yourself a $110 special bonus offer. We're also brought to you by LegalZoom. And LegalZoom, much like stamps.com, allows you to do a lot of shit from home. That's what today's all about folks. It's about saving time, being convenient, optimizing your minutes here on this earth. And what LegalZoom allows you to do is do a lot of shit from home naked that you would have to do at a lawyer's office. You'd have to make an appointment, go in there with clothes on. You couldn't be drunk, but you can be drunk and naked and still do legal shit. Like incorporate. Form an LLC for just 99 bucks. You can do a lot of things with LegalZoom that you would ordinarily have to make appointments for and spend a ton of money. It's a very easy and convenient service. And if I correctly, I believe you used it to incorporate on it.com. Is that true? On it, LabsLLC was formed originally by LegalZoom.com. Hallel! If you're thinking about starting a business, you can do that from LegalZoom. You can also protect your family with a last will for just $69 bucks or get a living trust, power, returnee, and more. LegalZoom gets the job right. Nine out of 10 customers would recommend the service to their friends and family. And we all know that at least one out of 10 people is a fucking whiny bitch. So that's basically it's awesome. Nine out of 10 says it's awesome. Nothing. If Jesus came back today, his YouTube comments would be atrocious. No one rides are free in this world. This world is overrun by cunts. It's like rats on a boat. You get personalized, affordable service that you can trust. And that's why they earned an A plus from the better business bureau. I'll say that again. LegalZoom.com earned an A plus. That's right, that one out of 10. You fuck head. You're wrong. You're wrong. They can help you with trademarks, copyrights, patents, all that good shit. In the past 12 years, over two million Americans have used LegalZoom and they've saved a ton of money. LegalZoom is not a law firm, but they can connect you with a third party attorney and provide you with self-help services. Third party attorney thing is very important because if you're one of those people that you're in the middle of this and you're like, I'm panicking, this is not legal and I'm going to jail. You don't have to worry. LegalZoom will connect you with someone that lets you know that everything's going to be OK. Use the code word, Rogen, and you can get a special discount for listeners of this podcast. Enter Rogen in the referral box at checkout for more savings. That's legalZoom.com. Go there and get your free con. And you can do it naked. There you go. to bratjubyonit.com. A what a coincidence today. We happen to have Aubrey, the CEO of Onit.com with us. What up? So he could tell us lots of groovy shit about Onit. I am on on it right now. I'm wearing an Onit t-shirt and I'm hopped up on Alpha Brain. I had some fucking Alpha Brain dreams last night, son. Go. Good googly, movely. I took Alpha Brain with dinner and I went to bed about four hours later and had Paula Dean wrestling dreams. I was wrestling Paula Dean on a psychedelic rainbow. It was the most bizarre shit. There were skateboards involved and the dreams. Even if Alpha Brain didn't enhance your cognitive function, which it does. Now it's been clinically proven to do so. It's worth taking just for the fucking dreams, man. I believe it's Colleen. Is it Colleen the cost of the game? Yeah, the seedling Colleen helps regulate the REM state in your sleep and REM state is the dream state. So the more seedling Colleen you have generally, the longer and deeper your REM state is going to be. So the crazier your dreams can get. So whether or not you even want to take Alpha Brain, double up on that seedling Colleen and go for a fucking ride ride. And it's a safe ride, folks. You're not going to die. You might think you're going to die, but I'm pretty sure you can't die in your dreams. Has that ever been proven? Can't die in your dreams, right? You just wake up. I don't know if that's a fact. Yeah. I'll be on the other end. Yeah, because you could lie about it. I don't mind my dream. Yeah. People would be like, well, the fucking thing is not the one he would ever know. Well, usually the adrenaline of the pre-death moment usually wakes you up. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The other thing I've found without for Brain, it's really interesting, is that lucid dreams are much more durable. Like, I've always found that whatever, I've never taken any lucid dream courses, I've never read any books on lucid dreams. Apparently there's a lot of strategies that you can use. And one of them I've done that I saw in one of those silly movies, like the secret one of those movies, what the rabbit hole or what the bleep do we know. I think it was where God was saying, go to every door that you walk through. And before you walk through it, knock on the wall and say, am I dreaming? And do it as a habit. So that every time you go through a door, you go, am I dreaming? One time I did it in my dream and it was like, oh, fuck, I'm dreaming. And so I really did wake up in the middle of a dream. But it was very, very durable. It was really interesting. Yeah, you can stay in it and play with it and see where you can take it. Yeah, that's not normal. No, usually I go, oh my god, I'm dreaming point and I wake up. And then it's gone. Party's over. Yeah, instantly. You were always flying for like 15 seconds or something like that. But the alpha brain dream. How long does it take for you to turn a lucid dream into sex? Because instantly, instantly I find someone and just start a rape fest. Now, you know, in the dreams, they all want to fuck, which is weird. Because it's your mind. It's my dreams. Very exciting. Since you've been here last, we were finally able to publish some of the first of a series of clinical tests. The first one on alpha brain. So tell some people about that because it's pretty exciting. Yeah, we did a pilot study just to kind of prove the concept with Boston Center for Memory and double blind placebo controlled study. People took two alpha brain pills, which was kind of hard to figure out because we did a survey and a lot of people take three. But the majority still take two. I take four. Some people take one. A few savages take four. I can't get you. You and AJ Hawke take four. Fuck you. You say, you say, you say, you say, you say, you say, you say, you say, you say, you went with two and did a study testing a bunch of cognitive markers. And even with the small sample size, we had 17 people total go through. We're able to achieve statistical significance and a couple key tests. Stroup in a mission test. Executive cognitive functioning, some verbal memory tests. So some really good indications that the alpha brain is, you know, having the desired effect that, you know, all the people who take it and, you know, everybody who likes it has been talking about. Now we have some science to back it up. So we're currently in a follow-up study with about 80 patients that's halfway through right now. It's kind of a rolling enrollment. And so hopefully we'll get some of that data at least to us by the summer and then, you know, look at the publication and presentation schedule. But there's stoked. I actually found out after the results came out that they didn't expect it to work. Not the people who are doing it. They're like, wow, oh shit. This really works. Well, for folks who don't know before we did any studies on on it, there have been studies done on the individual ingredients of alpha brain. And that's something like people going, there's no organism snake oil. It's not at all snake oil. The concept behind alpha brain was just that they would work synergistically, which has proven to be correct. But the ingredients, the individual ingredients, there is science behind it. There's research and references. All of it's available at on it.com. So go there if you're interested. What on it is, even if you go there, you're like, what the fuck are these guys doing? Prepare for war. We're a human optimization website. And what that means is we're trying to sell you things that can enhance your cognitive function, enhance your mood, enhance your physical fitness, enhance your body's ability to do work, enhance the way your body functions. And there's a lot of stuff out there that does that. Whether it's new mood, which is a five HTP and L-Trypt-a-Fans supplement that actually can enhance your brain's ability to produce serotonin. It's a pretty spectacular stuff. It really does make your mood better or whether it's strengthening equipment like the zombie bells and kettlebells or primal bells, which are kettlebells that we had designed by Steven Schuben Jr. That's how I say his name. You got it. Steven Schuben Jr. This fucking awesome artist has made us these incredible kettlebells that are also works of art. I know people that have these that don't even work out. They just have them because they're fucking cool. It's just a cool thing to have lean around your house, especially the gorilla. He's my all-time favorite. I just love working out with that gorilla man. It makes me feel like I'm doing something special. I just set the top secret monster bell series. I know what that's coming from 2014. I've seen some of that. I've seen some of that. Go to onnet.com. Oh, N-N-I-T. If you use the code word, Rogan, you will save 10% off any end all supplements. All right, ladies and gents, Robert Green is here and we're going to get busy. We're going to talk about some shit. We're going to enhance your life. We're going to get you fired up and you're going to fucking get shit done. Kill the music, Jamie. Joe Rogan, find that. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, my night, all day. First of all, Robert Green, thank you very much for doing the podcast. I really appreciate it. It's pleasure to meet you. Pleasure to have you in here. I've heard many, many, many fantastic things about you, but this guy over here raves, ransen raves, and I know you are recently on the Warrior Poet project podcast, which is his podcast. And he couldn't say enough good things. So how to have you in here, man. Have to learn stuff, have to figure out what you've accumulated for all your years of research and writing books. And your books all seem to be about getting your shit together, about producing results. Yeah. Starting with the 48 Laws of Power, I basically decided to enter the self-help genre with a lot of trepidation because I think it's full of a lot of bullshit. Wait a minute. Hold on. What are you saying? I'm saying that it's filled with a lot of triacually stuff that's going to make you feel good about yourself. It's going to boost your ego a bit, but doesn't get anything. There's nothing real behind it. There's some things about life that are harsh. There are people out there that are dirty and mean that you need to know about. All sorts of things that aren't being discussed in these books. And I know for instance, when I started out like in Hollywood, I used to work in Hollywood. I was really shocked by all of the kind of power maneuvers and the kind of passive aggressive games that were going on. What did you do in Hollywood? I wasn't horribly successful. I was a writer, I was assistant to a producer, assistant to a director, a researcher, a story developer. I basically did everything. So you were connected to the machine. You were in there. You got to see the gear spin. Very much so. Nobody writes about what really goes on in the world. I got so sick of it. I see all sorts of weird games being played, one director, this one producer who wanted to direct his first film. Basically it would look bad if he was the director of something that he had sort of put together. It just wouldn't look good politically. So what he did is he hired somebody he knew would do a terrible job, a director, a first time director. He knew the guy would fail and then he could go in and rescue him and become the director on the project. But in the meantime, totally destroying this other person's reputation. On and on, I could list 100 other sort of games like that. That's a quite clever move. All sorts of things right out of the art of war. That's basically... That's just so I can jump in here and give a bit of my story. I found that book, Robert Green's 48 Laws of Power. I had met you and I was in kind of a dark time in my own work climate. I started reading it and I started realizing all of the things that were happening like, oh shit, that's what's going on. That's why this bad shit is happening. That's why I'm being thwarted in this goal that I have. Because you go in with these good-natured intentions thinking, I'm just going to do my best and I'm going to wear my heart and my sleeve and it's all going to work out. Bullshit. It doesn't work out. I can't. It's all his, but it can. You've got to get lucky and get in touch with the right people. Or be in the right situation. Right. But a lot of times if you're in a kind of politically charged situation or situation a lot of ego, his book was like this wake-up call of just sheer, unabated truth about what the fuck is going on. It's not so that I could do it myself, but at least so I could protect myself and see it and identify it. So this move that this producer did in order to, that surprised you at all. You mean you were like, oh, you motherfucker. Completely because he never told me, obviously, he wasn't going to confide that this was going on. It's my interpretation later on. So you sure that that's what happened? Or completely 100%. And I seen him do other things. So I saw, what's his name? What's his fucking head? I can't do that. You shouldn't. He's no longer among us, so I don't want to. Oh, you did? Fuck him. You got off of life now. And he wasn't a totally awful person. You know, he had a good side to him. That business is ripe with that stuff, though. But what really annoyed the hell out of me about the Hollywood businesses is that people would pretend to be so liberal and wonderful and good. I love your project. You're wonderful. You're great. But at the same time, they were so fucking power-hungry. Yeah, there's nobody really talks about the power-hungry side and about what people are really up to. I worked with a guy on my very first sitcoms. The first time I ever did any acting at all. I was up at young. I was like 20 something, 25, I guess, or 26. And I was on the show on Fox called Hardball. And there was a guy that was on the show that would insult people right before it was their time to perform. Like you would say something about what are you fucking gaining weight in here? Something was going on with the gut. And the guy would be like, what? And then you'd see the guy perform with this shit. He would fuck with you. That's pretty good. Like, I've seen it was really interesting to watch. It was bizarre. Like, but it wasn't pretty good. It was really shitty of them. Yeah, he did it to me once and I went, what? What the fuck did you say? And then I cornered him and I said, dude, I go, don't insult me. I go, because you're an ugly fuck. You understand how ugly you are? I go, we could just start talking about what's wrong with you. Fuck this in the guy would go, come on, we got to film this thing. And I go, no, this guy's a dick. This guy likes to talk shit to people right before they, and everybody was like, what is he doing? He's calling out the thing that this guy's doing. Like, you're not supposed to do that. But he would be really subtle about it. You know, he'd be like, who picked up that shirt? Like weird shit. To girls, too, man. It wasn't just the guys. But this was his thing. He would be like really caddy. He was always reading entertainment weekly. He was always reading what I would call the devil's rag, like the Hollywood reporter, all that shit. He would read those things. little fucking power wheels spinning in his devious mind. Luckily he's dropped off the face of the planet. Fortunately. So you could read some of Robert Green's books, like Strategies of War maybe, and probably find some tactic in there that this guy was applying in order to weaken his, his people to gain power probably, right? I mean, if they didn't come to mind, Robert? Oh, several come to mind, mostly passive aggression. Creatively, though, that stuff is, it's very ineffective. Because I firmly absolutely wholeheartedly believe that if you put your effort into diminishing others creatively, it diminishes your own creative ability. I really do believe that. I also believe that performance wise, if you try to diminish someone's performance like in an actor, I just wanted to do reasons why this guy sucked. He was so transparent. Like he's just a shitty person. The guy that he did, the guy he called fat too wanted to kill him. I had to talk the guy out of kill him. Like he wanted this big fucking guy, like, you know, it shouldn't call him fat. Even if he is fat, like he was doing it to fuck with the guy right before his scene because he wanted a shine. He wanted to be the guy in the scene that was like really on top of the ball. So the key thing is to know these strategies. So you can do what he puts in there is called the reversal. You know, like how to be aware of it and then reverse it. Well, the main thing is to never get emotional in these situations. If you're in control of yourself and you can do like Joe did, you can sort of see the game behind the game. And you're in the position to do something that strategic, like he did to play the same game back at me. Yeah, good. It's mostly like a warrior, I call it kind of a warrior pose where if you're calm and centered and you're aware in the moment of what the other person is doing, then you've got strategic options to play the game back. But if you get emotional, you get angry, you get intimidated and forget about it. Yeah, I would probably today respond very differently. But when I was in my early 20s, it was scorched earth. It was every time I was going to Defcon nine every time. I'm like, let's see who can hold up breath along us. I'll drag them in a pool. That was always my strategy. Because I was always nice to people, but as soon as people weren't nice to me, I just said it's very, that's a good way to be. Very bad way of handling it. But that thing that people do seems to be not just calculated, but it seems to be something that's been going on since the beginning of time. As soon as people invented language and they invented the ability to deceive, you're touching upon the subject of my next book. That's why I'm smiling. What is that? It's tentatively called the laws of human nature. Essentially, I'm saying that somewhere around 10,000 years ago, maybe 6,000, our nature was set because we've started living in groups that were larger than 10, 23, the size of a tribe. And once you put 100 people together, all sorts of political games start happening. And things like envy and passive aggression and basic irrational responses, they already occurred in the time of the Bible. And so there are these laws of human nature that are so deeply ingrained into their ingrained just like a chimpanzee will react a certain way under certain circumstances. And I'm going to show you where these laws come from, why people are envious, why people are insecure, why somebody who has a certain exterior of face that they present to the world, why it's generally hiding the opposite on and on and on. So you can understand where people's behavior comes from and not be surprised by it anymore. So what you present is steps to recognize cons. Yeah, but you know what? There's a little bit of cutting everyone in all of us, including myself. All of us, though? Yeah. Yeah. And I hope you're not one of them. Deny are actually are actually crypto cons. A new word has been for. I was so excited. Crypto cons. That's a great, that's a great band name by the way. You can use a crypto cons. Yeah, if I was going to start a band, it might be the crypto cons. Just and get arrested just so they'd have to talk about it on CNN like they did pussy riot. Yeah. That was my favorite thing about it. Yeah, favorite thing about pussy riot. The name was just great. I'm talking about it on CNN. I know. Pussy riot. The members of pussy riot. I was like, stop. This can't be real. This is a beautiful time. A beautiful time in history. Those girls are fucking badass, man. Not just badass for their their ability to come up with an awesome name, but they get arrested. They spend fucking how many months in Siberia? That's true. They get out and start protesting at the Olympics. Get horse whipped. Those chicks are fucking gangster. They're so gangster. I love pussy riding. I'm a huge fan. You know, they're music sucks. And I don't even know if it does. It probably does. That live performance on Jerry, pussy riot, make it happen. So the crypto cunt, um, so that's just my next book. But does everyone have content in them because they're reacting to other cons or do you think that everyone has like a selfish aspect to them that's undeniable? I mean, what is it about people that you think everyone has a little bit of content on them? Is it reactionary or is it is it actionary? It's both. It's both. I suppose there might have been one saintly figure in our history who doesn't have any of this, maybe a Jesus or something. But pretty much the underlying philosophy of all my books, particularly the 40, it lost the power, is a human beings have a primal need for power. And we've used that word power in the wrong way. When we think of power, we think of white men up in the White House controlling the world. I try and bring power down to an everyday level and say, the feeling that the world is the only thing that you have no control over your life, over your destiny, over the people around you, your children, your wife is the most miserable feeling that any human can have, that you have no power over them, no ability to influence them. And so it's been the age of one, two years old. We have had this feeling of insecurity, of weakness. And we want to have control and power over the people around us, the events that go on in life. And that is the source for a lot of our manipulative behavior. Some people are overtly manipulative and very dangerous that way, but all of us, all of us engage at some point or another in something that teeters on manipulation. And my books are about, let's just be honest about who we are instead of trying to imagine that we were somehow descended from angels instead of primates. No, we're descended from chimpanzees. If you study chimpanzees, they're pretty Machiavellian creatures. That's where we come from. Let's be honest about the human being instead of trying to pretend that we're all born like Gandhi. Well, the Trampansee has one thing that we don't and that's language. Or we have one thing that they don't rather, which is language. And languages where things get weird because you get deception. And you also get strategy. Yes. There are chimps have some strategy. Like you've ever seen the videos where they chase monkeys, where they corner them on the sides and then other chimps rush them towards them and they climb up on the eat them. It's pretty radical stuff. And until the 1990s, people didn't even know that chimps ate monkeys. They thought these beautiful, berry eating friends. They eat bananas like curious George. Nope, not really. They fucking rip monkeys apart and eat them alive. And they engage in warfare. Yes, they do. They engage in warfare against other chimps. They engage in a very strategic sense. They have lines where they're not allowed to cross. And when they do cross, they take action. This is actually an interesting topic because if you read Chris Ryan, he has proposes a theory that this behavior that they've observed is chimp warring was created by the artificial production of this food box in the chimps habitat when they were observing them. They would have food around that they were giving the chimps. So this is pretty well done. They didn't see any of that prior to the food box when they were just going, no, no, no, I don't know who Chris Ryan is, but I think that's very wrong. Well, let me just finish this. So Jane, good all observed this. But to keep the chimps around, she had a box of food. So this is a fact. And after that, it created this zero sum game where the chimps were competing for a limited resource of food, which actually goes to the argument that when you create a civilization and it's not just tribal and it becomes a zero sum game, that's when the war and the strategy gets to a peak because you're creating a zero sum game. There's a limited amount of resource, a limited amount of crop or in the case of the chimpanzees, a limited amount of food that was coming out of this box. So only a certain number of the chimps would get the food. So kind of interesting. I just thought I'd bring that up and when Dr. Ryan's on here, you can certainly bring that up. He'll be on next week or he'll be on the 11th. What was your issue with what he said? Well, it's always a zero sum game. Why isn't it a zero sum game in which there's always limited food? Right, but there's always there's more resource you can go to. You're not competing for one very small section. One's really different section. You can go to more acres, more hectares of land and find, you know, the grubs or the fruit or whatever of that of that area rather than competing over. I don't want to argue with somebody I haven't read. So maybe he has a very valid point and I haven't read it. So it's not fair for me to. But it does. In fact, it doesn't affect your theory that once you're in civilization, these games begin and the tighter the resources in that civilization, i.e. bigger cities and the more closely people working together, the more fever pitch these games. Well, I don't want to get on a tangent here, but there's a writer, a scientist named E.O. Wilson, a biologist. And he's pretty much demonstrated that our earliest human ancestors going back to to Australopithecines were engaging in forms of warfare. Sure. So he wants to sort of debunk the notion of the happy, peaceful savage that goes back to Jean-Jacques Rousseau, et cetera, that we do have very violent roots. And so maybe chimpanzees, it becomes zero sum if there's overpopulation and they're fighting over smaller territories, which we humans were doing as we became more populous. So he was trying to debunk the notion that it's only at the advent of agriculture, where we started living in settlements and became civilized that warfare began. And he shows very clearly that the beginnings of warfare go back hundreds of thousands of years. What seems unavoidable, it seems like all animals who compete for breeding rights, who compete for food, they engage in some form of combat. I mean, deer is regularly kill each other. Yes. Because with elk it happens with sabels with those crazy big horns that they have, they fucking, they spear each other and they kill each other. I had Louis Thoreau on the podcast yesterday and he, one of his documentaries he had this African hunting camp, where they sort of these canned hunts, where they have these high fence operations, they breed all these animals and they have these sabels and they're fucking murdering each other. They just run into each other and gouge each other when the females are in what are sabels? So, as well as crazy fucking deer things, you pull up a picture of a sabel jammy. It's one of those African deer-like creatures with big crazy horns. They have these fucking murder weapons that they have built in their face. That's really what they have. But the point being is that, yeah, there they are. Those guys murder each other. Looks like a Orix. Similar. Yeah, there's a lot of those different types of antlerd horned animals. They clash heads. I mean, that's what they do. They go to war with each other. It seems to be a part, I mean, it's also a part of genetic selection. It seems to be unavoidable. I've always felt that when we look at the timeframe between now and 6,000, 10,000 years, whatever it was when we started having these civilizations, we're in a very small window between then and now. And such radical changes taking place between then and now, then and now. But yet genetically, not much. in a very small window between then and now and such radical changes taken place between them and now then and now but yet genetically not much you know a few various variations have been observed between us and people that lived thousands of years ago but god not that much when it comes to need when it comes to sexual desire and it comes to greed when it comes to motivating factors in all the reward systems that are in place. Yeah and the other thing being that we don't have release anymore the physical release that a human being is essentially hard wired every chimp they're swinging from branches and they're working out all day I mean they're they're constantly getting this release of energy and they're also getting a release of some of their aggressive energy as well which we don't seem to have a lot of. Exactly what I'm talking about I think people are essentially leaky batteries of aggressive energy I mean when someone's in their car and they start fucking freaking out because you got in front of them and fucking honking their horn that's a leaky battery of aggressive energy. The other day this mild-mannered woman in her 40s or 50s cut me off and she just turn around and get I've never seen a woman show that kind of absolute chimp like aggressive bearing my teeth at me in a car it was shocking. Yeah I've been to the post office very often. Stamps.com. Yeah it's a it's a weird thing and it's also there's the cars a very unique environment in that because of the fact that you don't even though you see people you don't feel them you know you're not in front of them like I'm looking at you right now and if I said something to hurt your feelings it would bother me but if I didn't know you when you're in a car I'm like fuck you dude fuck fuck you fuck you honk honk fuck you you know people do that all the time I've seen people cut in front of each other and race down the street in front of each other and just madness that you wouldn't see in a line you wouldn't see if you're waiting in line to go to a movie it's very rare but you see it there because this all the social cues are missing all the human interaction is missing it's like this is wall and this filter up same thing on the internet yes more so on the internet because you don't even see the person they're hiding behind you know dick fuck 69 is their name you know whatever it is they're not real and so they can reach out to Robert Green go you're fucking books are for faggots you know they just post youtube comments and go fucking crazy on your block like people like a friend of mine writes a blog and then these and someone's like why don't you have comments in your blogs like what do you read comments do you read comments on blogs why would you want anybody to write where you're writing you know if you had a painting would you allow people to to you know paint underneath your painting what they think about your painting you'd be a lot of dicks pointing to your painting the piles are shit with flies that's what they would draw there's not not all people but enough people to wear it's a problem because they haven't earned the ability to communicate with you like that you you choose who you communicate with in real life for the most part especially who you surround yourself with on a regular online you choose nothing online it's the beautiful thing about on being online is that everyone gets to say something and it's the horrible thing about being online is that everyone gets to say something and do so anonymously yep which is another part of what's weird about our progression from this ancient society where you know we hunted and gathered to eventually agriculture and then civilization in quotes to where we find ourselves today so your books essentially and this new book is sort of recognizing these traits so that you can move away from them well you talk about my new book that hasn't been written yet yeah um the point of the book is that this is human nature and it's an animal nature and to be truly human we have to overcome these traits in us to be truly rational reasonable empathetic and creatures we have to overcome these various aspects of our own nature which are embedded in each one of us biologically genetically such as our propensity to feel envy the propensity that for you envy is basically at its root the fact that we humans are constantly comparing ourselves to other people look at your own life and a day-to-day basis and be honest with yourself and try and calculate how many times during a day you're actually comparing yourself to another person he's got more money she's prettier he's you know got a better job you're doing it that's like so completely human for various reasons which I'll explain in the book to reach a higher nature which is the goal of my book you have to be aware that that's happening in you and you have to find a way to disengage yourself from that need to constantly compare yourself to others to find your own value your own self-worth from within it certainly these are all kind of cliches but I'm going to show you in a very real fashion how you can overcome them once you're aware that they're inside of you yeah that book is not written yet it's a beautiful point though that's that's the beautiful point of being aware of them instead of denying them instead of getting all food food you know chimes and you know Indian chance thank you being aware of them yes so when you started reading all of these self-help books and started recognizing that there was all this horseshit going on what was your immediate reaction to try to write something that you thought was more realistic and beneficial or did you just how did you how did you deal with it well there's a lot of anger um I've I have you know I have less now than I'm older but I had a lot of anger back then because it really pissed me off that no one was talking about it people were pretending that this was the world we lived in there'd be books in the business section about management how to manage people which is a very primal this topic of discussion you have a group of people in your elite or how do you manage all of these insecure egos who are thinking of themselves and these books were essentially dishonest they weren't confronting the fact that when you put ten people together those people generally have their own agendas they're thinking first and primarily of themselves and their future and their careers and what they can get for themselves and if you start from a basic false premise you're not going to get anywhere so I was dealing with I wanted to cut my sword through all of this thick bullshit and say this is what really happens in business in the music industry in Hollywood among lawyers in politics and if some of it was a little brutal maybe I gave myself a little bit of literary license to exaggerate ever so slightly but for instance I have a chapter in there about how to create a cult and it's obviously ironic I'm not telling you you need to go out there and create a cult what I'm saying is we humans are very gullible and we're very easy to mislead and we're very easy we want to believe in something we want to believe in a cause this is these are the strategies that people have used in history to create a cult like following and I'm going to sort of reveal that to you these are things that just aren't in self-help books at least in 1998 when the book came out so when you writing about creating a cult yeah what are your strategies how do you go about doing that well you're trying to wrap yourself up in the sort of mystical veil I the chapter originally I already fucked that part up you probably haven't because you have a cult like following and therefore you it's in cult like different though from what then cult cult like is different than cult because I'm not there's no organization whatsoever not trying to get anything out of anybody trying to tell them what to do oh there's it's different I'm not trying to benefit from it what you'd want to have as many followers as possible as many people shouldn't have as many as possible quality over quality very important I don't know you well business and I'm sure you're right I keep hearing you saying content cult and not oh cult we're done with cunt you know once you what was your term again crypto-cranto cunt yeah yeah you're you fucking knocked out of the park with that but um but basically if if somebody is using numbers now I know I have the 48 laws of power so I couldn't be guilty of it 33 strategies yeah they're they're probably starting to create a cult because that goes back hundreds and thousands of years not not hundreds but right hundreds and thousands thank you yeah giving a sort of mystical edge to what you're doing you're trying to make people think that you're creating a religion without a religion and there you know I show you the steps that people go through five steps in order and you can pretty much if you see those steps happening you know that this person is creating a cult like falling and one of the steps towards near the end is creating an us versus them dynamic it's us one thousand followers against the whole world that doesn't believe in our theory of how the you know of how aliens landed on the planet and started the human race so whenever there's they're creating this false dichotomy of us versus the non-believers and you know that appear on your way to a cult that the yeah that cult of thinking is very common isn't it yes the us versus them is really that's the big one that is the big one and that goes back I'm going to say in my new book which hasn't written yet um that that goes back to our hunter-gatherer ancestors where we're separating ourselves very violently from us from them that tribe over there they're evil they don't believe in the same gods that we believe in they don't practice the same rituals we have to go kill them it's very primal human thing yeah that see people have this really seems inescapable need to be a part of a group yes whether it's a group of Mac users or you know whether it's whatever the fuck it is I like for that I like shabby you know if people get they get really crazy about that and it's a very weird aspect of human nature yes like people want you to be on the same cell phone provider as them like what are you doing with team mobile man come on over to 18t like well that the companies have used some of those strategies they've created this us versus them mentality to help you know make people feel like that you know all of these advertising practices that you see you know generally you can find a lot of their roots and you know some of these larger scale strategies like look at this map versus this map creating this antagonism that actually probably helps both sides and it's they're all just shaking hands like that plane ride where the republicans and democrats were playing yachtsy with each other and having a big laugh I remember the think difference ads do you remember the think sure ads for apple well they use all these dead people it was like does that guy even know he's in an ad because dead this is weird you know think different with the apple logo and that and everybody wanted to think different effective at very effective but almost you know kind of deceptively so yeah and some weird sort of a way you know well you're just it's fucking computer man yeah which you have as a computer like it's not thinking for you that doesn't you could write the most racist horrible shit on a map and it doesn't stop you you could totally plot your agenda against whatever and they fill in the blank anti-homosexual anti-wom and anti whatever you could just write the worst shit ever on a map it doesn't discriminate it doesn't have any effect on how you think like it's it's such a dumb ad you think different think different how what do you know sitting in front of this thing going on I'm not thinking any different I think it's also grammatically incorrect it is differently yeah thank you right yeah it's fucking dead wrong but yeah effective yeah I guess it's that the need to be a part of a group is it's one of the things that people definitely play against well we're a complete social animals and that's the source if you think about the human being go back a million years ago we were incredibly the one of the weakest animals on the planet you know we were just barely learning how to stand up on our two legs we were slow couldn't run very fast didn't have teeth to kill another animal with no poison no claws we were the maybe one the weakest animals on in you know in in Africa and yet look at us now it was from our so becoming the preeminent social animal we learn how to work in groups to hunt in groups to cooperate out of that came language eventually so you can't divorce our extreme social nature from who we are and because of that we have a tremendous propensity to conform to to want to think like other people I don't know if you're familiar with the mill gram experiments about authority and obedience it was in the 60s a Yale professor had people come in for an experiment where they were made to give electric shocks to other people if they didn't answer the question correctly they weren't really giving a shock it was all a plant that he was trying to see how they would respond to authority and the most mild matter housewife would be given those shocks to people when they gave the wrong answer and he was showing how in bread our how we are all wired to obey authority so these are things embedded deeply in us as a social animal for the good for for a good thing our ability to cooperate but also it's a very dark and negative side which is our ability to engage in group think and our mindless obedience to authority is that where that's coming from when someone the mild matter housewives are hitting that button and shocking people is that where it's coming from or is it they finally have some power over something because I feel like there's a lot of people out there that feel incredibly powerless and frustrated and they feel like they have this backlog like they have a leaky battery for that like they want to have some fucking power over people and when you finally do like what was the Stanford prison experience that's the same was it the same thing they were two professors were friends they kind of did oh bullshit heads yeah pointing out how to make people evil the Stanford prison experience I mean they cut them off after they cut the experiment short because people were being so evil they had fake prison guards and fake prisoners I personally experienced that on a personal level when I was a security guard I worked as a security guard at great woods which is a concert center for the performing arts and massachusetts it's a mass man man field I think man man man man man man man man man man man man man man man where I'm fucking this man field mass I think it's it's uh this outdoor venue and um there was a lot of crazy shit going on they had all these nutty concerts there and all these fights would break out and it became us versus them us as a security guard versus them and I saw some really mild mannered people do some mean shit to the people that were uh were guessed there very interesting you know yeah I saw a guy that was would never hurt anybody punch somebody in the stomach because of the guy I forget what the guy did but I remember watching him hit this guy going wow this is crazy yeah and it was because of that it was because he was wearing a security jacket he was security the guy was a drunk asshole and but where he would normally if he ran into this guy in the street would never hit him yeah but because he was in this position of power in quotes you know he hit this guy I mean I don't know if the guy pushed someone or something but it was it was avoidable he didn't have to hit him yeah and I remember that mentality being very clear the us versus them mentality so the key to avoiding these dark characteristics is you have to be honest number one which I think he's very good at doing but then also understand and identify him not you know be able to look and say this is why this is happening we have this versus them dynamic it's creating this this thing and unless you can identify it and become aware of it it's you're pretty much powerless to break it so the knowledge that these books give give you at least in my opinion of one of the reasons I loved him so much they give you the power back by saying you're not just a leaf at the mercy of the wind of these forces of human nature and the forces of other people wielding these power games and the forces of seduction by these people you're desperately trying to date and how they've got you all wound up inside you're no longer powerless because you can see aha this is what's happening and you can take some of that back and then chart your course with your own intent with your own morality how you want to do it yeah that's that's fair thank you oh that was very well put but I have a book I should have you just do all the answer all the questions I did a close busy I did a book with 50 cent the rapper called the 50th law and basically what I did in that book was I wanted to figure out what made 50 so interesting so powerful and after hanging out with him I decided that the guy was fearless he had a just incredible fearless quality and philosophy of life so the book that we wrote together was sort of a meditation on fearlessness and the and the the whole point of the book was being fearless isn't a question of just going out there and saying fuck you I don't care what anybody does I'm gonna you know push you around and I'm not afraid that's about fearlessness fearlessness is first coming to terms with the fact that you are afraid you are afraid of death you are afraid of other people getting one up on you you are afraid of being alone you are afraid of people thinking that you're different okay look at it in yourself be aware that that's existing that it's it's it's happening in your body before it even hits your mind now that you're aware of it now you can start conquering your fears so I say in we say in that book for instance Napoleon Bonaparte or General Patton two men who were incredibly brave who would be on the front line of battle take bullets flying past them these were men who were very afraid in the beginning when they first went into battle and were quite ashamed of the fear that they saw in themselves and they became aware of it then slowly they overcame it by exposing themselves to the very thing that they were afraid of so that's sort of the paradigm you're talking about becoming aware of the process of these these sort of qualities we don't want in ourselves seeing how they operate inside of you instead of saying oh it's always the other person it's not me I'm not afraid I don't have these problems no you do have them let's let's confront it and let's show you how you can rationally and in an intellectual and mindful way overcome the overcome them because it truly is no managing of anything that you're denying if you're denying that exist you cannot manage well that was a well put too you guys are much more eloquent and I am why we take a lot of mushrooms Robert that helps us these interferes have you ever taken mushroom property yes big deep breath of course he has but I took a lot of pay out that was a drug of choice and just as good yeah yeah yeah just as good a talk talk about a way to show you the fears that you didn't realize you have and help you confront them you know these things they're really a great mirror to reflect upon yourself oh yeah listen to jennison yeah I think that's one of the great values that it brings is you you don't know exactly what your deepest fear is until you do ayahuasca and then it's like oh yeah that's it the thing that you've been showing me for the last three hours I guess I'm most afraid of that well the thing with pay-out is you never knew what was going to happen you never knew what one trip was never the same as another so you always had like trepidation like whoa this could be really ugly I don't know what's going to happen and you had to deal with it in confronted how did you do it did you do it in like traditional native american setting no no I I was in berkeley uh going to college uh we would take the weak buttons and you take off all the little white stringy poisonous bits and then you cut it up and you either put it in a shake or a peanut butter sandwich and then you go find a nice safe place a traditional peanut butter sandwich yeah exactly I mean they would eat Cherokee people they would eat it they taste horrible it's just it's not just the taste is the consistency and unless you're a native american it's hard to stomach it you're just going to vomit it straight up but you don't want to vomit it because then you're not going to get the trip so you got to trick your body into like digesting it and so you have to put it in the smoothie if you've vomited it doesn't work no you're vomiting out immediately all of the stuff you just did it's interesting because it works with ayahuasca well if you vomit based on the taste it hasn't had a time to assault but if you vomit later in the trip based on it trying to clear your body that's a different it's already assimilated so um anyway so you feel like those peyote experiences help form your view of things very much so very much so you know it just made you kind of put connects you to reality where there's things where you're you're just in a my a fog all the time because we're so conditioned to think in certain ways and to have something that draws you out of the same rut of thinking and confront you with really the real world this amazing world that's around you has had a huge influence on my writing and I know this next book hasn't been written but I have another book after that that has not begun to be even thought of as written and that's going to bring together all of my experiences on that level of book on what I call the sublime which I've written about in the 50th law and we'll write a whole book about it one point so the 50th law is the one that you wrote with 50 cent yes sir now what was the motivation behind that well basically my early books meaning the 48 laws seduction war to some extent were very popular on kipop artists real yeah basically because you know the music industry I described you Hollywood well Hollywood is kind of like kindergarten compared to the music business that they are the real sharks are in the music business they are pretty nasty pretty Machiavellian and people like 50 jz and their managers in the late 90s early 2000s were coming to grasp with the fact that they they wanted to control their own work to have some power and some money and become entrepreneurs and dealing with these sharks in the music business with something that nothing not even any kind of street life prepared them for 50 would tell me he hustled on the streets dealing cracks up people being knived and killed and dealt with a lot of danger and nothing prepared him for the sharky horrific games that he saw in the music industry with columbian interscope etc so they were reading my book to help them deal with us these are not people who went to Harvard business school they didn't have a book out there to help them understand how manipulative these people could be and so they gravitated the 40 laws power 50 was one of them and he contacted me at some point I think about a five or six wanted to meet me because he liked the book a lot and then we met and we had a really interesting synergy obviously we're not we don't come from similar backgrounds we don't look alike we don't seem not on the street I'm from a street but I'm not history you know you're born a field everybody's born from a street yeah I'm you know I come from middle class Jewish background so I'm not quite the same as you know South Side Queens but but we had a really nice energy together like we think alike like I told you about that Hollywood director most people in Hollywood were getting so angry with him and so angry about the games that they never took a step back to figure out oh this is the strategy that this guy applied and 50 was the same way he said I took a step back and said this is what the guy at interscope is really doing so we thought alike and we thought let's bring two minds together that think alike but from totally different backgrounds and see what happens that's fascinating the the music business for folks who don't know has been it's really a fascinating operation and it's kind of been gutted because the mp3 influx and Napster was the first blow and from there it's like really now it's kind of interesting because the performers actually make their money from performing more than anything else it's very difficult to make the millions and millions of dollars that the Rolling Stones and you know what have you all those bands in the past made from selling records you there's no really that that doesn't exist anymore in the same way but Courtney Love wrote a piece about I'm sure she probably didn't really write it probably they said it was ghost written I agree it's pretty fucking smart and I've seen a smart woman yeah okay I believe you but I don't know maybe not anyway whether she let's say she wrote it okay let's say she wrote it it's it's insane if you've ever read it that piece that she wrote on the music business and how it really works and how they extract everything from your profits everything promotion expenses all these different things by the time the artist gets paid for the records they have all this weird way of doing math where it shows like no money yeah shows no money's been made they use that for not just the music business but Hollywood sure do I have a friend who produced a television show it's a very successful television show and it's not just can you stop doing that the crunching thing sorry it's very distracting the television shows not just successful nationwide it's syndicated across the world and the company that made this show the production company it's claiming that it doesn't turn a profit I mean I'm not talking about one country it's in 16 different countries and there's like several versions of it with different hosts all throughout the world and they're trying to tell him that it's not it's always suing them and there's like this crazy fucking lawsuit lawsuits are just course for business you know that's that doesn't even scare it doesn't even make people bad and I in those industries but it's weird like how is it not making a profit did you get paid did you get paid is that a profit like where's yeah it's there there's got to be a fucking profit here because there's all this money like a movie that can make a hundred million dollars can be said to have turned no profit wow like that's bizarre where's that money going to but this fuckery this the shenanigans are sort of a lot of the stuff that you're talking about in 48 laws yeah yeah a Courtney love was a big reader of the 48 laws of power she used it in one of her lawsuits against the music industry she held up a copy of the book and said this is what you guys are using against us look at you you bad mother fucker he's helping out Courtney love did you ever see that documentary that claims that she killed Kurt Cobain or had Kurt Cobain killed yeah one of those fucking bizarre documentaries ever like someone fucking set out to prove that Courtney love was responsible for Kurt Cobain's death all right are you sure yeah but if you're not sure yeah that's a pretty fucking crazy statement yeah you know how can you just you can just do that you can just say that yeah nobody tried her for that like can you sue someone who says that you're responsible for the suicide of your fucking husband awful the off track obviously back to the book so this this business this music business is just an example really of what happens when power structures are created when people who are in these power structures understand the game and then take these people that are just coming into it fresh and especially artistic types people who are creative people who are artistic types oftentimes not very good with money not not sound financial thinkers and just the opposite of these business sharks that are involved in interscope or whatever the you know whatever the label is well they've dedicated themselves to the mastery of their craft and this whole other craft this business sharkiness is this other whole skill set that it's you know challenging to be able to master both you know so getting the cliff notes is awfully helpful to be able to sort that out because you know that is they to be as where they are at that point and obviously he'll go into his book mastery but that is a relentless pursuit of excellence in a well-defined niche that doesn't allow for a lot of time to explore these other things unless you know you're forming some bridge if you were gonna recommend your books to someone what what order would you recommend them in well depends on what business you're in and what point you are in life how about me i'm a you median yeah what should i do you you who are already so successful well probably mastery in some ways because maybe to take you to the next level uh i don't know if you're dealing with a lot of political stuff if you are then you're gonna want 48 laws or maybe the strategies of war it depends on who you are what your weaknesses are what your strengths are where you are in life if you're 22 years old and you're just graduating college and you're about to enter the real world i'd say mastery for reasons that maybe hopefully we'll get into but if you're 25 and you're now working at Goldman Sachs god bless you if you are i'm god save you i think you're gonna probably want the 48 laws of power because man that's a power hungry nasty manipulative macchia valley and environment if you're in the music industry as well if you're personally used a very afraid you got all sorts of great creative ideas but you're never going to the next nasty manipulative Machiavellian environment if you're in the music industry as well. If you're personally used to very afraid you've got all sorts of great creative ideas but you're never going to the next step and starting that great movie or project you have maybe the 50th law would be good for you because so you can get over some of those fears that are holding you back. If you're some guy who just can't find a, you know, a kenky, is really bad with women, art of seduction obviously would probably be you just, it depends a little bit on who you are. Now you wrote the art of seduction to help people get laid? Is that the idea behind it? No, I didn't. No? I know it sound great. I know I probably have 8 million people buying the book tomorrow and now I'm only going to get like 15. But the truth of a matter is art of seduction is about how to seduce people, how to get them to like you or love you. It's all about creating a spell. So if you want to just get laid, you know, maybe Neale Strauss or the pickup artist, that's probably more your speed. It's got all sorts of gimmicks about how to tell a woman something in a bar and melt her resistance and et cetera. I'm more about the long term how you can take that woman or it can be a woman seducing a man obviously and get and play a mind game on her. So in the course of three months, she doesn't want to just sleep with you. She wants to like give you everything she has. She creating stalkers could be and I have and I'm ashamed of it. But more likely. I don't believe you at all. When you say I'm ashamed of it, you're fucking proud of that shit. I see it. No, I don't like stalkers because really the book is about casting a spell. Okay. You know, let's say this is the goal of seduction. When that woman leaves you after the whatever night you had together, the date or whatever or just an encounter, she's going home and thinking about you. Okay, now you're starting seducer. It's a mind game. It's a mental thing. We humans are sex drive and our mental process are really interconnected. And I'm getting you to play on that. I'm getting you to play on psychology and melting other people's resistances, getting them to lower their guard because everybody's very got their guard up constantly, particularly in this modern world. Nobody is opening up to you or nobody wants to show vulnerability. It's just you're just dealing with a million porcupines out there. I'm showing you how to get those resistance levels down and give room to finagle your way into their head. And the converse, of course, too, which is a lot of people are getting these things played upon them constantly. And again, it goes back to the same thing. If you're not aware of the tactics that somebody's using, you know, you're defenseless against them. You're just completely vulnerable and you'll get sucked into this lure, this spell that they're creating by this push pull tactic that they're using. Whatever strategy that they're using. And you'll just be helpless to it. And you see guys fall for these all the time. You know, it's something that bums me in you out personally a lot when we see friends and people we love caught in this spell that someone's woven where they can't let go despite so many other things going bad in their life. They're just trapped in it. And reading something like the artist's deduction says, oh, she's using law number seven as her primary means in 13 and 17. And now I see you. Now I got you, bitch. You know, it's like you can switch it back and say, okay, now what do I want? Do I want to keep you around? Do I want to, or do I want to just release myself, you know, remove these hooks, these invisible hooks that you've created and just be free to chart my own course. Well, thank you, everybody. I find that a lot of people enjoy the struggle of relationship struggle because it distracts them from their own life. Yeah, distract them from their shortcomings and achieving their goals. They put up obstacles almost on purpose. They create these interpersonal relationships that are going to ensure conflict so they don't have to deal with success. So they don't have to deal with, they have like a built in excuse for failure. Yeah, that's very common. Yeah. Freud called that air full of angst. And basically that means fear of success, which is something I talk a lot about in my book. That's real, right? It sounds, it sounds ridiculous. Sounds like an oxymoron, but it's real. Yeah. That's a main, one of the main points in mastery about mastery is basically a book that's I'm trying to get away from all of the political stuff I've described in my previous books. And here I'm going to show you how we humans can attain excellence in this world, how we can be really, really the best at what we do because I think that's the highest form of power we humans can reach when we're so good at what we do. Then all the political games in the world can't topple us from where we are. And what holds a lot of people back is that they're really self-sapotaging. They're finding all kinds of excuses why they can't go through this process. They believe in the myth that people are born talented or geniuses or simply born that way, or that they didn't get to go to the right school, or their parents were mean to them, or yada, yada, yada, or my girlfriend is, you know, whatever. As you said, they get involved in drama games that so fill up their mind that can't think of anything else. So I'm going to make you as anisk book as well aware of what's holding you back and these fears that you're using to sabotage yourself. That is one of the most frustrating things to me when I'm talking to someone and they have these built-in excuses for why they can't do what they want to do. Like give me some of these excuses that you hear. Why I have a friend who wanted to be a comedian, he wound up not being a comedian. He doesn't have children, he doesn't have a wife, he doesn't have a mortgage. So he's not like he has this job that he has these responsibilities to feed his family so he's stuck in this job. But he was like, well, you know what, man, I've missed the boat with comedy. If I had started in the 90s, everything would be great. I go, what are you talking about? These people start right now. There's open mics right now. Good to Tuesday night to the laugh actually. It's a fucking line around the block to get there at 9 a.m. and they wait in line. You should do that too if you want to do comedy. Oh man, I can't do that on 30 years old. Do you think the fucking line gives a shit and how old you are, man? The line is no idea about your age. The line is there. The microphone is on for an 80 year old man. If an 80 year old man talks in that microphone, it makes noise just like a baby. If a baby cries into that microphone, it also makes noise. Like, what are you talking about? They're like, he and I got into this crazy debate about it. It's like, look man, it's easy for you to say, you're already successful. I'm like, look dude, it's not easy for me to say. It's hard for me to hear because you're fucking yourself. You want to be a comedian. If you think you're funny and by the way, you don't even really have to be funny. You just have to have the ability to figure out how to become funny. And that's self analysis, objectivity, and work. That's what it is. You're already creating this insurmountable barrier. You didn't start in the 90s. Like, what are you fucking talking about? In the book, Mastery, I interviewed nine modern masters to sort of embed them in months, all the ancient masters that I talk about. And one of the nine modern masters I interviewed is a woman named Temple Grand, and I don't know if you've heard of her. No. Temple Grand, it's like a very famous animal behavior scientist. And she was born with autism. And at the age of two, was basically going to be put in a mental institution for the rest of her life because she was a severe autistic. She couldn't learn language. She was just the kind of kid you see was just banging their head against her. Wow. She was severely autistic. And through a process I described in the book, with her mother's help and a speech therapist, she slowly got to the age of four to be able to start speaking and going to schools. When I show the process that eventually led her to become a great scientist. Now if somebody born with severe autism at the age of two is going to be institutionalized for their whole life, can become a master, then there's no fucking excuse for some 30-year old who has nothing, no barriers like that at all to ever get to that point. It's really the reason I put it in there. If somebody like that can overcome their limitations and there's no more excuses at loud. Well, there is one excuse. He's a weak bitch. Well, that's the excuse. My advice, don't be a weak bitch. It's so simple. Break it down to that. My other advice that I always give out is be the person that you pretend to be when you're trying to get laid. If you can just do that, just be that guy. What would that guy do? Be that guy and let it become you. That was something I never covered in the artist's deduction. Damn. Be the person. Be the hero in your own movie. That's the other thing I say to people when people, they feel like their life's pretend you're a fucking loser in a movie. You woke up today. The same scenarios you always see. Guy wakes up, makes a fucking blender full of pizza or whatever they do. Get their life together. Smoke a cigarette and realize you're a failure. The bills are piling up. The phones ringing off the hook from bill collectors. What would the hero in the movie do right now? Do that shit. It works. It works to some people. Other people define excuses to not do it. I got that advice from a family friend one time. I was terrible at dating till I was about 22 or 21. I was awful. I was way too nice. I was so doting. It wasn't even the real me. I was just playing this over nice person and people hated it. It was the most repulsive. The most repulsive. The most repulsive thing I could have done. You told me he's like, just analyze your actions and what you're saying and ask what would Bruce Willis do? At the time, I was that who was the big action hero or whatever. That's that help change the game. It's stay nice but be willing to walk away as soon as you expose that someone else is not nice back. Be nice always but then as soon as someone's not nice back, say, alright, good luck. Take it easy. Not need them at all. If you don't need them at all. The problem with nice people is they're needy motherfuckers. It's not just nice. The reason why they're being nice is they need you to like them. You could be really nice and not need people to like you. And if they don't like you or they don't want to be around you, you're fine with it. Then they freak out. They don't know how to handle that. They're like, shit, I missed the nice guy. He was nice and slipped through my fingers. Personal sovereignty. It's one of the most important things to have in this life. The ability to be yourself, to be by yourself and why would other people like you if you don't even like yourself? You've got to do things in life that you would admire. You've got to be the kind of person that you would like. And if you're not, why would you expect anyone to like you? I have this argument with guys all the time where they talk about women and fucking girls want money. They want this. They want that. You know, women always like, you know, I just, I'm not so good with women. I always say this, would you fuck you? Would you fuck you? I don't think I would. What would one of you say? How dare you? What, you know, it's not just physical. It's mental. It's the way you behave. Are you a kind person? Are you fun to be around? Are people that are just genuinely great to be around? You know, they don't have to be good looking. You know, they don't have to be, they don't have to be intelligent. They don't have to be well read. They just have a quality. They have a quality. And do you not have that quality? And if you don't have that quality, can you, can you acquire it? Well, what I try to do in our seduction is I'm saying people who read a book and try to seduce or usually the worst seduce or who've taken some advice because they're not in the moment and they seem like they're kind of being cold and calculating. And the trick to seduction is to appear or to be as natural as possible and to at least appear natural. So everybody has a different style. Some people are funny and great to be around, but maybe you're just not born that way. Maybe you're just not witty. But you have other strengths. You have other qualities. Something naturally seductive about you. That could be you're very social and you know you can think about what the other person wants. It could be I have one of the types in the book. Maybe you do have coketish qualities. Which I mean you can blow hot and cold. Coketish, ooh new word. Coketish. Never heard anybody say that before. Sultry French coket. Isn't that amazing? You could live 46 years on this world. I've taught you several words. You have. Thank you so much, CryptoCon. Yeah. That's my favorite word ever I think. You're free to use it. Everyone's using it now. In the world. What you're saying it kind of reminds me of what you talk about it. In the national book. Go ahead. Sorry. No, go ahead. No, it reminds me a little bit of what you're talking about in mastery of going with your natural inclination that is going to be the best thing like going with that vocation. Whatever makes you that unique individual. It's almost the same in seduction as it is in mastery, pursuing that channel, that venue of what is going to bring you out your highest qualities is going to lead to the greatest success. No matter what it is seduction or mastery. Yeah, I'm trying to make the point in mastery that you have your born with a key to success. Every single human being is born that way. I'm not trying this isn't some new age bullshit that I'm trying to peddle here. What that key is, the fact that you're something unique about you. Your DNA is unique, your brain is wired in a unique way. They've done these really interesting studies on newborns, infants one month to six months. They've been able to show that at the extremely early age infants are already distinguishing between things that they like and don't like on very particular levels like foods and colors and sounds. When you were really, really young, you had what Aubrey calls, and I call them the book, Primal Inclinations. There were things you were attracted to that are very, very unique and distinctive about you. It could be sports. It could be competing and winning. It could be working with people and social situations. It could be music, whatever it is. If you're able to stay true to that or rediscover it when you're older and mine, what's unique about you and your tastes and your way of thinking and your whole spirit, you are going to fucking succeed in this life. You're going to create a business. You're going to create a book, have a podcast that reflects your weirdness, your uniqueness, and people will come to you because it's true, it's authentic and there's nothing else out there like it. How do you do that? How do you stay true to that? How do you figure out what your life's task is as I call it? How do you keep connected to those Primal Inclinations? That's what the book mastery is about. But you first have to be at least aware of what the root of your possible success in life is. I try to make the point that if you aren't pursuing something that's personally and emotionally connected to you, you're never going to actually succeed in life. If you go into law and you were meant to be a writer, you might be able to bullshit your way for 10 years or so and be a pretty good lawyer. But eventually because it's not something you were meant to do, you're going to disconnect, you're not going to be into it, you're going to emotionally disengage, you're going to start drinking, your hair is going to fall out, you're going to start seeing hookers and getting on drugs. Wait a minute, wait a minute, you were good up until that point. I lost you. Well, because you're not pursuing what you were meant to pursue and your life's going to fall apart, you're not going to have a good time with hookers and drugs? Well, you can. I see. I see. That was your right. I probably lost you there. People are probably going, that's what I really want. Yeah, it's just a shock. The plan to mastery is you become a lawyer when you're really supposed to be a writer, then you get hookers and drugs. Yes. I think hookers and drugs are fun. No, no, I'm just playing. I fully see what you're doing. I do think that that is a very important point that people do sabotage when they're unhappy. and I find a lot of people that tend to work jobs, they find very unrewarding to be exceptionally materialistic because they're trying to reward themselves with these material items and these material items become goals for plowing through another day doing this shitty job. It's a real dead end. That's like one of the worst traps that people fall into. I have nothing against money. I like making money. The goal of your life, when you're in your 20s, for instance, should be learning as much as possible, developing skills in different areas and not worrying about how much money you're making. Giving yourself the freedom to make mistakes to explore, to have some adventures, to try things out that don't quite work for you. And then when you reach your 30s, you've got all these skills and experiences and you're going to make that money eventually. But the path to mastery, you look at somebody like Steve Jobs, you can hate him or you can like him, you can think he's great or not. But he ended up being one of the wealthiest men that ever existed on our planet. He never thought about money. He never cared about it. He lived in a house that was hardly decorated. He just was never on his hierarchy of values to quote, Maslow there. So if you're obsessed with money, you're actually going to find all sorts of problems in life. You're going to become hooked to that paycheck. Let's say you're 32 years old and suddenly you're downsized or you're fired from your job and you've been addicted to that $80,000 or $100,000 years that you've been getting. Now you don't have the mental freedom to take a job for half that price where you can now maybe start learning some skills and moving on and really finding your way because you're addicted to all that luxury and to the things, to the ego that you have connected to that paycheck. So money is one of the worst traps and the reason people get into that trap generally is because of their parents. Their parents tell them, Johnny, Susan, I know whatever your name is, you've got to make a living. You've got to go get a job that's lucrative. You've got to become a doctor, a lawyer. You've got to go to Yale and get this degree and go into business school, etc. And you're not listening to yourself. You're listening to other people in there and their values. You call that a counter force in the book. Work against you, to push, work against you from finding what you call your vocation, which is like what is going to make you the most happy in doing and being. And when you're in your vocation versus just doing a work, when you're in your vocation, you're passionate about it. You love what you're doing. And so you're going to naturally be more inclined to be great at it because you're going to put way more energy, way more passion into it. I mean, think about the people who have achieved greatness in any different field, all the people we know, even the bow hunter. He loves it. He loves what he's doing. He's found success in doing it. But he found his vocation and he's just stuck with it. And so he's become a master. But if he was trying to do some legal job or some accounting job, he would suck at it. Well, he actually has a day job, which he fucking hates and when he describes it, he talks about dying there. It feels like he's dying every day when he's at work. Yeah. But you're absolutely right. Is there a benefit in experiencing that resistance early in life so that you steal your resolve against it? Which resistance? The resistance to do what you actually want to do. I mean, I feel like a big part of my motivation in life and the strength of my resistance to getting other people happy or to doing what other people want me to do was that I was pressured in a way that I didn't towards a direction that I didn't want to go in. I was all this. Of course. Yeah. I mean, one of the things that I would hear all the time when I was starting out and stand up comments, my mom told me that I wasn't funny. My mom was like, why are you doing this? You're not funny. You're like, this is not as smart. And I would like bite down in my mouthpiece and fucking plow forward because of that. Because I didn't want to hear that. I didn't want to hear finish your college degree, get a normal job, stop being a dreamer. I didn't want to hear that because I had heard it. And it's strengthened my resolve. Yeah. Very much so. It's definitely a theme in the book. I mean, if your path is too easy, if you just fall out of the womb and suddenly you've known this is what you were meant to do and at 18 you're doing it, you're going to have other problems down the road. It's good to have resistance. It's good to have people's fucking with you and saying you're not good at this, etc. I know for instance in my path to writing the 40, it lost the power. I kind of knew I wanted to be a writer. I went into forms of writing that didn't suit me. I started off in journalism. Did that for several years and really kind of hated it. And at one point an editor had lunch with me and he pointedly said, Robert, you're never going to be a good writer. You just don't have the chemistry for it. You're just all over the place. You're not disciplined. Maybe go to law school or something. And that got me out of journalism because I made me realize I really hate the assholes who worked there who was just got to stick up there but and can't think about what real writing might be like. Got out of that and wandered around Europe and tried writing novels and all sorts of things that didn't work either. I tried Holly when I tried television. That through that process I discovered what I loved. When it came to the chance to do a book, I suddenly, the heavens blew open for me. Yeah, a book. I have a total control over it. There are no assholes telling me coming in like in Hollywood and changing everything that I write. There's no writing for an article for one week that disappears. I have a book. But it was only through this process of finding what I hated. So when people come and tell me, I don't know what my vocation is. I don't know what it is I should be doing. I often say, well, what is it that you hate? What are those things in life that you don't like? What are those jobs that you've had that suck the life out of you? There's sort of indications of maybe something that you should like. you don't like working for large groups of people. You should be an entrepreneur. You should be working for yourself. You're shaking your head. You look very skeptical. No, no, no, no, no. I'm agreeing with you wholeheartedly. The October opposite. Okay. I'm like, no, please go on. No, no, I'm just, yeah. So I love it. You've got to have the resistance and the worst thing that happens are people who get successful at 25 and then think that they've got the golden touch and they don't realize that they don't have the golden touch that they were kind of lucky. And then they keep thinking that they have to repeat the same thing that they did. Let's say they became a comic at the age of 25 became hugely successful, but they didn't have the resistance that you had. Now they start not listening to their audience or to other people or to their mother who says they're not really that funny. And they just think everything they do, everything they should is just wonderful. By the way, that's very common. Very common. It's a great issue with comics. Yeah. Well, a huge issue with comics is that becomes successful and then they start to suck. It's a real issue. Yeah. Like with some of the greats, I won't name name. I think we're having a Woody Allen. I mean, he's an older guy, but you know, I just agree with you there. Because his movies, his own movies are fucking brilliant, man. No problem. The Jasmine was great. It was a great movie. Midnight in Paris was fucking fantastic. It was a really good movie. I think he's just a crazy pervert. And then that's the problem. I think what we don't like to admit it, but what fuels Woody Allen is he likes getting his dick sucked. You know, he likes, he's a freak. You go back and you've ever seen Woody Allen's young stand up? Well, he was hilarious. He was really good. I thought he was much funnier back then than he is now. Oh, he certainly is, but he also wasn't exposed like you is now. He isn't hated and vilified like he is now. I mean, he became a pariah. I mean, he became like a real freak. Yeah. You know, we were talking before the podcast. I was saying that the sound of clicking, I was putting something on Twitter. And I was like, I'm going to miss that if they ever get rid of that. Like the sound of clicking is like so, I don't know, rewarding to me or something like that. Woody Allen does all of his typing all this. I know. I mean, old typewriter. And the way he edits, he takes pieces of paper. And if he changes the scene, he'll print it out a piece of paper and then cut it and then staple it to the other thing or tape it to the other thing. Like he's like so old school in his approach. Jesus is the same typewriter that he's always used for everything. Yeah. What's probably because he's fucking terrified to go on the internet. If he Googles Woody Allen, I mean, is a, I mean, you know, whoever you are, Jesus is a first word is going to be Kant, you know, if Jesus ever gets online and Googles his name, but for Woody Allen, I mean, the fucking hate and the vitriol that that guy must experience on a daily basis, just looking people in the eyes at a restaurant must be like really pretty fucking intense. Yeah. I think that phenomenon that you're talking about with comics, it applies to pretty much everything, athletes, entrepreneurs, because if you use this resistance of, you're, you know, struggling, trying to get to the top, people telling you're not going to make, you'll never be a champion. You'll never, you know, start on the basketball team. You'll never do this. And then once you get there and once you achieve that, that kind of opposing force that allows you to bring out the best can, can kind of go away. It's why it's hard for teams to repeat championships, you know, and things like that. An interesting phenomenon, it's almost like, you know, you need this kind of heat and resistance to create the greatest out of yourself. And when that goes, you have to look elsewhere and find it and other things. Yeah, you can't make a deal without fire. Mm hmm. That's right. I have a story in the book of Freddie Roch. He was one of the modern masters that I love Freddie. Freddie's amazing guy. And the story of Freddie's really kind of a model for mastery in a way. And basically, I'll summarize it quickly. His father was a fighter and he got all of his boys into boxing in the age of four. They were already in a ring boxing away at the age of four. And so, that age onward, Freddie was boxing on an amateur level. And at one point in high school, just like your mom, his mom said, and Freddie, you're not really very good at boxing. Why are you doing this? Your brother is so much better than you. And I got him really pissed. So he went back into the gym and he started training twice as hard. He suddenly got better than his brother. And not only started getting really good, got on the Olympic team, became a professional, I think, at the age of 18 or so. And he had a boxing career as a professional for about eight years. And he was good, but he wasn't great. He was kind of slow and he started taking a lot of punches and had an effect on him. And finally, at the age of 26, people were saying, Freddie, you better retire. Something's really bad is going to happen. And so he retires at the age of 26. And if you think about it, for 22 years, boxing was his whole life. It's all he ever did. And now it's finished. It's over. His career is over. And he's just, he's ready to go on a downward spiral to suicide or something bad. And he gets a job in Vegas as a telemarketer because he'd been living in Vegas and fighting. And he's drinking heavily in the day time because his job's at night and then he goes to his stomach. And he's on a fast track to suicide. And one day he decides to go back to the gym where he used to train under his old trainer, Eddie Fudge. And he's just watching the fighters there like he used to be trained. And he decides, hey, I'm going to maybe help this one guy out who's not getting any attention right now. And in that moment, he sort of realizes, wow, I like teaching. Like maybe this is what I was meant to be. And he starts coming back every single day. He's not getting paid. The trainer isn't hiring him. He comes on his own and he starts helping out the fighters. And he slowly realizes that training is the ultimate job for him. He loves competition. He loves winning. But he doesn't have to take a punch as the trainer. He can in the training area with his large mitts, but no punches to the head. He can strategize. He can win. He can compete. He can do all the mind games that he loves. And he can give these years of experience. The reason why I consider this a model is it took him a path where he sort of looked like he was going downhill, where there was nothing left for him to do. And suddenly, just a chance encounter made him realize what his real task in life was. And all that experience that he had now could be applied to becoming the greatest trainer, boxing trainer of our year and also a mixed martial arts trainer. So people always say, well, I can't make it. I don't know what my path is. I can't figure it out. I'm too old, et cetera. It's not a question of what age you're are. You can always take the experiences and mistakes that you've had in life. And if you still got some guts and you're not a whiner, you can find a way to apply those skills in a new way that's going to be something that more engages you personally and emotionally. Because in fact, he really wasn't meant to be a boxer. His father had pushed him into it. What he was meant to be was a teacher because he said, fucking brilliant at it. So that's sort of like the model of the path that you're for you. It's not all rosy. It's not all instantly finding the perfect job. It requires some pain, some defeat, some loss, some really tough moments. And then it's going to click together as long as you don't give up. here and it is important to experience the loss. It's very important to feel the lows. If you. Click together as long as you don't give up here here and it is important to to experience the loss It's exploring it's very important to feel the lows if you don't feel the lows You want to appreciate the highs right people in this day and age they want instant coffee You know they they want instant gratification They want everything to come to them with very little work They want to win the lottery right you know and winning the lottery is probably the worst fucking thing that could ever happen You as human being I think back I played the lottery once I want a free ticket I played it again. I lost. I'm done. That was it I played the lottery again. I'm the same way, but what if I fucking won man What if I won a hundred million dollars when I was 21? I would be the biggest fucking loser of all time now I probably would I would the money would be gone I'd be suicidal because I've blew through a hundred million dollars But it's what happens there's a reason why so many lottery winners burn through that money and it's because you don't know what it is You didn't earn it right it's it's not yours. It's crazy. What you've done is you've found a weakness in the system You've exploited it because the system is designed to steal money from people and get those dummies to spend all this money on a fucking lottery Ticket it's it's legalized gambling and the state profits from it not just once but twice because they don't just take the money Your tax dollars, okay, the money that you After you spend all your money on taxes and all that just what you've got left over then you buy a lottery ticket Well guess what all that money goes into a pool the government takes a piece of it always and then when you get paid They take half of that They fuck you every way coming and going and you get all that money and you still blow it you still blow it You can't keep it. It's almost no one does you can have a million other fucking parasites trying to steal it from you And because they know you don't deserve it. It's a it's a mad mad pursuit The way you appreciate money whether it's a dollar or a million dollars is when you earn it You work hard you experience the laws you go through the trials and tribulations and then you get it when I look back at my path I'll just say real quick when I look back at my path You know I've I got out of school and I didn't know what the hell I was gonna do and already felt terrible I had some idea that I was already gonna be in my vocation doing something great by the time I finished Well that didn't happen, you know, I was successful in a variety different things I kept trying but not really nothing that I could really hang my hat on So I was really anxious and antsy and now I kept trying things. I started a marketing company I sold fake pajinas. I work for a pharmaceutical company Yeah, flush light the largest fake pajina company. This is a tangent. We don't need to go down. It's for what first fucking Sticky penis in them but so now was you know, and I was working with oil and gas companies But every single thing it was like the universe came and just bashed me on the head Something didn't work out, you know, I'd even get options in this company that was gonna strike You know, they were fracking some gas or something like that I didn't really understand it at that point But if that would have been successful and worked I would have made a huge amount of money And that would have deterred me from this path I am now which now I truly feel I'm in my vocation But if I look back all of these things that I was fighting for for success if they would have come and they would have come Lucatively they might have deterred me from what my real vocation is so all of these things all these bashes on the head Like the universe taking a fucking hammer and saying whack not gonna work has kind of led me in this weird path to actually doing something That I truly now feel is my vocation, but those things are blessings those failures. I think eventually You would have found your way because it's just who you are maybe so like maybe It would have taken you for saying what to say when someone's successful. I know that's like the secret. I know I know My issue with the secret is they only talked to the ones who it worked Like I was hanging out the commish door once and my friend Kelly Kirsten very funny stand-up comic had a friend that came with her to the comic show seem like a very nice person and She was talking about the secret and this is the first time I met her and she was going on about You know, I am gonna have this and I'm gonna have that and because I discovered the secret and you know that movie where it tells you to Manifest your own destiny with your imagination. You can make things happen She had decided that because she had this belief in this system this secret thing that she was going to somehow another be super successful and Find the man of her dreams and be rich beyond her wild imagination Then I ran into her many years later She came to another comedy show that I had at the UCB and I remember she was very nice So I was talking to her. I was like, hey, how you doing? I hadn't I talked to her once and I talked to her twice This is the only two times they ever had interaction with this woman. She seemed very nice But I'm talking to her and she's like, I don't know why it's not working I'm my relationship to terrible. I can't cut myself off of these bad relationships My father is always wants money from me and he's always broken he drinks and it's like she had She's like I thought that I was going to be able to you know create my own life and it's just not working and The secret when you watch those fucking shows It's only the people that succeeded like I drew picture of the house that I wanted and ten years later I'm living in that house. I said a goal. My goal was ten million dollars. I have ten million dollars The secret is real well There's a person out there that drew a picture of a fucking castle on the moon and they're still in Pasadena They're like where's my fucking castle on the moon you ain't getting their bitch. Okay It's not that simple and when you you're dealing with a very Bias profile you're only talking to the people that are successful Yeah, well, I mean one of the things in the laws of human nature Coming up is this idea that if there's something That's easy that someone's trying to peddle It's it's a deception. It's a con game We want to believe we humans want to believe in something quick and easy and simple and if we believe in something That means it can't really be real if we believe it because of that in other words We want to believe that we can that God will grace us with You know if we do perform certain rituals or that we can make a lot of money by just following the secret The truth of the matter is that to get really successful to make money that lasts It takes hours. It takes 10,000 hours. It takes 20,000 hours. It takes a lot of work tedious work drudgery boredom moments of challenge Defeat that's the reality so anybody that's trying to tell you that that is is not the case that there are shortcuts They're con artists. Okay. That's just pure and simple. They're conners. And one thing I'm trying to tell show in the in mastery is that We humans are geared towards Pleasure we don't want to do things that are naturally painful We are immediately attracted to things that offer us some kind of pleasure or reward and The problem is too many things nowadays offer pleasures that are immediate instant rewards You know a movie or a video game or something like that or a drug Where without much effort we get a feeling of relaxation? Pleasure and what I'm trying to show in mastery is that there's a different kind of pleasure that you want to train your body towards Aiming out and that's a pleasure that comes from conquering yourself from learning something deeply as you're taking up or you've been doing Archery for some time. It's probably not too satisfying the first few days that you were doing it Or first few weeks. It was a challenge. It wasn't much Creativity involved etc. But if you keep doing this for five years 10 years suddenly It's you reach a level of pleasure that no video game could ever ever begin to supply you and I want to reorient your whole value system Towards this other kind of pleasure that comes from conquering your yourself getting discipline Getting skilled at something becoming really good at it and feeling incredible a sense of fulfillment as opposed to all those immediate rushes that are culture tries to pedal that's such a huge point for satisfaction in life I feel Most relax after I've worked out really hard. Yeah, and not just physically because I've blown off all this steam But because I did it, you know, I'm a big fan of being uncomfortable And yeah, I tell that to people and I'm like what are you talking about like look nobody likes sleeping in more than me? I mean, I maybe you do but I doubt it I love it. I love sleeping in but I don't do it. Okay. I get up. I get up on a half to get up unless I can You know, I'm like did all my shit, but my point is When I have something that I have to do when I do it if I don't want to do it It feels even better once I've done it. Yeah, really and that's that's the fan That's the fan of being uncomfortable that I yeah, I like that feeling I like that feeling because that feeling has shaped me It's rewarded me. It's one of the reasons why I pursue so many things that I've never done before Why I got into archery why I'm enjoying it why I'm enjoying it because I fucking suck at it You know, I like sucking at something Yeah, because you suck at it now. I don't suck at it as much as I did three weeks three months ago Whatever the hell it is when I first bought a bow. I'm better at it now for sure I put pictures online of my my fucking my my patterns that I can hit my the you know arrows and in the bull's eyes and shit because I want to reinforce that in my head to keep doing that And also there's a discipline involved in something that's very difficult to do that requires all of your concentration That clears the mind and I think that that's you can get that in gardening You know you can get them and running up hills whatever it is when you're running up hills You're not thinking about too much of the shit when you're absolutely exhausted in your heart's pounding in your chest You know you've got 300 yards to go and you don't think you can make it There's there's a there's a beauty in that Yeah, you're talking a lot about zen philosophy almost too as well as using some modality of movement Which is often it is or anything to find a sort of presence of mind You know returning to that state of openness of consciousness and you know Archery is one of those main channels and in the art of art really great book. I've read that and You know you work for these moments. They call it satori where it's these moments where you have this really mindless Shot that you take in archery and everything is just Completely in the moment and I think the masters have found a way to duplicate that more You know more often more They have a of almost a formula that can allow them to get these moments where they're really in the zone as you would call it Or flow like a flow Yeah, get in these flow states which is really you know Harkening back to that old zen philosophy of being of no mind Well, that is the the experience that best describes martial arts at its best as well When you're fighting when you're competing especially if there's anything on your mind Anything else besides the the task at hand besides dealing with the other skilled person You're gonna be diminished you will be diminished your skills of be diminished your mind would be diminished It's one of the reasons why so many people talk trash they talk trash to fill your mind up with other tasks They fill your mind up within security and doubt or anger which is just as bad fill your mind up with all those emotions You might be able to win with anger if you're fighting a less than skilled opponent But if you fight a real master and you have anger you're gonna make mistakes you're gonna open yourself up You're gonna fight with that anger and in fighting with that anger You're gonna expose yourself You're not gonna fight with perfect strategy unless your Mike Tyson versus Michael Spinks where Spinks is fuck no matter what he does Tyson could come into that fight on cocaine angry Didn't matter who's gonna kill you because he's just so much better and less that but when you have two Mike Tyson's You know what you get you get Mike Tyson versus a van or Holyfield You get a guy who's fighting with purity and a guy who's gonna beat your fucking ass You're not gonna take him out of there with one big rush in the first round and you know You're gonna wind up getting knocked the fuck out and that's what happened to holy food to Tyson when he fought Holyfield He fought a real master. He fought a master when he wasn't a master anymore Yeah, this I didn't include him in the in mastery of an included in my next book, but I was reading Phil Jackson's most recent book and he you know said master himself and he discovered Then dealing with all these incredible egos on a team as he did with the bulls and later with the Lakers That if he tried to get them all wired up before a game and emotional Which is what a lot of coaches would do yeah, we're gonna rip the guts out of them Let's go just kill the Lakers whatever that they would play much worse. So his job was to imbibe in them incredible peacefulness and calmness and they would meditate before a game which no over coach ever did before and He wanted them in completely to be mindful in the game so that they could focus on the task and not Use all that anger to push them and some players could use the anger a little bit But most people like Dennis Robman He would make them do all sorts of terrible mistakes and Look at the results, you know, there's no coach who's had more championship some more success than someone like Phil Jackson But the thing that I try and show in mastery because I have a story of a great Zen master Man named Hakooine because I've myself practice Zen meditation have been for many years this man This was in 17th century 18th century Japan He was reacting against all the Zen practices that were going on in Japan that we're trying to promise you enlightenment Through something very simple all you had to do was sit in what's called Zazan seated meditation and enlightenment would come to you And he said this is such bullshit. I hate this. This isn't the way to mass to enlightenment They've gotten away from the true essence of Zen. You have to have pain. You have to go through ten twenty thirty years of torture doubt Missouri the Zen master hitting you over ahead with that stupid stick every time you saw that you weren't concentrating and then you would be enlightened And so I'm trying to show you even if it's enlightenment which seems like the the most Unmaterial thing you could think of requires the same process of going through a practice of having pain of having resistance of having a teacher Tell you that you're fucked up. You're wrong hitting you on the head on and on It's a and life is the greatest teacher of all life will hit you on the head It sure was you don't have any teacher with an actual stick you better believe that you know life itself will handle that Can you go ahead? Yeah, no, I mean The one I tried to say is I'm grounding you in what the human brain was evolved for because our brains aren't wired for iPods and iPhones and Twitter They were wired over hundreds of thousands of years of hunting of dealing with extremely radical dangerous situations in which if in one moment if we're not careful a leopard will come and eat us and early humans were being eaten quite often by a you know large cats Very dangerous environment in which your awareness your focus your ability to understand your environment is if it were on your fingertips To know every square foot of that very dangerous African savannah that you're on that's what the brain was wired for focus Seeing something deeply understanding your environment not being distracted here and there and looking over there That's not how the brain was evolved so all of these disciplines from boxing to Zen enlightenment to archery to music To whatever they're all connected with the same brain process that we all have to go through in order to reach this point where we've mastered our environment whatever that might be Your work in meditation what what type of may you said Zen meditation? Yeah, what type of Zen meditation do you practice? Well? I've done mostly Rensa was called Rensa either soto and Rensa I I used to go to a place where I Was trained and now I do it on my own. What's the difference between two schools of thought? One of them is is more a passive process where You're just sitting there trying to completely empty your mind and that's sort of the easier slightly easier path and the concept is If you're able to reach a state where you're not thinking at all and you've emptied your mind Enlightenment will come to you the other school is more active You can't it's not just so passive You just can't empty your mind You have to do something else and that's something else is I'm simplifying it mind you here But that's something else is is more discipline and going through learning these various coans For instance the most famous coan is is there usually a series of questions? Those sound of one hand clapping but the one that I've used for years is the question is does the dog? Have Buddha nature and the answer from the Zen master is moo moo meaning No, but it means more than no it means like nothing just nothingness and It's the most powerful Zen coan ever written if you ever try and think about it deeply you will reach enlightenment The different school of thought is you meditate on that coan almost like a mantra and you try and figure it out until It opens up a gate in your head That's a simplified version of the two different types So the idea being that this preposterous question becomes sort of a pattern that your thoughts Go into and you become empty because there's this pattern becomes You say it over and over and over again You recite it you think about it over and over again until you you reach a state of mind Until you it's become so absurd that the words fall off of you Zen is trying to teach you something that's wordless We're so trapped in language and words and thinking that that's It separates us from our natural state of no of original mind of the non-thinking mind I know that sounds a straight idea, but so Through words you're going to realize the absurdity of words that they're not they're disconnecting you from reality And so at that point you realize that moo Means everything there's absolutely nothing real in this universe that can be encompassed by a word My talking about it here is absolutely Completely counterproductive and and ridiculous because people are going to think oh, I'll just repeat the word moo over and over again No, it takes months of thinking very deeply about this is trying to cut you off from that chatter in your head from from thinking Constantly linguistically about it's a total physical form of enlightenment Zen It's it's most physical form of enlightenment you could reach I keep being reminded of you know that bill Bradley story that you told You know and kind of repeating the same thing bill Bradley was he was a terrible basketball player To start big gangly slow not not terrible, but he wasn't good But he had the most relentless pursuit of improvement of anybody that I've ever read you can probably pick up the story But you you know just dribbling the ball You know constantly eight hours nine hours a day You know again over and over and over again and that kind of repetition You know, it's it's all part of this same pattern of doing the same thing over and over again Well, I'm glad you bring up is a great story. It's kind of another like Freddie Roach type thing You take this he's a white guy who happens to be tall But he loves basketball He's like nine years old and I know this myself because I love basketball when I was a kid Just the sound of the ball swishing through the net He just loved that that's kind of the sound of that the feel of it So he had the sort of visceral love of the game, but he stunk at it He was tall awkward slow There's no way he'd become good at it. So he decided he was gonna train himself from a very early age and I call it You know they have a concept in called deliberate practice Where you learn to practice what you're not good at because we often if we're taking up archery or basketball We find something that we're good at and we tend to just repeat that and then our Practice becomes very one-sided deliberate practices to practice on what you're not good at I call it resistance practice actually practicing at what is painful In enjoying the pain and that's Bill Bradley He put these special glasses on his head that prevented him from looking down So he could he would dribble on a court for 10 hours or I'm not 10 hours three or four hours And he couldn't look down at his feet Which trained him to dribble. That's the worst thing you can have for always looking down You're not able to see where what's going on on the court. So he did that. He Went on a cruise with his parents across to England and he didn't he wanted to build a practice there he brought his basketball and Below deck there were these incredibly long alleys that would go from one end of the ship to the other They were very narrow He would put on his special glasses and he would dribble back and forth in this narrow area so that he could dribble with absolute Complete control. He devised all of these other exercises where he could train himself to see Almost behind himself or at least way over to the side on and on and on until He became so good that by the time he got into college at Princeton and then later he played for the New York Nicks in the 70s with all their great championship teams people would look at Bill Brian. They go my god This guy is is a born he was born with a basketball in his hand He's naturally gifted. He is so graceful He has eyes in the back of his head He can make a pass to Walt Frazier without even looking they didn't realize that he had gone through the most insanely rigorous painful deliberate form of practice ever invented by a single he athlete at a very early age And it made you know it made the game fun for him It was sure it was a lot of pain But by the time he got good and he was in high school all the girls were admiring him You know, he was got invited to go to Princeton I mean it paid off and he got a huge level of pleasure and the game became incredibly fun But it was all based on these insane moments and periods of pain that he put himself through That's a beautiful story. Yeah, I love that story. That's amazing. That's such a huge lesson For young people coming up to learn and hear to instill that into your mind and to use that as a template Yeah particularly nowadays When you're just so inundated with immediate pleasures and so many young people are disconnected from what I call you know The the pattern that our brains were built for If you're going against that pattern and trying to get things quickly or immediately you're just going to fail You're just going to be a loser in life. There's no you can't You in your short life can't suddenly move against Two million three million years of evolution. I'm sorry. It's just can't be done That's a beautiful statement man. That's so that what you said is so important and the that story The bill Bradley story is such a powerful story Because anyone can do that with whatever you're trying to do exactly I mean, he just happened to be born tall So if he hadn't ended up being six foot six or seven he went to know But that's all he had what about mugs he bogs? Yeah, five foot six. He's a great-grandfather. Exactly. There's plenty of examples of people exactly They physically were built for it I mean Mike Tyson was one of the smallest heavyweight champions of that modern era You know, he was five foot ten. He you know, he weighed 215 pounds in his prime You know, go back to primo carneira who was the heavyweight champion in the fucking 20s or 30s or whatever It was he was like 300 pounds, you know, I mean Mike Tyson's in my opinion the greatest heavyweight of all time And it wasn't that big wasn't a big guy, you know, and that the cool part is it Ultimately, you know that we've talked about it before any master that you meet They're generally a real true pleasure to be around You know, they've worked through all of those Country egoistic attitudes that they may carry along and it's through this almost Overcoming this physical resistance in the very art of the mastery that they're doing doesn't matter ping pong bow hunting comedy What abascable whatever it is you reach a certain place by pushing through that pain and going through those hours and doing those things That almost tempers your spirit as the as the main thing that's happening And it just the skill kind of comes along with it sometimes I focused on sometimes not though unfortunately sometimes Focusing on that skill becomes to the detriment of all other aspects of your life And there are people that achieve mastery and very specific things That are fucking total shitheads Ty Cobb great example was you know Famous shithead, you know, I mean, there's a lot of people Mike Tyson in his prime You know, what did you have for rape? There was a lot of I mean, I don't think he did it He says he didn't do it and he's really honest about pretty much everything else in his life But the point being you know, he was a wild crazy fuck And there was one of the reasons why he was being successful There are very many examples of people who become so selective in what they're trying to do and so obsessed and focused To the detriment of personal relationships to the detriment of their own Personality I mean Steve Jobs would definitely fall under that. I agree It doesn't have to be that way though. It doesn't have to be that way And then I always say Even with Ty Cobb or Steve Jobs They were probably miserable to be around but he had a pretty hugely satisfying life Maybe I don't know man. I don't know that guy. No, I don't know. I think it kind of goes to your I mean There's a bathroom quick, please It goes to kind of one of your final points which is on that path to mastery the final level is Building bridges back to nature back to different and making other connections You know, so if you stay too focused in that one thing and you never look to build a bridge to anything else You can probably result in some of these issues. Yeah, I mean for those who don't know the book essentially I've laid out kind of five or six steps towards this ultimate form of mastery it's like a path and It involves first discovering who you are what you were meant to do then going through what I call the apprenticeship in which you develop all of the proper skills Later in life you have like a real firm basis for becoming creative and part of that apprenticeship involves working with mentors and masters and it also involves learning how to work with other people and deal with their weirdness in their political games and then showing you then how it you reach the creative level and then the mastery level and It's a loose path. It's not like a straight line But I'm sort of showing you The various steps that get you there and as Aubrey points out Particularly nowadays It involves a kind of a well-roundedness You're not just some Asperger's guy in Silicon Valley who's great at Logarithms and creating the ultimate, you know Facebook or whatever You also have to have social skills and I have a whole chapter in mastery of social intelligence You have to learn how to deal with people. You have to be socially fluid You have to know how to be empathetic how to understand what other people's feelings are how to handle the the assholes that will inevitably cross your path so Some of the people that the Joe's talking about who are a little bit one-sided They've kind of bypassed some of these other things that I'm talking about because I'm trying to get you to that well-rounded Form of mastery which is true mastery true mastery your whole life not just a specific time very much so Yeah, do you you were talking a lot about meditation? Did you ever spend any time in an isolation tank? I have Do you do it on regular basis? No When I was living in New York years ago as a journalist They asked me to write an article about isolation taxes was when they were just starting out early 80s or they were around before that they were but they became a recreational thing in the early 80s Yeah, they were around as a CIA experiment and but people know John Lillie John Lillie but but for the general public it really became like a fad in the early 80s So I was asked to cover and I got kind of hooked and I did it for a while I haven't done it since then but it was quite it's a great experience I think that was because the movie altered states. Yes when did that movie come out? Because that was how I found out about yes, I think you're right 81 no 1980 80. Alters States, bro exactly Yeah, that's isn't it funny how a movie can just start a trend like that. Yeah, I Found out about altered states when I was in high school. I watched the movie in high school or right after it came out Maybe I actually saw in junior high because there's 80 I wasn't in high school yet But I got into isolation tanks when I first came to California because they had them here And I never knew that there was a place where you could get into one and Um through talking about it on the podcast the the entire industry has got this massive bump now And there's isolation tank centers opening up so we could get into one. And through talking about it on the podcast, the entire industry has got this massive bump now. And there's isolation tank centers opening up all over the world that credit me talking about it on the podcast and YouTube videos that I talk about it. I have one in my basement. Oh man, that's awesome. I think it's how often do you do it? All the time. I think I was in yesterday. I think it's the most important tool, actually, yesterday, not online, day before yesterday, ningo yesterday. I think it's the most important tool that I have ever discovered for a moment. How often do you say that? At least an hour. I think an hour is the right amount of time. Is there somebody that wakes you up and gets you out? No, I have a timer. Yeah, I'm set a timer. If I have to. But sometimes I'll go in there. If I don't have a timer in the sense of time, you have no idea what an hour is. Kind of, yeah, maybe. I don't know. My brain seems to know when two hours is. Two hours seems pretty standard for me. Like if I don't have any time constraints, two hours seems to be what I really, depending on whether or not I'm sober or not when I go into it, never drunk, but marijuana is usually the intoxicant of choice, especially edible marijuana, which provides a much more hallucinogenic effect. Yeah, yeah. I think it enhances the experience of the psychedelic state inside the tank. You don't freak out or anything? I like freak out. I like freaking out. I think freaking out's important. I'm a big fan of freaking out. Because then much like the stress of exercise or discipline through the experience of complete freaking out, you, there's lessons to be learned. Confront your deals and stuff. Yeah, the psychedelic state that you can achieve inside a nice solution tank, I'm edible marijuana. It's pretty fucking intense. Wow. But it's just the environment for meditation. I mean, there's no better environment ever created for meditation. In fact, it's the only environment like it on earth. You're successful, man. How can you have a basement? But does that mean a basement? Well, I don't know what my girlfriend would want at our half shit. Get a new one. Can you girlfriend? Moving on. She tried to keep you from having a nice solution tank. What should I do? Can you give you from enlightenment? Yeah. All right, I'll try that on her. But Zen met a team. You wrote a Zen card, you're talking about your own laws. You're violating him right now by saying that. Did you girlfriend tell you what kind of card you could drive to? No. But sometimes you got to give in to the other person, relationships a little bit about compromise. Not if it's about a nice solution tank. No, you're right. You're right. And no fucking reason. Oh, I'm sorry. Beat me over the head with your own work. That's all right. Everybody does that. But Zen meditation is sort of like the isolation tank. Because the point of it is just to cut off all stimuli. And you don't have to rely on this environment that you're putting yourself into. So your eyes are open when you're meditating. But you're not looking at anything. And you're not getting in any stimuli at all. So you're not hearing anything. I mean, there can be sounds outside, but you're not paying attention to them. And you enter the state that's similar to what the isolation tank is. I can enter a state like the isolation tank without the isolation tank. Because I cut off all stimuli. And I enter my own mental space. And incredible things can happen. So you just ignore the stimuli until the point where it's not reaching the mind is at the idea behind it. It's training. It's years of meditation where you're not good at it. And still to this day, thoughts invade your head, which probably don't so much. Well, they do when you're in an isolation tank, of course they do. But if you go, it's called samadhi. And samadhi is a state where the samadhi tanks are and that's the name of the company. That's right. I remember that. Well, samadhi is a kind of mindless state, or the song exactly the word. But there's no thinking going on. And it's just incredibly euphoric. You could reach that through meditation. But maybe after 20 minutes or 25 minutes, you get to that state. But you're cutting off all stimuli. That's one of the reasons they founded yoga was to make it so that there was less stimuli coming from your seated ass. And the way that your legs were folded when you're meditating, because all of that noise, that an isolation tank filters out. And I love the tank. It's most effective for me. But they would do yoga so that they could sit in that pose and have less of that stimuli yelling for longer so they could reach those states, I mean, which they could find that. Wow. I also personally find that yoga releases some form of psychodemicals in the mind that it's its own practice. I've gotten high, legitimately high from yoga, to the point where not, I want to say intoxicated, like I'm diminished in some way or affected. Like I can't form sentences or anything like that. But I feel like a chemical effect or a biological effect. Some sort of a real tangible effect from yoga. Definitely. Which I've always wondered, I mean, my thought process was why would these people do all this for so long? Like why would they have this practice for thousands of years unless there was something to it? And there's something to it. I do a lot of swimming. And I find swimming the absolute ultimate form of exercise because there's nothing, there's no stimuli. I mean, you're not sitting there thinking about the water anymore in your brain, just zones out. And if you do long distance swimming, you can reach very interesting alpha states. I agree. I find it incredibly not just beautiful in that sense where you achieve states, but it's really taxing. Well, it's really hard to swim. Like most people think of swimming as like a recreational activity. Like I do a lot of swimming with my kids when we play around. But when I do laps, like, fuck, it's fucking hard. Swimming is hard to do, man. You look at it do like Michael Phelps. That's a bad man. That guy has achieved this incredible ability to move through the water like a fucking fish. That's not easy. That is a real legit difficult accomplishment. Yeah. I like the paint, the mental paint involvement swimming because I like to swim along distances where you're like, I just can't do this anymore. Of course you're so boring. And it's so painful. And I'm just, you know, I'm in a drown. I can't, I'm taking, you know, whatever. And then you just push past that. And you swim like two miles and you get out. Oh man, what a great feeling. So what did you just do laps? Yeah. Over and over and over again. Yeah. You know, one of those crazy fucks that gets in the ocean. Are you? I would love to. But I live not close to the ocean. And it's cold and polluted. If I lived in Hawaii, I'd be swimming in the ocean. I lived in the radio active. And then the shit comes from Japan. You're right. It says, I lived in the Yucatan. I'd be swimming in the beach. Ah, there you go. That's it. That's the spot. The long ocean swims. It's moved to the Yucatan. That is a beautiful patch of water, though, by the way. Salome, you've ever been to Salome? No, I've been to Chichen Itza. Oh, Chichen Itza. Yeah, it's amazing. Yeah, incredible. Yeah, that's a freaky spot. Being around those ancient ruins is one of the most bizarre moments I think I've ever had. Just walking around knowing that people were playing football with human heads and I was standing. This is just a scant 1,500 plus years ago or whatever it was. So this these altered states that you achieve with Zen meditation. Do you find them to be psychedelic? Do you find that you can hallucinate? Well, you're not supposed to. That's not the goal. They have this word called makyo, which means a demon. And what it means is, after a certain point, in meditation, demons start appearing in your brain, where you've cut out all sensory stimuli and suddenly images start coming up that are just weird and random and somewhat frightening. And that happens to me all the time. Like you almost are like in a dream state. You know how in dreams, the thoughts and images that are seem so random and sometimes scary by how random they are. You're consciously getting that in your head as you're entering deeper and deeper into the state. But you're trying to push past that. You're trying to push to the state where there's nothing coming in at all. And you kind of transcend this sort of thinking state that you're constantly in. Can't really put it in words. I don't even want to try and put it in words. So the goal isn't really to have these vivid hallucinations, but they happen. And they're very interesting. That's fascinating, though, that it's thought to be demons. Yeah. And in the traditional Zen form, that's what they call them. And I know that they have in Japanese iconography these very frightening looking demon-like figures. And then they do actually have a concept of hell in Japanese culture that came into Zen Buddhism. And I know how Cooene talks about these very vivid images of demons that he had when he was a child. That kind of he was so afraid of them that he decided he had to get into Buddhism. And Zen to overcome them. So I don't know exactly. I'm not going to be hallucinating these Japanese demons that were probably very much in their minds and in their culture. But it's interesting. This is a total. I don't know how far we're getting away from things here. No, there's no getting away. I get this concept in ancient times. And there's a great book called The Bicameral Mind. I don't know if you've ever heard of it. I know right at the end. The idea is in this book is that for ancient people, consciousness was almost like a voice in their head. And it flipped them out. And they couldn't understand it. And they were constantly like on drugs hearing their own thoughts. And that's why they had to project it onto gods and demons and other things that are out there in the world. But literally hearing their own thoughts was almost like a continual trip for them. It's hard for us to imagine because we're so used to the chatter in our minds. But originally, according to this man, this was how they experienced consciousness. Was this in the early days of language? Yes. But this was a fairly recent phenomenon. Is that what the idea behind it is? Yeah. I think 6,000, 7,000, 10,000 BC. It's a, I can't remember the writer's name, Julian, something or his last name is Julian. Great book. But if you read books like about Buddhism, which I do ferretiously, the history of it, early people in meditation and early adherin sebudism were constantly talking about that chatter in their mind as if it were hell. It was like hearing this noise of thoughts was just awful. It was claustrophobic and frightening. And they had to get into meditation and Buddhism just to calm the mind down and not hear that voice in their heads. Now this is a totally alien notion to us because we're so used to it. And it's almost not a good thing that we're so used to it. But I think that that's sort of the idea of the demons. Constantly hearing this voice, these things in your head, that aren't, you're not willing them. You're not willing these thoughts that are constantly coming up into your mind. Where are they coming from? There's a great Zen koan called, who is the master? Where are your thoughts coming from? Who is the master calling up these thoughts in your head, particularly in your dreams? Or particularly when you're not, when you're maybe tired and suddenly this image comes up, you're not calling it up. Well, where is it coming from? That's where I think this idea of demons is connected. This reminds me a lot of going through a psychedelic experience like ayahuasca. And in that path, you reach this very visual point in the experience, which is generally, it can either be incredibly beautiful or it can be incredibly hellish. Like we'd be an example of it. Well, incredibly hellish, for example. I have different spiders going inside of me and laying eggs and exploding and bugs are coming out of me. There's eels coming inside, eating through my intestines and eating all my organs coming out. I'm sliding naked through a down a vine of thorns. It's ripping up my flesh. These are all images that happen. And in ayahuasca trip, or incredibly beautiful, the most beautiful colors you've ever seen, the most beautiful lights, images, things. And I get a lot of people asking me about these trips. And for them, that is who haven't done it very much. They focus very much on those visions. But those visions are almost like the fireworks and the chatter to what's going to come after. And what comes after is this kind of oneness with your thoughts and your highest consciousness and your highest being that has passed all that. And maybe that brings up resistance to things you can overcome. Maybe it helps you with some thoughts. But the real value of it in ayahuasca or DMT or any kind of psychedelic is that period after where these demons or these visions and everything goes away. And to me, that's the real end goal. That's the real gem. Well, that's really similar to the Zen meditation because you're going through, let's say I meditate for 35, 40 minutes. The first 25, I'm having those demons. I'm hearing my thoughts. I'm trying to get over them. And then I finally reach that state, only lasts for 15 minutes. Oh, that's the best state. It also has a similar process. That's it. Yeah. So it's not so much about the visions. It's about what happens after the visions. It seems to me very much like what you're saying. Yeah, that state after very difficult yoga sessions, it doesn't last very long. But there's a period of intense relaxation and enlightenment that you achieve where you kind of have a better perspective of things. But it only comes through this very difficult work of the hour and a half of yoga that you have to do and get to that spot. And if you have acid anywhere along the way, you don't reach that spot. I don't reach that spot every time. I reach it a lot, but I don't reach it every time. It's very tricky, isn't it? Yeah, you never know. And I don't know if it's the same with archery or the things that you do like that. But when you start the meditation, you bring a mood and it's never the same. Someday for no reason, it just falls into place. And some days you don't know why. This anxiety is gnawing on your inside. You never can figure out what you bring to it. It's interesting. It really is. Do you have a very rigid schedule when it comes to your meditation and your discipline? How do you structure your days? You're obviously self-employed. You're right. So do you have a structure like I must write for this amount of time? I must meditate. Like how do you do it? No, every morning I wake up. I meditate for 35 minutes. And nothing will stop me. Really? I'm sick or even if I'm traveling or whatever every day. Do you sit a particular way? I have the proper pillows. And I have a little place. And I have a little clock that goes off with bells. And I sit in the lotus position until my legs are like, screaming. You can do that. You can pull your legs up. Yeah, it's hot. Yeah. It's hard to do, huh? I've been doing it for many, many years. But then I recently broke my foot. And I couldn't do it for about three months. So now I'm fine and I can do it. So I'm back to having some pain again. But the pain is good as we all know. And then I'm not usually writing because my books require so much research. So right now I'm in a research period where I'm reading voraciously books about human nature, psychology, et cetera. And then in about a year, I'm going to start writing. And then I go on to a kind of a different routine where I'm a little more crazed and hard to be around. That's fascinating. So you research for a full year before you're right. Yeah. And do you discipline the research aspect of it? Oh, man. I'm so disciplined. It's probably bordering on OCD. I read 300, 400 books. And I read them. I don't skim them. And then I go back and I do these note cards. And it's the note cards that's excruciating. That's like the Bill Bradley part. I put every book onto maybe 10, 20, 30 cards depending on how good a book it is. And at the end, I'll have two, 3,000 cards. And I can written handwritten. And I can take these cards and move them around. And the book is created out of the cards. So the cards are the beneficial aspects of whatever book you're reading or what strikes you or... But I'm able to break a book down that could be chaotic. So for instance, for this new book, I have it to love Anisha a lot. I'm very... I love this. It's how it's kid. The Ubermensch. This is a book about the Ubermensch, my next book. And there's a book that I've read for him, an early book called Human All-To-Human. It's just a most amazing book. But it's chaotic. It's all over the place. He's got all these aphorisms and these thoughts. And it's just like entering a rat's maze. I with my cards can organize all of his ideas and all of his thoughts and bring some order and show you the amazing pearls of wisdom this guy has gleaned out of his mad, syphalytic brain. Do you have syphylus? Oh yeah. He went mad at the age of like 44 and spent his last eight years and basically... Too much pussy, huh? No. Crazy. Well, he probably not enough pussy. Really? So he got syphylus pussy. He probably went to a prostitute when he was in the Prussian War and then got syphylus. And then he didn't get late enough. I was certainly probably his problem. That was why he was obsessed with the Ubermensch. This is the list. I'll probably why he got obsessed with the Ubermensch. Probably not the not getting late. What did they do back in those days when he had syphylus? There was no cure, right? Yeah. Did you an apple or something like that? So young and young. Yeah, it was before penicillin, right? Yeah, not the much. I think some people were smart enough to start trying silver. I think silver had some use in some of these things. But it's not very effective. Not like an antibiotic. Yeah. It's a fascinating because I was trying to explain to my kids the plague because we were reading a book. And my five-year-old and my three-year-old were sitting in bed reading before bedtime and the story involved the plague. A plague upon you was one of the lines. And they were like, what's a plague? I'm like, that's some shit before doctors. And they didn't really have doctors when all doctors could do was cut off broken limbs. They had diseases that would kill giant chunks of people. My kids were like, what the fuck? I'm like, yeah. Not that long ago, by the way. They wrote about it. So they had language. Yeah. You know, we were talking about earlier about the evolution of civilization and the amount of time, the very brief window between us and when we were animals in relationship to the length of time that things have been alive on Earth. It's kind of simple. We're going through the most crazy and chaotic time pretty much ever when the wheel, the description that McKenna used to use about the exponential growth of technology was about sending a ball around the top of a funnel. And then it takes a long time to get around the top, but that we're somewhere towards the bottom of the funnel now where that fucking thing is going around the tunnel, going around the funnel so quickly. It's hard for us to really wrap our heads around, but when we talk to children about it, when I talk to children about it, it really sends it home. When I try to describe to my kids what a fucking plague is. Yeah. Yeah. And I just remind myself of when you read actual accounts of the true pirates, like Blackbeard and things like that, one of the things that they would barter with for the most, like when they were making deals with the British ships or different things and striking deals was venereal disease medicine, like syphilis medicine. I could be like, we'll give you all the gold, but you have to bring over a chest of medicine to cure the venereal disease. I think that was probably a much bigger problem in ancient history than not, well not completely ancient, but in past civilization that we give it credit. Well, it's the first venereal disease. I don't know. I have no idea. What a fucking dirty trick. I mean, think about how few diseases kill you that you catch. Just walking around like the flu. But you know, I think it might be nature's way to keep the population down a little bit. Most likely, right? Yeah. I mean, it seems like what's going on. There's always a battle, right? Just like we were talking about the battle between discipline and success, the battle between being uncomfortable and doing things that are hard to do and the reaping the rewards of that, it seems to be a battle in nature of trying to fucking kill us so we get stronger. You know, I mean, we don't like to think that, but it's been directly proven that many plagues and many diseases have certain traits have risen through those, through those diseases, which have made the human race actually stronger. Although they say our crow magnon ancestors, for instance, lived longer than we do. Really? Yeah. I've never heard that. Wow, that's amazing. I've died in like 12. I mean, I know in the Bible, but who believes the Bible? Oh, 600 years ago, like Moses died at the age of 193. Yeah, that's a little shake. I know it is. They didn't know what a year was back then. They were making shit up. Yeah, the calendar sucks. Written on a rock. That you can't really, yeah, that's, well, you've lost shit in the Bible. It's fucking tough to swallow. Yeah. So where did you read the crow magnon live longer than us? Well, first, one thing that's for certain they were bigger than we were. Really? Yeah. They had, they were taller. That's a known fact. Before agriculture, we do not have certain diseases that we have now. Talk to the paleo people and they can fill you with it and with all that stuff. But before we started having grains and all that bad stuff, people were perhaps living longer, they were certainly bigger. Crown magnon was five foot seven to five foot nine. Oh, you're, you're, you're, you're showing me wrong. But they were taller than the people that came after them. Oh, okay. Well, you're looking at, there are, that's the average, but large males stood as tall six foot five. Oh, okay. Not really taller than us. Okay, but that's taller than the people living than the humans of those after. Yeah, there is. In ancient Greece or whatever. Nothing like the internet to be able to show that I'm wrong about. Well, you know, 10 years ago, there was no way you would have been able to prove me wrong. We've had so many examples of people stating, I don't know, you're not doing it, but there's been a lot of people that have bullshitted us. Yeah. Unfortunately, and I've spread information. So now I have to be like diligent about that. What is that Wikipedia? This is Wikipedia about has references. If you'd like me to find a scientific reference, is there and there as well, don't get crazy. All right. I think the path back between what we're talking about is that life itself needs resistance just as masters need resistance. I mean, there is no life that's worth living if everything is like that Alan Watts video. We could make everything absolutely perfect and nothing is a surprise and there's no resistance out there. It doesn't become what it is. It's not as rich anymore. It's not filled with the magic that life can be. I mean, resistance is an intrinsic part of that. And the fact that nature is constantly looking to pick us off is part of that resistance. And the fact that all of these forces are maligned against someone who's trying to become a master, the pain, the sacrifice, whatever people are saying, all of that, that is required for a master to be created. It's all part of the same thing. It's this kind of dualism of force and opposition. The average life expectancy of Crobe Magnum was 35 years. All right. I meant the height. I meant the height. Sorry, dude. Yeah. Okay. Most of them. Well, that's something, I've got something that's maybe not Crobe Magnum. I better shut up. No. All right. 45 would be exceptionally old for a Crobe Magnum. So if I was Crobe Magnum, I'd be the fucking old wise man in the village. I think it's compared to the people who got into agricultural settlements after Crobe Magnum. They didn't live to be 35 years old. Well, that age is also factoring in more infant mortality, more things like that. Things don't happen. Disease mortality, you know, it doesn't mean that the healthy Crobe Magnum wouldn't live longer. That's the big thing. It's factoring infant mortality. That's a big one, right? Yeah. Mother's dying in childbirth. Shit, that doesn't happen anymore. You know, that raises far much. Yeah. Yeah. But when I came back to what you were saying there in the preface to mastery, I tried to say the times that we live. And first of all, I make the point that we need masters in the world now. This is a time where we have incredible opportunity, largely through the internet, where access to information, the ability to learn things, to develop skills, to have an isolation tank, to learn archery, to do all of these things. The world is open up and the ability to develop skills and master something and create something is just completely unprecedented. At the same time, the distractions and the resistance that we have to go through is equally unprecedented with the internet, with iPhones, with all the other things that are making it so much harder for us to focus. And I want you to think of all of these things as the kind of the water that you have to swim against. And if you're able to swim against all of these distractions that the world throws at you, you're going to become a real kick ass master in whatever it is. Because you overcome something that 90% of the people in this world just submerges them under because they're too weak. There's also the cliche and it's very important to point out that there is no end result. It's a journey and this journey does not, I mean, becoming a master, there's no end point. You continue to get better at everything you do or you start to suck. And that's what happens. You will get better. If you do not continue to get better, you are getting worse. Yeah. It's true. And you take someone like Einstein, one of the greatest masters, he discovers the second theory of relativity at the age of 26 and nothing after that. He tried to do his unified theory and it just went... You know why? Pussy. So you get all that scientist pussy. He was too much. Oh, you mean he had too much pussy? Yeah. I'm sorry. It was a famous pussy, huh? A lot of people don't know that. It's true. It is true. Yeah. So it's fine. You know, two guys, the most brilliant minds of the 20th century, love pussy. I don't think that's a bad thing. You see that big old smile on Einstein's faces as f**king f**king. Wacky hair. He had a f**king whole image going on. Women loved him. He was like, yeah. Why wouldn't you? I mean, you talk about all the favorable traits for evolutionary success. Yeah. Talking about one of the most brilliant men scientifically ever. Yeah, I would think that a lot of women would want that seed inside of them. You know, look at him. He's like, see this? Look at that, ladies. F**k Gene Simmons. Look at that. That's the tongue of a f**king super genius with his own hair. That guy was, excuse me, he was a very unique individual in that uniqueness. I'm sure there was some motivation behind that, not just the scientific motivation, but the actual natural motivation to be exceptional for breeding purposes, that women would find him exceptional. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. You're right. It is a process so that you never can sort of rest on your laurels and say, ah, so the way I do it, I'm not saying that I'm a master, so don't misinterpret me. But the way I do it for myself is every book that I write, I'm back at square one. I'm nobody. I have no history. I have no thought readers. I'm not successful. I have to make my, it's death ground. I have to make my next book work where I'm a total loser. That's exactly the same process involved in stand up comedy. Stand up comedy. You put out a new special and then once you have that new special, you throw all that material out and you start from scratch and you write all new material. And if you do it that way, that's the only real way to do it in this day and age because too many people have the internet, too many people have, I mean everyone has the internet obviously. Too many people have access to your previous work, I should say. and comedy you constantly need new material unlike in music. It's not, it's great, it's rough but it's great. The roughness is the great part of it. But that whole process of mastery, you know you say you're not a master. I think you are but I think there is none. This is what I think. You are a master but there's no ultimate mastery. A master is someone who is very good at the process but there's no end. I am, that's very right. Yeah the end doesn't exist. There's no where it becomes easy. There's no golden age of retirement. That's a bunch of horseshit that they fucking sell you to keep you in your job. There's no golden age, you're fucking dying man. You're going to get old and you're going to reach that point where you know you can't really work anymore so you don't have to work anymore and then you got to watch your I could sell you to keep you in your job. There's no golden age. You're fucking dying, man. You're gonna get old and you're gonna reach that point where you can't really work anymore. So you don't have to work anymore. And then you gotta watch your money. This selling point of one day, you'll retire and everything will be groovy. The fuck it will. It's not gonna be groovy. There's that whole half waiting for something to drop on. Even the religious belief that you go through this life and just do your work and then you get to heaven, yay. Or you go through, it's not religious, this capitalist belief. You work in this job and it's gonna suck. But then you get to retire, yay. You know, bullshit. You gotta enjoy that every minute along that path that you're going on. What's usually different path? Fuck the money. Fuck everything else. Do what you love to do the whole time and you'll smile at the end when your time is up. Yeah, and if you do use the wrong motivations, you will not get the results you desire. I know a guy who has been trying to get famous forever and he's trying to do it in all the wrong ways. He's trying to become famous instead of focusing on whatever art form you choose to make you famous. Just watch fame. And it just escapes them. Like, sand through your fingers. Just can't hold onto it. You just can't get a quantifiable amount in your hands. And the motivations incorrect. It's like the motivation was just on his art. I think probably he would be far more successful. But instead, the motivation is based on the green demon of looking at all these other people becoming successful and not being able to find out why he can't achieve it himself. I mean, attention is never the goal in mastery and it's actually a negative. Yes. But learning. Learning is what gets you high. Learning is what you love. If you love the attention more than the learning, then you're fucked. You're never gonna make it. Yeah, and that need, the need for acceptance. And it's like, it's the very opposite of what you should be striving for. And we were talking about people that become really successful and then lose their way. And how you can learn so much from that. And comedy, my guide for that was always Sam Kennison. Because I think that Sam Kennison was the greatest comedian of all time from 1986 to 1987. I mean, I'm not kidding. I think maybe before that, I found out about 1986. I mean, probably it was the greatest in 85 and maybe even in 84. But that's it. From then on, it's dog shit. If you try to listen to Sam Kennison from 89 or 88, it's terrible comedy. I went to see him live. He was awful. I saw him live several times. Because that was such a huge fan of his work in 86. But the drop-off was so there's guys who have good CDs and they'll have like hills and valleys. My self, I have stuff that I really love. And then stuff that was like, that was my best one. But then more motivation to do better in the next one. There's just, you know, sometimes creative glitches or what have you, a part of the process. But with kennison, there's this fucking monster peak and then this crazy drop-off. And then this crazy drop-off. And then this crazy drop-off. Coconut. Coconut. Coke. A lot. Booze. You know, we had Mark Marin on the podcast, who was paddling around with kennison in the heyday at the comedy store. And Mark was a young kid. And he told some amazing stories about this amount of substances. Mark hung out with kennison. And he had a escape. He left L.A. And he hit it so hard that he was hearing voices in his head for like almost a year. Like literally he was psychotic. And I met Mark soon after that. I met Mark in Boston. Like after he had been hanging out with kennison. And after kennison was, you know, riding the wave. And you know, he, I met Mark. I think in 88 was when I started and I met him soon after that. So he had already gone through all this. And he was, you know, a young guy working at the comedy store. And he got to see this overwhelming amount of substances that kennison was consuming. And it just destroyed it. He never recovered from that. Yeah. Coconut alcohol. I mean, that was great. It wasn't writing either. His brother wrote about it. There's a book called My Brother Sam. It's a great book about kennison written by his brother, who is, I think also his manager at the time, who wrote about how there was a, he wrote about the tangible drop-off in his writing. It didn't write new material anymore and was sort of like just partying. Yeah. I mean, there's, I talk in the book about this myth that drugs will just instantly make you more creative. In fact, it's often the opposite. And I have example of Coltrane, who, you know, it's probably one of the greatest jazz artists who ever lived. And he got hooked on heroin for a while. And people have this myth that that's what made Coltrane so great, was the drugs and the heroin and the Coke. And in fact, he said it was the worst, he did his worst work in that period. And he got off of it like in 58 and never touched the drugs or drinking after that. It did his better work after that. It did his much better work. Because to create something requires so much discipline and so much mindfulness and focus that you just can't do it if you're constantly drugged out. Yeah, especially those two, those very depressive ones and very like Coke and heroin, probably two of the worst. But there seems to be a connection between heroin and deep soulful music. Like maybe it helps them for a small time, reach a state, but then ultimately the abuse of it destroys your body so much that you can't keep it up. Yeah, you mean like a velvet underground or something like that? Yeah, like there's something, well, Hendrix and people who argue that was wasn't really into heroin. But if you look at that photo behind me of his mug shot, that is from the fucking Toronto Police Department when he was arrested for heroin. So a little problem with that. Well, heroin and system. I don't know what drugs. I mean, I know he was also involved in acid and Morrison was into heroin. I mean, he was a lot of alcohol involved with a lot of those guys as well. But the ability to escape your inhibitions was, you know, they were chasing the dragon in a sense. Yeah, but look how long it lasts. 27. Yeah. They're all died at 27. Janice Joplin, Hendrix, Morrison. It seems to be the most dangerous path to embark upon if you're looking to gain something. I think one of the things I got from one of your books was the story about Theodore Dostoyevsky. Was that in 48 Laws of Power? Well, I think it's in the 33 stripes of what Aaron and the 48 Laws. Well, basically after he would be successful with the book, he would find that he was unable to really write and he didn't have that creative fire anymore to create another great work. So he would take all of his life savings and go to the casino and just gamble it away in a night so that he was desperate and hungry again. He was penniless. penniless. And at that point, he had to write something great to get himself out. So these people use these different strategies. He did that over and over again. That takes guts. Yeah. You got to be a fucking crazy person. Yeah. I call that death ground. Putting yourself on death ground comes from Sunsu. He says a general would deliberately put his army on death ground, meaning he would deliberately put their back against an ocean or a mountain. And they either had to defeat the enemy that's confronting them or they would die because they had no escape route. No safety net. No safety net. Yeah. Safety nets is something that I've argued against ever since I was a child, which was another thing that my parents had still been to me that I had to have a safety net. And I've always told everybody who would listen. Don't ever have a fucking safety net because if you have a net, you will fall. You might not make it without the net, but you will not make it within that. So there's that. There's that. I had an interesting experience with mastery where in writing the book, where I had written four of the six chapters, but I was getting really late in delivering the final result. And the publisher basically said, you have like 11 weeks to finish the book or were canceling the project or postponing it. And there were the two chapters left where the longest, the hardest, the most abstract and the most important. And it was like, there's no way. I'm exhausted. I just can't do it. But I had no choice because if they cancel or postpone it, all of my hard work would be thrown out the window. So that was death ground. And finally, after three days of torturing myself and whining and bitching it myself, I decided, all right, I'm going to do it. I'm just going to try. I'll just do what I can. And it was the most incredible writing experience I've ever had in my life. I had to work harder than I've ever had to work. I got on this high where thoughts were just coming to me and my dreams and my, you know, I'm having sex. It's just the most amazing. And they worked. And I was sitting there writing about creativity and intuition while this was happening to me. And it just demonstrated to me that the limits that I thought I had are just sort of self-imposed. And if I stopped complaining and stopped saying that I had these limits, I could explore beyond them and explore what I was capable of that I never thought I was capable of prior to that. You know, 100 Thompson wrote Hell's Angels. You finished like the last X amount of chapters in like two days on cocaine. Like he just got coaked up and fucking finished. You had a deadline. Maybe I should have tried that. Have you ever seen, I could have written in two days. Maybe. Maybe you need Adderall. Have you ever seen the 100 Thompson documentary fear and not fear and loathing? What the fuck in was it called? What? Yeah, Gonzo. Years ago. What is it? Life in times of 100 Thompson is the name of it. I got it saved on iTunes. I should just pull it up on iTunes. The documentary just from a couple of years ago? Have you seen that? Oh, just a couple years ago? No, I haven't. It's a fairly recent documentary, but God damn, it's good. God damn, it's good. I think it's Gonzo, the life and work of 100 Thompson's. Is that it? Yeah. I watched it in a hotel in Seattle and fucking spent that, that's it. Life and work of Dr. Hunter's Thompson. It's so good. It's so good. Seven point eight. Get that fucking blast at me off there. It's not a ten. That just shows you there's a constant, no matter what you do in this life. That's, that, that, that documentary is God damn ten. An incredibly inspirational and I watched in Seattle at a hotel room and just on a whim. Just sorry, I will watch this. I was alone. I was doing some work and, you know, I, I fucking wrote all night because of that documentary. I just got on the keyboard and just smashed keys all night. Oh, nice. That's those things that, you know, you catch these bursts of, of inspiration and Thompson who's a personal hero of mine used to call them fuel. You know, and he said that he personally believed that with the right song, you could drive further in your car. Your, your car would figure out a way if the right song was playing to go, to go miles past the E. And, you know, theoretically obviously, not even theoretically, you know, he was, it was just, it's a metaphor. It's a metaphor. Yeah, metaphor right. Thank you. Thank you. He was, you know, just great at figuring out how to put these abstract ideas into a tangible form that you've mind accepted and never met a deadline. And his whole thing was like putting things off into the last minute. And then this fury of fucking teeth gnashing, you know, slamming against the keys and this fucking, but it's almost like he forced himself into this, this back against the wall. What would you call it? The death ground. Death ground. He forced himself into a death ground in order to complete. Oh, I wish I'd done that. I would have included in my book. You do. You know, I've know you talking about comedy. You like following someone like Joey Diaz, who is hilarious. Right. Because you've talked about how that makes, you know, that would make some people, you know, a little bit scared and a little bit nervous, but you like it because it's going to bring out your best following somebody that's that great. You know what I mean? You kind of mentioned, isn't there something there in that same philosophy with that? Maybe, but my philosophy and that is that I think that not not working with funny, really, really funny people is a twofold problem. One, it's famine thinking. Like they think that there's a lot of really selfish comedians out there. And one of the things that they like to do is they like to stack the deck. So they'll bring, there's guys at a national touring headliner that bring the worst fucking comedians you've ever seen in your life. To open for them. Because these guys go up there and eat dick for a half an hour. And then you go on stage. This crowd has been tortured waiting for actual entertainment. And you're the hero. You're the conquering hero. So nobody out shines you. Yeah, that's right. It is incredibly common. And I think it's gross. I think it disrespects the audience. First of all, I think it disrespects the fact that these people have paid money to see you. They deserve entertainment, not just from you, but from other people as well. And you shouldn't be scared of other people being funny. Doesn't take away from you being funny. The only way it would take away is if the person on before you is stealing your material. Or what it's called stepping on your material. Like say if you had a very particular subject that you were famous for like Jim Gaffigan likes talking about hot pockets. He does his whole hot pocket bits. Really hilarious. If you went on before him and started talking about hot pockets, you would kind of step on his bit. And people will do that. Those same shitheads like that actor that I told you that would like to go up to my friend and say he was fat. right before he would go and read his lines. That's that same sort of thinking. That same sort of famine thinking. She's like, another person's success should be inspirational to you. It shouldn't be detrimental to you. And so I, and then the other thing is, I'm a fan of comedy. I want to laugh. So I bring Joey Diaz who I personally think is the funniest guy I've ever lived. I bring him to open for me because I want to be in a hilarious state before I go on stage. I want to be laughing. I'm not worried about not being funny because if I've done my job, I've done the work. It's going to be good. Like don't worry. You can't worry about that. That worrying is the enemy of comedy. Yeah. Yeah. It's just pathetic. I bring murderers with me, man. Everywhere I go, Duncan, Ari, Joey, I just bring the biggest killers that I could find. I take headlines with me. I've taken great fit Simmons on the road with me. I mean, I like doing shows with guys who are fucking awesome. I think it's really important. It's, but it's not because I want to die. Somebody wants to pull my back up against the wall. I want the audience to get their money's worth and I want to be around my friends. And I also want to support my friends. Part of the reason of bringing Joey and Ari and Duncan on the road with me all these years is, it's selfish because I want to have a good time and I want to be with them and I want to enjoy myself. So there's that. But also I want people to know how good these guys are. And a lot of these guys are good in a really fucked up way. It's not, it's not really palatable for comedy central. It's really hard for them to get on HBO. You know, for a guy like Joey Diaz, the only way for that guy to get famous is the internet. That's what made him famous. And my help, you know, helping get him out there in front of thousands of people that would never have had an opportunity to see him. And telling people, as I introduce him, ladies and gentlemen, please welcome the funniest motherfucker that ever stepped foot on earth. Joey Diaz. And I would bring on stage like that all the time. I tell everybody it's funnier than me. He's a funniest guy ever. Doesn't mean I'm not funny. You know, it's just, it's not bad for things to be great other than you. It's good. There's this, you should be inspired. The greatest people want those people who are great alongside them to push us. You know, I mean, although bird and magic were nemeses, you know, you talked to them now how thankful they were that they had each other on opposing teams for sure. All of these, all of these people, you need greatness around you. You need them. You need Yin to have Yang. You need, which one's good? Which one's negative? Which one's positive? Yeah, this one's good. Yin is passive. Yang is active. Yeah, you need that Yang to have Yin. Yang, you need Yang. You need both. Yang makes Yang. The universe has, you know, the tide comes in, the tide goes out. Bill O'Reilly. Yeah. You know, it's, there's something. Don't talk to me about Bill O'Reilly. It's not the greatest fucking, okay, you can't explain it. Yes, you can, you fuck. It's called gravity. They figured out a long time ago. You ever seen that thing that he did? We were talking about God. We were talking about you, the tide goes in, the tide goes out. You can't explain it. Like, you know, I'm going with God. Oh, it was the so, it's so disingenuous from a Harvard graduate. He said to fucking go. Oh, I'm, I have my own Bill O'Reilly story. Really? Please tell it to me. Well, 48 Laws of Power just come out in 98. And Bill O'Reilly decides to have me on the Riley, Oh, Riley factory, which was big then, but not as big as it became later on. And so I'm like, I just like one of my first shows I've ever been on. You know, no, no, no, nothing like this ever happened before. And basically, you go to a studio in Los Angeles, where he's in New York. And you're in this room, and there's nothing around you. And they put an earphone in your head, and you're staring at a camera. You don't see anything. You just hear Bill O'Reilly's stupid fucking voice in your ear asking you questions. It's like you're on drugs, and it's so disconcerting. It's like the guy who's trying to put you off your game before you already put off your game the moment you start. Anyway, he interviews me, and I prepared like shit for this interview because I knew the questions coming. It was all about Monica Lewinsky and Clinton and the scandal and the 48 Laws, and I nailed it. And he said, oh, that was a great interview, Robert. I'm going to have you on again. Okay, wow. And so I'm like feeling pretty good about myself. So four weeks later, I trudged back to that office, and I sent that same chair with a little earphone in my head. And he proceeds to just rip me to shreds. About what? Well, essentially, he hated the 48 Laws of Power. He liked the writing or whatever, but he was just using his game. He was just, you know, completely. He was just using it as a way to attack Clinton, which I wasn't wanting to do. So anyway, he was just like totally messing with me. And I was so expecting the opposite that I was like, and then he goes, and then he says, well, what about this law about you selective honesty? And I said, well, it's something that politicians and business people use all the time, like Lyndon Johnson, for instance. And then I was about to explain how Lyndon Johnson used me cuts me off. He was, yes, the same man who said 58,000 men of our young men to death in Vietnam. Let's break for a commercial. And that was the end of the interview. So he like made me look like I was supporting Lyndon Johnson, masking 58,000 Americans in Vietnam. He manipulated me and made humiliated me and like, and the whole thing was he hates the 48 Laws of Power because it's all about manipulation and ugliness. And he's the most fucking manipulative interview or you could ever imagine. Look how he manipulated me. He completely set me up by making me think this was going to be like a softball interview where we were just, you know? Well, he's a hater. He just hated that someone else wrote something brilliant. That's all it is. That guy's a fucking hater. He's the ultimate hater. Yeah. And it was a special type of looking glass that allowed people to see Bill O'Reilly for the fucking monster that he was. Yeah, and I find it only just a book. Incredibly ridiculous that that guy got to interview Obama. You know, not that I think Obama's, you know, particularly unique and special human being, relatively to what his position is and what could have been done by a guy like that in that position. But I think that, you know, having Obama being interviewed by this fucking buffoon. I think Obama has the most thankless job probably in the history of the world and maybe the most impossible job. I don't think he's done the best that he could with it, but I don't think anybody can. I think it's your setup. That's what I've come to. The more I think about being a president and more I think about dealing with the house and dealing with Congress and the Senate and all the fucking laws. Just look at what's happened to his hair. Yeah. The gray. Yeah. Well, that happens to all the. Receiting and gray, but like in this course of like a year, it just suddenly turned gray. I don't think we can even imagine the kind of pressure that you'd have to be to be the leader or the supposed commander in chief for the greatest super power the world has ever known, that wants to consume the earth. You know, this crazy super power that literally thrives on consuming the earth. I think we can gain so much from listening to Eisenhower speech about the military industrial complex when he was leaving office that then intense speech warning the people about the military industrial complex and the dangers of it and the influence of it. I don't think we could even imagine what that is actually like when you're in office. I'd like to think that Obama one day will write a book explaining everything and we'll be like, Oh, I got it. Because I don't get it. I don't get how he could have made the decisions that he's made based on what he said before he got into office. Sure. And less he's totally full of shit, which I'd like to think that he's not that sad. Him getting interviewed by a fucking buffoon like Bill Riley. It's just like it's watching that and just like what the. The most popular people. But it's so silly. It's so silly that he's one of the most popular people on television. It's so fucking silly. It's just it's just you get no argument for me. Well, it's it's unnecessary. And I think I personally believe that that style of television is like fucking silent films where you you debate a very important issue on a split screen for six minutes. And you know people yell over yell yell, Oh, Bill, that's not the case. And I'm fracking doesn't produce any negative results. The hippies and the liberals will be right back. No, we won't be right back. This is not the way to talk. This is not the way to address complex issues. This is not the way to have interesting discussions. Did you ever see John Stewart on the firing line years ago? We almost five minutes. Yeah. Okay. Yeah. We're on the. You know what? I'm supposed to. I'm supposed to pimp something that I forgot to pimp. Some special offers for getting the book mastery. Oh, yeah. That's right. Didn't somebody email me that or something like that? Too late to do no. No, not at all. Not probably lost everybody by now. Everybody's still here. People talking about man. Everybody's still in you'd be amazed. These people stick into the end. Most of the people listening to this are commuting or they're on the treadmill or they're you know on a plane or something like that. Okay. A huge majority of them are hanging out to the very end. You'd be completely shy. And it's like archived. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. This will reach fucking probably close to another. We have all sorts of offers for the book and for special bonus things that I used to give away when the book first came out. And you need to go to power, seduction and war, the and is spelled out power seduction and war. dot com slash Joe. Yes. I got it right here. I'll put this up on Twitter right now. Call me link address and what is the special offer that people get? There's some things that are not included in the actual book itself. So the full interviews that I had with some of the contemporary masters like Freddie Roach. Some material that never got included in the book for reasons that aren't having to do with the quality of it. And then this kind of essay that I wrote about the writing of the book itself and things that I explained today about my deadline. How would you explain it to tweet to give it to people? Like I'm writing a tweet right now. How would you explain it? Explain what explain what this offer is like what is like free you're getting free bonus material that's not in the book itself. Okay. He really gives insight into some of Robert's process. You know, because I've looked at some of these gives insight into his process how he did this plus bonus content and stories that don't want to admit the kind of like the directors cut. Thank you. It just got out to 1.28 million people. Oh, and for those of you thinking about it, for those of you thinking about reading mastery, I've read it and it's been an invaluable tool along with the rest of your books. Really, you know, you allow people to get the best out of themselves and that's something that I'm incredibly passionate about. And I think these are incredible tools to have. And you decide what to do with these tools, your unique individual. But there's no doubt that knowledge is power in itself. And you can use that power for however, however means you want to do it. It's up to you. But the books have knowledge. And when you consume those books that knowledge will translate into your own personal power. Clay Shays, a real ladies and gentlemen. Robert Green, you're a bad motherfucker. Robert Marcus, you're a bad motherfucker. You're a bad motherfucker. This has been an enjoyable podcast. I really appreciate having you on. It's been a real treat to pick your mind. Thank you very, very much. Great time. Thanks to our sponsors. Thanks to stamps.com. Go to stamps.com. Click on the microphone on the top of the page and enter JRE for your special. special $110 bonus offer which includes a free digital scale and up to $55 in free postage. Thanks also to LegalZoom.com and use the code word Rogan in the referral box at checkout for more savings. Thanks also to Onet.com, go to ONNIT, use the code word Rogan and save 10% off any and all supplements. Greg Proofs will be on one of the finest comedians in the land and any land and the host of the smartest man in the world podcast. Just a real treat to having him on anytime he's on. He's a fucking awesome dude and he's goddamn smart and hilarious and we'll be back tomorrow with big kisses for all. Thank you.