Well, it's Tucker Carlson. I'm honored to be sitting in to host the Charlie Kirk show today. I flew in from the East Coast last night and was thinking about what to do today for two hours. And there's all this very ugly drama swirling around the Republican Party, the right, the memory of Charlie Kirk. And I just thought, and I've got, of course, strong opinions. I have strong opinions with everything, and I've expressed them. But I thought I really need a break from that. And I don't think that any of it reflects who Charlie was fundamentally, who was Charlie fundamentally, he was a Christian man. And Jesus was the center of his life. That was obvious to anyone who knew him. It emerged in conversation immediately when you talked to him. That's just a fact about Charlie. His life was about following Jesus' period. And so I think the best way to explain who he was is to spend the next two hours talking about Jesus and Charlie's relationship with him. And so I'm going to be really happy to do that. This will be the happiest conversation about Charlie Kirk, I hope, all week. And so as I said, I'm hosting, but I have no idea how the show works. I literally don't know, though I've done it. But luckily Andrew and Blake are here who I know very well. I've actually worked with Blake for years in another life. We're both grateful to be gone from that. But Andrew is really going to be running in and out. We have these things called breaks. And you've got commercials and all that. There we've got a show to run here. But you know what? It's just not soon. But listen, we'll blow the breaks when we have to. So if you're watching on stream, if you're watching on Real America's Boys, you're watching on a video platform, you'll probably be fine. We're just going to have fun today. Good. Well, with you in charge of the details, I know that that will happen. Correct. Blake, it's wonderful to see we talked on the phone the other day. I've been thinking about you every single day. So I hope you're holding up. And I'm grateful that you're here. So yeah, I want to talk about Charlie's relationship with Jesus. And I'm amazed going. I have a whole list of thoughts or sound bites. Here I asked for Charlie talking about God in public. And I'm just going to make this the same back. I mean, they're really deluge. It was unbelievable because there's really no one in public life who talked about Jesus more than Charlie Kirk. And I'll just, now I'm revealing one of my ugly biases. But some of the people whose job it is to talk about Jesus are not, you know, I don't think is credible and believable. I'm just being honest as I think Charlie was. He really meant it. He wasn't being paid to say it. I think everything that he did, everything that he thought, the way he lived, were all informed by his love of Jesus. And I don't think I'm overstating. And I said this to him recently when he was at my house in Maine. I really remind me of Paul, like you never stop. I stop. I like to stop. I like to go fishing. I like to go bird hunting. Like to hang out with you on Saturday morning and bear with my wife and like, you know, be asked with my wife and all this stuff. But Charlie just did not allow himself any of that. He was so driven. And you can see it now maybe as part of a larger plan where he never wasted a minute. He forced himself to get on the airplane and to do things that were really, really hard in a way that I've never done. I'll just admit it. And I think that was because he felt God had a plan for him that he was on a mission that wasn't just about getting somebody elected. It was about something bigger than that. Am I, well, just ask you first, Andrew and then Blake, do you think that's, I'm reading too much. Andrew, what do you think that's right? No, I totally agree. And I've had wave after wave of revelation of what we were actually doing. You know, I was so in the weeds. We were so in the weeds that it was impossible to fully understand even what we were doing. But I, you know, I'm, I said. And I, Charlie and I bonded at the very earliest days because we were both like really strong Christians. And there was such a central part of who we were, but we didn't, we, you know, we didn't talk about it all the time to say publicly. But as the years went on, we both knew that we had each other in that way. And I've tweeted, there's two tweets that I've posted. I have realized in the days hence that he was a prophet, not a fortune teller like people's prophecy. He was like a biblical prophet that would go into a nation and call it to repent. That's what he was doing. He was going to these campuses and he was going on stage and he was going on the show in the podcast and he was calling a nation to repent. He went to London and he called England to repent at Cambridge in Oxford and they, they hurled insults at him. They mocked him. They jeered him just like the biblical prophets. They wanted to stone him and ultimately they killed him. And that is what Jesus said. He said, what did they do to the prophets? They killed him. And now the other relation. You're making me emotional again. Because I know that what you're saying is true. And the other revelation is specifically about these campuses, we called them campus tours. They were tent revivals. Yes. Complete with the tent, Tucker. That's so. I don't know why I didn't really see any of these. I didn't need those as it was said. And I just like to envision like George Whitfield like being, you know, as he loved Jesus was sent as a savior and must be accepted to be saved. Prove me wrong. Yeah. I know when it's so clear to me. No. It's so clear to me too. I don't know. It's. Yeah. I don't know how I missed that. I don't know why I thought it was like political organizing or something, which like on one level it was. But that's not, well, you guys were there all the whole time. I mean, it was more than that. It was. It was. And it really knowing him over the past almost three years, that was what I would always tell people who would ask about Charlie. And it's it's so funny where like they'd always just open like it's Charlie smart. And I'd be like, yes, but that's kind of besides the point. Yes. The amazing thing with him is not his IQ or like how much how many like facts he can know or something. What was amazing with him was his drive. The way I would say he was the highest agency person I had ever met my life. Yes. He thought if there is something I don't like, I have the power as an individual to change the world about that. Or at least if I don't take action, I have no excuse to complain about it. And he brought that to politics and organization, of course. But he especially brought it to the faith question. And he always, always wanted to talk about it. You love talking about it in private. He loved talking about it in places where it was, you know, arguably pointless. The last speech he kind of gave in public was we were in Japan. And Japan is 1% Christian. And maybe we were speaking to a party there that's, you know, we're aligned with them because they're anti-immigration. They don't like globalism. We were talking to them about all that stuff. He's like, go, you should increase your birth rate. Don't rely on immigrants and all that. But Japan is famously resistant to Christianity. Yes, yes. But and I told them about that. And, but you know, in Korea, we talked about Christianity. And there it was a Christian audience mostly. But he said he's like, you know, is there somewhere I can work in the faith angle to this because, you know, we're supposed to preach it everywhere, everywhere we go. And so we talked about that, you know, what could we do? And we found a spot late in the speech. And the very end of his speech, he was saying, look, guys, I want you to save your country. But in the end, you're going to have to believe in something transcendent for that to work. It's not just going to work on pragmatic grounds. And for me, and then he just, you know, for me, it's because of my belief in the almighty, my belief in Jesus Christ. And you're going to need to have something like that to, to be able to win. And, you know, I think two people in the audience started clapping really, really energetically. And the rest really sat there very politely as the Japanese people. Oh, yeah, Japanese are wonderful people. But, but you're right, they're not open to that. But there were two who were. Yeah. And maybe they were believers. I'm not sure. But, you know, I'm very glad he got to do that. And then in Korea though, you know, we're totally different. We have this clip. Why don't we just play it if it's okay? Oh my gosh. 18. That, that was 11 days ago, Tucker. And he's on stage. And in English, they asked him to come forward and pray and sing over Charlie and they put their hands up and they started in English saying, how great is our God? Yeah. See with me how great is our God. And Charlie put his hand on his heart. And Mikey said when he got off stage, like he could see his eyes were missed. It meant so much to Melbourne. It's one of the darkest cities really in the world. Hmm. There are good things about Melbourne. But basically it's in enemy hands and boy, do you feel it when you're there? And I was like, I got to go to church. So I go, of course, to the Anglican church, which is my denomination. It's now a museum in Felucinius, Turris. I was like, oh, this is the worst. I'm feeling despondent. I go next door to the Scottish church, the Presbyterian church. Beautiful, beautiful church, like in beyond. And there's no one in it except at the front. It's like a hundred yards away. It felt like there's a little group of people singing. And it's Koreans. And this Korean congregation of like nine people has taken over the church, rented it on Sundays because of course, no whites are going to church, of course. And I just thought to myself, this was God's way of reassuring me that even though the world that I grew up and has gone and totally, you know, everyone's fallen away and it hasn't worked at all, that the Jesus still lives. But, you know, his name is spoken in other languages. And one of those is Korean. And there's something about watching, you know, Koreans worship that just, oh, it's my favorite thing ever. I totally agree. They are absolute prayer warriors. But I just believe this Tucker and I have to say this like in this moment, I believe God is unleashing a new revival on this country. And Charlie is the spark that is igniting it. Completely agree. I don't even want to say it's his death. It's his, the start of his eternal life and his eternal glory, his immortality. And I believe that he is seated with God in heaven and he's seated in glory. And I believe that there's a reason that Charlie and Erica would look at each other and say, you know, our mission is to make heaven crowded. And, and I believe that that is actually the real mission. And that is actually going to be happening right now. It's happening in our midst right now. And it's sweeping the country. And there was, there was a story I just heard on the drive here this morning that they ran out of baptism space. They just kind of did an impromptu baptism space as one of my French churches. And so they went out in the parking lot and started dunking people in the fountain hundreds of them. Protestants are fun. I just, I just love that. If I can just say a word, I mean, I don't get involved in the Protestant Catholic Orthodox thing because I'm just for Jesus. But if I just stick up just for one second for my people, Protestants were real ones. Like they built this country. They did. I'm sorry. It's a fact. And they really believed in God and they, you know, they were on the right path. They were amazing people. And I'm very aware that they've declined to the point where I make fun of them constantly. But there was something very, very real there, very real. Sorry. Well, the circuit writers in the field have just said that. No, no, no. Listen, and there as I'm somebody both Erica and I were cradle Catholics, right? We were, yeah, did the first communion and we did the catechism and the, you know, the, anyways, I went to Catholic high school even. You did you go to Catholic high school long story? Long story. Well, I'll mention you in a few months. But the point is, parents moved me to public schools. I ended up getting saved in college. Very, very non non denominationally. Evangelical way to phrase it. I got saved in college. So I had this Catholic background, but then I found myself in a non denominational setting alone at a school in Seattle. Like the second least church city in the country. And I ended up getting radically saved. And so, but I've never cared about the distinctions. I love both. Yeah, I agree. You know, I might have petty minor little theological differences. Yes. It doesn't matter. I love them both. I don't understand. Because of my path here, I never cared. Anyone who focuses on Jesus is my brother. That's how I feel. And I agree with you a hundred percent. And if you let your say it's a little bit like Twitter actually. If you think about it too much, you end up hating everybody and you miss the commonality between people and the commonality between Christians is Jesus period. And if you think about what I'm mad about transubstantiation or like the last pope was horror. Which he was. I'm so sad we didn't get to just have that full debate. We wanted to have just a straight like just for fun. Like let's debate Mary. No, I'm not doing that. No, I'm not doing that. Not straight. What do you want to do with Charlie? No, we can. I'm not doing that. And one of the things I hope you guys live to your fifties because, and I'm sure you will, but because when you get there, you're like, wow, I've been wrong about so much. And you think that middle-aged people are wishy-washy. And low testosterone does account for some of that just effect. But part of it is just the recognition of how wrong you've been. And that is the Christian forgive us our sins as we forgive those who sin against us. It's like first you meditate on how fallen you are and then you realize you don't have a basis upon which to judge other people actually and you can forgive them. And that is the process that's prescribed in the Lord's prayer. Of course, it's the center of Christianity, but it's also just like a human process and you get there and you realize like, yeah. I'm mad about Mary. That's a fact, okay? But then I get older and my wife's like, oh, I was just saying the rosary, my very Protestant wife and I love it. It brings me closer to Jesus and I'm like, I'm not judging anymore. I really want people to understand Tucker. You and Charlie had such a unique and special bond and relationship. It was a deep friendship in both had each other's back and in my way. You had his back too. I know those stories as well. Yeah. And I promised I wouldn't get into any of that. But I will say, and I'm not going to, but I will say because I want this to be about Jesus and his love for Jesus and what he did to spread the word of Jesus throughout the world. But I will just say this, that whenever I would come and do a gig for you guys, which was a lot because I really enjoyed it. And he was so kind to invite me and defend my being there. But I would always, he's the only person I did this with, I would always say, hey, you know, let's like meet in my hotel room or have a meal like I, I loved talking to him. And it wasn't just to catch up on everything that's going on in the political world. He would always bring it back to God every single time. And it was so, there's no one around like so he didn't need to be like, Oh, yeah, I really love God. It is like just us. And you would come to Phoenix and you would reach out to I it's like I have so many memories of Charlie being like, I can't I got to do dinner. Who you doing dinner with? Oh, Tucker's in town. I got to meet up with always always. And he was so intellectually curious and flexible. And I think that also grew out of his Christian faith. And I know that as I've gotten older, it's been one of the things I appreciate most about believing in God is like you can admit when you're wrong. You can change your views. Paul who created a lot of the early church was the chief persecutor of Christians. He was a freaking Pharisee. So like in our religion at its core is the fact that God can change people. And so you don't need to be brittle and afraid about admitting that yeah, I was totally off base. And Charlie was so much like that. He was constantly thinking about it. Is this the right thing? Is that the right thing? Like there's no one in public life who does that. It's so easy for like, you know, for sometimes people use religion as an excuse for Megalomanias and Charlie was so humble. Genuinely humble. Thank you for saying that. We would have these moments. Thank you for saying that. On this note, we would have these moments and I'd be like, can you freaking believe what's going on? Your own South bark or whatever. All I got. And he would say, he would say stay humble, stay close to Jesus. That would be the type that we need to stay humble. Jesus, stay close to Jesus. Really? This is in his private text to be even works with. I have a story like this too. And I'm ashamed that I am the villain in this story. Basically it was two weeks before he died and I'll never forget it. I there was just some annoyance that was, you know, in our way and we needed to deal with something. I can't even remember it was and I just remember going, hey, you know, we could just tell them X, Y, Z and translation. We could just, you know, little white lie and it'll go away. They'll understand. And I remember seeing the dots who's typing right away. We don't lie. It was a private message with me. I love that. And it wasn't, you don't lie. It's not, I don't lie. It was Andrew. We hear on the show in this turn, in turning, we don't lie. Well I not only don't lie. I mean, without even getting into it, but like if you run a huge nonprofit and DC is all about huge nonprofits, I know everyone who runs them, but with their temptations and there was never any of that here ever. And Sean and I talked about that a lot. Like here are the pitfalls in a man's life. Here's how people get ensnared. It happened to David. I mean, we know this as a thing. He was so, again, I just had this conversation right before he died because I'm very focused on it because they've seen some people destroyed themselves and it's clearly like Satan acting on them. Sorry. And he was like, he was a narrow pathwalker and I just have to say that because most of them, he would run home to be with Erica. Yes. If he couldn't, yes. If Erica was on the road, he'd be like, are we done here? Okay. Like a donor dinner or something. He would, you know, he after our events at night, he would do kind of like a little circuit all the dinners and he couldn't wait. He's like, okay. And I'd be like, I gotta talk to you about one other thing Charlie. Hold on one second. One second. He's like, sorry, I'll talk to you about it in the morning. That's the first one. Bye. That is the key. I love to tell people this because sometimes people who didn't watch Charlie a lot would sometimes just think, oh, he's like a young influencer. So people would ask me, they'd be like, Blake, do you ever hang out with Charlie? And what I'd always say is I don't think Charlie has ever hung out in his entire life. It was always on his mission or, you know, he was with, you know, he was with his family. It was 100% all the tapping said some of the best memories that I have are the plain flights across country. Yeah. And that's the only time he can hang out. It was amazing. He's trapped. And by the way, when, and I think that gave him the freedom to kind of just go, I'm hanging out. And I mean, if you had to add him up, I've got hundreds of these hours and they are some of the most amazing because he was so funny and so curious. And so, so he did, but it was like you had to get him in this mode where you literally trapped him on a plane and he couldn't get out and he was stuck. Oh, what is that? And most people sort of fritter away their entire lives hanging out. And I'm, I'm definitely one of them. I'm like an Arab man in the suit. I like to sit around. I mean, getting the water pipe playing backgammon, drinking a little cups of coffee, talking about women. Like I've spent a lot of my life doing that. That's why I love Trump so much. Well, that too. But Charlie had like this mission. So my theory on that, Tucker, is I think in order for this whole God plan to work in Charlie's life, he had to like, he had to impress in him. Almost subconsciously hard wire it. Whatever it was, he was going to maximize the juice, the output and Charlie disciplined his body. He didn't put alcohol into his body. He didn't put drugs into his body. He didn't put anything into his body that he thought was going to slow him down or reduce his productivity. He was obsessed with biohacking. He was like, and I thought it was just this weird quirk because I'm thinking, Charlie, you're going to be alive because you're younger than me. You're going to be alive when I'm gone. Like chill out, relax, have some fun. But somehow he knew there was an moment to waste and I'm finding these things, Tucker, that he found time to do. Erica's telling me he somehow found time to journal obsessively. And she never went to the weekly note every single week. wrote her a weekly note on Saturday, every Saturday. He read books. He skimmed books. He got blaked to read them. He found ways to get the team to distill information so he could absorb it. And he, but he would do walks with books on tape. He managed to squeeze so much life into such a short period of time. And it's, I have to believe it was God impressing and blessing him with this divine ability to maximize his output. I love that. And I had many conversations with him on this topic also about like physical health. I'm a pizza guy. Okay, physical health. I quit smoking cigarettes in 45. Like I feel very very fortunate. You didn't want to put anything in his body that would hinder him. And it turns out the list of things that hinder you is all foods, except like cabbage, grilled chicken, hot sauce. That's basically what I mean, he was the biggest guy, but it was for a reason. How much time do we have in the segment left? We're going to welcome back radio in three minutes and 20 seconds. Then we have a nice 13 minutes. Okay. So I want to when we get to the 13, I want to tell the Blake story, Blake Neff who's sitting right here. It's story. And it's, it's just a story that just explains who he really was. And there's so much that goes on in Washington and political world that's so treacherous and cruel and anti human and Charlie just stood against all of that, not simply in public but in private. And I had a window into one of the amazing stories of bravery and forgiveness. It's just an incredible story. And it's about you. Again, it makes me emotional thinking about it. But anyway, I don't think it's ever really been told. Sorry to make you a little bit. All right. It's amazing. I don't know what I love about this Blake story too because I, and I don't want to, I'm not going to ruin the punchline here, but I would just say I, one of the strongest estimates to Charlie is the fact that this guy's a tough judge. And I know, I know he worked a little in when he first started working with us. I could tell that he was a little unsure. You know, you probably had the questions. You regularly Charlie spoke the language of the people and you're a Dartmouth kid. That's a total egg, egghead nerd, you know, like beautiful mind kind of person. And, but Charlie would cut through all that and he would speak right to the people and cut people's hearts into and make them choose the side they were going to go. And that was not the language of Blake, but we needed a Blake, Neff. And I knew we needed a Blake, Neff. And I just, there was this moment where I forget why, but you, you took this moment and I remember being really touched by it and you paid Charlie a tremendous compliment. And I knew, it was like a two years after the fact. And it, and it was, Charlie texted me like directly. He goes, whoa, did you hear, did you hear Blake? Like, because it really meant the world to him that he won. He had won your respect and it really meant the world to him. Yes, South Dakota Germans aren't big on compliments. But I do think that, so you, if you get one from Blake gets earned, I do think the question that people had about Charlie, the question I got most often and people came to me a lot about Charlie like, what is this? Because they knew that I knew him and I was friends with him. But really the core question everyone wanted answered was, is this guy for real? Is this real? Because like nothing in our world's real, it's all fake actually. And I hate to say it, but it's true. A lot of preachers are very fake. And I would always say, amazingly, it's 100% real. It's totally real. And I remember talking to you about that. I mean, everyone like, what is this exactly? And you concluded earlier, remember when you told me, no, no, it's totally real. That's incredible. You really have to have lived in our world for a while to know how wild that is. Because most people just think, yeah, of course it's real. Not in political world. Is that fair? Very fair. Very fair. He's like the realist guy to ever live practically. No, no, no. I know. Oh, it makes me sad. He's like, what is that? I wish I had said this in public before he left because I said it many times in private. I will say that to many people. Who is this guy? Is this real? What is this? And I would always say, man, if you would dinner with him, you would know. It's real. This is really the Tucker day. And I feel awkward even taking his in and out of breaks, but Tucker, I don't want to do it. I don't. I'm doing this out of service to my nation and to my friend. So yeah, the floor is yours. I know where you're going. Oh, this is Blake Neff story. OK, so this is story that obviously I was in the middle of it. And I've talked to a lot of people just this week about it. I don't think it's ever been told in public. I'm going to give the outline and then just turn it over to Blake to correct me and to fill in the details. But here's the story. So Blake worked for me at Fox News for years, probably more closely than anybody, like intimately at Fox. And I love Blake. And Blake is obviously an unusual person, but just a wonderful person and a really deeply decent person. I mean, it's true. And obviously Blake's weird, but Blake is the best. And people who love Blake really love Blake. And there's a little group of people who, we all know each other. We all talk about Blake. So Blake got caught up right at the height of all this insanity, true insanity called cancel culture. But it was more than that. It was like French Revolution stuff. And someone like, Blake is not. And Blake is a racist. Well, actually someone always say, Blake is actually not a racist. And I would admit it. He's not. He's a Christian who believes that God created everybody. So he's actually not a racist, but Fox overreacted of course. And he left and then Fox denounced him. They tried to get me to denounce him, Suzanne Scott tried to make me denounce Blake. And I refused something I'm proud of. But whatever. It was awful. It was the saddest moment in the 15 years that I spent there. And then Blake's unemployed and unemployed a bull. And I get this and I feel terrible. And I feel like I've got a moral obligation to help Blake. And who's kind of here Blake? Because he's like in the New York Times. He's like a bad person when actually he's a great person. Charlie Kirk calls me. He's like, I'm thinking about hiring Blake. I was like, God bless you Charlie. What's he like? I said, well, Blake's very eccentric. Like, no kidding. He's the only person who ever lost weight eating junk food. Like he's a really unusual person. Like we talk about Blake all day long. But he's a wonderful person. And he's incredibly talented. No one disputes that. And I think you should do it. He does. Charlie and I talk about then Blake and I talk about it. I have these like conversations behind the scenes about each other. And not only does Charlie hire Blake, he puts us. He makes me emotionally. He puts Blake on the air. As if to say, I know this man, he is a good man. You will judge me for doing this. I'm doing it anyway. Because it's the right thing to do. And then of course it becomes this whole thing where Blake is like a true asset to him. But when he first did it, it was like no. I'm doing this because it's the right thing to do. This is the last thing I'll say before training over to Blake. I've been in this business my whole life. Nobody does that. Nobody does that. Everyone's like, oh, I'm for free speech. You'll never until it hurts me. At which point like, sorry pal. Good luck. But Charlie pivoted against that in a way that exposed him and his group turning point to ridicule and risk and he did it anyway. And all week I've been talking to people about this. That was the acid test. Those of us in this business know how brave that was. Who's the bravest thing anyway? Sorry Blake. I remember talking to you about that because I actually was weighing another employment option. And as you said, I was like, I think you may be we're behind that one too. I was desperate to get another option. And I remember just I won't say what it was for. But we were talking about it. And I think the one that you really pointed out that was really important is like Blake, I think the most important thing. Charlie is a for real a sincere Christian. Yes. And I think you're going to want to work for someone who is a for real sincere, deeply believing yes. And you know, because then you'll disagree on a lot of things, but you will align on really important things. And I think that was what carried the day with me. And I'm very glad it did. And you know at the time, you know, at the time, I came in it was he was just a very different person. And it was over time realizing all the ways that as you say, so you have to really see it. You're like, is this for real? You like talk to me. What is it? Is this going to work? It also have that where you're like, this can't possibly work, right? And it does. And it does because he's so completely intently sincere and fully all in on it. And I think that's what like amazed young people, like, you know, when you go to these campus events. And you know, I think there's a lot of, you know, you'll see these people online who are like very like performatively trapped or Christian or whatever, because it like owns the libs or whatever. Yeah. But Charlie is just like, no, no, I like 100% believe in this. Like, because I believe it is true. And because it is important and I want everyone else to believe in it because it is true. And I think it is the most important decision they will ever make. Would always shine through in what he was doing and how he behaved that he really believes that. And well, and I mean, I think, and you know this because you were at some of the key. And what he was doing and how he behaved that he really believed that. And, well, and I mean, I think, and you know this because you were at some of the campus stops. I was at some of the campus stops. 90% of the interactions as he got older, right? The brand of Charlie was almost cemented, you know, in 2018 where he was much younger and he was up here to the kids on college and he was like, Charlie Kirk destroys the lives or whatever. And that was just titling. It wasn't actually Charlie's heart, but the Charlie, by the way, didn't determine the titles. You know, like people behind the scenes, right? No, behind the scenes. That's, you know, that's a social media team that's doing the titling that wasn't Charlie picking the title. You know, anyways, but the point is, as he got older, he transitioned to a much more big brother and people started observing like this incredible Herculean patients that he would exhibit on these, in these interactions with sometimes bad faith people, but sometimes people that just had bad ideas. And 90% if you went and sat there and watched the entire three hour prove me wrong, 90% of it has him being kind and gentle and thought provoking and working through whatever was the lie that was stuck in this kid's head or sometimes professors, but he would work with them through it and use the socratic method to draw out the truth. It was a beautiful thing. And, you know, he doesn't get a nearly enough credit for that because the Charlie destroys the libs clip goes megaviral, right? I couldn't agree with you more. I have to say when you, when all that happened to you, I just cannot say how pain, I, we you know, because you've talked about many times, but that was like one of those painful things that's ever happened to me in my life. Uh, because, you know, we have strict tight staff and, um, and the same staff, like I don't, don't have new people working for me really ever. And I don't care to. So, um, that was really, really painful. Oh, go ahead. And I just wanted you to have health insurance. My expectations for you were so low because you had been so mistreated and maligned and slandered. And it's just so hard to come back from that. The fact that he put you on the air is probably a mistake. Why it was not a mistake, but it was, that is so wild. So I, I have an insight into that piece of the story because I was aware of this other job opportunity. And I see it now all is like God's plan. And I was working on kind of a panel show idea, but I didn't have that. It was just like a nugget of an idea. It was back in my head. And, and I remember kind of just intuiting that in order to like restore this man that had been so wronged by Oliver Darcy or whatever and CNN, these scumbags. I thought, you know, I need to forgive Oliver Darcy. Thank you for reminding me is we forgive those to trespass against us. He needs to be daily wrote to show. But, you know, and by the way, I saw, I ended up in that moment in that when we were talking with Blake at the beginning, I looked back at your monologue from that night. And maybe it wasn't your monologue. I was the finish final segment, but you said, you, you really were defiant. And it was beautifully done because you were back at you, you, they, you were part of something and only had so much control at that moment, right? And so they were bullying me. Suzanne Scott got me. I was in the parking lot of a place in I was in Bozeman, Montana fishing. And she called me and I went outside to do my pre show bathroom break, always outside if I can do it. And she called me and she said, you need to say what he said was wrong. And I said, I'm not doing that period. And you can fire me in the show's live in Temets. I'm not doing that. And she goes, well, I guess I can't make you. And she until the day she fired me, she never really talked to me after that. Yeah. I'm not trying to get into any of that. But I do believe that I want to get into this horrible, they did to him. I'm just saying, I will, I don't know where to go. I will say, Tucker, this is awkward for me. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. Sorry. No, I would just say that I think this moment has profoundly changed all of us and getting people like Suzanne. And I just want to say briefly for what it's worth, she's been exceedingly wonderful and kind. And we all changed. And I've done crappy things, a lot of crappy things in my life. So I shouldn't be judging. But to your point, your hands were tied in that moment. And you, you defiantly said, I remember you said, I just want everybody to know that you are gloating over a young man's life being ruined and shame on you. You basically, you, I'll never forget that. And I remember thinking, okay, like if Tucker's got his back in this moment, this guy's pretty great. And best. Yeah. And he's been the best. And I love having boy. They came out of nowhere, man. I'll never forget that. I'll never forget that. As long as I live. But anyway, the point is, whatever. And I shouldn't even. But we put him on fire. Exactly. And by the way, and now look at this, this show is going on. Erica Kirk has demanded that the show goes on. And we're going to figure out the details. And Blake is going to be critical to that. And if we hadn't have created this, this roster, this thought crime crew that we do on Thursdays, I don't know what we would do. But it takes the bravery of an individual to get there. So like everything is fine now and Blake can do whatever he wants and people know who he is because they get to see him. And they can make their own judgments about him. But when Charlie made that decision and he's the one who would have been blamed if it had gone wrong, people didn't know who Blake was apart from what they read in the New York Times. slander devised by CNN and Oliver Darcy. That's a fact. And and not helped by a lot of other people who I shouldn't be attacking you. Right? Sorry about that. But he's the one who allowed Blake's life to continue. And I just felt it so strong because I've been, that's my world. Like I know what that is. I was people were like, whoa, you know, you can't put him on air like he did bad things. I heard that. And Charlie was like, he was willing to stand up and say, no, that's not true. Like most people are not going to do that. No one will do that. And um, what I remember the nasty articles with there was a few and Charlie would just write back L. Well, so that's courage in case you're wanting to encourage is that's actual courage. And you know that it is because it's so rare. He does that. If people do that, who are they? I live in this world. Like I know every single person hosting every single show and they don't do that. And he did that. And so that's what actual courage is. Courage is standing up for what is true in the service but other people in the service is showing love to other human beings. That's the commission that we get from Jesus. Period. And he actually did that at great risk to himself. And um, anyway, just I've had like 50 text exchanges by the time we come up. It bless you Blake for being the center. Thank you. Thanks for standing with us. Thank you. Thank you very much. Genuinely. Can I say something that you told me that the night of that blew my mind and it go for it? Go for it. So we're bringing Blake to the prank care. We were, we were in Provo the night of and it was like we were all shell shocked and Blake was there with them when it happened. We filter in late at night into this little like corner of the restaurant, the hotel in Salt Lake City. And I don't know how it came up but Blake says the most I will never forget it. He said Charlie gave me my life back. Yeah. And I, I knew exactly what he meant and now I think the audience does too. Amen. Our dear friend, Seat remains open with the Golden E.I.P microphone in front of it. This hero rush. That's pretty amazing. And so Tucker, I, this is, this is the Tucker show for Charlie. And so I think it's important that I get to ask you a question. Okay. When did you meet Charlie and tell us about how your relationship with Charlie grew because I think it's fast. So I met Charlie when he was a teenager. He was connected to funded by a close friend of ours called Foster Freeze. He was a wonderful man from Wilmington, Delaware, really from Wisconsin, but lived in Wilmington and then Jackson, Wyoming. And was an investor and an company that we had and more important like an actual friend, really the only investor I've ever had and anything. And in a very enthusiastic Christian man and the kind of person was just a collector of people. You know, I met this person who's so enthusiastic and almost everybody around him was just wonderful. But because he was so rich and so generous, he did collect their fonies in the orbit because they're always are when someone's rich. And so he tells me a dinner about this kid he's met. He's only 18. He's not going to college. I've always been a post to college my whole life. I tried to convince all my kids not to go. I mean, I really meant it. And so he's like, you would love this guy. He's not going to college. And I was like, man, I love that because I really am opposed and I mean it. And my kid sounds great. And he's like, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, dum, I'm thinking, oh man, some fast-talking kid. He's going to figure out it's like throwing back Reagan quotes or something at poor foster. He knows in his 70s and like late 60s. And he doesn't know. And I really thought assumed that Charlie was just some predator. And I didn't like it at all. And of course there's the bias against young people. I mean, Charlie's literally the age of one of my children. So like, and I felt this probably is totally conventional telling old people what they want to hear sucking up to the donors, whatever. So I meet him. I thought he was smart as hell, but I was very skeptical. Then I have this, he calls me, would you do an event? Sure, I was going to be in the state anyway. So I do it and we have this kind of sort of debate, not really a debate. Well, what actually happened was I was going to give a speech. And I got there and we were backstage and he was like, well, actually let's just do a Q&A. And I was like, I don't know, son, I don't think you want to do that with me. because I'm kind of a jerk. You know, which I am in those settings, right? So he's like, I want you. We can, it's okay to have a debate. I was like, I don't know, man. Like I disagree with your views on economics and foreign policy and I'm pretty hot on these topics. So I'm just letting you know that. Oh, no problem at all. So we end up having this kind of intense thing. And I'm like passionately opposed to marijuana and drugs. I'm just having used a lot of drugs as a child. Like I'm very opposed to drugs. I've never used any drugs in his whole life and he was at the time he was kind of libertarian on the subject. And I remember saying everyone in the crowd is for weed. Like you think you're so cool. But actually it's a control device designed to make you passive and accepting of the system that's destroying you. And people kind of booed me or whatever. But Charlie looked at me like, I think that may be right. And that it was that issue. It was weed of all issues. You know, it's not my top issue, but I do feel it really strongly. I hate marijuana. Okay. And I know it's really cool, but no, it's like fully corporate actually. And it's wrecking Americans, especially boys. It's wrecking the parking lot of the grocery store nearby. It makes me feel like getting my gun. Like I really feel that way about it. Sorry, I shouldn't say that. But I really am mad about it. And Charlie grooved with that. And that moment set off this like conversation. So I was back, I was in Arizona for something. He's like, let's go to lunch. It's got a dinner. And we started having these really intense conversations. So I'm putting them on Fox. And his views were changing. And mine were too, by the way. like I converted him. It's like I had been all kinds of embarrassing things during the scope of my long life of libertarian, a self described neo-con. Can you imagine? I mean, I'll admit it. I like got mad at Alex Jones for asking questions about 9-11. What? Like I was like a horrible person or a very close minded person. I was totally wrong about everything. And so I didn't judge like you should change your mind as the evidence changes. The things you thought were going to work didn't. And honest man asked himself why they didn't work and what might work. Like that's the process of adulthood. And Charlie, young people are very inflexible about what they believe I have found. And I have a lot of young people. I have a lot of children. He was one of the only young people I've ever met. He was like, oh yeah, I think I was wrong. And only belief in Jesus allows you to say that because you know that you're not judge. You know that honesty is the ticket and that if you pursue an honest path, you'll be okay. And you don't need the adulation from the crowd. You don't need the love of strangers to feel good about yourself because you know that you are loved. It gives you true freedom. And he had that. Charlie had no problem at all getting up and being like, I was at NioCon. And of course with me, he didn't because he knew that I was too. I'm like cheering on the Iraq war, which I did. Like I literally did that. And I'm ashamed of it. But I'm also proud to admit it because I think that it's important to let people know that you can admit being wrong. It's okay. Right. Where people were not gods. You can be wrong. I want you to know, Tucker, that that must have gone deep because Blake can attest of all the fringe issues that he knew he was on the unpopular side. He was very, very vehemently against weed. Oh, he went hard on it. Yes. I just, I think you really got at it where you know, one, he was totally on a frayed of being in a huge minority on an issue and being frank about it. You know, people would ask and he'd be like, they'd ask him about like abortion and he'd be like, look, you know, my position on that is a tiny minority in the United States and I'm going to keep trying anyway. And he'd say that on, you know, gay marriage where the polls would say, you know, a big majority supported and all of that. And at the same time, yeah, the zero, like shame about if he had to change his views. You see that? So often with politicians. Well, actually that was a different situation. You know, I voted that way because, you know, it wasn't like that. And he was like, oh, no, I was wrong. You know, I hadn't thought about this. But you can't be controlled. If you will, this is how the media control politicians, they find some clip of the politician saying something different 10 years. What's like, what was a different country 10 years ago? He would do that. We would see these clips, you know, these really like, they would be like, look, here's Charlie defending, you know, this issue and I would be like, Charlie, they dug up that old clip and he goes, oh, yeah, that was, that was back when I was a cook. Oh, I'm a percent. And, you know, there's no shame in that. And Charlie's example of admitting the truth about himself in public is the most edifying and important thing you can ever do because it shows people, you can take the leash off and you can live in freedom because you know you're loved. You can tell the truth. We're all going to die anyway is that this is the deepest truth. And your job is to be honest and to be loving to other people. Okay. That's your job. I believe in God allows that. And once you do it, it's like, it's not only fine. It's great. It's actual liberation. You said that I remember at the first amfest when you came back. So you had the debate and then you came back. The unplanned debate. Oh, I remember feeling so honored that you came back. It was our first amfest and we really needed like somebody of your caliber and you're, I'm going to say it, you're your fame, you're, you're, you're, the weight that you held in the movement, especially, I mean, it was an honor to us to have you there. Oh, I'm so excited. Came out the first night and you just said, let me say a few words about Charlie. He's willing to change his mind. He's willing to adapt and, and I knew that was your subtle nod to the people who might have judged you. Maybe you weren't even thinking that, but it felt like it was at least saying like, listen, I know some of you think Charlie's a certain way. Let me tell you from that 2017 or whatever, 18 debate to now, I was thinking it was 2021, like a couple of years ago, I'm bison's we'd had you back. And, and then we've, you know, you've been back ever since. But it was, it's, it's so important. I just can't say it enough to be honest about yourself. It's very easy to be honest about everybody else. Oh, you're fat. I don't like your dress. Like that's super easy. It's very hard to be honest about yourself. Like I'm fat. I'm wearing an ugly dress. No one wants to admit that. But once you do, you, the fetters are off and you are so free. And Charlie just lived that. I feel like that's almost one of the most important things is to admit the truth about yourself. And then no one can control you. What can you say about me that I won't readily concede about myself? Like nothing. And then what are you going to do to me? You know nothing. Oh, it's, it's amazing. I read that poem a week ago about Charlie. And I always think about that other one. You know, it's much more famous one if I read your clip. Yes. And it really does just perfectly describe Charlie. You know, if you can, you know, speak with kings but not lose the common touch. Exactly. And the really one, the one that ends the poem, which you don't hear quote is much if you can fill the unforgiving minute with 60 seconds distance runner or something like that. And like, but he, he really did encapsulate all like everything of, of that poem about what it is to, to be a true man, to be a true adult, to be a heroic figure. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. You want me to read it? Yeah. Go for it. Yeah. Okay. If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs and blaming it on you. Yeah. Just yourselves when all men doubt you. Exactly. Yourself. But, but make allowances for their doubting too. If you can wait and not be tired by waiting or being lied about, don't deal in lies or being hated, don't give way to hating. And yet don't look too good nor talk too wise. If you can dream and not make dreams, you're master. If you can think and not make thoughts, you're aim. If you can meet with triumph and disaster and treat those two imposters just the same. Exactly. If you can bear to hear the truth you've spoken twisted by naves to make a trap for fools or watch the things you gave your life to broken and to stoop and build them up with worn out tools. If you can make one heap of all your winnings and risk it on one turn of pitch and toss and lose and start again at your beginnings and never breathe a word about your loss. If you can force your heart and nerve and sin you to serve your long, your turn long after you are gone. And so hold on when there is nothing in you except the will which says to them, hold on. If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue or walk with kings nor lose the common touch, if neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you, if all men count with you but none too much. If you can fill the unforgiving minute with sixty seconds worth of distance run, yours is the earth and everything that's in it and which is more you'll be a man, my son. It's incredible. And the line that jumps out to me which is the truest and everyone understands it at some point. If you can treat triumph and disasters those two imposters, the same they are imposters actually because I'm not trying to reach the meaning from the human experience it is meaningful but it's not the real point actually and there is a sense in which this is... It just stands out to me how many of those things we just remember in the past hour. That's the one thing that I kept thinking about if you can wait and not be tired or being lied about, don't deal in lies or being hated, don't give way to hating and you know how many times the real trap winning is the trap. That's where men destroy themselves. That was what we hear and I talked about that recently all the time. Yeah. But winning is when you decide that you're God, that's the David moment for most men. winning triumph is the real trick and so few can do it and he could. I think. It's a beautiful thing for bringing that actually Blake has brought two poems to us this week that... M.D. I kept having... I mean that one about from where we're, what was the name of that poem? For the fallen. For the fallen. Blake can read poetry in a very heterosexual way which is... Are you saying that I just did it in the non? No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, that was so straight. It's unbelievable. I'm just saying, you don't meet a lot of guys or like... I want to share some poetry with you. I've never been accused of an unblemished record of heterosexuality. And you know, it's funny, I'm stealing that line from Charlie Kirk. You would always say I have an unblemished record of heterosexuality. I'm Andrew Colvin, the executive producer of this show. I'm joined by Blake Neff, another producer on the show and of course the wonderful, the great, the legendary. And Tucker, you don't get enough credit for something. I should have finished it. Tucker Carlson. But you don't get enough credit for something. I just want people to understand that Tucker, I mean, I've seen you backstage, I don't know, more times than I can count now. And you are the exact same with the guy who's taken out the trash as our PA's and our assistants and the people in between as you are with Charlie or me or Blake, you are the exact same human and I really want everybody to know that about you because you wouldn't say it about yourself. You treat everybody. I can't tell you how many times that has occurred to me because you'll be needing to drag you somewhere where you need you to go. But you're deep into a conversation in the corner with the assistant that I don't even know that I necessarily do the name of this because we have somebody who plays right here and you would just be like engrossed in this deep conversation and I would feel bad. Oh, I got a grab Tucker. He's got to go on stage and like five minutes or something. And I love that about you, man. And I just want the world to know that. Thank you. No, I mean, I love people and God created everyone. But it's also true that I grew up in rich people world back when it was in a egalitarian world. It's one of the main changes in my country, in my lifetime is that rich people are not egalitarian anymore. But I grew up in an affluent family around rich people and the housekeeper comes to Thanksgiving dinner period. And that's a wasp thing. I'm just going to say it out loud. That's a wasp thing and that's gone. We felt that very, very strongly. And I just think that's right. And it's not gone because we still believe it and you still believe it. I really believe it. I really, I'll just say one thing. Everyone hates the wasps and I beat up on them constantly. But in the club that I spent my life at, I don't even know if their clubs anymore. But the only thing you could do to get booted from the club was to be rude to the staff period. You could be drunk. They're always drunk, of course. You could be, you know, whatever you could say anything. If you were rude to a waiter, you were gone. I mean, they didn't even have a hearing about it because so deep was the culture on that question. It's that you, we are all underneath at all the same. We were all created by God. We have different aptitudes. We're lying. We're very different in a lot of ways. But fundamentally, we're all going to stand alone before God. And that was the idea that spawned the Democratic Republic that we grew up in anyway. That's the core idea of America that has never articulated anymore. We didn't have fast track at Disney World when I was growing up. And I still feel that way and I'm married to a chick who really feels that way. I mean, really feels you get married in my family. And in the guy who cuts her grass is coming to your wedding, whether you like it or not. Like that's, that's the rule in my house. I love that you're not saying that to make myself so virtuous. It's just like that is something that we have lost. And we have to fight to regain that and all these little fake aristocrats flying around their planes. It's one of the reasons I really am upset with them is because they forgotten that specific thing. Charlie wanted better elites. And yes. And yeah, I mean, you model it and it's not gone because we're talking about it right now and maybe we can bring it back. In the spirit of actually doing a show. We have books. No, I don't. I have this great clip that I can't wait to share with everybody, but we're going to bring in Frank Turick who cross talk. He was with Charlie on the day. Charlie, he would go to Frank with ideas of apologetics and how to argue for the faith and contend for the faith in the public square. So Frank, welcome to the Charlie Kirk show with Tucker Carlson, the great Tucker Carlson with us. Hey, I just want to piggyback on something Tucker just said, the only worldview that agrees with what Tucker just said is Christianity. You know, in Hinduism, there's a caste system in Islam, if you're not a Muslim, you're a second class citizen in the secular world. There's no way to ground these moral values and the moral worth that every individual has. The only worldview that does that is Christianity. And that was the worldview that Charlie and everybody here at this table right now, wants to demonstrate his true and try and persuade young people to follow. I love that you said that. I think that that is indisputably true. I think it's provable. The founding documents still exist. We know what the people who wrote them were thinking and they were informed by a culture that is a product of Christian civilization, period, Western civilization is Christian civilization. And I'm not against other religions, by the way, I don't follow them, but I'm not mad at them. I'm just going to want to say that. I'm not. I know a lot of great people who are of different faiths, but Christianity is unique in that it's true. And it's unique in that it believes that every person is at least potentially chosen by God, every person. And the holding testament is that story, by the way. And so Christians feel that deeply, the cultures that they create reflect it and I grieve its passing and I pray for its return to our country. Well, ironically, Tucker Charlie's martyrdom might be the turning point to bring it back. I don't know. Well, you do know because you're seeing what's going on at TpUSA right now. Yes. How many people want to start TpUSA chapters? What are we up to now, Andrew? Is it 62,000 something like that? Yeah. I mean, it's growing by the minute. So it's probably let's just say approximately 65,000. It's we had 2,000 before that. I mean, I'm seeing people online on on some YouTube videos that have to do with Charlie. Some of my own YouTube videos. They're all over the world. There's people in Denmark going, you know, I was in atheists and because of Charlie Kirk, I'm a Christian now. Australia, same thing, London, same thing. This isn't just in America. This has happened in all over the world. I want to commend everyone of you for advancing the cause that Charlie was so near and dear to Charlie's heart in a time of morning. It's got to be so difficult, Andrew and Blake, especially to continue on. But Charlie would want it. That's why we're all here right now. Well, and Frank, I bless you. I know you've had to deal with the conspiracy theories and the, you know, why'd you touch your hat at this time because, you know, that wretched video. I mean, but bless you, brother. I just want to be, I just want to be a character reference for you. And Charlie loved you so much. You were always there for Charlie. And I know how much he leaned on you for apologetics and for thinking through these deep issues around that when he was on Bill Maher recently. And, you know, you've meant so much to him and your work at Cross Examine. Like you are a dear brother and a dear friend and some of that garbage. Like I don't even paid any heed, but I know you have, you were there the day that had happened. I know this has been terrible for you too. And you've had to deal with all this garbage, but you know, God bless you. And I'm sorry that that has been something in your experience. Thanks, brother. I mean, that's that actually hasn't bothered me all that much to tell you the truth. I just think it's so colossally stupid that if somebody wanted to shoot somebody, they need a guy standing 25 feet from him to signal. Hey, get him. He's the guy. I mean, it makes absolutely no sense at all. So it was just a terrible day, but we all did the best we could to try and help and save Charlie. And then once we couldn't all we could do was take Eric as lead and your lead Andrew and Mike East lead, because you were all there to march forward and and take his legacy to new levels. And Lord willing, that's what's going to happen. Well, Frank, you're going to be a key part of that. And you know, I joke with Erica. I'm like, Erica, he left us all the keys. He had all the people that we needed. All the all the reference points, all the all the true allies, not the snakes, not the none, the, the grifters, the true people. And you are a true man and you have great character and you've great heart and you've been a great friend to Charlie and to us. So, you know, as you have to say it a thousand times over. Thank you. But let's just do whatever we can to advance this legacy now. And that you mentioned it. Erica. And I mean, we're just talking. We want to talk about Erica a little. Let's just do whatever we can to advance this legacy now. And that you mentioned it, Erica. And I mean, Tucker, we just talked, we want to talk about Erica a little bit here. So we have to go to a radio break, but we're going to keep going for the stream. And so hang right there with us, the great Tucker Carlson Charlie's dear dear friend is with us. And we're so honored. You know, they've been referenced. I know that a lot of stuff going on online, I've checked out actually. I just want to say that because it's too upsetting to me. I know it's extremely upsetting for you guys since you're way more in the middle of it than I am. But obviously you need a fair impartial well explained investigation that assures everyone the rule of law lives in the United States. I think it's essential. And I hope that we get it. I think we're going to have to push forward. We should push forward. But as to what happened, again, it totally fair in my view to ask sincere questions. But I think it's important to remember the big picture, which is whatever happened, it was a species of the same phenomenon, which was the fight of evil against good. And his murder was an attempt to extinguish the light period. And it didn't work. Like that's the main thing to know. There are lots of things I want to know. And again, we have a civil system that has to go through a process in order for this government to continue or any government. It has to be transparent and motivated by good faith. And it has to try to affect justice. That's a key. And I don't think we should blow past it. However, again, big picture, this is light versus dark. And you feel the darkness all around us. It comes in many different forms. And many different gazes. These are disguises. Okay. But what it really is is the age old. You know, it's the Lord of the Earth. It's Satan. Sorry to say that. It is. Deliver us from the evil one. I think is the actual translation of the Lord's Prayer. And the evil one is all around us. But Charlie's murder is a reminder that we are surrounded by God and God's protection and God's love. And that is so obvious. The light has not only not been extinguished. It's glowing brighter. I hate like dumb metaphors like that. Except this one is totally real. And so we should, or I speak for myself, I'm going to focus on that. I'm going to focus on the big picture while demanding a precise accounting. That is legitimate. But I'm not going to get so caught up in that stuff that I miss the true message, which is forces of darkness tried to extinguish the light. And not only did they fail, their effort was counterproductive. That is the truth. Frank. I was just sorry. I got I was in sort of wrapped by what you were sorry. I felt that I felt it coming up. I couldn't keep it down. It was beautiful. I was looking for somebody else to respond here quickly. Let me mention something related to that. Our mutual friend James Lindsay had a text exchange with Charlie. In fact, he sent it to me the other night because I was speaking at a university here in North Carolina on Wednesday night about Charlie. And I related this story. And let me just, let me just read you what James sent to Charlie and what Charlie sent back. Very astute response by Charlie. James said, this is August 24, 2023. Communism is by far the best evidence in support of Satan's existence. Charlie writes back 100% and then the next text he writes back. If there is a Satan, then there is a God. And James writes back that would follow. So people actually shows that God does exist, not that he doesn't because there'd be no such thing as evil unless there was good. And there'd be no such thing as good unless God existed because in any objective sense, the only way you can define good is God's nature. Otherwise, everything's a matter of opinion. You couldn't say murder was really objectively wrong unless there's a standard of objectively right that we're all obligated to obey. And what we mean by that is God's nature. And we're pointing out earlier, our founders understood that we hold these truths to be self evident that all men were created and endowed by their government. No, it doesn't say that endowed by their creator with certain unalienable rights. So if evil exists and it all that we all know it does, we saw it eight days ago, then God exists. Well, and that is honestly the way that a lot of us were convinced of the reality of God was by being forced to acknowledge the reality of evil. I can say that for myself, my wife who's like the person who keeps our family text chain grounded in the truth sent a verse this morning that basically said that exact thing. And there are a number of them throughout both old and new testments as you know better than I'd, but that say that God will use evil for his purposes and that he will reveal himself through through sadness as well as joy. And that is practically true. It's not even a theoretical concept. It's a living concept for those of us who concluded just on the basis of the evidence that these were not political differences actually. These were not political phenomenon. These were a bunch of different things I won't get specific, but you know what I'm talking about. This is the face of evil and that brought us to the reality of God. It's like wild. That actually happened. It happened to me. I want everybody to know and I know Blake you've been contemplating this too, but Charlie was willing to give the very last measure of his effort and his life. He really was and he said it multiple times and I think the first time he said it on stage. It wasn't something that was planned. It came out of him naturally and Erica heard it and Erica was like, you'd be careful when you say that. Please, you know. And that's really powerful, but he said it again and again. He said it on a Lance Walnau show I remember one time saying like, you know, I mean, and he was very aware of the story of Stephen. He was very well aware of the prophets and he was very well aware that people that wanted to hurt him and it never stopped him. And I think we need to remember that when we think about evil and we think about because death wears your victory or death wears your sting. It's the last thing that you know, it's like you said, they tried, they meant it for evil, but the Lord is taking it and he's turning it to good and for the saving of many lives. And I always was caught by that wording in the scriptures. The saving of many lives obviously he's talking about the Israelites in that instance, but it as we contemplate it for our own moment, the saving of many lives. And I think about all these baptisms and all these reports of the churches being overflowing and across the country and these, we didn't riot Tucker. We didn't burn businesses. We didn't tear down windows and doors. We prayed and Charles that is the biggest, most amazing testament to the character of Charlie. It's also the nature of where it has been my experience anyway. I'm not a theologian, but I just will say that I've had many moments, especially in the last 10 years where you can feel it around you, like for real. In Field of Menace you can feel the hate, you can feel the threat. It comes out of nowhere. I've had a couple pretty intense experiences with it, very intense. And they are followed invariably by the peace of God, by the Holy Spirit. And you know that God is using this moment for your benefit, your edification and your joy. That is true that out of tragedy, and it's such a cliche and it's such a kind of syrupy hallmark false assurance on the surface that I hesitate even to say it, but I've just lived it so much. I've lived it so much. That is absolutely how God is communicated with me in my life, like directly is by contrasting His presence with the evil that you feel around you. And so it is in a weird way in the middle of tragedy, like a true blessing. And if you see a loved one, we all go through this as we age. I've been through it a lot recently where someone who really, really loved eyes. And then you're just filled with this since the presence of God that's absolutely real. It's not, you're not manufacturing it. It's like a immune response or something. It's like a presence from outside coming into you. And I think the whole country feels it or the people who are alive to it feel it now strongly. In fact, the greatest evil of all time, the sacrifice of Jesus has had to the greatest good. Yes. Without the sacrifice of Jesus, we'd all be dead in our sins, but Christ was sacrificed so that our punishment could be put on Him. And when we trust in Him, we're not only forgiven, but we're given His righteousness. You know, there's a misunderstanding among some they think in order to get to heaven, I got to be good. No, no, no, there's nobody good enough. Jesus said there's nobody good but one. And that was Him. In order to get to heaven, you need to take His sacrifice and apply it to yourself. You need to take the punishment that went on Him and you trust in Him to get that forgiveness because your punishment was put on Him. And then by trusting in Him, you're not only forgiven, you're given His righteousness. So good works are a result of Christianity. They're not the cause of Christianity. The cause of Christianity in someone's life is to trust in what Christ has done and out of love for what Christ has done, then you'll do good works. By the way, I'm really struck by a quote from Peter Crest who said this about what evil can do in our lives to help us become more like Christ. He said this. He said the point of our lives is not comfort, security or even happiness but training, not fulfillment but preparation. This world is a lousy home but it's a fine gymnasium. Well, well, Frank, I just want to say again, I know you've got a catch a flight here. So God bless you, my friend. Thank you for joining us. Thank you for being such a rock in Charlie's life. I'll say you don't have to give them any heat. I'm sorry about the conspiracy theories specifically around you and some of my other friends that were around the table. They are utter garbage and we stand by you 100% my friend and just thank you for being just an amazing guy and you meant so much to Charlie and we'll see you in a few days. Thank you, brother. Thank you, Tucker. Thank you, Blake. Thanks, Frank. God bless you guys. So Charlie was very well aware of the existence of evil obviously. So we're us on his team. You know, there's a, by the way, just one other conspiracy theory. I just want to snuff out here. One of our dear friends that literally from the very beginning started with us and loved Charlie like a brother. He grabbed the SD cards out of the camera afterwards and there's all these conspiracy videos about why did he grab the SD cards? Well, first of all, they're in the possession of the FBI. Okay. It's not like he took them and like ran off with them. Second of all, I asked him personally. I said, why did you do that? And he looked at me and this was his answer. He said, because I know people can be evil. And he did not want that footage being grabbed by somebody. There was videos of people after the incident going and stealing hats off the table. I mean, so I'm so grateful he did that and that that was his instinct. He's like, I'm depressed to know that that was why I did that. But I knew that I had to protect that footage because I know I want to, I mean, you know, you're recording in like 4K, you know? And so I'm so glad he did that. But Charlie knew the existence of evil and so I think that people can feel the existence of evil and that just to put in a sympathetic word for people who are trying to make sense of this and coming to the wrong conclusions. I think they're motivated for the most part by pure intent. I think they don't trust the authorities. They have every reason to feel that way. I know that for a fact. Not the Trump administration in general, like, you know, there's been a lot of lying and it's corroded the trust that's not their fault. Actually, they're the victims of it. And they say no. Either, of course, bad actors were doing it for clicks or whatever, but I guess, but they're far more people who love Charlie. They loved what he stood for. They feel like he was murdered by evil. They're absolutely right. They're not sure what variety of evil. There's no authority to person to tell them. So I guess I'm just not surprised at all this message I've told to a lot of people. This is what happens when you lie too much and you hide too much and going forward, I just want everybody with power to be honest in the way that Charlie was honest. But themselves, that will do more than anything to fix this to make people love each other and hear each other. And if people are honest, we got here because of lying and the only antidote is truth. And so truth about yourself, not about other people, stop talking about other people, admit who you are. And once you do that, people can feel that and they immediately, as they do what Charlie, they respond to it. They're like, I believe you because you're honest about you. Anyway, I want that. Yeah, a buddy of mine just said something that I think is really profound. He said, two people, and I believe this about you two Tucker, which is why you're so important. But two people can say the same, could say the same thing. Just to imagine Charlie Kirk, 30 million followers across social media and somebody else also very prominent. Yes. And they would say the same thing. But when Charlie said it would echo and ripple across the world. Yeah, because we're all like we're all animals, by the way. And so much of what we know we receive non verbally, we can smell each other. We can feel the vibe. I don't care if that sounds flaky. It's true. My dogs can do it and so can you. And if a deceptive man is speaking, I don't believe what he says, even if it's factually accurate. And if an honest man is speaking, I know it. I can feel it. That's where everyone loves Blake despite his eccentricities. He's not a key, as honest. He's not a liar. And Charlie was the same. And we just know that. You can't just wait me of that. I know that's true. Let's go ahead and play cut 20. This is Charlie talking about the existence of evil revealing God's presence. Yes. Christians, ethical monotheists, we have the problem of evil. Atheists have evil no problem. On the atheist side, they can't say that evil actually exists because without God, if God does not exist, then we are nothing more than just a clump of cells. And there is no such thing as evil. You only know something is evil if you have good to compare it to. If I have a piece of paper and I draw a crooked line, how do you know this line is crooked? You immediately look at it. You say that's a crooked squiggly line only because in your mind, you know what a straight line is. If you don't believe in God, then you say evil is no problem. But if you are upset with it, you actually are implying that you believe in God. You might be angry at God. You might be wrestling with God. You might think that God is on just. That's a completely different thing than not believing in God. There's nowhere to believe in God. Everyone believes in God because the Spirit of God is within us because he made us, the divine spark, exist whether you acknowledge it or not. So your options are three. Either you acknowledge it and try to live by it, you ignore it and numb yourself or you rage against it. And so that would be the atheists, the agnostics and the Christians in reverse order. And you can see them immediately. You know, the agnostics are numb, the atheists are enraged and the Christians have peace. But you don't have any other options because it's just real. It pre-exists you and every single person feels it. Executive producer of the show. My good friend, Blake Neff, another producer of the show. And of course the great good friend. Wonderful man. Honestly, Tucker, thank you so much for making this time. By the way, everything we've asked of you, you just said whatever I could do. Yes, I'll clear my schedule. Yes, absolutely. And that's just how you are and I love that about you. Well, I want to get on the, I mean, my favorite thing that Charlie did in his professional life was get out and physically speak to people in their physical presence. I think that's so important. I love the internet, I guess. I'm pretend, love the internet, hate it. But mostly I love being with people physically and smelling them. And he was like the last person who really loved that. And he got murdered. And I just, I grieve his death, of course. But I also am really concerned that that whole thing will die. It's so important to be there physically. Like ask me anything in my physical presence. And so I'm doing that for you guys. I'll do as much as you want because I just really believe in that. Well, you, you, we were going to save that for Monday, but I, I don't know why I love it. So they didn't know how much of a planter. But yeah, so breaking news, you guys want me to go out there and do it. Yeah, breaking news here, Tucker Carlson will be a part of continuing Charlie's legacy by touring with us wherever you want. It'll be at least one stop. We'll say it like that. During the browse season. And so that's like the ultimate expression of love. Talk about laying down your life. I love the season. Take up your cross daily. So I want to, I want to pivot this conversation to Charlie's wife. Yes, Erica Kirk. And I jumped yesterday or, yeah, I thought, crime. I got a little, you guys, you guys razzed me about it. But I was quoting Blake and because it came out, it was just like amazing thing. And I, I, I should know better than to air private conversations publicly. But Blake, Erica was referencing Blake just goes, what a woman. To cheese some believable. She's amazing. I was in Phoenix flying to Phoenix for something else. And Charlie texted me on the plane and said, I heard you're coming to Phoenix because he knew everybody. I was like, how do you know that? He goes, do you have time for lunch? Yes. I had nothing to do with him. Was not here for turning point at all. And so I meet him at lunch with his girlfriend, Erica. And he wants to introduce me to her. And I called Susie my wife after. And I was like, because my long standing view has been, you know, it's critical. Like a really believe in marriage, but not for like, like, therapy reasons. Like I think it really matters. I was like, that chick is a star. I mean, she was just like, no, this is what's true. And that's not true. I mean, she is tough. It's not exactly the right word because it's from love. It's from Christian faith. It's from faith in Jesus. But it like, oh, man, I'm in a way. Oh, my gosh, unwavering. And you want to know a crazy love. I don't know a crazy thing I just realized last night. So Andrew Breitbart dies in 2012. March 1st that inspires Charlie Kirk to start turning point USA in 2012. Guess what else happened in 2012? And we talk about people getting prepared and these little like nuggets that you think about. I just realized this. Erica Kirk won Miss Arizona in 2012. And hung out with Donald Trump in 2012 because of that. And so I don't know. There are no coincidences. But you can just see how God was preparing them. And, you know, Erica as well. You know, Erica grew up with a single mom. And so, you know, obviously you want to Charlie's kids to know their father in a deep and profound personal way. But Erica is uniquely even in the midst of that tragedy is uniquely able to navigate that even just conceptually and emotionally something I've talked to her about. And it's powerful even hearing her as she's working these pieces out. And again, I don't want to share too much privately. So they said this publicly. And I just love it. And I shared this on Twitter. X the other day and it went viral. So let's go ahead and play cut 19. And I'm going to play a favorite interaction scene. Charlie and Erica. My wife joins us. Erica Kirk. The beautiful legendary Erica. I love you so much. I love you. You're my best friend. Welcome to the Charlie Kirk show. We have asked the audience for questions. You pick one. Who is more conservative than why? Erica. Yes. By far. Not even close. I am a moderate country to Erica. Andrew always joked. So once you got married to me, you got more base. That's true. No. Erica is very conservative. Do you think having kids made you more conservative? 100%. It would, I didn't think was possible. But 100%. Absolutely. And a better wife. Mm-hmm. Boy, that's the realest thing ever. It's hard to talk about your marriage because don't believe you. Of course. It's like it's your wife. You can't say anything bad. But like, I just know for a fact that that's true. It's really true. Yeah. Yeah. And by the way, I should note because I can't control myself but there was a picture of them in Maine, which they loved. Mm. That makes me sad. Yeah. Well, Charlie was a bad. He was bad at vacations. Yeah, terrible at the beach. So he was in Maine this summer of vacation. And he was, I just loved how it kept like, oh, well, okay, Fox and friends want me to be a guest. So we were going to take the weekend, like the best days of the vacation, you know, where he could actually maybe. And Erica was just totally game for it. She was like, cool. Let's go to New York. No, they came to my house. I want to buy a house here. I was like, oh, got to. The state needs you. It's good. You know, and that's, I'm sorry that they didn't. But it's just been amazing to hear talk about, you know, not just their relationship, but like how, as a, you know, how they both viewed marriage. And you know, we were saying the last, the last exchange I had with Charlie by text message on the way to the event. He was, I was like, what are the best arguments for monogamy? And it gets back to that, you know, the Christian civilization stuff we talked about. Because he loves all the takes I'd give him. Or I'm like, yeah, you know, Christian marriage is in the Bible. But it's also this like secret weapon that made the West great in like countries that follow Christian marriage. Like they're amazing. They excel. They improve. They get better. They have this true harmony between men and women far more than any other civilization. He loved all of that. And so I was rattling all that often. I think the last thing I got from is he like, he's a little bit of a list that I posted. And 10 minutes later he was on the stage. Yeah. Yeah. That was, I've looked back at those because I was on that text chain and I was chiming in and they were the last text that exchanges them to. And it was like 30 minutes before it happened. And yeah, we were talking about marriage. That is true. And what they talk about hearing Erica talk about it. She'll say stuff that sounds unbelievable to you. You know, she'll be like, people would ask me, you know, I had Charlie because he traveled so much. I was doing so many things. And she's like, no, I didn't. And it was because we were on the same team. We were on the same mission. And I would have never wanted to in any way be hindering from him executing God's mission. And he would have never wanted to fail in any way in me executing the mission God gave me. But when he was present, you know, he practiced with the shabot not because he's Jewish, but because he needed sort of a discipline to follow. And so from sundown on Friday, really all of Saturday, it was like he was off. He turns, you couldn't call him. You couldn't get a hold of him. I mean, there was ways if an emergency happened that I could get a hold of him. But and it was legit. But it was legit. You see the wave of him like reading the things you sent on like Friday night or Saturday night. And he certainly finally really went up on Sunday. And I'm trying to go to church. All of a sudden, Charlie's back on. But he gave that time so purely and fully to his wife and kids. And Erica absorbed every moment of that. And I told this story yesterday. And I do want to clarify something because apparently people took it the wrong way. But the night it happened. She got a call from a very important person. And that very important person. I'm not going to say who. It may be isn't who you think. But it's a very important person. But asked like, I just have to ask like, what do you know? And he wasn't talking about some conspiracy there. We didn't even they hadn't even got the shooter at this point. And it's a fair question. He was asking what do you know about turning point? What do you know about what Charlie was doing politically? What do you know about the donors? What do you know? What do you know? Like what are we working? What's our starting point here? And she said back. I know everything. Thank God. Because Charlie would spend, they would walk and they would talk. And they would religiously they would walk. As Charlie heard his back, he couldn't run anymore. He used to run like seven to ten miles a day. When I first started working with Charlie, he would just be gone running. And he heard his back. He couldn't do it. So they would walk together. And if you ever walked with Charlie, the guy could keep a pace. The guy big long legs. Yeah. And they would talk and they would land bed and they would talk. And he told, she was his vault. And she knows everything. She's the same spirit. So when that was announced, I heard that she was taking over. I was just, I was just elated. It's not attacking anyone else, by the way. Her reference to any of the Internet scene battles currently going on, which I'm trying to not think about. It's just the fact, the provable fact that she had the same spirit and the same goals, same mission that he had. That is just true. Just more based. Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh. Let me, I just want it without, you know, whatever. But getting into it. But I just want to affirm that. I just saw that recently yet again. And I'm just so thankful that she's taking over. Because it's a big deal. I saw Trump on Monday, he said I couldn't go to elected without Charlie Kirk. You know, he's not prone to say things like that. He meant it. Wow. Yeah. JD said the same thing. Jesse and I know JD feels that. And you know, it's just been amazing too to see Washington, you know, the power center, the imperial capital is Charlie always say, by the way, Charlie hated going to Washington, hated it. He loved being out here and Phoenix thought it was like our secret weapon. What besides you being the secret weapon? It was our secret weapon to be outside of that bubble. And yet somehow all of Washington is coming to him. You know, kind of say one thing I shouldn't even get involved in this, but it's a fact. So I want to say it. He loved JD Vance. He loved Donald Trump. Of course, often said it, but he really loved the game. The stuff he would talk about in private and some of that would, you know, bubble out. You know, he loves telling the story of the first time he endorsed him for office. And in case people haven't heard it, it's such a great story where, you know, Vance has announced he's running in Ohio for Senate. And it's a very long shot bit at this point. I think he pulled it to her. Yeah. He comes in. He meets Charlie. He talks to Tyler too. And they come out and they're like, he said everything. We believe like we've got to endorse them. Like if we're not going to endorse this guy, what, why are we even there? Exactly. And they're basically like, you know, they can make that commit. And there's a miscommunication because it's a big open Senate. You know, it's a big Senate race. And Charlie's got a call, a lot of donors and, you know, explain why we're doing this. We're not going for your guy. This isn't a slide on you. You know, manage all the other guys was their guy for sure. And instead there's a miscommunication. And it just goes out like blast turning point as endorsing JD Vance. And it goes out way too early. And he is somebody's like, what we all believe in. I mean, J.D. Vance is amazing. And by the way, that you're part of that story because it was, he saw JD on your show and was like, he, and at that point he didn't know all the little deep things that he believed. And he just, he kept, I remember him saying, J.D. He's got like something. There's something about JD. He's got, he's got the goods and before you explain why I'm not going to get involved. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Just think he loves to love JD. He loved, by the way, JD loved him. And I think you can see that. Do you want to put any cap on that? I know you haven't started it. Well, I just want to, I don't think I can emphasize it enough. And again, I'm really going to try because I think the point of Charlie's life was following Jesus. I just want to say that again. This one you knew him well. I think the point of his life was following Jesus. He wanted to help be helpful to that mission and not get distracted with the other stuff. And I have distracted with the other stuff for sure because I feel strongly about it. But I'm going to try and stop. But I just want to say if you want to understand Charlie Kirk, he loved JD Vance and Donald Trump. But he was genuinely close to JD like as a friend and vice versa. And that is just factually true. And I don't want to hurt anybody by going on, but that is true. And JD earned every ounce of the day. Yes, he did. He loved the story and it really meant a lot to him. So we had that event in June. It was in June. It was Detroit. In Detroit, the people's convention we called it. I assume that was like, it was pre, it was pre him getting announced as VP. And they were just starting to kind of like float his name out. Yeah. Which Charlie, of course, is very much wanted to do. And he used all of his political talents to try to promote that. And one of those things is, yeah, I invite him to the convention. And what he always loved about it was, I think it was his anniversary, either the day before or the day after. And so yeah, no, no, it was the day before because, yeah, we wanted him on Saturday night to be sort of the final speaker on Saturday night. And he said Charlie would love that. He's like, it's my anniversary. I can't say merch. Yeah, we wanted him on Saturday night to be sort of the final speaker on Saturday night and he said Charlie would love that. He's like, it's my anniversary. I can't say marriage has to be with my wife, but I will commit to getting there on Sunday and Charlie was like, great, you can be the final speaker of the event and that gave him just enough time to get to literally just drive up there, which I believe he did he personally himself drive the car. He gets there and like, you know, were you still a lot of people having, you know, on tromages and he just just I think he had one aid with him. There's JD. Yeah. That's what's in. I'm JD Vance. I'm a speaker. I think maybe some security guy didn't initially recognize them. No, there's JD Vance walking by himself backstage. He's like, I think that's we're in the like, he's just kind of like strolling in and like we found out he drove. He's like, yeah, it was just, you know, there's never been a less affected politician. I always promised myself I'm not going to compliment you. And he fanciful because I don't want to hurt him, but there's never been a less affected leader ever like period. I totally agree. I've I've never seen one if there is no, but yeah, Charlie, people would ask Charlie a lot, you know, are you going to run for president? Are you going to run for office or, you know, like, and he would always, you will not find one piece of content anywhere ever. It doesn't exist where he said, yeah, you know what? I want to be president someday. He would always say, you would always, you know, I love what I'm doing. Like God's called me here. You know, we have more impact here, you know, and that it was all very true. Privately, I had that conversation with them. And I wouldn't say he answered it with me, although that maybe there were some other instances where I caught an inclination. But what he said was, JD's ready. Because JD's running, I don't even have to think about it. I don't know if that's like, I don't know if he said, let me say, because JD exists. We're going to do everything we can. He didn't say that he, you know, confirmed or anything. But because JD exists, I don't have to think about it. And Charlie, you know, was such a champion of JD's political talents in his future. And if JD does decide to do that, certainly Charlie would cheer him on from the hereafter. Yeah, Charlie has a lot of faith in JD Vance. I always loved his, his frankness on just topics like that, you know, in the, in the 2024 primaries. He would just come out and he's like, well, I promised Trump that if he ran again in 24, I would support him. So that was that. Like I made a promise. And if JD chooses to do that, then God bless him. And I would be here to cheer him on. We have our final radio segment of the day. Are you serious? It goes, that one's the best. Yeah. But I have this great clip of Charlie that we're going to play. Play cut to this is Charlie talking about his lovely wife, Erica. Wife is the best person ever. And she's a patriot and she's a believer. And we don't want to have to be accountable to God when this life passes. And he asks, why did you not trust in me? And not fight evil because we as Christians are called the fight evil. It's one of the lesser known scriptures saw in 97 10 for those of you that love God, you must hate evil. And again, everyone is called to something different in the body of Christ. Some people are called to heal the sick. Some people are called to men, broken marriages. Some people are called to do outright hot gospel teaching. My call is to fight evil and to proclaim truth. That's it. Who has that clarity of purpose at that age? It's such a rare gift. I think it is a gift. It's not detracting from the choices that he made, but like he knew what his purpose on this earth was, he worked tirelessly to fulfill that tirelessly. I can't overstate that as someone with a similar gig, like I've never seen a man work harder. And with greater self sacrifice, with greater self discipline. And it all flowed from his belief that this is not pointless. We are there's a race that we have to run. And he I mean, he left us in mid stride. I thought that that night. And I was heartbroken and struggling even now to control myself. Excuse me. But I had that image that day I was on a plain one. It happened of him going like that, you know, leaving this earth in that position in mid stride. And that is as tragic and overwhelming as it is, that is such a gift. Like made that be the end of my life too. And all of our lives to leave in midst of purpose and midst of forward motion. You know, very few people get that. And you know, in this case at 31, it's unimaginable. However, that is something that I know that I want. And I think that every person who thinks about it wants that too. And so I'm grateful for that. Well, you know, you have a special place in the turning point family, Tucker. I know you know that you have you had a special place in Charlie's heart. And I just want to address one thing before we go here. We've got like two, two and a half minutes left that there was pressure put on Charlie, you know, about you appearing at the turning point. Oh, you think? And he's not just Scott about it. So he's just like, oh, you're putting pressure. on me. So I've got a double down. Yeah. He was like, you know, some of the funny text messages that we found since then he goes, oh, they don't want me to have Tucker. Oh, maybe I'll have him speak twice. And he just left you. He just loved you. And there was, you know, and there was what the hardest thing to explain to people that you know, maybe didn't like your views on foreign policy or whatever. Like my future for trying to be diplomatic here, Doug. Thought I should brace it. Br reason. Yeah. And, but I just, you know, Charlie, this was the hardest thing to explain is that like, guys, you don't understand like Charlie's mission is three steps down. He's keeping a coalition together. He's keeping friends together. He's keeping networks together. He's a statesman and he's not, he's not going to knee jerk and be morally blackmailed by anybody. And if you do it, he will double down. Oh, yeah. And you saw it in that clip. My mission is to confront evil. Oh, yes. And to proclaim the truth. Wherever it is. And, and I would just tell people, listen, you might think one thing. Fine. But Charlie and Tucker are deeply, deeply on a very personal level friends and Charlie is loyal. Oh, yeah. And if you go down this route, don't be surprised when you have Tucker having three speeches on three different nights at Amfest. You know, like when I was a kid, I drove my in high school. I drove my car into a white pine and Maine going about 40. And I remember thinking it totaled the car. And I remember thinking, wow, the treatise doesn't move. It doesn't hurt. Or to hit it. And that was Charlie. He was just a towering white pine man. He was just not, it didn't matter how hard you hit him. It wasn't, wasn't moving. I, there's a few things I respect more than that. Well, Tucker, it's been a pleasure. One of my favorite shows. And I think it was so fitting that you capped off the week. And I know you're going to be speaking at his celebration about Jesus, not politics to be clear. But I'm so glad that we could take some time to talk about Jesus, not politics, because that's the whole point. Well, it's funny. When I first started being around you, the way you would talk about faith was much more reticent and reserved. And Charlie has made a convert out of you. And you are proclaiming the truth as well as any preacher I've ever heard. So thank you. Thank you. Bless you. God bless you. God bless the reach of your word. Thank you. Thanks so much. Talk to you soon.