All right, here we go. Thank you very much for being here. I'm a really big fan. So this is an honor for me. I'm really really excited I'm really excited about your book. I'm really excited about just your films the untold untold history in the United States Which I think is fantastic. I mean that is that's one of my favorite things that you've ever done and and so thorough and so interesting but The book at first of all look how good you look in there on the cover there Well, it's an old shot done handsome bastard. Look at you. Yeah, looking good there Which is that from it was 1968 November. I just come off the last mission in Vietnam Wow, it was on a hilltop. We got stuck in a rain in the Ashau Valley It was first cabaret and we really held cup was couldn't get in for 11 days It was awful Wow, we had leeches everywhere. Oh, and the enemy we didn't know where they were But we felt that they were gonna close in I was but it was too wet Ultimately for them to close in but they knew we were there so we were praying It's a whole time was kind of nerve-wracking because it was my last few days you understand I was supposed to get out of there What Diro sleeve the country I was due out I had volunteered I had volunteered for an extra three months in Order to get out of the army three months sooner. Wow, in other words. They had there normally you had to serve if it's too Year deal you had to serve six six months state side on the back side of it So I didn't want to do that because I was going nuts with the rules and the regulations and I got in this in trouble with that So I extended in combat for another three months and that ended up in this mission How much did your time serving impact your directing and you like you you've had these life experiences as someone who's just a filmmaker They really can't draw upon like you've had actual combat experience and when you're making movies about Combat I mean that has to be a gigantic Advantage or at least it adds layers to it that are almost impossible to create to recreate for someone is just trying to imagine what it's like Yeah, and that was very important when we did platoon I was trying to get the exact Distances and what and the amount of firepower is not as you it's not as intense generally speaking is the movies make it Yeah, and that's the problem because the movies have so much to You know so much to show they bring the enemy much closer. They they condense things and they Amplify as much as possible now. I did that too here and there So I'm guilty too, but I think overall it's way over done and the newer stuff that's come out since 2001 You know with the patriotic stuff and heavily heavily militaristic stuff is way off way off and People don't die that way like you know in the Type of films like Mark Walberg, May or you know those kind of films. They just way way over done Anyway, and what way like well What was the name of the film lone survivor? Yeah, was that the name of it? Yeah, yeah, they get dropped off Whatever in ten guys and they managed to kill how many Taliban for each guy, you know How much of that was based on I mean it's all about Marcus I haven't had a chance to talk to Marcus all the I'm friends with him, but I don't know how much of it They they monkey with everything whenever they may Was way over done they and what I heard and what's been reported is that they know they got trapped right away They was pretty quick the ambush went on and they and they got they got the shit kicked out of himself and I can't I can't be I don't remember exactly the details, but he did get away and yeah some people did scam But it doesn't look like it does in the movie where he wins a hero, right? That is a problem And that's one of the things that I really loved about platoon everyone wasn't a hero. I mean the Tom Barrenger character The I existed it's in the book. Yeah based on a guy called Sergeant Well, I called them Sergeant Barnes, but he had it wouldn't news his real name real guy Can shot in the face and Was scarred distorted Kind of handsome like that, but he was a serious guy and he knew what he was doing. He was the leader of the platoon See I I made clear that the leaders of the platoon were not really the lieutenant say with the platoon sergeant in the and the squad sergeants and They were very important in our lives. So I barely saw officers I was dealing in the jungle you deal with what's right in front of you So the sergeant was crucial? Barnes is a crucial character. So is the other character Sergeant Elias played by Willem de Faux was he in another unit that I Had combined four different units of in three combat units. I combined them into one One unit one platoon for this movie purposes So the Willem de Faux character was also based on a real person. Yes. He was he was based on a guy I'm you in the lirps long-range recon patrol Who was a great guy? He was in Apache kind of an Apache Mexican Mix a not quite sure what he was because I didn't get to know him that well, but I admired him because he had that life grace of A guy who fought a lot had been around he'd been in before he was on a second tour and very much a love a beloved figure and he was killed after I left the unit He was killed about a month later in a friendly fire accident Now friendly fire is met we talk about it. Yeah, but quite a bit, you know because it's also underestimated People never the Pentagon cuts it all out especially in the movies that come from the Pentagon approval Right they they don't like to emphasize how difficult how often I would say 15 to 20% of our casualties in that war We're friendly fire now. That's not just ground fire from when you get into a jungle situation You're close to people. You don't really know where you're shooting sometimes. You know where the incoming fire is is coming from so It's quite a mess. It's chaotic the radio people screaming shouting noise Confusion and a lot of fear Yeah, that was highlighted for us When the Pat Tillman incident. Yeah, very important one Pat Tillman who is this Spectacular athlete decided to postpone his NFL career and and go over and serve and was killed in friendly fire And it wasn't really reported that way for a while. That's absolutely correct Which is the point is that they don't they really don't want the parents to know what's really going on So if imagine if imagine 15 maybe 20% are dying from that friendly fire That this is not just ground fire. This is of course bombing and certainly artillery fire Because that is often misplaced. It's not that easy to get the coordinates down in a tense situation where you you can hit your Where artillery 20 miles away 40 miles away has to hit you have to hit the spot When you're making a movie like platoon and this is in many Much much of it is based on your actual real life experience How much preparation is involved then? How much is it different than when you're making another movie because this is Something that's intensely personal to you obviously Mm-hmm. Yeah, how much preparation? Well, I got I got a great combat advisor. He'd been there as a marine Dale die He came in out of the blue and he he was a real lifertype So he remembered all the details of uniforms and Fire and the and the firepower. I mean it's it's take a lot of details to put this together But the preparation was I've been doing it for 10 years. I started the picture in 1976 I wrote it. It wasn't made it was rejected by the by the powers it be The first time and then it was it was considered great great script But two you know two realistic a bummer a downer if you remember back in the 70s and apocalypse now on dear hunter Yeah, those were big films and mythic beautiful films, but they were not realistic Then they had Sylvester Stallone to his Rambo series where he goes back and fight some war again. Does those drive you crazy? Yeah Although the first one was pretty good But the first one was different. They're playing up the you know the whole sympathy card the pity card I don't buy that you know that there's a lot of that veteran Feeling that you know, it's we were we were beating we had our hands hide behind our backs and we couldn't win and that kind of thing Believe me it was a badly conceived war with a lot of misinformation I go on in the book and talk about the lies that were spread by the military The propaganda that were winning the whole time. They were using the body counts heavy body counts They say well if we kill him so much so many of them They're not going to be that many left and but on the other hand as the years went on More and more them kept appearing So they they've yet in them. These were indestructible in a way. They were like ants They were they were fighting for their independence. They're for their land man It was their country and they never gave up ever and you could have nuked them and that's what Curtis LeMay at one point suggested you could have dropped a nuclear bomb it wouldn't have done it wouldn't have made the difference that God they didn't but America went to extremes to win that war with poisoning the bombing the bombing of Not only Vietnam Laos and Cambodia was intense Intense of bigger the by far than World War II for this crazy war Well, it also it's set a precedent for Our lack of trust in the military and lack of trust in the government that guides the military Particularly in how they deal with the veterans that are dealing with things like agent orange Or you know people that have come back that were sick where they denied that this was part of the problem Sure, we didn't even have PTSD. We did yeah with what that was but it started to prop up when I got back and I talk about it here I've been about PTSD which I'd never heard of but I think we all have it. What did they call it back then? Shout-shark I guess so but I wasn't it was not a diagnostic diagnosis It was not an ailment that you could officially Cataloged because if you did the army would be admitting to a huge amount of insurance problems and all kinds of medical problems They would have to cover So it was you know it was something that There was no word for it frankly To get back to the issue of The original question was the platoon was rejected on for these two It almost came to be again in 1983 fell apart again, and it's a heartbreaking story. It's in the book and and It's resurrected. I mean I forget about it. I just put in the closet after those movies came out I said, they don't want to know about Vietnam in this country. They really forget it. It's not going to happen Fine. I live with it. I was moving on with my career. I had midnight express. I had Scarface I was I had other things in my night but Michael Tiamino who had directed the deer hunter Told me he wanted to produce it with me as the writer as a director and that We would we would resurrect it because he said Vietnam's coming back. I said that nonsense I don't think it's kind of come back. He said look it's nearly Kubrick's pictures. He's going to make a picture It's called a full metal jacket and It took three years or two years for him to make it But the fact that he made it certainly gave us some impettas to make we made it very low budget and By the way, it was made by the same company as made Salvador my previous film. They made him I made him back to back in Mexico and the Philippines Back to back finance very low budget by him Dale a British company led by a gentleman named John Daly who I Who was my mentor I'm much credit name in the book so We were nothing film. I don't know where I mean we were the bottom I mean we're in the Philippines and making a film that Nobody really knew much about and At the bon you know, we were struggling to get it made and there was a weather problems There was all kinds of Logistical promise, but we'd been through hell on Salvador as I described in the book in Mexico So we were a unit by this time we we got used to the difficulties of making low budget films in between the time You wrote it in the time it actually got done Was there ever any effort by the studios to try to water it down or to try to doctor it up and Sure, now that went on quite a bit Everyone read the script at one point or another. I'm going to reject it So and when I finally almost got made with chamee no in 1983 We thought we'd bring in we thought we'd get it made now but the Resistance to it at the very end with the MGM was supposed to be the distributor And Henry Kissinger was on the border directors along with the Hague Alexander Hagg you remember him Military guy in the secretary of state Very bad tempered though. They were both on the board and whether they went to that board I don't know But that's what the story they cover their house by telling me we can't make this movie We can't distribute this movie because The board would be against it now sometimes they say they tell you that without checking but in this case. I don't know So as a result the film fell apart again. This was a hard break Did you ever think like maybe I can move it a little bit or change it a little bit or would you just identify? I've got pentagon said to me Forget it. We're not going to help you at all and this thing is completely distorted They were upset as hell about the fragging. I mean that's to say You know what fragging is yeah, there was a lot of that towards the end I mean it started in 60 7 8 but there was a little more and more discontent when Lyndon Johnson pulled out of the presidency in March of 68 That was a big moment. I think all the sold everyone kind of knew that this thing was not going to work out And who wanted to be the last guy to get killed in Vietnam. Right and so I think 69 70 were more and more fractions more fraction Fractic and there was more and more incidents at one point. There was a pentagon document that came out I've seen it that said this situation in in the army is getting so Poor so bad the morale is so low that it's a it resembles it's beginning to resemble the French mutinies in 1970 in the World War one That was a big concern of the pentagon. They knew they they thing was not going to work It was cracking from within so we we gave more and more let's say more and more Credit to the Vietnamese South Vietnamese insane that they were going to take our place we're going to put more money We put a fortune into them. South Vietnamese army like we're doing now or the Afghan army It's interesting when you look by what year did platoon come out 80 finally made it out in 86 86 December when when you really think about it You're only talk you're not talking about that much distance distance between that movie coming out in the Vietnam War ending I mean in terms of how we look at the world now I mean if we look at it's 2020 if we look at 2000 that doesn't seem like 2003 That doesn't seem that long ago, but that's kind of the timeline you're looking at And so you know in a lot of ways it was probably very fresh in a lot of people's eyes particularly people in the Pentagon It was quite something when it came out. It was you know It was like a bomb went off. I mean went around the world first of all It wasn't just America this film played everywhere and Was I guess it was a shock at the time because it was more realistic than any warfield that they had seen And of course it was dirty and got you know, I mean it was that we had drug use in it or which was you know description of the division there was a division in the Army we were we were draftees many of us So it wasn't all volunteer, you know, and it wasn't all like Gung Ho at all it was a split and I just I just I showed this split as much as I could I would be in the I joined the camp where the people who I would say were anti Thoritarian I wouldn't say they were anti war because we didn't have anything like that going on. You know It's just the army sucks the man sucks, you know a lot of the black troops knew this So there was a lot of dissension with the black troops too because when Martin Luther King got killed in April of 68 That had that had a negative impact over there So there was a lot going on in the country and people were seeing it feeling it And new new troops were coming in all the time from the country draft team So we were you know, you get a feeling for what's going on Did the movie did the movie feel different to you than anything else you've ever done in terms of your obligation? Because I really do think that that was the most realistic at that point for sure war movie ever made and the one that left people with the most conflicted feelings and just this this feeling of As much as you can relate in a film with notable actors You you you showed the horrors of war in a way that I don't think it had ever been portrayed before in a film Well, we got the details right I mean when you see a dead body and you see it being lifted into a helicopter That's really looks like a dead man And yeah, the pain of death. I mean you feel The danger you it's it's never what you think it's going to be It's always comes up in another way. It's like sloppy sometimes and battle And that's why I don't like about a lot of the movies. A battle is often just confusion Breaking down things don't work It's like Mike Tyson said, you know Your plan goes out the window and you can hit in the face. It's that's the way it goes. It never See the Americans had a methodical way of doing it We go to the jungle. We send the little guys into the jungle They meet resistance pull back bomb artillery do anything Take minimum casualties. That's not what the Marines did, but that's what the armies idea was and that it works to a degree But it Iratticates the whole the bombing is is very sloppy And not only you have friendly fire, but you have a lot of civilians killed to Imagine when you finish a final cut of that movie and it got really that had to be a very strange Almost like you're releasing a child You're you I mean it was it had to have been so much more personal and so much so much more See I've been through so much. I really I didn't I didn't think it was good I thought was a good movie. I thought it was a good script I didn't expect anything. I had just done Salvador which was about a dirty civil war down in the in the central America In which America again supported some pretty bad guys some desk wads And I showed that and that picture had not done very well because it had been America had been very little in no interest really in the central American issues of the 1980s Remember they sent in east to revolution in Nicaragua There was a lot of turmoil and Guatemala turmoil in the Honduras where I went down there to research as albedorn What I saw in Honduras was the beginning of another Vietnam That's one of the reasons I really committed to Salvador's heavily when I saw the troops the American troops now There were women men and women Young in uniform many of them national guard troops reserved They were there building up for this I think it was pretty clear that Reagan was gonna attack Nicaragua in some way but it never happened because of a fortuitous accident when the CIA got busted for Flying a cargo cargo over Nicaragua And it was a huge scandal that led to the Iran country unraveling with Reagan so Reagan was unable to do what he wanted to do in In Nicaragua although we had mined the port. We'd done everything possible Supporting the contrast all that pissed me off in other words. It was like 20 years after the war 15 years after war here. I am back in central America. I'm seeing the same thing young guys like me in a country Yeah, you know just Believing what they're hearing from their superiors So you felt like this obligation to not just release Salvador but also release platoon as In platoon your experiences showing what the Vietnam war was really like and with Salvador saying hey This is happening again. Yeah, I did him simultaneously except I didn't really believe and in belief with tune was gonna work Yeah, come out so I did not much faith in it well when it did come out how much of a surprise was it when it was a giant hit Well, I knew that in the moment Put it this way the shooting was you could tell from the young people the actors and the Their enthusiasm for this they there was a hunger to make they were so Delighted to become so so Soldiers for the purposes of the movie. We trained them on a 24 hour basis for two weeks and it was it worked. I wanted them to get no sleep and Dale I helped me with that we we put them in a bivouette training situation But a real one. I mean where you don't sleep and you you basically pull in century duty all night Kind of you have you split your duty with foxholes three guys and Dale would stage attacks and stuff in the middle of the night Real they were nervous and they were they were tired beyond belief which is good That's where you want them so how did how did you plan this out? So when you were when you were about to start filming you had it in your head We have to make this more realistic. What's the best way to do it and then from the beginning we from the beginning the way I cast it. I wanted you I wanted young people as much as possible in the in the roles people who were fresh Who didn't look like they've done other movies rap and types They were based on everybody I knew in my platoons people from the south a lot of people from the south of people from the Midwest a lot of inner city people Chicago especially St. Louis, New Orleans and I you know Californians and I've tried to mix it all up But the whole idea from the beginning was that we're gonna make this with our little bit of money We're gonna make this as realistic as we could so we planned it that way and we the camp worked We got the full cooperation of the Philippine army and some shitty helicopters that they had but very dangerous ones But at least that was it was a start had that ever been done before the camp the idea of having them I don't think so because that had bothered me a lot of them maybe in the old days But I don't I don't know one. No what what made you fall on that like what why was that well? I'd lived it right I'd lived it so I wanted them to above all I wanted them to be tired Irritable it gives you a sense of what it's like in it. There's bugs. There's a heat. It's it's a jungle and How do they respond to that? At first there were a lot of bitching there was a sag SAG the sad yeah, you say unions and you you have to have 12 hour turnaround so a few of them quit really yeah Well, but then and we replaced them because I had a long list waiting list of people and I'd seen over the years Wow, actually Charlie Sheen was the Broad the younger brother Emil Emilio Estivaz who was my first choice to play it in 1983 and after the movie went peeled back to 86 Emilio had gotten older and I went with Charlie who came of age about that time was my age when I was over there Oh, wow, so he was 1920 So you know that's what I wanted those faces once you get the faces you can train them and Barringer and to follow the oldest and they that helped enormously they were this you know Anchors of the operation When the film was this gigantic success Did that How did that feel to you did that validate this idea that you had and it shocked me? I mean For years has it been rejected ten years, you know, I mean I was sick of it I was saying I'm not gonna make this movie because it's gonna go wrong, you know I didn't think was possible but because of this you know Kubrick picture and the support of the English company John Daly They wanted to make it this is news for me because I hold my life I'm fighting to make it for me against somebody's wishes all of a sudden I got some people on my side. That's a big that's a big difference and the enthusiasm of the cast and Dale dying all these great people and my cameraman everybody they loved it and We made it and frankly we finished it. We did it on budget 50 was 50 days and went 54 days But that was in we had the money in the in the 10% contingency We finished it in 54 days and it was tough And we got out of there just in time because the bunsunes came And in the editing right away you could feel that people were reacting to it in a different way we edited it there was no We we edited it a little bit, but you know we played with it playing with it you massage it But right away I would say from the first screening on you could tell people were Responding seeing this is real This is I've never seen this this is real So it it took care of itself in a way I mean they didn't put much money in the distributing company was Orion pictures existed that They they put a they said well give it a quality release of few theaters at Christmas in 86 And it opened huge first day in New York. There was a line of veterans young me Veterans were look young I mean not were were two enters young parents. They were around the block at the Lowe's Astor and I wasn't there, but people told me that they were they went in quietly. There was a mute mute and they sat through the film Very little talk very little anything not a lot of the gung-ho stuff you hear and at the end of it They were quiet and they some of them wouldn't get up out of their seats quite a few of them were sitting there still in their seats You know Somewhere crying It took off and then It took off like I can't I've never you know, it's a phenomenon you rarely see in the world This is like the top third highest grossing film in America that year and it was It was a blockbuster because it no children are allowed in, you know, and you don't have much of a woman's audience at first So you don't figure on these things, you know It It took off and kept going and then the women started to come in the third week as it was getting more and more talked about There's no stopping it in Then even when you went to places like Paris or London, you know people cared it was unbelievable Well, it was a masterpiece and is it is that your finest moment in your your proudest moment? You feel like as a filmmaker Well, it's one of the highlights of my life and it it's a climax of this book The ten chapters here lead up to that because my story starts in 76 I'm in New York. I'm broke depressed written 12 screenplays and nothing's happened I've come close a few times nothing's going on and my marriage is ended My first marriage and Looks I haven't I taught my compass in my life the things that matter so at the age of 30 you kind of wake up You say, you know, what can I do my grandmother dies? I talk to her I go and talk to her on their death She's she's dad, but in France. They let them my mother was friends. She said they laid they laid them out and I was talking Or and then this I think it's a very moving scene where he communicates with her Because she loved them and his own family life was quite Disturbing in many ways. It was for him a traumatic divorce between the mother his mother and father and he goes into He goes into this what happened in it's about a family to it's about how a family life can break apart You can become a child of divorce so his life kind of falls apart and he goes out You know hence he goes to it Vietnam has a teacher Then he goes join some merchant Marine there's all kinds of things that happen comes back to school goes back to Yale University drops out again. He writes a book writes his first book about his experiences I did this before back in 1966. I was 19 years old Didn't work out it was rejected. It was ultimately published about 1997. It's called a child's night dream So I was a writer from the beginning. I think before I was a director and When that was rejected. I just said fuck it, you know, I'm too I'm too full of myself. I'm too much of a narcissist here I can't write about myself so I joined the army And volunteered for combat and for Vietnam. I didn't want to miss it You know, I wanted to see it right away because I'm for the experience. No, I wanted to get the bottom of the barrel Oh, I wanted to see what what this country was about. I you know, I was I was inquisitive get right away for the experience. No, I wanted to get the bottom of the barrel. I wanted to see what this country was about. I was inquisitive. I wanted to know what life was about. I mean, I'd grown up relatively sheltered. You know, I went to my father, met a living on Wall Street. He was a Republican. Eisenhower supporter, he was in the lieutenant colonel in World War II where he met my mother. I mean, he was a strong Republican and all his life grew up in that ethic. But it really, it's something that when I went to Vietnam, he had never been in combat. But when I saw what I saw over there coming from a sheltered existence relatively, it was shattered. The glass was shattered. It was just, I couldn't take my father's word for it anymore on anything. So I had to learn for myself. And that's why. What was different from your father's perceptions of what was the support of the war? Like many, many people did for several years until he got older. And then he came around one day and he said, I think it's a, I think you were right. I think it was a, it's a futile thing because the whole idea of the Cold War, he began to question it at the age of 70, about 65. He said, you know what, what differences it make? This domino bullshit. He said, you know, the Russians have a sub off Long Island. You know, they can, they can nucus from anywhere. It doesn't make sense to play this zero sum game of fighting for land, fighting for one country or another, intervening in other countries. He began to question everything. So, and I was too. So I didn't change. I know you're going to go to later in my life. But basically I didn't change until I went to this trip in Honduras, which I just told you about with my friend Richard Boyle for Salvador. In 1985, I went down there and what I saw in Central America confirmed that we were doing it again. We were going into these countries. We didn't know what the fuck they were about. We didn't, and we were fighting these. In most cases, the interests of most of the people, the majority of the people. They had a revolution in Nicaragua, because it was so corrupt. Nature revolution in 1979. And we've been opposed to that new regime ever since. So when you first, when you entered into the army, when you signed up, did you, did you have clarity about this? Would you just have this idea in your head that you needed to find out what it was like? No, no, I had no clarity. I was, I wanted to get out of New York. I wanted to get away from my, the whole, my parents were divorced, my father. I wanted to get away from my father. I wanted to get away from everything I knew. I didn't like Yale University. I was in the class with George Bush. You know, I come from that generation of Donald Trump, George Bush, Bill Clinton. It's the same generation. But I don't identify with those people, because maybe they didn't have that sense of service at all. I did. I had a sense of patriotism, I'm not that, yeah, but I think call it, I really think it was misplaced, but I felt that I owe my country something. I can't work just for myself. The reason why I keep going back to this, it's so significant that you had that moment in your life when you were involved in Vietnam and you were in combat duty, because all of your films, although there are these big commercial successes, they all have a message. I mean, midnight express, even Scarface, there's a message in these films that's based on real live scenarios, that took place that a lot of people were unaware of. A lot of people got their education about Cuba releasing prisoners to America based on Scarface. That's how a lot of people found out about that. That's too bad, because I wish we had more study of what's going on in the world, more contemporary studies. Well, that's, again, what I really loved about the untold history of the United States. It's a fantastic piece that you put together. Want another chair? I think I'll not share right there. Excuse me, no worries. But that's something that's really flavored your life, is that your work is not just commercial. You don't just put out these commercial success. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. But they are commercially successful, but you balance it with a message, whether it's JFK or whether it's platoon, all of them. There's something to them that resonates with people. You can answer to your question about whether I was clear. No, I wasn't clear. I was, here's what I was felt at the time. I said, look, I wrote this book. It didn't work. I spent two years putting that together. It's my whole life's on there. It's not of interest to a publisher. So therefore, I'm going to go into this army. I'm going to go to this war. And I'm going to let, at that time, I was in good Christian. I'm going to let God sort this out. And he'll decide. In other words, I put it in. That's how you felt in somebody. Yeah. So if I'm not meant to come back, I won't. Wow. And I went under those conditions. So you have to realize a lot of people at 19 are suicidal in nature. Yes. And we know this from the facts now. And now they were talking about it. In this country in America, we have a certified of suicide among the 1920s, 21s. And it's sad. But that's where I was. I was spiritually desolate. And frankly, it got cleared up over there in a sense that I came out very grateful to be alive. I've been seeing a lot of death. I had been wounded twice. And I got in the Bronx star and done 30, 30 or more helicopter missions. It seemed quite a fair share of combat, which I described in the book. I came back alienated and numb. I didn't come back as a protester. But confused. How did you feel about fighting with my father? Fighting with your father? Of course. Yeah. I gave him LSD. I didn't know. Didn't you know your gift? No, he didn't know I'd give it to him. But he knew that he was on salt and y'all. How did you do that? We just live in his coffee. No, it's scotch. Ah, even better. It's not a good touch. Quite a bit. He was stronger. He handled it. He drank whiskey every day of his life. So yeah, he was a tough guy. But he was great. He was like swaned to the music. Oh, wow. I mean, sex fantasy. Wow. Did you tell him about it afterwards? No, actually we took, but over the years we knew I kind of after a while he figured it out, I guess. I was long-haired while. Right. I kept talking black talk to him. Did you feel like you had to do it? Because you knew what kind of an impact it would have on him and open salt. I was fighting with him. No, we were fighting about the war. I was fighting about everything. Like I just didn't like his ideas. And one of the destroyers mindset. Oh, wow. His mindset was okay. This Vietnam is a mess. But his mindset was, but we can learn from it. We can get our immense will going to build up our knowledge for the next war. That was his thinking. He came out of that generation of World War II. His father was wiped out in 29. And his first job was his floor walker. He didn't have anything. So he worked his way up on Wall Street. A very hard worker research in the back offices. So when the war was, the Second World War was the highlight of his life, he says. He comes back from the war. And America faced this problem. What are we going to do with all these men? And now we've got the women working. How are we going to employ all these people? Everybody seemed to be scared of another depression. They thought we're going back into that. So there was this militarized economy that we had. And they kept going. It basically kept going and built up by 1945 by 1950, when we were back in Korea, where we were building up again. So the whole concept of an enemy was important to the American economy. And the Soviet Union, of course, fit the bill, although they were our ally in World War II. And most of the fighting, they became our biggest enemy right away. Right away. There was no hesitation about it. It was often a political decision to have an enemy, to create fear, and to keep the militarized economy that we have. And I was an hour talked about it. He was an underbuilt at up to most. But we're getting ahead of ourselves. No, no, no, we're not. It means fun. But my father came from that generation. And he believed firmly that Russia was really invading our country, threatening it. He were in our schools. They were in our state department. I mean, he wasn't Joe McCarthy. But there was a lot of that mentality. Nixon was like that. Hoover was pushing it. And I grew up terrified. I grew up terrified. Dad, why do we let the Russians do that? That kind of mentality being besieged. And so my father and I fought a lot, as you can imagine. Because he had got kicked out. He'd take me to a restaurant. I'd have an American tie that was made of American flag. And the restaurant owner would kick me out because he thought it was a disrespectfully. But the ex-marine. That's interesting. You can have an American flag anything now on your respectful. That's weird. You can have an American flag hat or a t-shirt. Oh, come on. This was a different world. So this is a high to the still the 70s. And the older people were offended by that. Yeah. That's interesting how that's shifted. Now the more American flags are the better on everything. Socks underwear. Nothing is respectable. Yeah, it's different. It's so, yeah, it's really weird. It's kind of been bastardized. What was it like coming back and seeing the protest, though? And seeing these people that were your age that were angry at people like you who had been over there. I didn't have any horror stories. I didn't see that, you know, baby killer. That's been exaggerated. I think by people looking for, you know, looking for revenge. I mean, someone yelling baby killer with a soldier. Yeah, that's right. None of that. I mean, I think there was just comfort. I went back to New York society, which was, I didn't have any veteran friends in New York. My friends went back to small towns in Tennessee and Kentucky and Georgia and in Chicago. So I never, I didn't see them until I made platoon. And, well, I think the problem was it was indifference. People didn't care. They didn't give a shit. I mean, most people were making money. It was the 60s man. People were getting jobs. It was all kinds of new liberating ideas. The world was on fire. And I think people were thinking about the Vietnam War. But the Vietnam was an afterthought unless you were directly involved with the relative. At least in New York, very little occasionally people would wonder, why did you go over there? You know, like I was an outcast. Why did you waste your time? Get ahead. Make some money. It was the Donald Trump generation. You know, that kind of a feeling. Make money. There's a thing about your films, though, that I think I can keep getting back to this. Because you did go over there. It's almost like in your films, like you have something you have to tell people. But yeah, it's like you have to give them medicine, but you got to give it to them in sugar. I don't think it that way. I want to, I take thorny subjects. Yeah. But they're entertaining too, because I want to know what happens next. Like you, I think you have an interest. So even political matters can be fascinating. Yeah. Who else would do Nixon's life? Right. I mean, come on. He was not the most popular guy. No, he's in the same. Man, for me, it was a challenge. Yeah. Same thing with the JFK murder. I mean, it was so, so gnarly. That one's extra complex, right? Because you took some liberties there to try to move the plot along. But liberties in the spirit of the, I didn't violate the truth. Right. So in this, I mean, I had to combine characters. That is a complex story. The story of JFK's assassination is very complex, because I can learn a lot from a person in what their opinion is. Like, what do you think happened? Oh, Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone. You get these very specific character types where these people have these predetermined patterns that they plug into. Sure. And the Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone as one of the weirder ones. Yeah, sure. That is one of the weirdest arguments. And when I talked to them about the magic bullet, you know, like, and they go, well, that's actually been proven that that can happen. I mean, that drives me nuts. Yeah, sure. Because I'm a guy who shoots guns. I'm a hunter. Yeah. And I know what happens when bullets hit bones. It doesn't ever come out like that. And also, you know, it was a hell of a shot. Well, hell of a shot can happen. I don't think it's that bad of a shot. I don't think it's that big of a deal. I think that's overstated. There's many things that are overstated. One of the things that's overstated is the scope was off. You know, people always say, well, the scope was off. Well, fucken it, anything can knock a scope off. You can drop a gun in the evidence room and the scope's off. That's nonsense. That's people who don't understand guns. But the bullet hitting those two people and finding its way on a Connolly's journey, magically with very little distortion the bullet at all, is straight up horseshit. And the fact that that still gets touted as being, well, this is actually how it could have happened and weird things happen with bullets. Sure, weird things happen with bullets. But one weird thing that never happens with bullets is when they hit bone and shatter bone, they always distort. Always. Yeah, I'm making it. I made a documentary. It's almost finished about, we went back to the case again, taking all the information from the assassination records review board that came out of the film. They passed an act that JFK Act Congress did. It was amazing. And they allowed the board to exist for five years and they went through a lot of detail. They weren't out to prove anything, but they found a lot of little detail that we put into this documentary, which I think you'll love. I'm sure I'll love it. It goes into CE-399, the bullet, but it also goes into so much else on the autopsy that's screwed up. The two autopsies, the one in Bethesda and also the one in Dallas. There was no in Dallas. Well, they did. They did it. They did it. They did it. Exactly. Yeah, of what happened to him in examinations and Dallas. Everybody saw a huge gaping wound in the rear right of his Mr. Kennedy's head. Yeah. And that was covered up. Yeah, there was also the reason why they needed to make that magic bullet work. The guy who got hit onto the underpass, which is, oh, I know you're, I could see you're in the essay about this idea. Yeah. And also, you know, come on, I mean, if you're an infantryman, it's a heart. You can't fire three shots like that. Why aren't you not firing at him when he's coming towards you? If you're serious. It's very unlikely, but possible. I mean, it can be done. The shot can be done, but that's one of the least ridiculous things about that story is whether or not one person could have pulled off the shots. I don't think it'd be done. I don't think the world's the best marksman couldn't do it. I remember reading something about that. It's a hard shot. It's a hard shot. But hard shots can be made. Hard shots. Three shots in that time period. Depending upon how much he trained for it, depending on, I mean, I've, I've know some people that are spectacular marksman that can do some ridiculous shit. But it was so fast. He wasn't. But he was also trained. And if you, depending upon how much training he did between his time in the service and his time actually getting ready to shoot Kennedy, you can get a lot better. I don't know how much training he did. I mean, you could take someone who's three years ago a terrible shot and then they kill someone. Well, he couldn't have done it. He's a terrible shot. Look, three years ago, he was a terrible shot. Well, if that guy was training that entire time. Well, the, the rifle, look, it can be done. But again, whether it's likely or not, that could be debated. But it's the least ridiculous thing about that story. Well, wait till you see the documentary. I can't wait. We go, we, I think we pretty much proved that there's no chain of evidence on, on the rifle either. Oh, no, I'm sure. I'm sure. Did you read David Lifton's book, Best Evidence? Years ago. Yeah. Yeah. That's what got me into the Kennedy assassination. Somebody gave it to me a friend of mine, a musician friend of mine when I was on the road. And I read it, unfortunately, all day right before my standup comedy shows that night. And I was so depressed. Yeah. I didn't think anything was funny. And I went on stage. I had a terrible show. And then I had to shake myself out of it for the second show because I was bummed out. I was like, I had never considered it before. I'm like, Jesus Christ, they killed the president and they covered it up. Yeah. And we're paying for it to this day. Because I think Mr. Kennedy was one of the really on the road to being a great president. And I think he did a lot of great things that people don't even know. And we put that in the documentary when he was actually doing in Africa. People don't know what he was doing around the world in Asia and Cuba, obviously, South America. What his plans were, people don't understand that it was a big divide between Lyndon Johnson, who he was about to get rid of him as vice president for the next election. It was a big divide in thinking between Kennedy and Johnson. Kennedy was without doubt pulling out of the war. There was a directive we bring it up from the Assek Def conference in Hawaii from earlier that year. It was pulling out. He made that very clear. Well, there was also the Northwood document, which is really crazy. Oh, that's shocking. When you actually, because this is not speculation or any kind of conspiracy theory, this is all from the Freedom of Information Act signed by Joint Chiefs of Staff. They were going to blow up a jet airliner and blame it on the Cubans. They were going to arm Cuban friendlies and attack Guantanamo Bay. They're going to do all this to get us to go to war with Cuba. And it was, it's stunning that this is an actual plan by the United States government, vetoed by Kennedy. Wasn't there plan also to fly a plane into a building? I don't know if there was a plan to blow up a drone jetliner. They were going to take a jetliner, fly it, blow it up in the sky, and attribute all these deaths to that. That came about actually the Northwoods came about as a result of the movie, because that was what they was found by the assassination records for people. Real. Yeah. Wow. It's one of many documents that come out. That's why it's important for my space of mind to finish this thing. It's kind of like, okay, this is the end. I have to just put down the evidence because I couldn't do it in a film. Right. That's what I was going to get to. What does it like when you have this passion for this story? And this is a critical story in the history of the United States. And a clear piece of, I mean, it's a clear historical record of an assassination of a president. And most likely, who would it, who would, I mean, I don't know who do you think was behind it? I think I'm not going to get a little sued because they're all right. But I think that Alan Dulles has to be looked at a lot closer. And I think he was no longer in the CIA, but he had tremendous amount of influence. And I think he needed some organized, very organized top people to help him. So I think it could have been a group of people that were involved in that maybe involving certain people in the Pentagon, too, because there was an awful lot of strange things that happened. Yeah, he certainly had some ideas that didn't jive well with the people that were in power. Don't let this was fired by Kennedy. Let's call it, call it a straightest paid, which had never been done. This was a shock to the American way of government. I mean, we'd come from a pro military system, and here was Kennedy questioning it. And then, you know, when after he was killed, I mean, it was insane for Lyndon Johnson to appoint him to the Warren Commission, where he managed to control pretty much the hearings and who was heard, who wasn't heard, and what the CIA was delivering to the, was a joke. It was transparent, a joke. There's a couple of things that are Joe. Arlen Specter being the guy who comes up with the Magic Bullet Theory is another joke. Yeah. There's a lot of that that's just very disturbing. It's one of those things where you go over that subject, and you just leave in this state of discomfort and unease, and it's very hard to relax afterwards. Well, you'll wait until you see our documents. I can't wait. I'd love, look, I love, like I said, I love the untold history of the United States, and I think you do a great service with that series, where you illustrate in a way that's both entertaining and very thorough. All the pieces that were moving and all the things that took place. I really, we really worked on that. I had a professor of history, Peter Kuznick, worked with me. Five years we spent on that. Wow. We wrote it. It was really a non-profit kind of enterprise, but I really had to do it. It's amazing. I don't think it gets nearly the credit that it deserves. A lot of people like it, though. It's great. I love it. It's available on Netflix. Yes. Yes. When you're doing... Can I click a P? Can I click a P? Yeah, go ahead. We'll break. Yeah, yeah, yeah. No words. Thank you. We'll be right back, ladies and gentlemen. So we're back. You were asking me about... We're back. You were asking me about why I get attracted to these kinds of subjects, and they don't seem attractive on the surface, but when you're more you get into them, the more they can be exciting. So I am a dramatist at heart. That really is mine, what I do best, which is to dramatize situations. Take something and bring it to life. So take it a kind of the murder. It was extremely challenging. And I knew it could work. I felt like it could work. It was a surprise. I had like platoon. Basically, how can you take this war is boring? There's a lot of details. I was in four different units. Time, not much happens, and then suddenly things happen. It's not that easy to make it happen in a movie-time, movie space. So I took two different sergeants from two different units. And I imagine what would they be like if they were in the same unit? They would clash. One would be the law and order guy. As a guy who believed in what he was doing and fought it viciously. And the other guy is the guy who was an anti- ... ... who was a rebel. A bit like my own character. My father was much of a law and ordered a guy. My mother was very much a rebel. And I kind of put that into this conflict because I saw it in every platoon. There were people who were like doing marijuana. People who were doing alcohol. You know, there was that split kind of. And a lot of the black guys I hung out with were doing marijuana. And they were doing music. The music was unbelievable. But they had a different kind of music than the Okie music. So I was all the split in these platoons. I saw it constantly. Black, white, and country, city sensibilities. Also a very important point is that I found over time that the law and order guys ... often were the most racist in terms of coming down on the Vietnamese civilians. Because we had... we did jungle duty, but we also did a lot of civilian villages. Search and just search and whatever. Search and search them. We find stores and weapons. Not necessarily they were cooperating, but sometimes they were forced to. But a lot of guys screwed with them. Didn't like them yet in the middle at all. Which was not the black problem. That was, you know, that was more of a... it was a white problem. So I found there was a lot of that going on. I couldn't... that was not my thing. And I just really didn't like what I saw. There's a lot of cowardice too. Could only imagine. And that's a shock education. You talk about like a Noah's scale. Yeah. Just thrust into this completely volatile, chaotic world. And then introduced to a bunch of different people that you weren't around. Yeah, and then when they got out, I got thrown into jail. It's in the book, too. But I was just looking forward for a federal smuggling marijuana coming back from Mexico. How much... How many... I just... I just... An ounce or two. Really, that's it. Federal smuggling for an ounce or two? I'd taken some Vietnamese grass home. Oh yeah. But I never went home. I just went right to Mexico. Oh. So I was a few days later, I was in the jail. Wow. Called my father and said, Hey, Dad, you know what I'm in trouble? I said, why haven't you called me? You where you've been for that? We knew you got out two weeks ago at Fort Lewis. I said, well, I said, Dad, I'd... You want to hear where I'm at? You know, blah, blah, blah, blah, and he got me out. He got me out with some money. Wow. Without it, I would have been sunk into that prison. It was awful. Prison was filled with blacks and Latinos. I mean, there were 5,000 people in there for 2,000 beds. That was the beginning of the drug war. Nixon had been elected, but had not yet declared that war on drugs, but it was filled. Oh, most of them were nonviolent crimes, you say. Yeah. And I saw that side of America coming out. So we have a lot of law and order types here. Yes. Well, that law and order stuff was instituted when they passed that sweeping psychedelics acts of 1970. Oh, God. Yeah. Well, they were trying to do is they were trying to squash a civil rights movement. Yeah. That's a big part of what they were trying to do. They were trying to make everything incredibly illegal, schedule one so that they could have a reason to infiltrate these groups and start arresting people and break the groups up. That's absolutely correct. Yeah. And Jay Edgar Hoover was still around, unfortunately. He was a lot of influence on marijuana. I'd been the devil drug. What a fascinating character he was. Yeah. Yeah, they never got him yet on movies. No, no, God. Almost impossible to really get. I really wish there was more, I mean, real personal footage of all the crazy shit that he was actually into. Yeah. When you get an understanding of how nuts it was that this guy was in charge of spying on people. And Linda Johnson, you have to ask, you know, did Linda Johnson really believe the bullshit he was talking about? The black civil rights movement had a communist basis. That the communism was supporting it. I mean, that was very much Hoover's thesis. Yeah. Well, that was a great way to get people motivated to see your side of things back then, you know? Yeah. During the whole Cold War scare and the red scare, it's like communism being a motivating factor for any group. Yeah. Yeah. No. So when you put together JFK, you have this film that is about this incredibly important subject. But yet you want to make it interesting and you want to make it a great film and you succeeded in doing that. But what is that like doing that balancing act of having so much information to tell? Yeah. Like that story is so complex. It was three hours and ten, twelve minutes. And I got it through the system, which is unbelievable. I'll tell you how later. But at the time I needed a protagonist and a protagonist and who was the guy, you know? Yeah. The only person who ever brought any kind of charges publicly was Jim Garris in New Orleans. He was a district attorney. And I read his book. He wrote two books and I actually got to know him. And he was a man who like 20 years after he did this and went through hell, came back to it and wrote another book. And that's the book I bought. In other words, he was devoted to the subject like you are. He believed a lot more than me. He would be in a patriot in World War II and he'd served in Korea. He'd been, he'd been, I mean, he'd been called every name in the book. But he, as a patriot, he firmly believed that Mr. Kennedy was killed by these intelligence forces and he went after it. And in those days you just couldn't do it. You couldn't prove a covert operation. Right. He got killed by the press. Killed. And that's, we've now we've found out a lot more about why what was going on. We know a lot more facts about how the media went after him with bullshit, a lot of bullshit accusations and made him look as bad as possible. Well, Kevin Costner did an amazing job of playing him in your movie too. Well, he was a basis of that. Once you get a costner in the middle of it, then you can start to move. You've got an interesting central character. Then you bring in all these crazies that you read about people like Jack Lemon, Walter Matau, all the lunatics around New Orleans, Dallas involved in the war against Cuba. Yeah. And then I wanted a Lee Harvey Oswald character. Which was to tell a little bit of his story. So I had two stories, Garrison and Oswald. I got to know Marina. I didn't, you know, the track to a lot of the Oswald story. Not enough of it, but there's more now. But it's some, he seems to have been definitely in the employ of the CIA when he went to Russia the first time and when he came back again. He was, there's too much evidence of it. Yeah. We would bring that out too. But that story had become, and then the third story would be the daily plaza, the actual assassination. So Garrison's not there. He has to go back into the past to find this out. So yeah, that's that whole Dallas section is part of the, it's. Harrison's not there. He has to go back into the past to find this out. Right? So yeah, that's the thread. The whole Dallas section is part of the structure. It starts the movie. But it also we go back to it at the right time and at the climax we go back to it for the final time, the way it probably happened. So then that's three stories. And then the fourth story, if you want, know the truth and my thinking at that time was the Donald Sutherland. Yes. He comes into the movie at the halfway point and he gives Garrison a lot of new information because Garrison thinks he's dealing on the local level. He thinks he's dealing with something that's in New Orleans. He's not sure what's beyond it. So he and now, he says it's a much bigger story which sends Costner into the last act going to Dallas and it's too much for the Costner character. He's blown away by it. He knows he's up against forces of much larger than he ever thought. And this trial, who was the motivation for the Donald Sutherland character? Fletcher Proudie. He was Lieutenant Colonel in the Air Force. He was the focal officer between the CIA and the Pentagon. An old-timer World War II did a lot of service and he was in charge of basically providing the CIA with military equipment for covert operations. He worked in Tibet. He worked on a lot of the operations in the 50s and the late 40s. We had operations going on in Ukraine. Ukraine, at China, Tibet. He trained Tibetans in the Colorado mountains and many stories. He's written several books. He was a keen observer of the differences that were going on. He knew dollars, used to brief them and told me stories about then. Everything changed after Kennedy was guilty. So you got to meet him? Oh yeah. Oh yeah, I hung out with him. Garrison too. Both of these were authentic men and Fletcher described the difference after November 63. He felt it right away. He left the Pentagon a year later. There was something that changed in the country. Sure enough, we were in Vietnam faster than you can imagine in the combat troops. Yeah, another crazy character in that whole historical record is Jack Ruby. He's a very strange one. I just read a book called Chaos by Tom O'Neill. It's about the CIA and Manson in the 60s. Oh yeah, I know the book. Yeah, it's very interesting. But Ruby is in that book because Ruby was actually visited by, I forget his name, Jolly, something, Jolly West. What's it? Jolly West. Jolly West, thank you. Who was the central character in MK Ultra, who they believe was involved in these various, yeah, that's a plastic cell. Now it comes off. I'm sorry about it. I'm listening. But he was a central character in the CIA's use of LSD during the whole Operation Midnight climax in San Francisco and they ran a free clinic in Hey Dashbury that's connected to Manson where they were giving people LSD and running studies on him. He went to visit Ruby in prison. And Ruby who had shown no psychological trauma or distress after he left was a mess curled up in a fetal position on the ground and was thinking they were burning Jews in the streets and literally was in a psychotic state and they think they dosed him up while he was in jail. Yeah, he seems to be the mob connection to this thing. Yes, yeah. You can put your arm back. Yeah, it's a no, Ruby's, his contacts alone. He goes back many years of the 40s. He was quite a, he was mobbed up completely and didn't want to do it. He was forced into doing it. Why do you think he was forced? What, what do you think it was? I think he was scared about what? Well, I have never followed that in depth because, you know, people must say they organized crime killed him. I don't believe that because they didn't have the power to pull this thing off. I think that they they're an element to it. Yeah, you want it to rub out Oswald. Probably Oswald was intended to die there on that day. You say, there's a lot of things at point in that direction, but he didn't and he couldn't be allowed to go. It's crazy that they got Jack Ruby to do it. I mean, they, they killed off. Everything that Oswald said in that station, police station is gone. Yeah. It's, uh, you're saying. But, uh, what he said in the corridor outside, it's very interesting. And, um, we know that Ruby was there. So Ruby, I think, was pushed into this thing because they had to make it, it was a quick operation. We got to get to him, you know. And it's really crazy. The story plays out 12 years later when on the Haraldo Rivera show Dick Gregory brings us a Pruder film and introduces it to the American public. Yeah. And then they get the chance to see Kennedy's head going back into the left. Yeah. And everybody's like, what? Yeah. That's disgusting story. But, uh, you know, on the, on the, on the Ruby affair, don't forget that he was also, he was urgently asking the Warren commission to get me to Washington. I want to talk to Jesus. What he knew he didn't know everything. I don't think anyone knew everything. They, he knew his part of it. So the whole idea was that how can you get cancer out of the blue like that? So suddenly, yeah. So suddenly and die so quickly. Now there again, there's a lot of cancer experimentation going on at this point in the 60s. I'm sure doctors in the MLK cancer too. There was a huge, huge, uh, experience, there was a doctor in the Orleans. I forgot his name, but working on it. And David Fairey was one of these people who knew him. Fairey had a lot of mice. And he was operating on his, he was using his mice as cancer. Feeding them huge doses of cancer. The idea was that they said they were going to kill Castro with, you know, inject Castro with a needle and kill him because they make it so strong and they're getting this cancer to play, they're building up through these mice. A cancer that was so powerful that could kill. I mean, I heard everything on this film, but that seems to be truth to this. Do you feel like you're going to put it to bed with this documentary in your mind? Like you can do. It's the best we can do. And I mean, I mean, I have Jim D Eugenia working with me. He's, he's followed this thing like he's a fifth generation researcher and he's very, very up to date. But uh, why is this coming out? It's I don't know yet. Well, I don't know if we can get it out. We're going to try. Now when like Scarface is another movie, like we were saying that that, that is the introduction for a lot of people, uh, they, a lot of people, especially outside of Miami really just didn't understand how crazy things had gotten there. And uh, I have a good friend of mine who was an ophthalmologist who did his residency in Miami and he would tell me stories like he was there in the 80s when all the crazy shit was happening. And uh, just he was like, it was a war zone. You would just everybody was, you just everybody coming in was shot. People were all coaked up and all these overdoses. And well, that's I think there's a lot of sensationalism in that, you know, America likes war. They like to play up the, uh, the machine guns and all that. That was 1913, dirty Chicago time magazine went out of its way to sensationalize it. I was there. I saw, you know, it wasn't wild that way in the sense of shooting in the streets. What happened rarely, but they happened. People would be gunned down. Families were killed. Drunk dealers went after families of each other. So yeah, there was a lot of that kind of internet sign warfare. Well, my friend saw it because he was in the ER. You know, so I was seeing it. What the you know, doing his residency there. So he was seeing it. I think in any American city, there's a lot of shootings every week. That's true. You know, especially right now, right? But definitely there was a new element. It was it was the Colombian element. And the Mario Lito's came in. Some of them, uh, Cubans who were, uh, gangster element out of Cuba. Yeah. And it got bloody when the, the Colombians were not playing around. So there was a lot of cutthroats. They used to, they used to, she bought those, uh, Columbia necktie. Yeah, that's right. That's it. Yeah. When I was there, I heard about a couple of these guys, uh, it was interesting because I was working both sides of the case. I was trying to get to know that the crime element is more than, so I knew all the lawyers and I went over to Bimini one day to, uh, to, to get some real information about them because they couldn't in the US. They were scared to talk. So I, I located through a defense lawyer, a couple of some guys in Bimini. I went down there and I met with them. And they were talking it because that was Bimini was another kind of world. They was, the government was on the take there. I think. And they had a lot of speed boats going out of there every night at the hotel towards, you know, Bimini's very close to Miami. And I, I was doing coke at that time. I got, when my wife, I, she was my cover. And I, you know, and I, Hollywood screenwriter wants to talk to you. He did been not expressed. They liked that, you know, they want to know about the business. But then in the middle of this, we're all coaked up in the hotel. You know, the way conversation goes and I drop a name, uh, just like that, you know, a guy I talked to. Well, he'd been a defense lawyer when I talked to him. But in the past, he'd been a prosecutor, because that prosecutor's often flipped to defense attorneys to make more money. So when I mentioned that name, two of these three guys got really uptight. And they walked, they, they'd excuse themselves. One in the bathroom when I said I fucked up, I knew I'd fucked up. And I didn't know what was going to come out in that bathroom. You know, if they thought I was in some kind of cop, some kind of under-informer, because they did, they hated that prosecutor that put them, put one of them away. So a few minutes went by there and it was pretty hairy. But, uh, I think I was paranoid, but because they came out and they didn't have guns in their hands, but they, they cut the meeting off and, you know, I went back to my room. They were staying the same hotel all night. I was tense because I, you know, I knew they could come and get me. It was their hotel. They owned, they owned the island. Right. But it was nerve wracking. And I got out of their first thing in the morning. The whole point is you say the wrong word sometimes in your dead. That's the, that's the kind of tension I wanted for this movie. I put it into the scene earlier in the picture where Mr. Pacino, I'll go with those in to make a pickup, make a trade. And he says, he senses something's off in this meeting and he, and he becomes that blood, bloodbath with the dismemberment. Remember, yes. And the chainsaw. The chainsaw. Yeah. I was going to bring that scene up. Yeah. There was a chainsaw murder at one point. Yeah. Does something about the way you filmed that was so excellent because it was obviously gory and disgusting, but you didn't have to show it. I didn't direct it. I wrote it. Right. Brian DiPama did a great job directing it. Grandhopper. No, that's right. He did an amazing job. It's right. When you are talking about someone who is in that world, when you're trying to make a film about a guy who is in that world who is not a good guy, you're your main guy, Al Pacino, Tony Montana is a bad guy. He's the hero. It's a very strange movie. Well, yeah, it is because he is a hero because he's free in a way. He's a free man. That's where people liked it. White people did not like that movie when it came out. I was disappointed at first. There was a black in the Latinos in the inner city. He said, went and they loved it. And also people who white people who were doing some drugs, they went. That was a kind of audience. We were a bad boy movie. The movie didn't do it as well as they'd hoped because it cost a lot of money. He went three months over budget. It was a very tedious shoot. I was there the whole time. But over time, the film garnered a reputation and made money for the big money for them. Well, it's become a psychotic drug war movie. It's the movie for gangsters. It's bold. Yeah. In fact, wherever I go in the world, I mean, I pretty much people, you wrote Scarface. I got into Salvador. I got into the fascist party that way. It's a research. Yeah, they thought I'm weak on this. When you're writing about a movie or you're writing about a guy like Tony Montana, how do you, you did, you walked this fine line of telling the story accurately, but actually making him likable in some strange way. Well, he's not a hypocrite, you see. He tells the truth is he says, even when I lie. He's a man who's free unto himself. And I think that's what worked because the people around him are so corrupt. I mean, the cops are corrupt in the system, the bureaucracy that press down on, by the way, I mean, let's be honest, let's talk about the drug war. I mean, this is an invention that's come about that's a disaster. It's the bureaucracy of enormous billions of dollars being wasted on fighting drugs with this super DEA and now they ice and all that, whatever they want. We always create wars. We call a war on drugs, war on poverty, war on this war on that. We make, that's the problem. We make too much of a bureaucracy. I noticed this in Vietnam. It bothered to shout out to me because we were sending five people non-combat people over there for one every combat person. We had an infrastructure, Las Vegas of the of the of material. We had PXs. We had everything we wanted. They sent cars over there. A lot of this stuff was, you know, sold on the black market in the end by my master's origins, making a buck on the side. You know, there was a lot of shit going on crime stuff. And the Vietnamese were benefiting from it. They loved the Americans. Of course, they loved us. It's the same thing. If you understand it, it goes on and on and on. It's like we create these super bureaucracies around events. So what happened in the war on drugs is the same thing. And then I think that Pacino is a hero because in a way he sees it all. He sees it's all bullshit. And he calls it out. And I think people, I think a lot of people just picked up on it. They knew the war on drugs was a lie. Yeah. Well, most people today at least have a sense that it's not going well. You know, back then they thought of any countries. How many countries have we pissed off? How many countries have we told? How you got to do it this way? We're coming down there. We're going to bust you. Speaking of Geraldo, did you ever see the footage where Geraldo was in Afghanistan and he's walking through the poppy fields that are being protected by US troops? Yeah, sure. And it's on Fox News. So he's trying to do this weird propaganda job of explaining why in order to get these poppy farmers to give us information about the Taliban. We have to somehow or another protect their crops. So we've got American soldiers. It's the crazy story. Well, then you find out that spectacular growth of heroin. Like heroin, just heroin sales and heroin use worldwide went up in an amazing manner. Yeah. This was going on by the way in the 1980s when we were when we were supporting the Mujahan 18 against the Russians. Yeah. That's when it started. They were fighting for the poppy fields. Yeah. We're talking about billions of dollars here. Billions. Yeah. It's not like some of these drug dealers. We don't even know their names, but they're well known in the Pakistani kind of world. Yeah. Some of them are unbelievably rich. But it's so transparent. The poppy fields being guarded by US troops and that's a new one. And then talking about it openly on Fox News and some, well, don't worry, folks. This is why they have to do this. Like it's one of the weirdest parts of the war. Yeah. As was Dan Rather doing his stand up at the beginning of the war and about how he's we're fighting the awful Russians. They got us going on that. I didn't even see that clip. But when was that early in the war? Yeah. He was he was brought the flag to Afghanistan, you know, making heroes out of them. The action of the guys we supported, you have the most money was to Hector Hachma Tier who is a drug dealer. We gave him the most amount of aid. Hachma Tier. He's like the killer, killer warlord. It's so strange. It's such a, it's so strange how history repeats itself in different forms. Just over and over and over. Or yet, no, there was a whole, in Laos, there was a whole poppy growth. Yeah. And a shipping that was CIA shipping out, air America. Remember that movie? Mm hmm. Yeah. Yeah. There was a, I was at a guy on who was in denial of this. And I showed him the CIA drug plane that crashed in Mexico with several tons of cocaine in it just a few years ago. I'm like, this is a plane that had been to Guantanamo Bay multiple times. Like this is still going on. All that shit that happened with Barry Seals and. Yeah. You're telling me about your own country. Yeah. I mean, that stuff's still going on. That's an ugly story. Yeah. Very ugly. Yeah. The Barry Seal movie was okay. Other top three. They got a piece of it. Yeah. But it was unclear that that. Yeah. We were basically Reagan was selling arms to Iran taking the cash and splitting it with the contrast. Yeah. The contrast with one of the most brutal, brutal groups, terrorist groups in Nicaragua, trying to just, they were killing civilians blowing up farms, scaring people. And we supported them. We supported a lot of bad guys everywhere in the world. You have a very comprehensive knowledge of history. And is this one of the reasons why you decided to make that documentary series, the untold history of the United States? Because you mean, you obviously get some of it out in your films. But did you just feel like? Well, yeah, I've done a lot of films about subjects around it. So at a certain point in my life, I say, I really like to know more about American history because something's weird here. And I think I went to school kind of back to school. I never studied. I never got a college degree and normal subject matter like history or mathematics. I got a film school degree. So I had to, I thought I knew things, but I learned a lot with going back and learning by with historians who were throwing out all the myths for me about American history. And I made that film with just five years it took, we had to rewrite it, rewrite it, rewrite it. It was complicated. We started with the Philippines because that was the beginning of overseas imperialism. And we worked our way up through the, through the Obama administration from 1898 to 2013. It's amazing series. It goes too fast if anything. Yeah, but I think people could watch it two times without and learn each chapter is revealing stuff people don't know about how this country really got off. I don't know. I mean, it got off, maybe it got off on the wrong start with earlier, but you know, it really got off the bent in its purposes. And assuming we're the good guy, assuming we know this exceptionalism that we have, we're somehow motivated in a different way than other countries. Yeah, that's the way we excuse it, right? We're the number one superpower. We do awful things, but better us than them. There's no excuse for that. No excuse it. It doesn't hold up to history. It won't hold up to God either. Yeah. When you're making a series like that, it's difficult to edit it down to a palatable sort of version. I feel like it moves fast. You can't accuse that series of board. If anything, it just has to because there's decades to cover. But I'm so proud of that. I think I'm glad you mentioned it's one of, frankly, it's one of my achievements in my life. It stands up there with JFK for me in platoon. Now, when you've done so much, I mean, you've had this amazing career between writing and directing and putting together all these incredible films, what motivates you now? What gets you going when you're trying to make a new project? Well, this book is a lot of work. I remember it's a chance to rediscover. I went, it was going so fast at times between films that I didn't have that leisure time to think about what I've done. And I think by reliving it, each film, each film for me is important. By reliving it, I'd rediscover a lot. I thought a lot about the Vietnam War, for example, came to a lot of the conclusions that I put here that I wouldn't have been so cogent before. Also, I realized that I'm a fundamentally flawed character. I mean, I understand this for really understanding the contradiction in myself between my parents, my fundamental nature, which is you have to do that with yourself. You have to look at who you are, my mom being, who she was, my dad being. I mentioned earlier the writer director side, there are two different people. You can't be the same person when you do it. Writing is very much an inner loneliness. So I'll have to, my father was like that. And directing is very much being external, being warm, being inviting, working with people, collaborating. It's a wholly different exercise in your and those two, I think I'm double minded, I say in the book. And I think that's a good thing. Do you prefer to do both? Do you prefer to write the film and direct it? How much sounds faction do you get out of just writing a film like Scarface or writing a film like platoon and directing it? I think for me, it was the both. I mean, that's why I wanted to direct. I went to film school for that. So the writing I'd always been doing naturally and directing is what I wanted to do. Then don't forget editing. There's editing process. I worked very closely with my editors. And then there's the whole process of selling the film, which is another category completely called marketing. It's a crazy fucking business. It's hard. I've done 20 of them and they're killers, 20 films and eight documentary, nine documentaries. And what am I going to do now? I don't know. I think there's another book in me. That's for sure. Yeah, absolutely. Because this is ends in 1986. The story is not over. It takes another turn. It has two films, documentaries satisfy me. Do I need to make another film only if I really needed to? Was it the last film you did? No. 2016. Well, you interviewed him. Yeah. We talked about it briefly. Yeah. You understood his point of view. It's a crazy story for our times that that this man is persecuted. This guy who I think is a hero. He's exposed things that are unconstitutional, things that no one signed off on. He exposed that there's this widespread surveillance of law-abiding citizens who've done absolutely nothing wrong in this data collection. And the fact that this man is hiding in Russia is to meet crazy. And I mean, I don't know. I don't even know if at this point in time anybody could pardon him, but it's stunning to me that no one has. It's stunning to me that Obama didn't. It's stunning to me. He pardoned Chelsea Manning, God damn, pardon Snowden. Yeah, but Obama went after the whistle blowers with a ferocity that was crazy. Using the S. B. and O.J. Act from 1917. I mean, it was really ugly. And he was zealous. I mean, he was actually like he did more damage and bush in many ways overseas. Well, it's very counter to his image. I mean, if you look at the hope and change website, remember that? They're the whole thing about empowering whistle blowers to come out and tell their story. Oh, geez. They had to delete that. I supported him at the beginning. Boy, he seemed perfect. I mean, he's a statesman. He's a brilliant speaker. Seems like an amazing guy. But whatever the fuck happens when you get in that office, you can't change things. You know, I mean, it seems to be every president since Jack Kennedy. Is he Kennedy tried on a fundamental level? He wanted to change the CIA. He wanted to change the Cold War. It seems that you can't get off that path in this country. I can't. It seems very hard. No one's been able to do it so far. When you see a story like the Jeffrey Epstein story, which is playing out right now, right? Right. You could talk to my son. That is one of the craziest fucking stories of our time because it's a conspiracy theorist wet dream. And no one would have ever believed there's an island where a guy brings prominent scientists, celebrities, and politicians to fuck underage girls. They film them all and use it to somehow another blackmail them or they film them apparently. According to Gailaine Maxwell, there's tapes. You know, I mean, there's so much to the story. That's so crazy. Oh, for sure. So that's going to be the next next mystery. Well, the next mystery is how they're going to kill her. That's the next mystery. I mean, how long is it going to last? I mean, there's supposed to the whole trial doesn't take place for a year. That's a lot of time. And that tombs you feel that was a murder from outside? For Epstein went yes. 100%. Yeah. The guys on suicide watch, the film doesn't work. The surveillance cameras don't work. And Michael Baden, the forensic scientist, reviews the autopsy and he's like, this man was strangled. Look at the the break in the bone of the neck that's consistent with strangulation. Look at the position in which he was choked, like which which part of the neck that's not consistent with hanging. Oh, there's all the factors point to the fact that the guy was killed. And then the fact that I mean, the guys on suicide watch and you know, how, how is it possible that this guy was one of the most important witnesses in a case against a gigantic number of very powerful people, just winds of committing suicide. Whoops. No worries. Sorry. Well, if I stayed away from that picture. It's a mass. It's a mass. But that's one that I would think would intrigue you. I mean, if at the end of all this when the piece is all fallen to place, is that something you would think about covering for a film? Well, if I had to write it, I had to get very interested in the subject matter. It seems it doesn't, you know, I mean, it's, I don't know what it's about. I mean, if if it's really what they say and there's all these world leaders in blah, blah, blah, I mean, it just doesn't really lead anywhere. It doesn't make sense. I mean, the world is a much more important places. World a sense of world peace. And this is the most important issue piece in our time. And we are building up nuclear weapons at an incredible rate under this guide Trump. And it's a huge, it's a return to the worst of the core war. And that scares me. That's an issue I would like to. I think if I were to get involved again in another movie, if not a documentary would be that one about the accumulation of arms. Yeah, the building of the courts and the madness of our leaders, Democrat and Republican, constantly pushing for more sanctions, more pressure on our perceived enemies, China, Russia, the North Korea, Iran, Iran, and Venezuela. I mean, it's just why? Yeah, how are we doing this? We don't have to. The world could be a much more peaceful place. Take our foot off the pedal. Is there anybody that has stood out in recent memories of politician that gave you some hope? Kennedy. Before we got to go back to the street. Obama. I was there. I mean, I was hoping for Clinton too. It just doesn't seem to be in the cards. In other words, the office is not as important as you make it out to be. I think there's a system in place. A system that Eisenhower quite well described as the military industrial to corporate complex, it drives money, profit, greed. That speech is so amazing. That speech that he gave upon leaving office. It was a warning. Yes. He knew that he'd fucked up. He said, I leave my successor a legacy of ashes since famous quote. Eisenhower did not horrible. He knew that he fucked up. He said, I leave my successor a legacy of ashes. This is famous quote. I was an Howard. Did not horrible things. He started intervening much more in other countries than ever. He appointed John Tossa Dulles, who was a psycho, in my opinion, as his secretary of state. He's like Pompeo now. Mike Pompeo. And Alan Dulles at the CIA, the word brothers. But anyway, Eisenhower knew I think he felt bad about what he'd seen happen over those eight years. And I think Kennedy was a great hope because he was a new man, no generation. He changed two Kennedy in office. He moved more and more to the left as he stayed in office. He saw the problems. He couldn't believe it. He saw the lies. He was lied to a lot. The Bay of Pigs was the first one. But he was lied to a lot of the things we get into. It's the great mystery, right? What happens to a candidate once they win the presidency and once they're in office? What is the process? Well, that's where you have to have courage. And that's where Obama really failed. I mean, when he appointed Hillary Clinton as a secretary of state, you knew it was over. you have to make decisions and you have to go in a new way if you're going to be there. And it's just so, it's such a, it becomes such a bureaucratized office that it's almost impossible to appoint a thousand people when you come in to work with you that are going to be on your side. But as a guy who's a storyteller, this is one of the great stories of our time is how impossible it is to be a president. I think it's very hard, very hard. But you need guts, you need guts. And if you have guts, it makes a difference. Remember, Kennedy had been in war. He'd save people. He was a hero in that, in the Pacific. Yes. Those are the kind of guts you need. Right. When you put together the Snowden movie, what was your aim? Like what were you trying to get out of that film? Well, I knew it was important story because surveillance had never imagined surveillance. At this level, I realized that it could be, with this new technology we had, that it could be everywhere. I mean, beyond my imagination, beyond anybody's imagination and what I did the movie, it was to reveal what he revealed, which was shocking in its implications. We weren't even further. We showed how the control of information, the use of information, can destabilize many regimes. And they went after regime change. We came to new, new, new modus operandi for the United States. It was okay to change regimes. We were good at it. And the way we did it with the soft power, subtle. What happened in Brazil, a couple of years ago, typical, you know, the whole forcing out the president of Lula, getting rid of the Dilma, bringing in this, well, this other guy came in from the right, but essentially Brazil was completely changed. Completely changed. They're still working out in Venezuela. They got, they got, they worked in Bolivia. They got, they got rid of the guy illegally, Honduras. Libya. Libya. Libya. That's the most spectacular failure, right? Well, I was one of one. Yeah, it's a failed state now. But it was a, yeah. But that comes down to our policy in the Middle East. Yeah. When you make a film like that, how hard is it to put together? I mean, the Snowden film is so disturbing because it's current, right? We're dealing with things that are happening right now. Yeah. How hard is it to put it down and make it this dramatic piece that's going to be in your car? It was hard. You have to judge after yourself. I like the movie. It's a, it's a, it's tense and it keeps the, it keeps the tension throughout the movie. Uh, like of course I got to know so and very well. I went to Moscow several times and met with them. Oh, really? Yeah. How does that have kind of ranged? No. Do you have to put a band in over your eyes? No. I've done that too. Have you? Yeah, that was a terrorist group in the Middle East. What was that for? That was for a persona non-gratite. It was a documentary I did about in 2003, for about the leader of the PLL. Well, Arafat. Yeah, I got to do it. Yeah, I did an interview with him. Wow, what was that like? I was more, I didn't because of my connections. I had more contact with the Israeli side. I was in Ramallah. So I mean, I was talking to Netanyahu before he was prime minister. I was talking to the leader, the expert minister at the prime minute and all that. And then I went to Ramallah, which was a capital of the PLL there in actually I was there the day the Israelis, the day before the Israelis came in and knocked out that, knocked out the lights and there. Wow. I was isolated, Arafat and the Ramallah PLL. We got out at the last second actually. But we were seen, Arafat, and showing his side of the equation, showing what he was thinking. So part of that, part of that I went to see a terrorist group. They became quite famous later than they well known. They were young guys and they had their masks and I went in midnight. I was more scared of the Israelis than them because the Israelis could be tracking. They had all this equipment and bugged shit out of us when we were in there. That's what I'm scared of. Israelis were dangerous. You thought the Israelis would do that knowing that you were a filmmaker? I don't know what they're thinking. No, I'm not sure they knew what we were doing. They saw people going into a underground bunker with people with masks and who knows what they're thinking. They have great reconnaissance. So you have to be careful when you fight them. And so they requested that you wear a mask when they tracked them. Not the Israelis, but I mean, the terrible. Yeah, they transported them. Yes, but when I got there, I took it off. Did you, but that decision was out of tough decision to make to let them? No, not for sure. Do you hear about where the mask going? No, I was very anxious to meet them. They were, they were, they call them terrorists, but who's a terrorist these days? Right. You know, we can bomb other countries to death and call ourselves a good guys, but we kill a lot of civilians around the world with our bombing. This, that's true. But this message that you have that you, you're not just a guy who makes movies, but your guy who makes movies and also a guy who's very outspoken about all of these issues in the world. Do those two get in the way of each other sometimes? Of course. Of course. There was people that think sometimes my outspokenness over shadows, my work, they might be true for them. But they're true. They're true. They're a label you both ways too, which is very fascinating to make. The world is, the world is complicated. And I did speak out and some people think that's, they say I'm a filmmaker stick to being that, but you know, it's very hard if you care. You know this. Well, it's, it's very important that you don't. I'm glad that you have the courage to not stick to that. Yeah. I mean, I think it's when someone, oh, sorry. Please God, it's noted. It's noted that we couldn't get support for it. We was financed ultimately from France and Germany and Italy. And we got some, some small money at the end from the US with a small distributor. I mean, this is a biggest story. One of the biggest stories of our time and we couldn't get support from any of the studios. We went to all of them. Well, people are terrified of it. That tells you a lot about what a mess we're in. We don't even have the guts to talk about stuff. We shut up. We censor ourselves. We self-sensor. Yeah. I mean, I don't, in the 1980s, on 90s, I probably could have gotten it finance, but not now. Well, it's such a dense time. And that, that issue is so polarizing. And I don't understand how it isn't. I don't have, understand how it doesn't have universal support by American citizens. The, the, the, this story needs to be told. I mean, even when he was discussed as a podcast guest, a lot of people were saying, you should really stay away from that. They don't understand. They think he's some kind of Russian agent. It's crazy. You know, he's very, very clear about it. Well, he's, it's very clear when you listen to all of the interviews with him. And then when I got a chance to talk to him myself, he, who he says he is. Exactly. A boy scout. Yeah. I mean, he has a story and it's a spectacular one. And it's, it's one of the most important historical moments of our time that we recognize that this overwhelming surveillance state has, has existed without us even knowing it. And cyber warfare too raises the whole issue of who's doing what to who? Right. We're very quick to say they're doing that to us. China and Russia, this is not, they're doing their steel blah, blah, blah, blah. What are we doing? Yeah. So you had difficulties in making films, but is there ever a film that you wanted to make that you never could? Yeah, sure. What is that? Several, uh, me, lie. Me, life, I got very close. We were about two, three weeks away from shooting it in 2007 in Thailand and some of it in Vietnam. I've been to, to me, lie in Vietnam. Great story because the massacres unknown. They don't know. We don't, people don't know the real story. It was investigated that massacre, you've heard of it, right? I've heard 500 civilians were shot down in cold blood. Babies, well, everybody, everybody, old people shot. And not one enemy bullet was fired, not one. And we've heard all the obfuscations of that. The whole thing was, you know, basically a misplanned operation because of basically CIA. It was guiding the war and they were torturing to death, some, no torturing, some poor soul who gave him information. There was faulty. Happens all the time. Right torture works, right? 200 doesn't work. And as a result, that operation, they were told that there was NVA in that village. They were not there. So the guys went in thinking they should kill. Did you ride a screenplay for this? No, someone else did and I was about to direct it. And it was, it almost happened. It just ran into the fiscal crisis of 2008. Oh, okay. But that's not an excuse nobody wanted to make it. Have you thought about trying again? I did. No, no go. I also tried to make the Martin Luther King story years ago. Many years I worked on it. Martin Luther King is a great story, but it's a two-tough story to tell. I mean, I think there's a lot of portion of the black community that's really kind of of a creature like a saint, a martyr, whereas this is more of a human man. And he's, you know, he's failing to this and that, but he's a hero in this. But you know, he's relationship with women is fascinating. And we were into that whole aspect of it. And what happened with that? It just never got together. Never. It might be a good time to revisit that now. No, I think it's a black filmmaker could revisit it. Right. It's definitely moved into that direction. I've also tried, I tried for many years to do a Vida and I wrote a script for that, but another director made it. How far down the road had you gotten with the Martin Luther King story? Twice, I went. Yeah. I wrote a, I, me and someone else wrote a whole script. I think it's very good. But gone, you know, you can't, so many films get planned and not made. You feel me do this like five, five, abortion. Damn. That seems like a great one, though. I mean, he's such an incredible and important character. And boy, is the world need a Martin Luther King Jr right now. Yeah. Well, things are changing all the time. Well, listen, Oliver, I've taken up a lot of your time and I really, really appreciate you being here. Your book is called Chasing the Light. It's your memoir up until 1986. I really hope you make another one because you have had one of the most interesting and spectacular lives in show business. You're a bad motherfucker. I appreciate you. Thank you, Joe. I really enjoyed today. I, I, I, I, I, I, I did not, I was, if there's a clean copy, I can give you it to you, I guess. Okay. What do you look, what you mean, right? I was looking for a spider in it. I would know that's my, I have to send you one. I have one. I have one. I have one. I have one. Thanks for everything. I appreciate you. Thank you. Bye, everybody.