[Music] So, how did you get into this whole political game? So, ironically, with everything that just happened with Charlie Kirk, I was actually recruited to work with Turning Point. So, I had this goal and ambition of going to medical school. I had joined the military. So, left, you know, pretty young, 19. And after I finished up my undergrad, I was in a gap year. And so, for those who've gone through the med school process, there's a lot of volunteer work that you do to kind of build up your application for these schools. And so, I started working as a counter-trafficking activist and started using then social media before political influencers or influencing was really a thing. And Turning Point had found a video that I did on the hypocrisy of what was happening with border security and basically recruited me to work with them. So, Charlie called me a day before I was supposed to go to medical school and offered me a job as a national Hispanic outreach director. And then, at that point in time, I basically had less than 24 hours to decide was I going to go one path or was I going to go completely separate route. And so, one of my mentors at the time was like, you have the ability, if you do get into politics, at this time I didn't ever think that I would end up in Congress. But, he's like, if you can at least work with this organization, at the time Turning Point was just starting out, um and you can be influential in the policy, you could probably do a lot more than you ever would. So, as a doctor, you can always go back to medical school if it doesn't work out. So, um I ended up taking a gamble. Best decision that I ever ended up doing and worked alongside Charlie Kirk and then realized that the activism was good to a certain point, but if I wanted to really make a change, I had to really focus on what was happening in Washington and I had to go to Washington to do it. So, that's kind of how I ended up running for Congress. Okay. So, long story short, activism into politics. >> Were you at the uh that memorial for him there? >> Yeah, I spoke at the vigil and the memorial. So, the vigil at the Kennedy Center and then the memorial in Arizona. Yeah, the whole Charlie Kirk thing has just been like I don't know, it's it's put like a a very weird vibe out in the ether to me. It feels like we're we're in like a really weird place right now and I said the other day it feels like it all the vibe right now almost feels like the COVID vibe. Yeah, it's it's dark dark energy. What I will say is that with So, I was ironically enough filming a documentary on the assassination of JFK cuz part of my task force in Congress is I'm actually looking into the historical assassinations for the declassified files that the administration has directed these agencies to release. And I will never forget where it's like when you ask people where were you at on 9/11, you remember. I remember where I was at when I found out that my friend had been murdered and David, my comms director, came and he goes, "Onna, Charlie's been shot." And I went on X and I immediately saw the video and I wished to the I wished that I did not see that video cuz I it was basically like watching my friend bleed out in real time. And I saw that and I was like, I generally don't think he's going to make it. And then I called um my friend over at Turning Point and he told me at that point in time that it wasn't looking good. And then I found out on the House floor that he had officially passed away and then that was a whole thing in itself because we had called, which I don't care if if this would have happened to anyone else in the country, like left-wing or not, I would have still said like let's pray for the family. And to see people choose that point in time to boost someone, I just felt like it was so disgusting. And I think that's part of the reason why people just hate politics is cuz you have a lot of weirdos in in DC. Yeah, and also all of the overwhelming amount of conspiracy theories and like flooding the zone or whatever you want to call it of all the people on the internet trying to dissect the whole thing and do an autopsy on the event and, you know, it came from here, it came from there, it was this person, they're covering it up. Nothing's real. We don't know what is up, what is down, what is left, what is right. And it just feels like, at least for me, it just made me want to like just step away from the internet for like >> Yeah, I think people need to go outside and touch some grass sometimes and get grounded in reality. It's not to say that people don't have the right to ask questions, right? Like part of what my task force is doing is looking into some of the biggest assassination in in US history that were surrounded by conspiracy. And to speak on just JFK, for example, we have found out that there has been credible credible evidence that the CIA intentionally lied to Congress, undermined investigations, stonewalled Congress's efforts, and then intimidated witnesses, etc. Um there's actually a lot of information that has come out where we won't ever have a smoking gun, per se, but it creates a mosaic of where you can draw your own conclusions and assume that the CIA definitely likely had a hand in that. >> Yeah, I mean, imagine if we would have had social media in 1963. Oh, it would have gone different. I think I think a lot a big >> All of the [ __ ] that was going down there. Yeah, and and we're seeing that though re-happen now. It's kind of weird because, like you said, there's kind of this weird energy surrounding what happened with Charlie. But, remember there was two assassination attempts on the president. A lot of people still don't In fact, the administration doesn't know what happened with Butler. I can tell you that I actually cross-examined the Secret Service director who lied to me under oath and I was going to hold her in contempt of Congress. She resigned the next day. But, we knew directly from whistleblowers that came forward out of the Secret Service that they intentionally did not send people to the meetings with these sniper teams that were supposed to be pulling security for the president. You basically had an open shot. This isn't conspiratorial. Anyone who's pulling detail security company will say, "Why would you leave that shot open like that?" Um then we, you know, It was a slanted roof. I mean, it was really hard to get snipers up there. Uh it's the whole thing is just such a joke in the way that it was handled. You know, you look at the fact that leading up to that, a lot of people have, and they still do, continue to call people that disagree with them fascists, Nazis, all this stuff. But, then you look at the fact that this this shooter was, you know, he had burner phones. Whatever happened to the burner phones? Why did we not find out any information? You're telling me that you can find out more information with the NSA on any other American with a FISA warrant than you can on a shooter that tried to assassinate a president. It doesn't sit right. But, there are a lot of historical similarities between what happened in the '60s and the civil unrest and now the pendulum swinging, I think, back into more of a pro-America conservative base value system here, politically speaking. But, it's weird because in the '60s you had Kennedy assassinated, whereas there's two assassination attempts on President Trump. Then you had MLK assassinated. You had Charlie Kirk assassinated. Um there's been a lot of similarities and I just hope that the rhetoric can be toned down. You're seeing a lot of nonsense right now with the government shutdown. But, if you think for a second that these people don't know what they're doing, they pull test everything. I mean, like certain keywords they'll say you can pull up the messaging from different political pundits and outlets and even the same messaging topics from the Democrat Party because they know exactly what will sway their voters. So, they're targeting a certain sect of their own voting base to get them to turn out. And it's unfortunate because that's that rhetoric is what got Charlie killed. But, it goes a lot deeper than that. So, there's been a lot of questions as to whether there was foreign government involvement. In which one? In the assassination of Charlie Kirk, right? So, like we're going to address these theories right now. Um back during the ice rights, do you remember all of that at the beginning of the year? A lot of people were like, "Where are all of a sudden these big violent rights coming from? Who's funding these organizations?" We found out that there was a foreign funding tie to an individual by the name of Neville Singham, who's a multi-billionaire. And he made his billions by working with the communist Chinese government. And he would take, and he's not a registered agent a foreign agent, which is a far violation. So, he's taking these millions, funneling it into organizations like the Party of Socialism and Liberation, who then, in turn, create these very radicalized movements. But, they're not even American in theory or funded by American people. They're actually foreign funded by foreign governments. The irony in all this is that Neville Singham not just to Mondani's election, so like Jews for Mondani, but he actually also has ties to funding the Party of Socialism the City Queer Group, which is now being investigation investigated with former knowledge on whether or not they knew Charlie would be assassinated, who had ties to the shooter. So, I do think that there's a foreign funding tie. But, the question is which government? And I think it's tied to the Chinese. Interesting. What was called the Queer what? >> Salt Lake City Queers. Salt Lake City Queers. >> They're being investigated by the FBI. But, if you look at the organization where the funding comes from, I mean, not just them, they had ties to groups in Cuba for and they are actually like calling themselves terrorists. But, not just that, they also have ties to the United Nations. So, there's this aspect of a a very pro-globalist and then a pro-Marxist movement to really sow discord and divide in this country. And that's why I recently posted on my social media, I was like, "Check out the bot farms that actually exist." And when you see all this [ __ ] talking on Twitter, make sure you're not arguing with a bot because that's not like a fake thing. It happens. And so, we have to realize that social media is being used to kind of stoke this divide. But, in the instance of the shooter, Charlie Kirk was almost like a son to President Trump. Don Jr. will tell you he was like his little brother. Right. Very close to J.D. Vance, very close to Kash Patel. So, if you think for a second that there will be any amount of resource spared in his investigation, you're wrong because I know these people and I've seen the way that this administration has worked towards at least issuing some of the darkest secrets. For example, what happened with CIA and the connection to JFK's assassination. I've met with the director. But, to I think really take into account that you have the family that is seeing all this stuff out there right now. Um I hope that they get every single person involved. I definitely think that it's likely that more than one person knew about what was happening because the Salt Lake City Queer Group immediately deleted their page. They're under investigation. There's a foreign funding tie there. For Tyler Robinson to say that Charlie was, you know, hateful and that he just wanted to eliminate his hatefulness, where does that come from, right? Like if you actually listen to the things that Charlie was saying and you don't clip it, you can realize it was a very logical conversation that he was trying to have. If you don't agree with it, it's still not a reason to kill to murder someone. Right. Well, I think the problem is people have valid questions about the narrative that was immediately projected out into the media that obviously it if anyone with half of a brain can see that there are are massive holes in it. There's big questions. There's the things like the Discord thing where Discord came out and like denied it. There's like the >> they're being subpoenaed too, by the way, to go testify before Congress. So, they're going to be coming to testify before the oversight committee. Yeah. And then like the way he wrote the messages, which doesn't seem like something a 20-year-old would write. There's the whole history between him and his boyfriend and like the the weird love letter he wrote to him detailing everything he was going to do. There was the video of him getting pulled over by the cops, which didn't seem to like match up with the way he was using his language there. The Dairy Queen casually getting an ice cream, you know, if you're a sociopath, maybe that's a normal thing. >> thing, yeah. Um there's just so much so many strange things happening with I mean even the guy that the the I don't know. I've been following the whole Candace Owens thing. I've been trying to follow Have you paid attention to what she's been doing? >> I haven't seen too much of it. I've been trying to see what she's been >> videos every day that get 5 million views in like 24 hours. It's insane. And she's talking to all these people that were involved in it. Politicians running around Utah and they all have different stories. You know, it's all super strange. >> Well, the good news is is that the trial should be public. So, that'll all come out in discovery. Well, that would be nice. >> Um which I'm a huge fan in just direct transparency, but you have to understand too that there's an open investigation into this. So, if you have the FBI investigating Salt Lake City Queers foreign funding ties, multiple people under investigation, they're not going to be able to give that stuff immediately. But you should be able to see it and it's all going to come out in discovery cuz they have a full-fledged trial. So, I think a lot of those questions will be answered, but either which way, I mean the the reaction of a group of people, even people in Washington, to the assassination of another American was really disgusting to watch in real time. Yeah. And it was even more disgusting to see that people, instead of saying like, "Hey, this was like another American that got shot." They're trying to justify it. And then when people were basically held accountable to their employers, like, "Hey, this is not like if you are representing a company, right?" Um you probably shouldn't be like saying, "Great, kill his wife next." And that's what some people were saying. I actually worked with the um did some of these different social media companies and I was like, "Hey, um there's photoshopped images of children with blood splatter on their face saying Charlie's kids are next. Do you think that this is against your terms and conditions?" And I will say too even the um attorneys over at Blue Sky, which is a left-wing version of Twitter, they're like, "This is not what our platform is supposed to be used for." And so when people violate the terms and conditions of usage, we're going to delete the stuff. So, that's not necessarily cancel culture. That's just, "Hey, you guys have terms and conditions you agreed to." And by the way, you probably shouldn't be calling for the assassination of his children. Right. Totally. I totally agree with you on everything you said. >> common sense thing. Totally. And the question is when it comes to free speech online on these on these platforms, which are public utilities, where do you draw the line? You know, I think it's >> have they have terms and conditions. I actually sued Twitter at one point. I don't I don't know if you know that. >> Did you really? Yeah, during my election, this is before it really became a thing in 2020 with kicking Trump and deplatforming him. So, I was throttled on my engagement on X. And they were shadow banning me on Facebook as well. So, I couldn't actually get my message out there even to fundraise and all of that. And so >> This was in 2020 when I first ran. And so I had sued them and the thing is is that you So, social media is considered I consider it a public utility, but there is stuff with section 230 that Congress I don't think is ever going to want to reform because a lot of people in Congress are owned by some of these tech people. And it gives certain protections to these tech companies. But at the end of the day, these companies, when you agree to use them, there are still terms and conditions, right? Like you can't go into a crowded theater and yell fire. So, if you are saying that let's call for example, the public assassination of the president, you can't do that. Um you can't do that because there are people that will actually engage in that act. Now, there's a big difference between like what is considered hate speech and I think that that's a very slippery slope. Yes. >> So, terms and conditions what the company then puts it out there for if you use our app, then this is the code of conduct you're expected with the company, way different than, you know, deeming something as hate speech and then moving from that, which I would argue can be very slippery slope dystopian in form. Today's sponsor, True Classic, started with one vision, and that's to bring comfortable, fitted clothes to everyday people. Because looking and feeling awesome shouldn't come at designer prices. And their customers agree. They don't just sell 25 million shirts to 5 million customers on accident. What sets them apart is the message behind it all. From uplifting men in their daily lives to giving back to underserved communities. And it shows in their brand how they understand the everyday guy. I've been wearing True Classic for a while now and it still impresses me every morning I put them on. Sometimes it can be difficult for me to get around in public with all the people trying to put their hands on me to cop a feel of this buttery smooth fabric. Forget overpriced designer nonsense and skip the generic cookie-cutter potato sacks. True Classic delivers premium essentials built for real life, whether you're out on the town or working up a sweat. Level up your wardrobe with style that fits any scenario. You can grab it at Target or Costco, but for the best deals, head on over to trueclassic.com/danny. That's t r u e c l a s s i c.com/danny to get hooked up today. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. And then you have the section 230 thing, which in I think it was 2020, you had Beto O'Rourke saying that we need to take a look at section 230 and repealing section 230. Uh was a huge Democrat thing. And now, since the Charlie Kirk assassination, you have people on the right saying we need to question 230. Just the other day, the guy the I forget who the guy was. I don't know these people's names. They was questioning uh the FBI director saying, "Look look at this. They're talking about your family on these social media platforms. They're coming up with conspiracy theories about your family. We should talk about section 230." Like Well, I think I think so, section 230 does give certain protections to a lot of these apps that I would argue immunity and basically makes them almost impossible to sue. So, the reason why we wanted to repeal section 230 is because they were literally tipping the scale on election. Like if you're suppressing, shadow banning people because you don't like their viewpoints and you're interfering with the reach of that person to be able to talk to constituency, Right. that's election law that they're literally meddling in. And I actually found out that after the 2020 election, I was questioning Yoel Roth, who was over at Twitter before he was fired, before Elon Musk purchased it and changed it to X. So, in 2020, and actually brought this up to Netflix because I was debating this topic. So, on January 6th specifically, President Trump said for people to remain peaceful. I got proof that um the Department of Homeland Security under CISA or um under a domestic terrorism watch division was actually engaging in joint state actor relationships with Meta, YouTube, um X now formerly Twitter and a few other outlets to suppress the president specifically calling for there to be peace and not to have happened at January 6th. And so we questioned him, he perjured himself, he lied about it. I had the evidence. I actually had screenshots from a group chat that had taken place. And he did not ever think that that would probably resurface years later, but they were actually communicating on a private cloud server and it was a big deal. And the fact is is that you do have people in government, many of them are not elected officials, but these bureaucrats that have been there for X amount of time. And they're they're behind the scenes doing and operating in a way that's unbecoming of any government official, but I would argue too are responsible for American civil liberties being violated. And so, this can get into a bigger conversation on FISA reform and all of that, but it's it's a problem. And so you see the corruption, you see how they tipped the scales, you see how the social media companies up until President Trump won, really until he got shot. He got shot in the face. Grazed his ear, but literally the guy would have killed him if Trump didn't move his head. Um it wasn't until that point that these social media companies were like, "Wow, this is actually a problem." And then completely pulled back and then got behind the president. Yeah, that's a problem when they can do this throttling stuff and the shadow banning stuff because they they don't have to warn you. They don't have to actually say, "Hey, you violated this rule." It can just be some subjective behind the scenes thing. It's happened to me before. I've talked to people at YouTube about it. Um there's a a whole layer above their head, above the moderators' heads. When they see like, "Hey, we're looking at a video. There's nothing wrong with it. You violated no rules. We're looking at the transcripts. There's no words in there that are pulling up any flags." But for some reason uh your video's not searchable. So, this means this is above my head. This is the floor above me." They exactly said >> information. Yeah. That's a huge problem. And I get why you would threaten them with the section 230 stuff um over that stuff. That makes total sense. >> a li- it's literally election interference. We have proof that they did it and I it's dangerous because if it's happened once, it's going to happen again. I remember where I was at when I heard Alex Jones got kicked off of YouTube. And I was like, "Oh, this is going to be a problem." Um so, he's now I think since been reinstated. I don't know if that's Is he kicked off again? >> or not. I keep saying these things about Alex Jones and Nick Fuentes saying that, "Oh, they were kicked they were kicked they were let back on and they were pulled down the next day or something." >> are allowed back on YouTube and I say that because I saw a statement from House Judiciary saying that people that had formerly been been banned from YouTube are now back. So, and that was like a legit press release. Okay. Can you find out, Steve, if Alex Jones is back on YouTube? Or the press release from House Judiciary, too, that talks about it. But, um, all that to say that there's definitely an issue with 230. All right, is Congress going to fix it? Probably not. No, Alex Jones is not back on YouTube, also according to A I. Um. Let's Can you find the House Judiciary release on this? It might be on House Judiciary House GOP, um, This is This is the question. What's worse? It What happens if you remove 230? Now, these companies >> reform it. These companies will go bankrupt, right? Well, so there's a certain level of two um, when you are basically blatantly interfering in elections or defaming people, putting out false information that's literally responsible for I would argue Remember that faulty lawsuit that President Trump was hit with? Or some random woman was like, "He assaulted me in a changing room." Yeah. There was no evidence. It was hearsay. They basically went after him. It was lawfare in conjunction with a smear campaign. I mean, these people, if they're knowingly engaging in that stuff, should they not be allowed to be called out and sued on that? Yeah. >> I would argue that they would then be more careful in putting out correct information. >> could be carve-outs to if they're actually caught putting their thumb on the scale or doing something like that. >> reform it. You don't have to fully delete it, but at least have the conversation to reform it. But, to say we can't do anything about that. >> Where it doesn't interfere with the users' free speech, but it keeps them accountable for political [ __ ] Exactly. No [ __ ] Is this it? Yeah, hold on. Yep. Uh, due to our oversight efforts, Google commits to offer all creators previously kicked off YouTube due to political speech violations to return to the platform, but that's not all. What is this? So, it goes into all of it. When was this When did this come out? What day? September 23rd. >> 2023. Oh, okay. Interesting. >> So, Google, obviously >> 25 million bucks. >> paid out, and I think that he probably I mean, his lawsuits are not done with, but I mean, think about how much if people had to argue just on truthfulness alone, I think it would really change the game of politics. But, you always know, too, like in you know, there's these like October surprises right before an election season. They'll save the worst smear campaign right before an election to the month of October because they're like, "We're going to hit voters, and if we do it too early, then they can diffuse it or get ahead of it." Social media has actually contributed though to the ability of many people to I think refute false narratives right away. So, thank you to Elon for purchasing X. Yeah. forever be happy. >> And allegedly, Google is going to move in this direction, too, with these community notes. Um, they should. However, what I have seen is the issue with community notes currently is there's still an issue in way that people can stack it. So, going into like the whole bot farm aspect of it, if you get a bunch of people to file the community notes, it can kind of sway Yeah. >> of community note in a direction that might not necess- It's like it's not necessarily fully transparent the truth, but might kind of more direct a way that they want you to go. So, it might be a half-truth. Right. >> Um, so obviously, we don't want, you know, a um, Better than I mean, yeah, I don't know. I don't know what the alternative is. Yeah, we we don't want like the Department of Truth Ministry here, but I do think that, you know, with what happened with Charlie influencing, I do think that there should be some mechanism on these social media apps to track if someone's a bot farm, which you can't tell me that they can't come up with that tech. So, track the bot farms. At least engage and flag if you're engaging with a bot. And then also, too, in the way that you have to be a registered foreign agent, if you're an influencer taking money from a foreign government, you should be required to divulge that to the American people. Right. Influencer taking money >> Yeah, which I >> Are there influencers taking money from foreign governments? >> I would assume so. It seems pretty apparent. >> of any? Not personally. Everyone's Everyone's accused of. I'm I'm accused of taking money from the CIA. I wish I would I could get money from the CIA. >> you that even if you could be taking CIA >> buddies to get me some get me some CIA I feel like give me money from the CIA. Yeah. USAID was paying influencers, so it's definitely a thing. Oh, yeah, that's true. We had Mike Benz in here yesterday, and he was blowing our minds. >> him. He calls me Tip of the Spear in Congress. >> us all of these crazy uh, these crazy carve-outs, these companies Shell companies, too. >> taking billions of dollars to uh, draw these crazy heat maps of words. Hate speech words, COVID disinformation, pharmaceutical words, and like mapping them across all the social media companies, and it was like some crazy Minority Report uh, social media AI >> I said they like poll test and like sway influence. So, it's like half the time you go on the internet, it's like, "Are you even interacting with a real person or is this a psyop?" Right. Yeah, it's insane. It It was He was scaring the [ __ ] out of me yesterday with with all the money um, that they were dumping into that stuff. All the just like the taxpayer dollars that are going into these basically CIA carve-outs to to regulate free speech online. And to regulate the internet. >> has um, it's been going through its own cultural change, I'll say. So, the current director is a like-minded individual and very much aligned with the president. But, he's not controlling everyone at the agency. So, these different intelligence communities, especially, there's a lot of people that have their own goals and objectives. Mm. Yeah. And like, when it comes to people like these guys who uh, like the Tyler Robinson guy or the I forget the guy's name who tried to shoot the president and shot his ear. Like, when it comes to the FBI and the CIA, at what point are like, obviously, they are using some a lot of some crazy super advanced surveillance tools that we probably never heard of to monitor people's communication online, their search history, all that kind of stuff. And going back to like the the moment that we live in today where like nothing is real. We live in this like fake reality matrix. Um, Well, do go to black pill. I mean, there's still a lot of good that's happening, but in a sense, you just don't know when you're arguing with a I don't know what's real anymore. So, I just like let all the influencers battle it out, and then I sort of like I'll take the scraps. But, like when it comes to monitoring when it comes to these agencies, the FBI and the CIA trying to monitor terrorists. I mean, after 9/11, Well, you're getting into FISA now. >> did so much so much like I had a I had a NSA whistleblower in here who was first day at NSA was 9/11. And he was explaining to me how they basically implemented this dragnet system. I forget what it was called now. It was under the Patriot Act. Yeah, it was the Patriot Act. This was This was a a specific software that they were using in the NSA and the CIA. And it was like a dragnet, right? >> that on January 6th, too. Right. >> Mhm. Right. And um, to surveil and and try to track terrorist activity. Now, all the stuff that came out on the shooter that shot Trump, uh, searching the internet how to assassinate somebody, the best weapon to use to assassinate somebody from 200 yards away. Like, I think he had a handler and all this stuff. >> it was insane. Like, this guy would be the top of the red flag list if I'm any of these agencies. >> So, you're getting into though the reason why we need to repeal the Patriot Act, FISA reform, all of that. To be clear, I was one of a handful of Republicans that voted down FISA, and as a result of that, I was kept off as a female veteran on on House Armed Services that like comes up with a policy and appropriations for the Department of Defense. Can you explain what FISA is for people? >> Um, FISA is basically what they use as a means of violating your civil liberties in the name of protection and and keeping you safe. Um, it was put up uh, as a result of I think people wanting to push more of a police state, to be honest with you. >> Mhm. Um, but the reforms that currently exist, I mean, President Trump was illegally surveilled in in prior to him getting a into office, and we all know that by the information Tulsi's put out at the direction of Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. Um, but he was under surveillance because they got a FISA warrant in a secret court and got permission to surveil him, and that is completely unconstitutional. But, there's some reforms that can take place to ensure that good Americans aren't having their civil liberties violated, and they didn't want to put those reforms in place. FISA is up for renegotiation, if you will, this year, but I don't know that Congress has a stomach to actually put those reforms in place. So, we'll see how much pressure the White House puts top down to actually get that done. But, all that to say, because I voted down FISA because it does violate your civil liberties, I was kept off committee assignments because of it. >> And it goes both ways for people, too. John Kiriakou was a CIA whistleblower who tried blowing the whistle on the torture program, and he tried to he's supposed to go in front of like a get a some sort of like secret court to explain this stuff. There was a There's a whistleblower protocol in the United States, and they denied him. And or maybe he did do it. I don't remember exactly. Anyways, And the whole their intelligence >> on him to like the other all the other judges, and then they they alerted the head of the [ __ ] CIA and the NSA this guy's blowing the whistle. >> Well, the former directors a lot of them not so good people. Yeah. Yeah. So, there's still there's a cultural change in the CIA and the FBI, but there's still a lot of growing pains as a result of that. But, all that to say, if you are a good, God-fearing American that believes in the Constitution, you should consider going to work at both those agencies because right now, they were recruiting from a lot of left-leaning colleges, and what we're finding, at least on the polling, is showing that there's literally this assassination culture culture that exists on the left wing or means to say that if you're an American, but you disagree with what I have to say that it's okay to kill you. Mhm. As a result of that, and that's kind of the radicalization. I think a lot of it is due to foreign influence, but a lot of people, unfortunately, are being pushed in the wrong direction. So, we need people that generally have a passion for that job to go into these career fields. Um, now, in regards to the Patriot Act, I think that that was done in the name of the American people being afraid, and so people wanting more of a surveillance state push that and I I do think it still needs to be repealed. If you ever said that before you'd probably kill your political career. We actually have a number of bipartisan supporters to repeal the Patriot Act, but I don't think it'll ever be voted on because I don't think they'll ever bring it to the floor. Right. How would that happen if it would was if you did actually >> So how it works with legislation is you have to either get a certain amount of co-sponsors, but they can even then block it from coming to the floor and then there's something called the Rules Committee and it's a number of Democrats and Republicans. It's usually like six and six so 12 members total and they take the direction of the speaker on what legislation to bring from the floor working with the House majority leader which would be Steve Scalise and then so they just they determine the legislation that comes to the floor for the House of Representatives. Ah, okay. That makes sense. So it's not like you know, I'm just a bill in Schoolhouse Rocks. There's people that yeah. I wish it was, but it's not like that. Yeah. Yeah, no. The social media stuff is uh it's crazy and uh you know, it does feel like it's getting better right now and um you know, I know especially ever since Elon purchased Twitter and and made it X things have been getting a lot better um and this news with like YouTube reinstating people and letting off the the the boot on the neck of the people who are violating these quote unquote hidden policies like in the COVID era and all this stuff. Um I just always I always worried what's going to happen with the social media companies when Trump's no longer in office and when when the pendulum swings. >> have to evolve with the times, right? Cuz like no one thought even 50 years ago that there'd be apps and people be talking in apps. Like people used to read the newspaper, now they go to X and do it kind of the same way you used >> always the newspaper. Okay, well your dad's a cool guy, but but most people are on social media, right? Especially if you're like under the age of like 45, you're on social media. >> Yeah. Um but it's definitely something that we have to take a look at. I think Trump has a pretty good finger on the pulse because he was personally impacted by it and his son Barron Trump, Don Jr., Eric Trump, they're all very active on social media so they understand and so I think a lot of good reforms will happen, but um after Trump if it's J.D. Vance, it's going to continue to kind of force the country in the correct direction at least in regards to protecting freedom of speech, but then also ensuring that if you are straight up putting out defamatory information or you're allowing your platform to call for the assassination of sitting members of Congress or people that you don't agree with, you can't do that. By the way, also too, I think we can also say like hey, you know, maybe these companies should be a little bit better at allowing snuff films to be publicly circulated, right? Like you snuff film is like someone getting killed. Um in the last week leading up to what happened with Charlie, I saw a black woman executed broad daylight shot in the head in I think it was uh Philadelphia somewhere. That was circulating. Um I then saw the poor Ukrainian woman that was stabbed in the neck and then the assassination of Charlie Kirk and it was like this stuff, you know, you have 12-year-old kids on these apps. Do they really need to be seeing that? There should be at like a certain level of like warning or like put up something, but warn people ahead of time. Yeah. Fall is finally here and that means yard work, football, and hunting trips. And the only way I'm staying fresh through all of that is with Mando deodorant. From your pitch to your package and everywhere in between, Mando controls body odor for 72 hours and that's perfect for long game days or hiding from the feds in a crowd of fanatics. It's clinical strength, two times better than the standard. After just 12 hours sweat was reduced by 92%. And it doesn't just mask odor, it prevents it. 100% of study participants experienced all day odor protection and that's why I use Mando. It's absolutely wonderful in hot situations. Try Bourbon Leather, it's delicious. Mando is known for using premium ingredients like gentle mandelic acid. Don't wait. Grab yours now at shopmando.com and experience double protection today. Mando starter pack is perfect for new customers. It comes with a solid stick deodorant, a cream tube deodorant, two free products of your choice like mini body wash and deodorant wipes, and free shipping. And there's a special offer for our listeners, new customers can get 20% off sitewide with our exclusive code. Use code Danny at shopmando.com for 20% off sitewide plus free shipping. s h o p m a n d o dot com Please support our show and tell them we sent you. Mando's got you covered. With deodorant plus sweat control, say goodbye to sweat stains and hello to long-lasting freshness. Did you do any work on or um have anything to do with the push to release the Epstein files? Yeah, I was the only member of Congress calling for this back in January and then people decided to make it political. So I'm not going to use it to smear the president, but yeah, I was actually very I was very pleasantly surprised to see people all of a sudden care about this until I realized they were trying to smear the president with it. What do you mean like all of a sudden care about it? >> So back in or I think it was um last >> And what made you what made you what why were you the only one talking about it in general? >> get to that. So in November of last election cycle, there was a Democrat senator that actually blocked Marsha Black Blackburn's push to release the Epstein flight logs. Mm. So that was remember Joe Biden era blocks release in the Senate and she was pushing for it. >> So then you saw um the new DOJ come in. Um I had been pushing I think it starting in January. So my task force was stood up. It was January, February time frame. My task force was stood up and this was part of our purview of jurisdiction, but we don't hold declassification authority. So we basically wanted to see if there's any ability for us to investigate the files. So we kept calling for it publicly. Around end of February time frame, I had become aware of a whistleblower that came forward that was formerly at the FBI that was alleging destruction of evidence at the agency under the former FBI director prior to Trump getting into office pertaining to of all things Jeffrey Epstein among another of things. Destruction of of files? >> Evidence. Of evidence. >> Yeah, so I was like this is interesting. So I actually introduced a piece of legislation in March that actually was called I think it was um the stop the shred act. You can pull up the Fox News article on it and I reference it right then and there like hey, there's something shady happening at the FBI. Here's the person that's doing it. I had actually reported it to the FBI and I was still calling publicly for the release of the documents and no one gave a [ __ ] No one gave a [ __ ] There was not one person that was a Democrat that cared about it and then all of a sudden we started seeing them realize that you could probably try to use this to smear the president. What's been interesting is I have a paper trail leading up to this. Not one person said anything all last Congress, they didn't care about this and then I actually take this topic obviously very seriously and I actually went into the room with both Democrats and Republicans and the victims and their attorneys that came to talk to Congress. And they actually themselves said President Trump had nothing to do with it. So the question I have is that you had the Democrats in Senate blocking this last cycle. Then you had them try to use it to smear the president. They're up there with like these protesters had showed up completely separately and unrelated to the press conference that they were hosting on this, but with signs that were basically alleging that President Trump had assaulted people. That's all political theater. They don't really give a [ __ ] If you're telling me that the same group of people care about victims yet they did nothing when they're allowing literally Hispanic women and children to be trafficked across the US and Mexico border and they're like no, please come on in and they did nothing about it. >> Yeah. I think it's completely hypocritical. Sure. Now, House Oversight which I encouraged Chairman Comer to do this and I'm glad he did, released information and documents. I think it's to the tune of over 30,000 documents which they said there's no new information. There actually was new information and by the way, I don't know any member of Congress or investigator that's gone through all 30,000 documents and for people to say well, that was publicly available. Really? Where? You had to go physically to court, request the documents. It was nowhere housed online. So we've been able to put that information out there. But interesting to note, there is currently an active lawsuit with the victims and the banks that allowed for these transactions to take place and some of the perpetrators that were involved in what happened with the trafficking, their attorneys have contacted the victims' attorneys to settle. So you have an active lawsuit right now. So we can't tip the scales of the lawsuit cuz that's using your position of influence in a legal matter. You can't do that. That's illegal. So yes, we want to find out who's involved and we want to know, but to say that this is all of a sudden done in in the good heart and good nature because you believe it should be released. Where the hell were you back in January? Where were you in February, March, and April for all of this stuff? And then you see them smear the president and I'm not going to get behind that. Mhm. Yeah, totally. It's a but I think that um >> Actually should pull up the shred act. It was a good one. I have the shred act on on a Google Fox News. I was astonished at the response to the Epstein files because it seemed to me like it finally seemed like we had one topic that both the left and the right could agree on, right? We need to see the freaking Epstein files because it if you do any kind of research into the guy, you can tell that he is connected to both sides. There's one common denominator with the all the people that are attached to Jeffrey Epstein and that is super wealthy powerful people. Whatever is in that list or those files or whatever, it is without a beyond a shadow of a doubt, it's going to be the Rosetta Stone to all the most powerful people in the world. >> Sorry, so check this out. So this is look at the date. March 14th, 2025. Okay, so I'm like going public with this and I'm I'm the only one screaming from the rooftops. Now go down to and read about it. It even references it down here. So this is right after we were notified got a little bit that there was destruction of evidence under the former deputy director at the FBI. Um okay. So that's a legislation. Once federal agents caught destroying or concealing government documents to be eligible for a life sentence in prison. Luna who is leading the task force on the declassification of document of government records is introducing a new bill called stopping high-level record elimination and destruction shred act of 2025. It would levy mandatory sentence of 20 years to life for any government official or employee of the Department of Justice or anyone in a wider intelligence community found to have concealed, removed, or mutilated federal records according to the bill text previewed by Fox News Digital. Wow. >> So, you can go down and actually references the conversation that I had with the whistleblower. So, go down. Blah, blah, blah. Oh, and this goes into the Secret Service allegedly had destroyed documents with Kennedy. So, that's why it's referenced there, too. But, yeah, you can Benny Johnson reported whistleblower allegations within FBI in a bid to block Patel's work. And then, if you go down declassified documents about Epstein, Project Mockingbird. So, like I reference all of it. So, all of that to say I do think that it's possible that information could have been destroyed and or planted. And so, that's when I think they're like, "Well, we're going to release credible information and whatnot." But, I also think at the end of the day, so the one thing and I put out a tweet about this on my X platform because people wanted to know what the victims had alleged in regards to foreign government ties. >> Yeah. And so, the um attorney spoke for the group and said that they were made aware of foreign ties to Jeffrey Epstein. Specifically had referenced Actually, pull up the tweet. Go to my Rep Luna account and type in um just like on the search and you can actually get the verbatim posting right there. So, yeah. Type in um Epstein or like foreign ties and Epstein see if that works. Epstein victims, maybe. Yeah, see if it's on there. Go down. Yeah, hold on. Yeah, yeah, that one. September 4th. There we go. This is uh who what is this from? >> This is my X account, my official account. I mean, like what are the what is this information from? This is from witnesses? >> This is from directly from the witnesses, their attorney. Got it. Read that second paragraph. Uh in my opinion, there's definitely an intelligence connection. Countries named by the lead attorneys for the witnesses included Saudi Arabia, Russia, and Israel as well as former CIA director inferred to uh be the CIA director under the Bush administration based on the attorney's description of interactions while Epstein was in work in his work arrest program. >> Yeah, so they named those countries. What's interesting is is that >> They forgot the He forgot England or the UK. Well, they didn't That's They didn't reference that from what the witnesses So, that came directly from the witnesses and the attorney. Mhm. Um so, this was specifically though alleged who he worked with, right? >> Yes. >> So, what's interesting about that though is that this was like I didn't see many people talking about what the victims were telling us directly. And they did promise to get us a list of names, but we have not gotten that list of names yet. And I think that's because there's a pending lawsuit. >> Who promised? >> The victims. They promised to release the names of their perpetrators, but we haven't gotten that list yet. And I think it's cuz there's a pending lawsuit. >> And that's why they're saying that Jeffrey Epstein only trafficked to himself. He's a lone trafficker. >> Well, I that's that would be a question for the victims, right? Like I don't know who they're going to have on the list. Everyone's asking for the list. Both Democrats and Republicans Republicans are like, "Hand it over if you have something." But again, going back to the statements from the attorney Yeah. their clients are being contacted by these people that are allegedly involved. So, we're very careful to make sure that we don't tip the scales of lawsuit. >> Yeah. It's just so It's just like the whole [ __ ] of all of it is just like Transparency is the best disinfectant. I just like it's It's like, "Look, it walks like a duck, it quacks like a duck, it's probably a [ __ ] duck." It's just like the JFK thing. If you ask everybody if you poll every American and ask them, "Do you think Lee Harvey Oswald was acting alone on November 22nd, 1963?" 99% of people that are paying attention at least would say absolutely not. >> Well, and there you go. I'm vindicated with our findings cuz we have now testimony that he was shot from both the front and the back. There's multiple shooters and yeah. Right. I mean, anyone with two eyes can see that, right? Like it's the same thing with Jeffrey Epstein. Anybody with two eyes can tell you >> at the time, too, anyone that did question that, they had people at the Washington Post that would discredit people. They were threatening doctors' licenses if they went forward that were actually in the operating room when Kennedy was brought there. So, there's been a lot. Um we can talk about the intelligence influence in old media, which is now different because we have social media. Right. Well, didn't didn't uh Obama didn't he do something like a new age uh project mockingbird? That would open the American people up to propaganda. Yeah, it was like opening the American people up to propaganda like like making propaganda legal. >> Mike Mike Lee was talking about that. Smith Mundt Act, something like that. Smith Mundt Smith Smith something Act. Anyways, we wanted to rename it the Charlie Kirk Act, but I don't think that'll happen either because Congress is Mhm. Yeah. It should happen though. Well, I mean, like the Epstein stuff Look, I'm not optimistic that none of any of this stuff's ever going to come out. Same thing with the Kennedy stuff. I Well, the Kennedy stuff we've gotten some pretty wild stuff. So, they've literally basically admitted >> right? If you If you want to like If you want to find it, the documents have been have been uncovered and declassified if you actually >> And we're still getting more documents though cuz there's like this was decades of hidden information. By the way, the Secret Service did destroy certain documents that they were told not to. >> Mhm. Why would the Secret Service do that? Seems kind of shady. Mhm. Um but there's still documents that we're still gathering to include stuff that we're getting from the presidential library. So, we're still And as soon as we get it, we upload it to the archives. But it's like how many people are going to go through that? So, we're doing it in the name of historical significance and transparency, but a lot of people just have moved past it cuz it's not a hot trending topic anymore. >> Have you ever talked to um John Newman? >> Mhm. He I think he's a professor at the University of Washington. And uh I think that's the name of it in in Washington, D.C. And he is um out of all of the JFK experts and and authors I've talked to I asked them like I'm like, "Who's the top guy like that knows more about this stuff than anyone?" And uh they all say John Newman because he's the guy All JFK authors, they base their books on previous books. >> Mhm. Right? Instead of going to the source they just they read a bunch of other books and they compile their book, right? They all base their books on this guy's work and this guy's books, John Newman. >> He has literally like schizophrenically drawn out the map of everything that's happened. Yeah, it's the always sunny in me. And he's read every document from forwards and backwards. >> Stone's film. I interviewed Stone. >> Yes. Yeah, he was uh yeah, yeah, he was for the first JFK film, he was a super advisor for it. >> Yeah, so we um we work with Jeff Morley and a investigative team. Yeah, so Jeff Morley I I He's like a Bernie Sanders Democrat. So, I mean, this is truly bipartisan. Yes. They won't tell you that. So. Yeah, it's definitely bi- It's obviously bipartisan. And um so the smoke one of the biggest smoking gun that John Newman explained to me was that Oswald a two-time Russian defector, Soviet defector was on the the parade route on November 22nd. He had like the highest level of FBI flash stops on his file. He had a CIA an active CIA file and an active FBI file. >> and they lied to Congress about it. >> him. Like on the on the threat list, he was at the top. >> Yeah, they were reading his mail. We have all that evidence. >> tracking him through through uh New Orleans, Dallas, Mexico, Mexico City. And um they Newman got all of the all of the files on him, all of the cables that were going between the CIA desk in Langley, between the CIA desk in Mexico City. And he has the evidence of all of them and he has all the people who signed off on them. So, there was one lady who was the lia- the counterintelligence liaison for the CIA. Her name was Jane Roman. And she was still alive like maybe 10 years ago. And I think Morley and Newman went to go visit this lady, Jane Roman. Mhm. Because there was all these files on one hand that were saying the FBI was monitoring him through New New Orl- Yep, and the CIA. FBI and the CIA through New Orleans, Dallas, and New Mexico. And then, there was another CIA file after or I think it was maybe like a week before they shot the president that was signed off by Jane Roman, the same lady who's signed the other ones, saying that we have no contact or no records of Lee Harvey Oswald since uh January of '62 which would have when he was still in the Soviet Union. So, they went up to her and they interviewed her and they say, "Look, why did you sign off on this?" saying that there was no contact with him or no records on him since '62 while over here there all are these other records of him. You guys were following him up until the day he shot the president. And she like stopped and like grinned. And she said, uh obviously this is obviously evidence of something about Lee Harvey Oswald that they wanted to keep very close to the vest. >> Yeah, so I actually um went and met with the investor to Russia and his team. And what's interesting is when Lee Harvey Oswald went to Minsk, they actually had him under observation. They did a full psychological profile on him and they thought he was a freaking kook. And they're like, "So, the Russian government at the time was very friendly with Kennedy." And I I'll get into this in a second because in the '90s, the investigator body of Congress that was looking back into the JFK files after Oliver Stone's movie Mhm. tried to get these documents from the Russian government and they said, "No." So, we've been the first delegation since the '90s to meet with the Russian government, which is separately crazy. Like, why have we waited that long to meet with another superpower? By the way, and this could go back into like 2016, the Russia collusion thing was total nonsense. We know that for a fact. But, look at how it's impacted and affected foreign policy. So, this is something completely separate. So, I met with them, and they agreed to release these files publicly on their KGB findings, but they actually brought these documents to the American government at Kennedy's funeral. The ambassador to Russia brought these documents saying this is who we think that actually did it cuz they had these people under surveillance as well. As like a hey, we want to be friends. Like, let's figure out who killed the president. And we never got these files. I think that the CIA destroyed them. And so, all that to say that in the psychological profile that the Russian that the KGB put together on Oswald, they thought he was a cook. He was not a good shot. There's a famous story of him being under surveillance in Minsk, Russia, and he tried to go hunting to feed his family, and he couldn't shoot for [ __ ] And so, they're like, there's no way that this guy could actually pull the trigger. And then, in addition to that, he showed up to the Russian embassy in Mexico City with a pistol, and the head of the KGB was like, you're crazy. Like, they thought he was just 5150 nutjob. So, yeah, he was a patsy. Yeah. This So, this was the This was the text from John Newman that he he basically wrote up the story about how him and him and Jeff Morley went to visit Jane Roman. And she signed off on the October 10, 1963 CIA HQS cable saying that the latest HQS, whatever that I don't forget what that stands for. Headquarters. Maybe. Information on Oswald was dated to May '62. She replied, yes, I'm signing off on something I know isn't true. And then, she asked what she thought about the false HQS cable from John Whitten. She replied, to me, it's an indicative of a keen interest in Oswald held very closely on a need-to-know basis. Oh, yeah, no, we recently too found out last week, I'll actually read this to you. So, I actually went on with Morley to talk about this cuz this was a finding that was released in the JFK files. Pull up the the the the cable, Steve. I think I think I sent you a photo of the actual Oh, yeah, there So, this one actually broke on Monday. So, this is on Will Harvey's travel log. So, he Yeah, so, um Let me get through this. Hold on. So, there was a CIA assassination program at the time known as ZR hyphen rifle. And ultimately, what they found out is that an individual by the name of Harvey had defied Kennedy during the Cuban Missile Crisis in the fall of '62. Harvey was transferred to Rome in June of '63, and within 2 months after he was assigned to Rome, he had received off- authorization to covertly travel back into the United States. And it became apparent in this release of the document that the CIA told the Church Committee in 1975 that Harvey did not use the alias William Walker after June 1963, which we now know is completely false. And that the FAA in supporting Harvey's secret travel in late 1963 is entirely new unfound in documents. So, he basically used a fake name to travel back to the United States running a assassination program, and just so happened to be here when JFK was assassinated. And this has been released. So, we're still getting new documents, and this is just the length of time that it's taken for the task force and really Morley's team to kind of go through all this. But, all that to say, when I first started the task force, they thought that we were going to post a bunch of conspiracy theories. When I said that there was multiple shooters, they said that I was pushing conspiracy theories. And I was right. And so, we're we're interested in facts, and we can let the American people draw their own conclusions. Yep. It's It's pretty crazy when you really dig into the I like to call them the boring details because it can be boring reading through some of these old reports. >> the director Ratcliffe actually has a great perspective. He goes, I'm the new director. So, whatever sins were committed of past agencies, I'm not going to take responsibility for, and I'll let the American people know the truth. And so, he's been releasing But, does he have the power to to let the American people know the truth? >> previous previous directors, even though presidents had authorized the release, did not release the files. But, we have Tulsi Rat- Tulsi Odi and I, Ratcliffe at the CIA, and Patel at the FBI. So, under their direction, they can push for the authorized release of these files, and not undermine the president. This was all previously stonewalled. In fact, there was documents that came out in the Kennedy release that Biden had also tried to release, and the National Archives refused to release them. Really? >> Yeah, so, there's been a big push for this. And we're we're going through We have the MLK hearing next, so we're going to be going through that, working with some ex- expert investigators. Um and then, after we have the archive I think they're going to wait for everyone to die. I think there's a couple people still alive. They released the MLK files, and they released the RFK files. We just haven't had a chance to fully go through this stuff yet. Right. Have you ever spoken to Danny Sheehan? Mhm. He's fascinating. He's a Harvard lawyer who was He worked on the Pentagon Pentagon Papers. He worked the Pentagon Papers thing all about the um the the Watergate scandal. He >> Oh, that's an interesting thing there. He He Look up all the cases Danny Sheehan worked on. A bunch of really famous cases. And he is like a galaxy brain on the whole UFO topic and the JFK topic. And I had him in here. We were talking about JFK. He was explaining to me basically how like the mob and the uh Yeah, let's get The Pentagon Papers, the Watergate burglary. >> him at my hearing on UAPs. >> The Iran Oh, yeah, he was he was on the Iran-Contra scandal. He deposed everyone in Iran-Contra. He's like, yeah. He's a OG. He's a He's a legend when it comes to all this stuff. But, um you know, because he was around and deposing all these people during this time in the middle of the Cold War, he had like firsthand knowledge of all the people that are peripheral to the Kennedy assassination. And there's a lot. And yeah, it's crazy how connected it all is. >> Well, speaking of his work, I mean, he reminds me of George Knapp. So, at the UAP hearing, George Knapp is like, yeah, I smuggled these Soviet files on a program called Threat Three that was looking into UAPs. It was like a UAP task force cuz they had a lot of weird interactions in the Soviet era. And yeah, we're like, well, how the heck did you get these out of Soviet Russia? He's like, well, I just ripped off the top paper and stuck them in my bag. I'm like, you probably deserve a star at Langley for that. I mean, like, you worked at the agency, but the fact that you're able to smuggle out these like Soviet era documents to, you know, the United States is pretty wild. Yeah, that's insane. My free time is short, and the way I see it, why would I waste time binge-watching actors on a television when I could learn something from people I admire? That's why I've been using today's sponsor, MasterClass. On MasterClass, you're not killing time. You're getting inside of the heads of some of the most interesting people of all time. I can watch Metallica talk about leadership and dealing with ego over decades. Then, I can flip over to Werner Herzog talking about filmmaking and telling stories that feel true. And then, I can dive into Noam Chomsky dissect how power works and how language is used. And to me, that's a night way better spent than watching reruns or scrolling. It's easy for me because the classes are broken down into bite-size lessons, and I can watch it in 10-minute chunks, or sit down for a full hour if I really want to dive in. With over 200 classes across business, writing, music, politics, you name it, it's like having a library of mentors on demand. MasterClass makes me feel like my downtime is actually paying me back. And right now, our listeners can get an additional 15% off their annual membership at masterclass.com/dannyjones. That's 15% off at masterclass.com/dannyjones. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. But, Danny was explaining to me how these anti-Castro Cubans were working for the CIA. And tied into the mob, too. >> And they were tied into the mob as well. And basically, when Kennedy did the Bay of Pigs thing, and basically didn't send the air support and all that stuff, the Cubans despised him. They tried to They were training hit teams, and he was calling them triangular hit teams. The CIA was in Miami to take out Castro. And there was I forget the names of the one of the guys who was in those triangular hit teams who was a Cuban dissident, went to Cuba twice to try to assassinate Castro. They failed. And Danny was like, they basically used the same Cuban hit teams to assassinate the president. And he goes, these I have evidence that these Cubans were there on the route in 1963. And I was like, that's weird. I'm going to interview an ex-CIA anti-Castro Cuban guy who's like 95 tomorrow. He goes, what was his name? I go, uh Felix Rodriguez. He goes, oh, he was on that team. And I was like, almost I almost freaked out. >> he kill Kennedy? You should have totally asked. Go back and ask. >> But, I I went in there I went into his museum in Miami, and he had all these like Cuban armed commandos everywhere, and I was just like, one guy had an office with a picture of Kennedy and like a strike through his face. And yeah, it was crazy. But, Yeah, I think a lot of people stood to benefit from his elimination. And so, it's interesting cuz, you know, obviously, we're very you know, we also know that the Kennedy family is still around, so we want to be respectful of that. But, also, the American people deserve to know if there was a coup against the American people in the US government by an intelligence agency or people connected to an intelligence agency. >> Well, Long story short, John Newman, his his overall theory on this whole thing is that it was a military coup. He thinks it was the Joint Chiefs of Staff who wanted like an all-out nuclear war with China and Russia. Oh, they definitely What I can tell you is from the Russian perspective, they um the CIA did not And this is just based on the documentation that we've also gotten from the release of the files. The There are certain actors within the CIA that did not like that Kennedy was so openly friendly with the Russian government, and I think that they viewed him as a communist sympathizer. And he did not have his cabinet with supporters, and his own vice president at the time, I believe was seriously undermining his efforts. So, he had his brother, but then they killed his brother, too. So, would they turn a blind eye if they knew about an assassination attempt? Probably, because they looked at him as a sympathizer. He also was at the time working on a joint He wanted to do a joint mission with the Russian government and American astronauts to the moon. A lot of people don't know that. And so, he was a very, very friendly with the Russian government and was back-channeling communications even despite what the CIA was trying to push in Bay of Pigs and all that cuz they did want war. And then the day after Kennedy was assassinated, we found ourselves up for Vietnam. Yep. Yeah, there's there's these SCIOP meetings, not PSYOP. It's called I think it's like SCIOP meetings. I forget what it stands for, but there was there was these meetings that him and RFK were both in where the Joint Chiefs, Lemnitzer and Maxwell Taylor, were had this crazy plan because that was the point in history where we had the most nukes and Soviet Union had the least amount of nukes. Like, that was when they first started to build up their arsenal. So, we thought we could get away with just nuking half the planet Yeah, not not good in theory. We don't ever want to have a launch a nuke, yeah. And then he was obviously back-channeling with the the Russian president and um and trying to stop all that. And then, you know, obviously like the CIA was involved. A lot of people like to say the CIA killed him, but John's theory is just like the CIA there was there was certain elements of the CIA who were involved in the cover-up. >> Exactly. So, um definitely certain factions involved in the cover-up. Obviously, you can't just blanket label an organization. However, the CIA has done some interesting stuff. And I think when you look at some of the declassified files on their readingroom.gov website, you can see for yourself. They've looked into it. It's very wild reads on a Friday night. >> Yeah, I heard you talking about this. There's lots of crazy kooky Have you ever Have you ever heard of the um the gate the CIA Gateway project? >> Stargate? No, not Stargate. This was called the Gateway. >> No. There's this guy named um Itzhak Bentov who was uh I think I forget what his specialty was, but he was like a genius. And uh they were studying him and they were studying the brain uh with this Gateway process with a way for uh figuring out a way for the human brain to transcend dimensions. Weird. And it's all declassified. It's on their See, if you pull up the Gateway Bring us to the readingroom.gov. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Pull up the the documents. That's insane. >> I mean, sometimes when I'm bored, I'll go on it. And it's just the stuff that we've looked into. And it's funny cuz you say it, and if you don't have the documents to prove it, people think you're crazy. But I mean, these documents are weird science fiction. >> Yeah, it's very weird some of the stuff that they've gone into. Yeah, it's like you know, you've seen all that stuff with um the whole Captain America movies and you know, Hydra and all that crap. But I think it's largely based on these declassified documents cuz you look at what really the the relationship on MKUltra that the US government had with certain scientists. And it's very creepy. So, this Gateway declassified program, they they declassified it I think with the uh I forget when they declassified it. I want to say in the '90s, maybe. And they redacted one page. Like one whole page? So, it's just like a black blur, yeah. >> like page 20 24. And then somebody I think it was Robert Monroe released it. >> go back to the illustration. I want to see what that the the top one. What is that? Galactic South? So, that's a representative of what Is that a atom or or like a version of our universe that we're unaware of? White hole. I don't know what that >> Oh yeah, it's like it's a depiction. It says universal nucleus hologram. >> punch in a little bit so we can read that text? Diagram of the cosmic egg. Go to the right. What does it say? >> supposed to be a representation of our universe universe? >> like I think it what it's doing is >> universe? It's saying that the brain and the universe are like one thing. Like it's like we are the uni like it's like the whole point of it is like when we die, our consciousness molds into one universal consciousness. >> image. >> Well, here's the thing. There was one page that was redacted until Robert Monroe let it out. And the and the the whole reason they redacted it is cuz it was like all about who God is. So, confirming God is real? I don't know exactly I haven't read I don't think I've read it, but um something about God. And the for some reason the CIA was like really interested in this stuff and like throwing money at it. >> they threw money at trying to find the Ark of the Covenant. >> about about God? I don't know. I think a lot of people it's a lot easier to control people when if you convince them that God's not real. Really? Oh yeah. Imagine if people realized there was accountability after this life, how much society would change. Yeah, but wouldn't it be easier to control them? >> seen this before. Yeah, yeah, yeah. >> Yep, yep, yep. I've seen this. So, the left hemi hemisphere is like So, the way that the brain dissects into interact with the universe. >> Right, right. Yeah, this is just it's trippy stuff. And if you watch videos of this guy Itzhak Bentov talk about consciousness, it's bizarre. >> it's interesting though cuz people um I think there's a very new age perspective on consciousness that tries to remove God from the theory and topic. And then, you have a lot of these people it's like kind of weird. And the UAP space, we meet a lot of interesting people. Um >> Yeah, I bet. >> but The god the the religious stuff and the UAP stuff is like melding. But the thing is is that it the failure to recognize that God is real and that to cut God out of the equation, I think you know, like I'm a Christian through and through. So, I don't look at it from that type of perspective cuz I think that when you're opening yourself up to these energies, how the hell do you know what kind of energy you're opening yourself up to? Right. So, I think that that's a very um interesting thing, especially if like you're newer in your spiritual walk and you're kind of looking towards some of this stuff. It can be dangerous. Um but definitely interesting the CIA has looked into it. I think if you have time, go to the CIA reading room and you will find some most interesting reading material on Friday nights on that website. Well, the crazy thing about the UFO stuff is there's so many parallels in ancient texts and the Bible and accounts of these UFOs like before uh before people could I'd say ancient texts and the Bible. I'd say ancient texts and the Bible. >> like like write and write down accounts of things. Like there's there's accounts of like of objects coming out of the ocean in like I think Richard Dolan was explaining to us this was like in uh 1700s, maybe, where just like these glowing orbs the size of football fields would come out of the ocean where these like sailors on this ship would see it and then they would like write the account and like find it later and like find drawings of it. And this is like this goes back into to antiquity. So, the question is like, you know, were the angels UFOs or are the UFOs angels? What came first? What do you know what I mean? Like >> Yeah, I was just um listening I wish I would have brought the paper. But um you know, Plato talks about the legend of Atlantis. Plato was a smart guy. People read that and forget that the Atlantean civilization was a very advanced technological civilization. Where did they get that tech from? And then, if you read the Book of Enoch, which I would encourage everyone to read, a lot of people are like, "Oh, that's fake. You know, it shouldn't have been in the Bible." Well, actually um it was removed from the Bible because people wanted to gatekeep that information. It's still in the Ethiopian Orthodox text, which I would argue is the least watered-down version of the Bible that you will get because it has been in its original form since basically the beginning. And a lot of people don't know about the Ethiopian Orthodox Church or the fact that they are can trace their lineage all the way back to the ancient Israelites, okay? Um but why would they specifically remove this text? And it does talk about fallen angels and information, knowledge, all that that was handed over to mankind. Um all I'm dealing though with in my task force is on the facts. And so, the facts are there's stuff that we can't explain and there's information that's being hidden from the American people in Congress regarding that topic. So, usually if someone's hiding something, you should probably ask why. And so, the information that we released from our last hearing actually um Representative Burchett released it. It was a piece of footage that was dead dropped to him. And you can look at that and that's pretty wild. You have a Hellfire missile hit one of these things and it deflects it. >> That's not a balloon. That's not a balloon. Who's Who filmed that? How did that get filmed? Was that Was that radar on a plane or something or what? >> yeah, yeah. It was from a MQ-9. So, it >> in English? >> Here, we'll Google it for the viewers. Um it's a surveillance plane. Okay. Drone? Well, Okay. MQ-9. Oh, there you go. Yep. That's our drones. AKA the Reaper is its common term. But it was some surveillance footage. But you can pull that up and a lot of people were like >> Find the video of it, Steve. >> Yeah, so and like even right before hearing, we had the former director of AARO, Sean Kirkpatrick. The guy's a total clown. Um but he was attacking our witnesses, you know, why is he even involved in what Congress is saying or doing when he's like a documented liar? Um so, yeah, we kind of proved him right with the hearing. That was good. So, Proved him right in the fact that, you know, or proved him wrong in the sense that um he has been gaslighting the American people. >> Right. Um going back to the the the Enoch stuff and and the religious stuff. I've noticed um a lot of Well, not I mean, there's a lot of people online and there's also a lot of people that write about like this this connection between like biblical stuff and like the modern UFO stuff. And I feel like there is a weird faction of people in the government who are like battling on these narra this UFO narrative. I don't think it's like a battle. I think there's certain people that want to release classified videos and there's other people that don't. Yeah. The fact is is that these things, if they were a foreign government that had this type of tech, we wouldn't be number one. And we're still number one. But I think there's like very separate. So, like we're talking specifically on like tech advancement and national security. >> Yeah. But then there's like a very separate religious perspective and like I think when you're talking about like biblical text Do many people know that the New King James Bible was actually rewritten? And why was it rewritten? Why were books removed? Why are there different Bibles in the Catholic text now? Why are there different Bibles books of the Bible in the Ethiopian Orthodox text? So there's like 88 books in total in total in Ethiopian Orthodox text. And so like I think that this gets into like a very religious perspective. But if you interchange, you know, the term alien I I don't call them alien. I say UAP unidentified aerial phenomenon. That's what they commonly are termed as. We actually have a really high number of reporting here in Pinellas County. Really? >> Yeah, a very high number of people in the county have actually reported to see these things and there's different hot spots around the world but specifically in Alaska, definitely off the coast of Florida, around the Bermuda Triangle. So, you know, it's like not something when I first started this stuff they were like, "Oh, you're going to ruin your political career." And I've actually gotten more questions on this from people very wealthy people, very powerful people to your average Joe that pays attention to this cuz they realize they're like, "Yeah, there might be something there." So, the problem with the biblical stuff is that it is like this game of telephone, right? It's hard to know what actually happened 2,000 years ago or more than 2,000 years ago going back into antiquity. in a in a textual context or in a literary context. When it come I'm talking about like going down to the bones of the language, right? Because like how many people do you know that can read ancient Greek fluently? >> Well, Aramaic I mean Aramaic and Hebrew I mean Hebrew's only has what? 7,000 unique words. That's like the Ethiopian Orthodox Bible. Ancient Greek has over 1.2 million words. The the the Library of Alexandria was all Greek. There was no Hebrew. And when you go into antiquity, everything was written in Greek. The medical text, the legal text, the philosophical text, the historical, the comedy, everything was Greek. The only Hebrew is the Dead Sea Scrolls. The only Hebrew is religious stuff. And there's only 7,000 words. I've never met I've met I've met maybe one or two people that can read Greek really really well. And they're all and and you know, on top of that, there's like you said, there's the Enoch book, there's all these other books that are left out that like go way against the narrative. And you know, you can imagine if you're trying to create some sort of a like Plato would call it a noble lie for society to keep society in line and to help your civilization thrive, you would want to take out some of that stuff and put in some of the good stuff, maybe change the meanings of some words and over 2,000 years just think like something you you had for lunch 10 years ago or even last week, like your memory is so inaccurate from what actually happened. Now take it 10,000 years or I'm I'm sorry 2,000 years and translating it through different languages, through different text, through church fathers who were making money by preaching this stuff and you know, having the the Council of Nicaea depending on just trying to come to an agreement of what's going to be Yeah, which Bible like it's just like I'm glad you brought that up. We don't know. We have no clue what actually happened back then and there's absolutely people who had an axe to grind and a narrative to push. And um Ethiopian Orthodox text is direct translation hasn't changed. It literally um in the 5th century they >> What language is it in? The Ethiopian language if we can pull it up. Find out what what language the Ethiopian Orthodox text is. >> The whole story on how they and allegedly the Ark of the Covenant is housed in Ethiopia allegedly, right? There's a story there. But um you kind of look at the fact that I believe it was a Council of Nicaea that actually replaced Revel or Enoch the Book of Enoch with Revelations. >> Right. >> Revelations you're like, "What the heck?" So I would encourage everyone to read it. It makes a lot of sense if you read it. >> there's perspective. Have you ever read the Infancy Gospel? Of Jesus? Yeah, where he kills a kid? I've looked into it. Well, he technically gets like angry, the kid falls and dies. He brings him back to life. >> Yeah. No, he doesn't bring him back to life. >> I think he calls him back to life cuz they're like, "Did you do this?" And then he comes back and he's like, "No, I fell. Jesus didn't um or he actually didn't do it." Uh Ethiopian Orthodox Church uses Ge'ez? That's what it's called? Oh, interesting. Yeah. So it's just like It's preserved for spiritual and scholarly purposes. So it really hasn't changed. It's a very ancient language. Right. And then and then like also, I've had a lot of theologians in here I've talked to. Um and it's like there's it's just kind of weird to me how people will dedicate their entire education, go to college for eight years and to get a PhD in a science, right? Like you're you're studying the science of these ancient texts and translating the Bible and figuring out what it meant, but simultaneously subscribe to the belief, right? I don't have a problem with it, right? I have no problem with whatever your belief is, you know, if it makes you a better person, God bless you. But isn't it a conflict of interest when you're actually studying a science of something and you simultaneously believe in it? You know, like people it's a self-fulfilling prophecy. And then Yeah. Well, I like the stories of people that have not started out as believers and then try to debunk the Bible and then end up not being able to and then becoming believers. Those are always the >> goes both ways. It goes both ways. And there's there's people who translate >> though there's there's a a really big portion of this discussion that when you have certain texts that are removed and have been known to be removed because they didn't adhere to whatever standard was. So I think it the Book of Enoch was removed in the 5th century because it wasn't in line with what the Torah was. But the ancient Ethiopian Orthodox do have ties to the tribes of Israel and they do think that it was actually something that they would consider sacred text. And then you actually read what Enoch talks about. It's not like too crazy to be like there's something there on this. But you know, that that would get into the more the philosophical. So then you have this aspect of UAP. So what are these things and I mean it talks about in ancient history, the legend of Atlantis and the technology that was given to mankind. Uh-huh. Maybe it could be an explanation. I don't know. People should look it up and see. The Atlantis thing's so interesting. It's so fascinating. But like again, it's so it's such an old text and the game of Steve, I know you have this. We got to pull this up. You have the chain of transmission for Atlantis. We've done we've talked about this so much on here like ad nauseam. So I'm sorry for everyone who's listened to this 100,000 times. The chain of transmission from for Atlantis is actually like 10 times crazier than any any religious text. Oh, and like the the legend of Atlantis? >> Like there's there's thousands of years of just verbal Yeah, Plato had to go to Egypt to hear about the legend of Atlantis and then reported it in his text. Yeah. Yeah, and there's Pliny the Elder, Pliny the Younger, Solon, the Egyptian priest. And it wasn't written down until like 10,000 years after it was orally orally explained to somebody, right? But like Plato, he was also not a historian. He was a philosopher and he would come up with theoretical hypothetical like like social experiments or like what what are they called? You're good. Um like war game experiments and some people think that like, you know, he came up with the allegory of the cave. And um they think that this was like some sort some people like the people who the skeptics I guess you could call them try to say this was like a hypothetical war game between Athens and like some others advanced civilization. Okay, so the destruction of Atlantis. Glad our US government doesn't do this. Oh yeah, of course not. 9,000 years before Solon's Critias, right? So was was the destruction of Atlantis. So oral history goes on for 1,000 years written down by the Egyptians 8,000 years before Solon. Of course the of course there's no actual writings. Priest records it or the priest reads the records, years pass, tells the memory to Solon without consulting written records. Solon tells his relatives Dropides tells the son his son Critias the Elder at age 90 tells his grandson. And then 50 years later Plato writes it down. Like Wild. >> 10,000 year How many years of oral transmission is that? 8,000, 9,000 years? It's just like it's wild. If we had a time machine, it would be interesting to go back and see what happened. Give me a time machine for a day. I'll get back to you. But but yeah, no. So like the the the UAP thing is interesting too how like there is evidence I mean I don't know if you want to call it evidence, but there's there's connections in things like Enoch and these stories that suggest and philosophers have suggested this and like, you know, people like me who nerd out in the UFO topic that this could be some civilization that's lived here on Earth for over a million years. And they could just be underground or they could have been a breakaway civilization or something like this part of Atlantis if it Atlantis was real and it was a super advanced civilization and there was a cataclysm if God sent the flood they escaped. And now maybe they've come back when things have calmed down and they live here on like a higher dimension similar to like we live on the same like we live next to ants but they don't know we're there. >> Yeah. So and the whistleblowers that I've talked to, the ones that Grusch explained it the the best but never calls it alien, interdimensional. Maybe. What's interesting is based on the videos that are publicly out there, these things are operating in a way that defy physics as we currently know it. So, there is some there there to this, but I'm just going off of what I've seen and what evidence has been presented to me and then testimony from whistleblowers. What's the craziest thing you've seen? Um probably the one of the craziest would probably be the video of the Hellfire missile being deflected by one of these things. That's pretty wild if you think about it. Um but, you know, we've had different briefings and we want to push for the declassification of the stuff that we've seen because I think that there's over-classification and there's been other governments that have basically already decided to do the same thing and talk about this publicly. I think that the US government set set a trend with our neighbors in South America, for sure. Really? >> topic, yeah, in regards to addressing it. But, you know, um that this stuff doesn't need to be gatekept and I think there has been a generational uh change in how we approach this. So, the baby boomer generation was largely the generation that was impacted by the whole um Project Blue Book to kind of take this stuff and really make it sound crazy. Mhm. Whereas millennials and even Gen X are like there might be some there there and now that there's been this evolution of tech and people being able to record things on your cell phone. Mhm. I mean, we've had many credible people military service members, pilots, um Commander Fravor that literally was like a Top Gun pilot be able to say, "Hey, we don't have this in our arsenal. We don't know what it is." We've had whistleblowers come forward saying that they were intimidated not to come forward or they were in fear of their life because they came forward, all this stuff. So, there's something there. We have the open door policy and that we'll talk to people, we'll bring people to skiff. But, then also at the same sense, I've seen kind of this disinformation campaign online specifically with whenever we try to do this, people coming out trying to discredit. It's like, "Well, if we're not asking questions, no one's like going to ask questions." And then there's a lot of chatter trying to discredit the task force part of the hearing and then after we had the hearing, they disappeared like cockroaches with the lights on. And so, I think that there is an effort to try to still kind of keep this stuff under wraps, but I think there's too many people >> whistleblowers? We should have called in Boeing and asked about that. Um but, we've had it's it's the biggest bicameral and bipartisan issue. And what made you want to get involved in the whole UFO stuff? >> I did not lead out the efforts. It was Representative Burchett who's been on this for a while and then we suggested a hearing on it last year or last Congress and that's when you saw the David Grusch hearing take place, which was one of the most widely watched and attended hearings in congressional history. And then after people realized that they wouldn't be called crazy, then they designated the task force to kind of look into it because everyone in Congress is curious, everyone. So, that's what we do on our free time and there's a lot to do. So, this is kind of something that we've been able to do when we're not, you know, battling it out on other issues in Washington. Yeah. It's just crazy that it seems like these private contractors have been able to get away with this for so long. It seems like since the creation of the CIA >> so I've yet to I've had a lot of people say that it's contractors that are housing this tech or but, I haven't been able to get a whistleblower to come forward yet on that because of fear of retribution from what we're hearing from these whistleblowers. But, the information that we have seen has come out of the Department of Defense. And we have been personally denied access before by the DOD and even up until recently we're told that we do not have access as members of Congress to these programs. So, we have to then go above the DOD, to the executive branch and request access to investigate. But, there have been other agencies that have briefed us on the certain things and I was pretty I mean, I already know that these things are out there. So, I'm not like it's not changing my mind or perspective, but it's just confirmation of what we already know. >> Well, wasn't that the whole purpose of pushing this stuff into private contractors so it wouldn't have congressional oversight and we wouldn't be able to FOIA it? >> there's still certain parts of the federal government that deny Congress access, right? So, that's a problem because we're supposed to be the check and balance and I think that that's been like decades of lazy Congress. So, I'm one member of Congress. I know I'll get people all the time that are like, "You know, I'm not going to vote for you again." I said, "Well, that's great cuz you're in California, you can't vote for me anyways." So, you know, we'll get the those writing calls from like California and New York, but the good news is is that residents in Pinellas appreciate it and one of the top issues is looking into government corruption and I would say if you have whistleblowers that are being threatened by government contractors or there's allegations of it, well, we're going to follow up and kind of see what's there. But, it is kind of funny. People are like, "You're basically asking the question that every kid asked in grade school growing up and like you're actually bringing the answers like JFK, UAPs." You know, we're looking into it. >> They're the biggest questions. >> They're the big and we're finding answers and we're like, "Here's the evidence. This is what we got." And people are like, "Hm." And it's kind of, you know, so there's a lot of people that are curious about it at this point. >> What do you think it's going to take to actually get some sort of real substance stuff instead of like just random grainy videos and like >> not just a random grainy grainy video. That's off the NRO. >> it, Steve? Yeah, pull it up. How how would we search for it? Um it should be on my X platform. Yeah, just MQ-9 Hellfire missile deflected by UAP. Is that it? No. Is that it? Yeah, that's it. Is there any audio, Steve? >> Boom, deflected. Deflected. That's crazy. I know there's no audio. And then it does this weird blob thing and then it just rolls together. And where was this allegedly? Off the coast of Africa. Whoa. Where's Burleson? Good old Burleson. Where's our whistleblower? Steve, I got no volume. >> Oh, there we go. That little blob thing kind of moved in its other direction with the blob. That's so crazy. But, if I was a foreign military or a private military contractor and I did have this technology, I would absolutely try to convince everybody that it was uh aliens and not my stuff. Especially if I was a if I was government, I would do that. >> this, back in the '90s, the Soviet government had a task force looking into this because these things flew over a Russian nuke silo and activated all their nukes. Yeah. And those nukes were aimed at the United States and they were freaking out and they weren't able to shut them off and then these things shut them off and then they left and that Soviet government was like, "Don't engage with these things ever again." And that's actually part of the documents that George Knapp smuggled out of the Soviet Union at the time, allegedly according to him. >> cuz the same exact thing happened here. Yeah, so it's interesting and then you can hear the testimony from the witnesses. So, it's like not me making the stuff up. I'm not just like pulling this out of This is directly and you can see the documents that have been actually entered into the congressional record. I would use an app to translate it, but those are all Russian documents and they were confirmed separately by the DIA. Did you pay attention to any of those Wall Street Journal articles that came out um about a month or two ago about how Saying that it was a disinformation campaign. >> psyop against uh people working at the nuclear sites, specifically the one in Montana. Um the name of it is escaping me right now, but they were saying that like it was the military testing EMPs to see if they could take the nukes offline. Yeah, very interesting that they've had these issues around the world. So, And uh A big psyop. Jesse Michaels did an amazing video about those articles and he like found that one of the the primary contributor to that first Wall Street Journal article on her LinkedIn just open in broad daylight, go to her LinkedIn, like the first thing on her LinkedIn says uh head of psychological operations for Northrop Grumman. Very interesting. Yeah, that's weird dot to connect. >> Saying that these are like some like elaborate hazing rituals for these nuclear base commanders and these these Air Force guys. Wild. They apparently did that in Russia, too. I don't believe it. Yeah. Yeah, no, there's no way. There it doesn't make any sense why we would test EMPs on live nukes and then the nukes would just come right back on right afterwards. I think I saw that, but it didn't get much traction. I think videos like this are a good way to inoculate with the truth. But, I mean, at the end of the day, I don't hold subpoena authority. It's up to my chairman. >> Yeah. >> He'll issue certain subpoenas depending. So, we've been, you know, going back to what happened with, you know, some of these apps, Discord coming out with the whole Charlie Kirk shooting saying we have no information. Um the CEO of Discord's coming in, Reddit, some other apps are going to be coming in as well to testify before Congress on what they're doing about this stuff because Discord's been very interesting to not to pivot fully from this, but in the fact that a lot of this rhetoric and weirdly enough a lot of these shooters have been using these apps and we don't have any information on who's contacting or handling or encouraging these people. And it's something that we should look into, especially because politicians are literally getting killed and people that are engaged in the political discussion are literally getting murdered. Yeah. Yeah, it's definitely crazy that our FBI and our CIA can't can't track that stuff down after >> now. I think before they didn't want to. At now meaning when? Like so, when did that start? >> change of administration. So, the Secret Service was at the direction of Joe Biden prior to President Trump assuming office. >> who was the head of Secret Service, wasn't she like previously working for Pepsi or something? Um I don't think so, but I know that she resigned shortly thereafter. So, she was on Maybe you can find that, Steve. I heard that I forgot who told me that. It might have been Mike Benz. I don't know. I wouldn't be surprised based on her response. I would not be surprised. Uh but, you know, all that to say, we need more young people to run for office, more good people. Um I got in and I have been very disappointed with how it functions internally. And then you realize a lot of these people they could make a difference, but they don't want to. And they fall within this kind of group think. She don't >> director of global security at Pepsi. So, that's interesting. She was recruited by the Secret Service. What were her qualifications? Yeah, I mean, both Democrats and Republicans were like, you need to resign. Yeah. And she perjured herself and then she resigned, so. >> Yep. Yeah. So, who are the reptilians that are controlling all this, Anna? I don't know that there's lizard people that I've seen yet. So, um They didn't they didn't come sit you down on your first day. No, those are people that >> say, "Anna, listen." No. Because you imagine there's like there's got to be somebody. No, I don't think it's somebody. I think it's a I think >> a group of people, whether they're connected or not, whether it's like a a decentralized group of folks that have had discussions about like, "Look, if we like if they've had this stuff since the '40s and they've like been able to psych out people and obvious gate and throw disinformation at this problem for this long, there's a a very strong reason that they've come to or conclusion that they've come to that the public knowing this stuff, it would be very bad for national security. Like I imagine they have a very legit reason for not letting it out. I don't know. I think it's um just I think perspective generationally on how to address it because videos have come out. I mean, literally Tucker Carlson through showed a declassified video and everyone was like, "Wow, that's wild. Crazy would have to is it?" We'll never know. And then move past it. Now, is there What is the isn't there an issue of like >> They showed it on Fox News. certain people would get in trouble if this stuff came out like they would be finan like financial crimes, black budgets, and like there would be like lots of >> an issue with the amount of government wasteful spending and the Pentagon up until recently hasn't passed an audit in I don't know how many years. By the way, I mean, this goes into why are we sending money to Ukraine? Apparently, Zelensky's like wiring $50 a month to some Saudi bank. That's weird. 50 USD or 50 million USD. Um Yeah, and we've had Yeah. This is, you know, I I I get it. For issues of national security, there are certain programs that not should not be public for the American people. However, when you have people coming forward and saying that there is no government oversight, right? Like we're given classified briefings on a regular basis to information, but when you have Congress that's supposed to be the oversight authority being denied access or told that they don't have clearance, that's a problem because then you have that information that's now operating without oversight. Mhm. And that's a problem. Like how is this being done legally if you don't have accountability for that? But that's not just this topic specifically. There's that issue that also exists with covert programs that previously existed with the intelligence agencies. So, this is an ongoing issue, which is why we should publicly talk about it and discuss it cuz sunlight's the best form of disinfectant. Right. Right. But >> like not just specifically to this issue. Yeah. But there's and there's people that speculate that this like 25 trillion whatever dollar black hole in the Pentagon's budget could have been contributing some of this stuff. >> that Tim Burchett has definitely gone on record with that and I don't think that he's necessarily wrong because we've been denied access to certain clearances or or um been denied access to certain programs, which is wrong if you're an oversight arm of the federal government. Why would you not be given clearance, especially when you do have a top clearance for that. So, Mhm. Um definitely problematic in that sense, but I have yet to see evidence on paper of that specifically, if that makes sense. So, I like to talk about I don't necessarily like to speculate. I like to just go off basically what I have been presented with in the fact forming uh fact-finding mission Mhm. that we've been given. And so, I think that we will continue to push for the declassified version of stuff that we've been able to see because I think that that belongs to the American people. Um but the perspective on whether the American people can handle it, the American people can handle it. Um I think that this gets into the sense of if you can't explain something, how do you then present that? But the good news is is that it's not a foreign government because if it was a foreign government, we would be number two and we're still number one. So, um I do think though that there are many governments that have looked into this based on what we've been told and what we have now evidence of according to the documentation submitted by George Knapp. What was the thing you were asking Ryan Graves about? Like the red something red that came out of the ocean. >> he Ryan Graves had initially told me about the Vandenberg Air Force Base incident and actually the individual that witnessed that, the first-hand witness, actually testified to me at the last hearing. And you can actually pull up his If you go to YouTube and you type in um Rep Luna Vandenberg Air Base, you'll probably see the witness testimony as to what they saw appear over the air base. It was wild. I mean, this is like first-hand witness accounts of um of a security force And it was allegedly like in the early 2000s. >> Yep. And it was I think like a football field or two wide, which is wild to hear. And then just Oh, here we go. No, don't go to that one. Go to the first hand. No, no, no, go down. It's going to be at the last hearing. Wow, there's a ton on Yeah, there's a lot UAP. Type in UAP hearing Vandenberg Air Air Base. Don't don't put my name on it. >> UAP hearing Vandenberg Air Base. Oh, there you go. Yep. The top one? >> Yep, yep. That's him. First-hand uh whistleblower account. Morning. Thank you, Terry and Luna, ranking member Crockett, and members of the Oh, is that James Fox there behind him? Look at that. for giving us the opportunity to >> So, this is the actual witness. >> Yeah. My name is Jeffrey Tell me. I'm a former military police officer >> had it at double speed. years of active duty service in the US Air Force. I'm here today because the American people have both the right and the responsibility to know the truth about unidentified aerial phenomena. That truth remains hidden, classified, and silenced by fear, retaliation, stigma, and confusion. He goes into a full description of this also later down in the questioning. You have to watch the hearing. Air Force Base. Right, right. At the time, we were conducting launches by the National Reconnaissance Office as the most important in 25 years. These were historic launches. These facilities were vital and they were repeatedly visited by UAPs. >> the Each incident was witnessed by multiple personnel, documented, investigated, and reported up the chain of command. We sent information up, but we got no guidance down on how to handle these events. I personally witnessed one of these events and investigated others as they occurred. Six other service members have provided me with the information that I will share with you today. The incursions began on October 14th, 2003, when Boeing contractors reported a massive glowing red square silently hovering over two missile After several minutes, it drifted further east onto the base and vanished over the hills. This event, now known as the Vandenberg red square, was referenced by Representative Luna at the first hearing on this topic. Official Air Force records of this event are in possession by Arrow and the FBI. Later that night, while I was on duty, security guards at a critical launch site reported a bright, fast-moving object over the ocean. I responded to the incident. Chaos ensued over the radio as the object approached rapidly. I heard my friend screaming, "It's coming right at us. It's coming right for us. And now it's right here." Moments later, I heard them say that it had shot off and was gone. When I arrived on scene, I talked to five shaken witnesses who described a massive triangular craft, larger than a football field, that hovered silently for about 45 seconds over the entry control point before shooting away at impossible speed. About a week later, another patrol reported a light over the ocean So, we had him um the chief next him was is still actually active duty in the Navy. So, we had active for the first time a an active duty service member coming to testify on the topic. And then um two other We had George Knapp and then um another individual who actually who uh uh Borland, I think is his last name. He actually um faced a lot of retribution for coming forward on this. So, they tried >> Really? Yeah, like they tried to go after his VA medical history, all of that. And we actually saw >> after it? Um whoever these people are, like people within the government. Um but that's not the first time that we had a vet have their records leaked or attacked after coming forward. So, Grusch had his >> So, like just shadow people are releasing this. So, like we don't know who. >> Well, yeah, it's like an inside job. Botched job on their reputation to try to discredit them. So, shortly after Grusch had testified, someone leaked his medical records out of the VA. Right. >> to discredit him. Ah, that's great. I mean, Yeah. This is like the Streisand effect, right? Like when you when you when you're attacking these people who are coming out and saying this stuff and trying to like deliberately ruin their reputation. >> They tried to ruin Borland's life. Um he's later on. You need to watch the whole hearing. It was pretty wild. So, anyways, all that to say that we just go on facts. The facts speak for themselves. I don't tell people what to believe, but I can tell you that I've seen some pretty wild stuff in this task force. The the the the giant red square coming out of the water is just totally insane. >> just him. It was multiple other people that saw it. Yeah. And there's reports allegedly how's the Arrow. I've had not a good experience with Arrow. I would like to defund Arrow altogether. I think they're a waste of a program. >> Yeah, yeah, yeah. Um out of all the people you've talked to and like all the skiffs you've been in and all these whistleblowers that you've interacted with, if you were just to take I know you don't like to speculate, but if you were to bet on like what this stuff could be coming from, like what do you think? Do you think intergalactic space aliens? Do you think it's time traveling humans? Breakaway human civilization? >> intelligence. Angels and demons like Tucker Carlson thinks it is. So, Grusch does a good way of outlining this in a way that's very factual and he called he calls it NHI. Um I think an older term for that would be what Tucker Carlson probably calls it angels and demons. So, So, like from where though? But, that's that's the thing is we don't know. Like, it's not like I can be like, "Beam me up, Scotty." and answer the questions. But, >> don't know, but I'm like I'm saying like what would your if you were in Vegas? I don't know that answer. But, what I can tell you is it's been interesting cuz, you know, we go back to some of these very old texts that talk about this that were somehow removed from the Bible, which is also a weird conversation. But, it's pretty straightforward in what those things are. So, I don't like to tell people what to believe. What I can do is present you with the facts and tell you to read a book. You should probably read the book and then conclude draw your own conclusions. Mhm. Um I had this NASA dude on here, uh Kevin Knuth. Mhm. You know him? He he um so, he worked for NASA for a while and he was a physicist for NASA. And he believes that uh these things, whatever they are, they are in the oceans exclusively because all different planets throughout the solar system have crazy different atmospheres, right? Like like they have different gravity, they have different at they they have different uh levels of gas and oxygen and whatever it is in their atmosphere. They're highly vulnerable to like meteor impacts or comet impacts, um volcanoes, you name it. Also, atmospheres can be gas, all different kinds of uh the temperature can vary like thousands of degrees in the atmosphere. But, what he was explaining was on all the different planets, all the different moons in our solar system, the water temperature water can only exist between 33° and like 200°. >> state. So, it's like a very very controlled environment. So, if you were uh another species and you were hopping from planet to planet, you would look for the planets with the water. And we're like an like we are a water world. If you you can look at our planet, look at the Pacific Ocean and there's no land. It's just all ocean. So, like that would make that and that kind of like blew my mind the way he explained that to me. He's like, you would just hop from water world to water world to water world cuz you have this perfect environment. I would say though you wouldn't want to hop, you would do uh time travel if you could dimensional something. >> Um look, I don't have all the answers, but what I will say is that just based on the stuff that we've seen, there's definitely something there. Um I don't believe when people try to gaslight the situation because I've just seen too much publicly out there available evidence to include things that I have seen that aren't publicly available that I do believe um tell a different story and I think though that with social media, the ability for people to do their own research, I think that it's really kind of created this environment where people have access to more information than any other time in US history. Mhm. And so, I'm simply here to present the facts and I think that this is one of those questions. I think when you don't talk about these things or you try to prevent the conversation from happening, that's where you get like the weird conspiracy theories, right? Um I think the way that the federal government handled JFK was wrong. Yes. >> that the way that the federal government handled MLK was wrong and RFK. And so, being able to just put this out there and let people do their own homework and research is the best. I think that as soon as everything is concluded with the trial for Charlie Kirk, I think that they need to release that information, too, because I do think that in the name of Charlie receiving justice, the American people need to know the truth. And I do trust that J.D. Vance, the president, myself, Kash Patel all have an invested interest in figuring out what actually happened and who should be held accountable. If Tyler was acting alone, fine, he's acting alone. But, like let's see the evidence. Um but, I do think that there were people that had knowledge of that because of how they reacted after the assassination. Everyone freaked out, deleted pages and information. China's tied to this foreign funding aspect of Salt Lake City Queers that goes back to Singham who's targeting and doing the violent riots even just months ago. There's targeted media campaigns calling people that are typically conservative leaning or right-wing leaning as fascists, Nazis, um that deserve and make it okay to assassinate these people. And then you have your stupid idiots that repeat the narrative talking points and they fundraise off of it in Washington. So, yes, they are responsible. They do own that because you have to realize that when you're an elected position official and in that position, you have a certain level of influence and you have to be careful about Is your audio okay? Sorry to interrupt. I just want to make sure you kind of talk from the mic. Is she Is she good? She could scoop a little forward. Right, that be Scoop a little that way. Just make sure you're on cam. Make sure you're in the demonizing and stigmatizing Americans in that way because really like even just on the topic of ICE raids or immigration, um Barack Obama was known as the deporter-in-chief. And Joe Biden put kids in Conex boxes. Everyone forgets about that right prior to getting elected. Um you had Hillary Clinton that had the same perspective and Chuck Schumer on illegal immigration. And yet, all of a sudden, you have Republicans or conservatives or people that want strong Even moderates that want >> was MAGA as hell in the '90s. >> Yeah, she's like she's like base 101 in the '90s. What happened? You know, was it bad for fundraising for the Clinton Foundation or something? >> this clip of her talking about deporting illegals like from like '98 or something like that. >> Yeah, she's she would be the face of MAGA now. She would She really would be, which is the irony in all this. Um I actually was just on a documentary on the 14th Amendment with Netflix and we were talking about this and I'm like, these are the same perspectives. Like, the Republican Party hasn't shifted perspective on their um perspective on immigration. The Democrat Party has. Like, they literally So, now and I'll get into the specific specifics of this. So, when I started to get politically involved and active, like really 2018, but you can see in 2016, Democrats and Republicans for the most part had a very strong perspective and standpoint at tail end of Obama administration, right? On um illegal immigration. Obama said, "Don't come here." Okay? He literally is on record saying that. Yep. Then you have in 2016, the start of outpacing of the black minority community by the Hispanic American minority community. And not just any Hispanic minority, it's specifically Americans of Mexican descent. So, why all of a sudden in 2016 with the rise of Hispanic Americans now being the largest voting minority, do you have a shift in the talking points from black Americans to now Hispanic Americans and specifically on immigration? What could possibly cause that? Well, it was because they were trying to target the voting minority block for election purposes. They didn't realize is that Hispanic Americans, specifically Mexican Americans, actually largely voted in favor of President Trump's platform because they don't want illegal immigration. So, it backfired. But, you see this >> Especially the Cubans. The Cubans, especially. But, specifically, they're targeting the largest voting minority in history. So, why do you think we saw a Neville Singham funding the two more riots, which what I called the riots in LA on ICE. They were literally passing out Mexican flags, brand new Mexican flags. Why just the Mexican flag? Why not the Honduran flag or El Salvadoran flag or the Cuban Why specifically that flag? And it was because want to create to create the optics to resonate with the voting base where you now have people that are of Mexican descent saying, "Oh, well, you know, they're deporting my people." [ __ ] they're deporting sex offenders. Are your people sex offenders and child molesters and rapists? Mhm. Last time I checked, I'm American, but I don't own that [ __ ] Deport them. I don't want them here. In fact, I don't even know why we're deporting them. I think that they should If you are victimizing children like that, especially, why deport them? Capital punishment all the way. Like, I do not think that people like that can be rehabilitated and I think that they're very bad people. Um this gets into the whole like argument of due process. Due process applies to American citizens. Just because you're here illegally does not believe or does not guarantee you due process cuz you're not a US citizen. Right. So, fine, deport them. But, in general, these people for them to exploit specifically because of polling to target for elections, they don't actually care who's hurt in the process. They just care about getting elected. And that's what this is really about. Yeah. I think it was 2018. And I don't personally agree with the pathways to citizens uh to citizenship for DACA, okay? But, President Trump had a plan that he presented to Nancy Pelosi on DACA. And she did not take the plan. Remember, Barack Obama created DACA. I think that they created it to create a What does it stand for? Deferred Action Okay. Yeah. Can you Can you look up the full Yeah, look up DACA. But, it was created by Barack Obama at that famous um Rose Garden ceremony. I believe that that was done not as a solution, but as a foreshadowing future political talking point and leverage point for that demographic because they saw at that point in time the rise of Hispanic Americans as the as the targeting voting minority and it's all about controlling the election cycle and the voters. So, Pelosi, the Democrats actually at that point in time, and she was largely protested because of it, um they actually did not do anything about it. So, immigration has been one of those things in Congress that both sides benefit from the division on it. Both sides fundraise. I don't think they'll they'll ever actually provide a solution for it because >> That's so crazy. >> from it. But, that's the truth because they've had multiple options to and they didn't. Then you have on my side where you have Republicans that represent large agriculture communities that don't want E-Verify that would actually force farmers to actually hire American citizens because it's cheaper for them to hire illegals, but then they're also hiring children. And so, hiring children, that's not hiring children, that's slave labor. When you hire a a 16-year-old, you know, 14-year-old Tyson chicken farm got busted on that. Kid lost his arm in one of their meat processing facilities. I was like a Why is a 14-year-old a >> Like, 14 14 or 15. Um and you can look up that article, but the the the point is is that this has been very frustrating because the system because of decades of this mentality is broken. So, the only way to actually fix the system is to put a temporary pause in the immigration process and let it catch up for people that are trying to come here legally, which by the way, my office handles a lot of cases for people that are trying to do it the right way, and it can take sometimes up to 20 years for people now because of how bogged down the system is, because there's not enough judges, attorneys, all of the illegals that came in are taking away resources, time, court appointments, all of that. They're not actually waiting in line, they're breaking the law and coming here, and they're essentially trying to cut the line and doing what they're doing, and that's not fair. And so you put a pause, you let the system catch up the illegals, and if people want to come here the right way, do it the right way, but you can't cut the line and you can't just show up and expect us to roll out the red carpet for you. And the cartels are making money hand over fist trafficking people over here. Well, now now they haven't, right? So like we've seen a decline in the number of illegals coming here, but during the Joe Biden, Kamala Harris administration when they were running on this stuff, absolutely they were making a killing. And they're killing people in the process. Yeah. There was a um And by the way, there's there's like separately aside from like the Hispanic voting block issue and targeting for of politics, they literally were letting in terrorists. Like multiple members of the known terrorist watch list were released into US territory. Yeah. Which is wild that they allowed that to happen. The best immigration policy that I think made the most sense that I've ever heard of was I came out right before 9/11, I think. And when 9/11 happened, like the whole thing just got exploded and they never happened. And I think it was um the basis basically what it was was that um Mexicans could come across the border legally to work. And Like a work permit. >> able be they would have to spend at least 6 months of the year in Mexico. So they could come here, they could work for 6 months, they would always have to pay taxes and all that stuff. Deferred action for childhood arrivals, DACA. Yeah. >> Oh, that's what DACA is. Okay, okay, got you. Yeah, and then for the remainder of the year they would have to go uh back to Mexico. And I was like, man, that makes that makes so much sense. Like come here, get find a way to get them to pay taxes, they can work their job, these people that are running these companies that benefit off them, they're going to have to they're going to have to find a middle ground where they're not just going to have to pay, you know, get out of jail free card to pay these people nothing and uh benefit from illegal immigration. You know, I have a friend who runs a huge commercial concrete company, and 99% of his people are Mexicans, and a lot of them are illegals. And like cuz no one else wants to work. Like these guys, their biggest These guys aren't rapists, they're not serial killers, they're not committing crimes. They're young Mexican dudes with families who like all they want to do like their biggest gripe is they can't work 10 days a week. They want to work Monday through Sunday all day long. And they're not and and you know, and >> This gets into a larger discussion though like in the '90s you had and previous to that under Clinton NAFTA, which like completely destroyed the Mexican economy, and then you have cartels literally running Mexico, so it is what it is with that. So you have people and there's been a vacuum created by like the amount of drug dependents from Americans onto the drug economy that the countries in South America with the exception of El Salvador and a few others, you know, the gangs are essentially running these countries, and so we're the biggest consumer for that product, and so there's been decades-long things that have been flawed within the institution of government and Congress because I think just good people don't want to run for office. I I'm like very convinced. I Some of the people that I deal with um wow, I sometimes question why Yeah. >> it. Um but the the perspective up there is that, you know, this is just kind of the status quo, and if you have good relationships, if you have a zero tolerance on um drugs in this country, on a lot of the crimes that we're seeing, it does have a ripple effect third and fourth order, it does impact other countries, the things that we say or policies here do impact the countries, people wanting to come here, work, economy, all of that. I mean, you have a lot of people that were programmed into thinking that your typical four-year degree is like the way of making it in life. >> Yeah. Meanwhile, we have I actually was actually just at a meeting with a couple of uh manufacturer and construction-based companies here in Pinal County. And we have a really good um program that exists for people that are doing trade schools, but a lot of people look down on if you're in the construction industry or you're an electrician or you're a welder or a crane operator. I got news for you. Those people straight up out of high school are making six figures. You can make great money in those industries, but we've been so programmed and like dumbed down in society. >> Yeah, everyone wants to be a YouTuber and or Instagram person, and when you Tik Toker >> And China has been largely a part of that. They don't show their kids twerking videos on Tik Tok in China. They show them how to be an astronaut. You want to be a physicist? Like that's cool to them. Here it's quite the opposite. So you have society that's really been dumbed down, and it's because of how lazy and I think the lack of oversight and conviction of elected officials, but this has been decades-long. Like you have people that have been in office for longer than I've been alive. Like >> That's so crazy. >> Yeah, and they're like the the government's broken. Yeah, because your ass has voted us into this brokenness, and we're trying to fix it, but there's not enough young people with that perspective, so Congress is truly I think the average age we're in one of the oldest Congresses I think in US history. I think the average age is like 60 plus, you know, 70 years old. So when you have people that are on the way out, do you think they really care about ballooning debt? >> No. >> No. No. They're just trying to line their investment accounts. >> Yeah, and so we tried to ban insider trading, and um I actually am leading that charge right now with actually 27 other Republican and Democrat members of Congress, and I was told that I was going to prevent members of Congress from uh sending their children to college, and I was like, I don't think insider trading You're going to have to prevent them sending their kids to college. >> I was like, I don't know that. I'm pretty sure that that's illegal, but um so yeah, I was told that I was going to, you know, destroy the republic and cost us the midterms and force my colleagues to take bad votes, and I was like, well, if they want to go trade stocks, do it on Wall Street, don't do it in Congress. So we're trying to force that right now, but Congress does get access to information. We have meetings with CEOs, market information. We know when the policy is going to be hitting the markets. We know when to buy. And anyone that tells you that they don't have some special knowledge into stock trading is lying to you because we do. Yeah. And that's why you see these people go and making $175,000 a year become multi-millionaires. Mhm. What about lobbying? What about it? Seems kind of like a dirty game. >> Yeah, it is, and you can be a member of Congress and go right into lobbying, and that's also legal. Which is also not good. Yeah. >> Yeah. It seems like it's just crony a way for a way for corporations to run the country, you know? >> Yes, so I was talking to a parliament member in the UK, and they actually don't The UK does a lot of stuff backwards to be clear, but the one thing that they do do correctly is the finance law that they have. So there's only a certain amount of money that you can spend lobbying don't typically meet with They actually don't allow lobbying directly to members of the parliament like they do here. And it is crazy. You can see on opensecrets.org who takes what money. >> Yeah. Because of I guess like my brand of elected official, I don't really get a lot of special interest money from DC. So I have a lot more small dollars, but also initially in my first election that I won in 2022, my seat cost an estimate combined between both Democrat and Republican money spent, it was like upwards of $20 million. So what people can afford to do that or even fundraise like to the tune that you need to for a congressional seat? Like millions of dollars, that's why you have a lot of self-funders, which there are some people that are self-funders that are doing it for the right reasons, but then you have a lot of people that are not doing it for the right reasons, so I joke that this is my $20 million piece of jewelry um cuz it's my pin for Congress, and it's how much it cost to get elected, but that's ridiculous. Yes. >> $20 million can do a lot, and it's just ridiculous that it takes that much money to get elected. Yeah, it's crazy that you can like look up the the people who are funding everybody, and then you can just basically it translates directly into the laws they try to pass or they vote against or don't vote for. >> There's people on both sides. I don't know. >> Yeah, so like here's an example. Um I don't take pharmaceutical money, and I'm one of two members of Congress that's a Republican that sponsored a bill to codify President Trump's capping of prescription pill prices. Trying to codify his capping of prescription pill >> executive order to cap the prescription like so that they can't price gouge Americans on prescription prices for drugs basically. >> And I'm one of two Republicans. Really? That's how I look at that, yeah. It seems like that Massie dude's pretty cool. Yeah, he's um he marches to the beat of his own drum. Yeah, it seems like he can't be controlled by anybody. He's just like roaming around with his chickens. >> this, I like Massie on his Second Amendment standpoint and perspective, but I think that his um >> I don't even know if he's a Republican or Democrat. What is he? He's a Is he independent? I think he's more independent. But the thing is is that I think that what happened with the Jeff free Epstein personal attack with the president was not cool. What did he say? I don't I didn't follow that. He was the one that has been largely accusing President Trump of having, you know, a reason to hide the Jeffrey Epstein files. And I think when you're looking >> been doing that, to be fair. >> the one that specifically has been making it personal with the president. >> Oh, And you can see that based on the press conferences. So what I will say is that Massie's good in certain things, but I think that he tends to make things very personal with the president, and you can still push for transparency. I did, but I didn't make it a personal attack on the president. Yeah. It just seems like he'd he's just like an everyday dude who has chickens and lives in a trailer, He definitely doesn't live in a trailer at all. He has a very Yeah. >> he was I thought it maybe was like an RV, I don't know what it was. No. He definitely He's a very smart guy. Uh he actually designed this really cool thing called a Klux capacitor that actually yeah. So he's very he's he's actually very smart and we we connected on our chicken issues. Um, but I'll tell Thomas that I think that the way that he handled it was wrong. And I think that's something that he'll have to work out with the president. Yeah. The Epstein thing's crazy because everybody's implicated in it. Like it it's every single high-ranking official when it comes and and >> Well, I'm not on it. Yeah. >> you you're not on it. Thank god But uh, I mean all these, you know, all these people that were running around on Wall Street and in Miami, Fort Lauderdale in the '80s and '90s, these powerful people were one way or another connected to him. And there was a lot of innocent people connected to him. Tons of innocent people I'm sure. Like all the physicists and scientists and actors and stuff that he flew around. I'm sure majority of them are innocent never did anything. But, you know, I don't know. I think it's pretty obvious his intelligence ties with the CI and Israel and Saudi Arabia and the people he was around. I mean he was definitely he was friends with Trump for over 10 years. Was really close with him. He went to his townhouse. I mean all the a bunch of witnesses. I think it was Virginia Giuffre was the one who said that Trump was at his townhouse, you know, multiple times every week. And um I don't know. I don't know if he's guilty or I don't know. I mean I think he was definitely the right choice to be the president. I mean I would say all the of all the elected officials Trump and presidents cuz Bill Clinton was also on there. Um >> Yes. Trump was the only one that cut ties with him and to my knowledge was able to at least cooperate when investigators approached him. Mhm. And so a lot of people are saying, well you know, you have people that are implicated in the investigation, right? You have innocent people. So the question is the information that's been out obviously the victims asked for their information not to be released. We don't want to dox victims and we're not going to. Yeah. But didn't they say they wanted this information to come out but they could still remain anonymous? Correct. That means that their names are going to be redacted. Um, but also at the same time remember what I told you about the victim testimony and from the witnesses and from the attorney. Mhm. They told us they would give us a list. We have not gotten a list yet. >> Yeah. The crazy yeah, right now >> an active lawsuit and these people are contacting them to settle? Right. >> So >> Yeah, there's a ex-there's a victim compensation fund as well. I think that might be part of it. >> not I'm not an attorney and I'm definitely not involved in the case like that. >> Mhm. But what I will say is that do these people deserve to be um ignored and removed from polite society if they are engaged in sex trafficking? Absolutely. Should they should they face justice? Absolutely. >> Right. However >> more deep state than covering up for Correct. Correct. No one likes pa-pals. Um, I have a bill called um well, you can look it up. It's CAPM but we we want capital punishment for pa-pals which by the way majority of Congress does not have that perspective. >> They're uh minor attracted people. >> Yeah, that's crazy that that they even try to make that um a a sexual identity. It's like completely opposite and really gross especially if you have kids to think that that's okay. But the fact is is that the way that this has been ballooned into my opinion a direct smear campaign against specifically the president is what I don't like about how this has been handled because you can see the paper trail that I provided. Mhm. Not one person would help me with this. Not one. No one wanted help. Mhm. Um, towards the end some of the members of my task force signed on to a letter to the Department of Justice and then everything started to come out. Well, I have proof. We have witness statements. They're investigating. I presented the document that there was destruction of evidence. Mhm. The point is though is that the way in which Democrats chose to handle this specifically Joe Biden was in office for 4 years. They blocked the release of the flight logs. >> Yes. Yes. No one talks about that. >> Yep. Why all of a sudden now information was released by the White House? They want names specifically. The victims told us they would give us names. We haven't gotten the names yet. >> Bill Gates pushing hard to have them not release it and to keep it. Wasn't he like lobbying hard to keep them suppressed it? >> I have not talked to Bill Gates. So I wouldn't know. But based on the rumors yeah, the rumors of what we have heard specifically is that and this is directly from the attorneys is that when they found out that the witnesses were coming to talk to Congress they got very concerned. So then their their phone calls started ringing. So when we get the names and Comers decided to send subpoenas and all that, that will all be public for the American people to see. Mhm. But I would just encourage people to understand that at the end of the day this is politics. Yes. >> And so when you see a timeline of people not caring, the same people that claim to care about this um that have used this to smear this president specifically knowingly for also 4 years did nothing when they knew that women and children were trafficked at the US-Mexico border. In fact, they encouraged it. So if you're trying to tell me now that they all of a sudden care, I don't believe it. >> Right. >> Because I was on this issue way before and no one spoke up. Mhm. Yeah, no it's a it's being used as a political football on both sides. Absolutely. But um like I I just think that the whole Epstein files thing is a limited hangout. Yeah, I just think that >> [ __ ] There's a there's a [ __ ] hard drive sitting somewhere in another country. >> was photos that, you know, he would allegedly had like during the investigations in West Palm Beach there was like server or like a Oh, yeah. like the towers old school computers The one of the witnesses said there was an entire room the size of this room that was literal servers and monitors. Like he has to have a freaking vault of the hard drives. >> What we do also know though from the victims and I'm sure Democrats would also testify to this if you bring them in and interview them is that we were told that there was a lot of C Sam materials in that. Child sexual assault material. So obviously not going to release that information. But for people where is the accountability for these victims and who they were involved with? Virginia Giuffre before she passed away had alleged a number of people that were on this. The attorney and lead attorney that's now working with House Oversight on this. I hope can provide a list of names. But ultimately my task force doesn't have subpoena authority. It's up to Chairman Comer and because of the nature of the investigation it's now been designated to the entire committee to deal with. >> Right, right. Yeah, it's just you know, it's just frustrating and I think it's I think all the evidence and all the stuff that the FBI has come out with is straight up an insult to our intelligence. Just like showing the video of his cell. Like that wasn't even his cell. >> say if I if I was in charge of the initial rollout I would not have done it like that. Yeah. >> At all. I would have just put everything on the National Archives the way that they did with the JFK files. I've been encouraging this this since day one. Put it all up there. House it in one area. It was like also done in like a Google I think it was like Google Drive or something. They should have done it directly on the National Archives the way that they did with JFK. Allow for easy PDF search on all of it and then as we get more information just upload directly. Mhm. I mean it's like when you give the illusion that you're hiding the ball or you are hiding the ball, that's when it's like, hey there's something not right here. Right. >> Yeah. Yeah, and it's just like it makes me just wonder like what happens to people that it goes back to my lizard question too earlier. Like what what do the lizard people say to you when you finally enter the government? >> No lizards yet and if I do I probably >> Gash Patel looks like he saw a lizard when he was sitting there the other day. Um, I I've yet to see lizards. Now really stupid people I've come across. Very stupid people that you'd be surprised are in government totally come across as unfortunately on a regular basis. So Yeah. >> Yeah. Well, Anna thank you for doing this. This has been a fascinating conversation. I appreciate it. Is there anything that we should cover that we haven't that like what you're working on or what you plan on doing? So our next hearing is going to be on MLK. Uh, we are pushing for the banning of stock trading for members of Congress. So that's made me incredibly popular among my colleagues. Um, also going to be forcing a vote on term limits or at least calling people's bluff to see if they're actually serious about it cuz everyone campaigns on term limits. >> Forcing a vote on term limits. >> Yeah, so >> your limit be? So I'd say three terms. But, you know, right now a lot of people again you have people that are that have been there literally for decades. If you're, you know, in your late '80s and you're still in Congress like go joy enjoy the rest of your life. You don't need to be in Congress at 80 and also it's probably a health risk to you cuz there's so many stairs and a lot of marble you could like break your hip. Yeah. Um, but uh there's also this aspect of I think people tend to prioritize this and make this their life when in actuality you should also if you want to be like a really grounded representative, you should I don't know go back to your district and interact with the people that vote for you and maybe have a family and love your children and be a good parent and then you can bring that perspective to Washington. I think that that's what's needed is a pro-family environment up there. Um, so it'll be interesting to see kind of what happens with what happened with Charlie. I think a lot of people kind of took a step back and were like, well, who is this Charlie Kirk person? And then they hear the things that he's talking about and how much sense it actually made. And the fact is is that we've gotten to a political climate now where people thought it was okay if they disagree with you to kill you. So just think about that. If someone doesn't like what you're saying because of the political nature and environment that we're in maybe they don't like that you have me on here. Um, in some people's perspectives they can shoot you in the head. Mhm. And it's supposed to be okay. And that that is a problem that we have culturally right now and so I think that that's why collectively everyone needs to kind of push back against that. Yeah, I totally agree with you. Um Question everything but read the facts and verify for yourself. Bring on the AI government. No, no, no, no. We need some interface with with humanity and soul and not Yeah, we don't want AI government in that sense. That's As long as it's not owned by Palantir, it'll be okay. Oh, well, that's too bad. Palantir my no no, so But thank you. We appreciate it and um yeah. My pleasure. Thanks for that. All right. Thanks a lot. Good night, everybody.