David Sinclair, lifespan. Why we age and why we don't have to. I'm so happy. There are people like you out there because I don't want to age. I'm aging clearly, but I'm not interested in it. I don't like it. Yeah. Well, I don't know anybody who does Joe Rogan. Thanks for having me back on. Thanks for coming back. The first one was a smash hit, man. People loved it. All my friends were very excited. But I had a question for you right off the bat regarding Metformin. It was actually an article I'm sure you saw it recently, like within the last couple of days that was going around through all the mainstream papers. It was talking about how, with the use of Metformin, DHEA, and was there something else as well that was taking two years, human growth hormone, taking two years, two biological years off of people's lives in terms of their age, which are natural, eight, which are actual. I'm 52. It would make me 50. Even 49.5. That's what I'm looking for. Yeah, that was back to the fourth. Yeah, that was a good study. It's only nine people. So we have to repeat this. Were they studs? Did you get nine super athletes? Or did you get like schmose that don't exercise? I as far as I know, these were just regular schmose schmose. Which is good news. Schmose like me. Yes, good news. Yeah, but I mean, that's what you want. You don't want like some people just respond better. They have super bodies. Great thing about that study is, first of all, I was with the main author on that paper while it came out. I was over in Israel as part of my journey up the Great Rift of Africa, ended up in Israel. Anyway, the guy there, Steve Horvath is his name. He and I and a couple of other guys are trying to figure out not just why we age, why we don't have to, but is aging truly reversible. And that's what this study suggests is that it's not just about slowing down aging, but one day we could be 80, but biologically 30. Now when we're talking about the biological age, how is that measured? It's just measured by the length of the telomeres. Is this measured by physical performance? Is it measured by a combination of these factors? It's none of that. No, something brand new. Most people don't know about it. So it's called the Horvath Clock and what Horvath and others have discovered is that if you read the DNA and you don't just look at the letters, a C-T-G, if you look at what's on the letter C, size in it's called, there are chemical modifications and those chemicals change as we get older in very linear and predictable ways. If you use a computer, AI, you can say, if I took your blood sample right now, I could read your DNA, look at those chemical groups on the C's and I could say, you want to go, okay, 52, you might be 46 according to that clock and also I could predict when you're going to die. Whoa. Scary thought, right? Yeah, we're going to fortune tell her. Yeah, but the good news is, now that we know what's not just measuring aging, we actually think that clock is part of the aging process. We're learning how to reverse it too. Hmm. Now, is this just one modality, this combination of growth hormone? Is this one way of going about it? Are there other ways of going about it? Growth hormone, DHEA, Metformin, is there anything else? Well, that's the first that's ever been shown to me. Just those three things. But I'm sure there's going to be many more discovered. We've only had this whole-ath clock over the last few years in humans being used widely. But I think as we use this clock, we're going to figure out that whole bunch of stuff that we do and things that we can do and combine will not just slow aging but reverse it. Just by two and a half years, eventually, and some of the technology that I talk about in my book, we think could turn the clock back by a decade or more. Whoa. Now, what things are you talking about that could possibly turn it back a decade or more? Well, so, and who do I have to blow? Sorry. Yeah, you can blow me, but yeah, you may have to do it a few times. But the amazing thing about where we are now today with aging, and we're right on the cutting edge. So it's great to be able to share this with your listeners, is this clock changes on the DNA, right? What I'm saying in my theory of aging is that it's not the DNA that we lose. That's the old theory. The old idea that Antoxidants hurt the DNA. Just throw that out for a while, maybe forever. What I think is going on is that the DNA is getting modified, and the cell can't read the DNA the way it used to. That's really important. So the clock is not just a clock. It's not a clock on the wall. It's also, if you move the hands of the clock, time changes. That's what I think is going on. Can we pause right here for a moment and explain what you were saying about antioxidants? Well, Antoxidants have been the biggest disappointment in the aging field. You don't stop 40 million people every day buying drinks with Antoxidants in them, but Antoxidants have, with very few exceptions, failed to extend the lifespan of any organism. But you are a proponent of resveratrol, at least you used to be, are you still? I still take it, and we still study it in my lab. But what you brought this up is really important. Resveratrol was originally thought to be an Antoxidant, and it is a mild Antoxidant. But the way it really works. What we know this is a fact from my lab is that it's stimulating the body's defenses against aging and disease. Because it's binding to these enzymes that we work on called Sertuans, and these are the defenders of the body. And you were saying that if I remember correctly, you take resveratrol, you take a powdered form, actually bought exactly what you take, and you mix it with yogurt in the morning. Is that how you do it? Yep. What's the dose that you take? Well, it probably comes out to about a gram in the morning. Okay. So if someone's taking capsules, what depends if it probably capsules at 250 milligrams, that'd be more in the morning? Okay. Yeah. You know, I'm still alive. It's a good time. It's a good time. It's a good time. Oh, thank you. Do you, is it important to take it with fats? Is that why you take it with yogurt? Yeah. Yeah. Either high protein, which is a Greek yogurt, suffices, or fat. Water ill. It's like brick dust. It won't dissolve and it won't absorb. Okay. But a glass of whole milk maybe would be okay. Yeah, that's great. But it has to have something to bind to is that the deal? For sure. Yeah. In our studies, in humans and in mice, if we didn't give them high fat food, it barely got in. That was fivefold less. Now, this study of Metformin, D-H-E-A, and human growth hormone does not include N-M-N. Right? So, but N-M-N is also effective. Well, let's delve in a little bit. Please. If you read the paper and I have, it turns out one of the effects of this treatment was the reduction in the levels of a protein called CD38. CD38 resides on immune cells. And it goes up as we get older. And what they found, one of the biggest effects of the treatment was the levels of this CD38 protein went down. So what is the CD38? This is the main enzyme in our bodies that degrades NAD. NAD is required for these two end offenders to work. So one possibility is that, and I'm sure it's complicated, but one way this could be working is by allowing your body to make NAD and store it rather than degrading it as we get older. Interesting. So would supplementing with N-M-N, which is a form of NAD, correct? A precursor. Yeah. That enhanced the effects, do you believe? Like if they tried to do a new study? It could. It could. Each of these patients cost $10,000 for the treatment. So it's not easy to do these studies. $10,000 for the entirety of the treatment and the treatment lasts how long? I don't remember how long they treated the patients for. But I do know that it wasn't cheap. That's why they only did nine. So at first I said to my friend Steve Horvath, nine patients, you're kidding me? What didn't you do 50? No, it went well. We didn't have the money. Anyway, my point really is that we need to test a lot of different combinations. Include anemone, include, there's one called RAP and Mysen, which is a little bit more risky and toxic, but there are better molecules in development. The question is, what is the best combination? And do you use it with exercise and fasting? Or is it bad to combine them all together? We don't know yet. That's a good question too that I wanted to ask you because one of the things that came out of the podcast was input from some other people that I know that are nutrition experts and performance experts that were skeptical about Metformin. And they were saying that Metformin, although it may have an anti-aging effect that actually decreases physical performance in athletes. Well, there is a study that shows that. And Resverital too, actually, can prevent the great gains from heart exercise. So here's the solution that I think is worth trying a solution. And that is a theme that I have in my book and in my research. And that is we don't want to be doing everything every day necessarily. We want to pulse it. We want to shock the body and let it recover. We know that you can't just exercise. I mean, some people who have been on this show run 100 miles every weekend, but generally you want to hit it hard and let it recover, hit it harder. So what I am planning to do and actually started doing is on days that I'm exercising and recovering. I don't take Metformin. And then when I'm just sitting around around a plane, I do. And that way, I think that my body can have the best of both worlds. So when you are not exercising and you take it, you feel like it doesn't have a hit. When you are exercising and not taking it. So it somehow or another, whatever performance hit it has, it's temporary. Yeah. Right. So well, this is all just theoretical. It is. Right on the cutting edge of human knowledge. We don't actually know what the best thing is. But my best guess is that we want to allow the body to recover. So I don't take Metformin on those days rather than taking Metformin every day like a diabetic would. Now what is the, what is the, what's the hit? Like what is happening? What's the mechanism behind the performance hit from taking Metformin? Oh, we don't know. But I can tell you the best explanation that I can give you. Metformin is a derivative of plant molecule, the French lilac. So it's not crazy molecule. It's pretty natural. But what it does is many things in the body. Scientists will quite annoyingly argue about it for, for, they have for a lot past 40 years. So there's no correct answer. But what I think is going on is that Metformin is interfering with the mitochondrial micronry in the cell. Micronry, we call them battery packs. They're basically making chemical energy. without that chemical energy, we'd be dead in about 20 seconds. So we need that for life. So Metformin interrupts that energy production in the mitochondria. But you need the mitochondria to amplify after you've exercised. So they're antagonizing each other. So why does Metformin work? By inhibiting the mitochondria, the body gets a signal that it doesn't have enough chemical energy. It's not making enough. So it expands the number of mitochondria. These are ancient remnants of bacteria that entered our cells. And we have less if we sit around and like we are now and we have more if we exercise and metformin by telling the body a shit we're running out of energy, the body responds and makes more mitochondria just like exercise does. But I think if you're taking Metformin and exercising, that inhibition is preventing the benefit somehow of what you get with exercise. Perhaps preventing your house. So what did the study or what studies have been done and what did they reveal? I don't remember the precise details of the study. It was giving Metformin every day to people who were in a controlled exercise, I think was treadmill a few times a week. But then what they measured was the mitochondrial benefit. Now that and I think they measured a bit of strength. It's so confusing that there's a mitochondrial benefit but a performance hit. Well no they actually metformin prevented the mitochondria from amplifying up. So it must be interfering with the signal that you get from exercise whatever that is. We don't know exactly what that is. So you'd really have to be some sort of a guinea pig to try to fuck with the stuff, to go back and forth from taking it and exercising, not taking it. Yeah, an exercise. I'm one of those guinea pigs. And what do you know just respect? How hard are you working out? Not enough. I'm saying. I spent three hours a week in the gym. That's not bad. That's only one day. That's maintenance. Oh one day? Really? One day three hours? Yeah that's ridiculous. Why are you doing it that way? Because I'm a schmaw. But you're so smart. That tries me crazy when smart people do dumb shit. I got Peter Hotez on the podcast who's a brilliant man in the University of Texas. A researcher in tropical diseases and he's obsessed with diseases and the importance of vaccination, all these different things. Then he's talking about how he's diet is terrible. He's junk food. He's constantly jacking the box and chatting. I'm like what the fuck man? You're so smart and you're a guy who works on diseases. What's the number one cause of diseases? Oh yeah. I don't get that. Some of my colleagues eat the worst food and they study longevity. Crazy. It's crazy. It's like they can't help their impulses. It's like there's so many people like that that are obsessed with various aspects of health or performance but they just can't get it together. Well I would work out more if I had time. I'm usually working till midnight. After that I'm not really getting out of the gym. You do have an excuse. You have a crazy work schedule. You do have an excuse. Yeah. Well I'm on planes, Fitbit. So I try to exercise on the planes pretty hard. Do you really want to do? Do you really want to do? You guys are trash room? No squats. So nobody thinks you're crazy. Yeah. You guys got to pee a lot or you're doing blowing there or something. Yeah. I'm done. I'm done outside of sweating. I'm out of sweating. I picked you in there doing meth. Yeah, doing something in there. So what do you do when you work out? I lift weights for an hour. Then do a fair bit of stretching and then actually do some hot and cold treatment. Oh, okay. Yeah. You remember we did the cry of therapy last time? Yes. Yeah. That was fantastic. Yeah. You want to do it again? Today if you have time. Oh, do. Fantastic. Earlier. So I like to do hot yoga in the morning and then cryo after podcast. I'm sorry. I like to mix it up. All right. Let's do it. All right. I don't have a cryo handy at my place, but I do the sauna and then the cold tub. And you should get a cryo set up. They're not that expensive. You get one. What about these infrared boxes? Are they any good? Oh, for saunas. I do not know. But some people swear by them, Laird Hamilton, who were talking about it, by the way, how good is that coffee? Fantastic. My handle tub, super food coffee. Whoa, we'll get you more. Well, oh, Jeff is going off to pick up our Pablo Escobar mug shot picture. I'm obsessed with mug shots for some strange reason. Oh, he's collecting new mug shot pictures. We've got a giant Pablo Escobar. It's very nice. The Laird Hamilton stuff is that's got turmeric. It's got coconut milk. It's organic coffee. I'm so addicted to it. I drink that stuff like water. Yeah, I'm going to have to get myself. So yeah, it's delicious. He's so, I mean, you don't need a machine. You can mix it yourself. He has all this stuff. You just poured into coffee. Yeah. I mean, he's a hero of mine. He's a stud. What is he? He's 50 something. No. He's 1,000 years old. I runs mountains, fucking serfs, things, tall, the empires, state building. He's a very interesting character. The last I saw him, I was watching something on Instagram. I saw him in a sauna with oven mitts on, riding a bike, like one of those echo bikes, like those rogue, you know, those aerosol bikes, riding one of those fucking things in a sauna. I was doing his sauna routine. I did not like it. I was cranking a sauna up to 220 degrees. And I think I cooked my lungs a little bit, not bad, but people who listen to the podcast afterwards, my apologies, because I was coughing like that for like four or five episodes. And then I had decided, okay, this is fucking stupid. Like I don't think this is good for me. Right. Well, you know, for me, sis. Yes. What doesn't kill you makes you live longer. That's not exactly true. You can push it a little too far sometimes. Yeah, how about booze? Booze doesn't kill you, but it definitely doesn't make you live longer. That is true. Have you drink hard every night? Kill somebody, shit. If you look at two people, one that drinks hard and their brother who just drinks water and runs all the time, boy, that water drinking guy who looks fucking fantastic, doesn't he? He comparison. Well, yeah, that's probably another one of my vices. I got a layoff. I got booze. Yeah. Well, how much do you drink? I probably have one or two a day. When I'm on vacation like you, I overdo it. I just got back on vacation. My body's way out of shape. Yeah, I get fat on vacation. That's time I was on vacation. I was doing this. I was grabbing my size. I was in Italy. I went hard. I was drinking wine every now, I was drinking about a half a bottle of wine every night. I was eating pasta all day long. But when I'm on vacation, I just go fuck it. And also it kind of gives me a little project when I come back. You know, like, all right, now it's time to get serious. Right, right. Well, I was in Africa recently. And I got to tell you, when you see a wildebeest, get attacked and chewed on for 45 minutes by a crocodile, nothing better than going back to the camp and having a beard or to calm down. So I deal a lot of that. So when you were on safari, how did you, when are you in one of those open Jeep deals? Yeah, a lot of that. We did also some hiking. We had mess eye leaders that would go out and with a federal officer with gun to protect us. Oh, Christ. Oh, it was fun. It's so much so different than being in a Jeep to walk among the cats. Oh, yeah, man. You got to show her. You're almost dead. Yeah. It's like you're right there. And you feel like you're alive. You know how you get the feeling of what it was like to be an early human. I've never encountered anything other than bears in the woods that are terrifying. I've never seen a mountain lion while hunting. I've only seen two mountain lions ever. One was from my back porch in Colorado and one was in the street in Santa Barbara. I was driving and I saw one run across the street. I didn't realize it was a mountain lion until I saw the tail. I was like, oh, shit. I thought it was a coyote or something. Then I saw that long tail. But while hunting, the only thing I've ever seen is a grizzly bear. A grizzly bear once. I've seen black bears. Black bears are unnerving. Grizzly bears are terrifying. They look at you like this. You could shoot them and they'll still come. They just look right through you. They look like, am I eating you? What's going on with you? Am I going to eat you? They're trying to have black bears. So like, oh, shall I get out of here? Should I run? Am I the boss? Are you the boss? Like they're not sure. Grizzly bears are fucking sure they're the boss. They're just trying to figure out whether or not they should eat you. Right. Actually, one of the things you realize when you're amongst these animals, it's a huge privilege for us to go for a walk without getting eaten. Yes. Yeah. We don't think about it that way because we're so used to being in parks and, oh, I'm out in nature. The fuck you are. You're not really in nature. You're in some weird sort of nature preserve that we've sort of set up inside cities. Right. And people ask me about my work. Oh, isn't what you're doing on natural? A fuck natural. What about our world is natural anyway. Brush your teeth isn't naturally, they're stupid. Right. You're born with a toothbrush in your hand? Shut up. Right. I'm not sure if you're going to say what? I had 30,000 feet drinking a cocktail, surfing the internet. Not so natural. That's natural. You're getting bombarded by solar radiation. You're booze in it up. You're also somehow or another online. No way that anybody's ever going to be able to explain to me that my puny brain is going to understand. Right. Yeah. Exactly. Well, yeah, don't give me the argument that aging is natural, therefore it's acceptable. Pies. I don't buy any of those natural things because everything on earth is natural. Even chemicals. We're not getting them from the stars. We're not pulling them out of the dimensions. Like we're talking about. It's all from earth. Everything. Right. Even polysuticals, most of them have derived from plants. Sure. In Africa, I was hanging out with the butler tribe. These are the pigmies. They used to be in the forest and I had the chief take me through the forest and he was showing me all the drugs they used to take. There's this clustodinium. I think I'm saying it right. It was a leaf they used to chew on. They'd smoke a bit of weed. They'd go a little dizzy. They'd crouch down. After about 15 minutes, they'd stand out. They'd help and they felt invincible. They'd go kill one of those elephants in the jungle. Jesus. Pigmies killed elephants? Yeah. Mini elephants. Oh, the smaller elephants. Yeah, but now they can. They're smaller people. They can't. Except for worms. The worms were about this long. My buddy Justin ran. We're a big supporter of fight for the forgotten charity. It's a charity that my friend Justin ran set up and they build wells for the pigmies in Congo. And through this application called the cash app and I personally don't need it to. We also were doing benefits for them. We're doing a big benefit in LA coming up soon. That'll be announcing soon. But he goes over there all the time and he's had malaria three times and just recently has acquired some unknown parasite that is just devastating his health. He's trying to figure out what it is. So he's got to go through a battery of tests and they've got to examine him. The next time he goes over there apparently he's going to bring his own food. But I mean the fucking poor guy's got malaria three times. Yeah. Well, it should be taking his medicine more often I think. But they're all in no it recurs. Does it really not? Yeah, he's not getting rid of it. Well, it becomes systemic. Right. It's horrific man. I mean the way he describes it and he's a gorilla. I mean a fucking gorilla. He's a huge man. He fights for Bellator. He's one of their heavyweight contenders. Contenders. You know 250 pounds stud of a guy who goes over there and catches his horrific diseases and just like barely survives. It gets the medication and comes back but then when he gets sick sometimes it'll kick back in again. It's kick back in twice. Another reason we don't want to go back to natural way of life. You're a good man, Joe, for supporting the pig may. I was just in a such fucking angel. When you talk to him and you see his documentaries that he's put down and his films that they've done with Water for and now just with his organization fight for the forgotten. You can't help but help. Oh gosh, I was on the Ugandan side of the volcano rift and the way they live was just, it was shocking and we're going to help rebuild a school for them but they need help. And the right on the edge of civilization, the but to try the pig may are in the worst situation than anybody and they're the lowest of the low. They're picked on racially. They were kicked off their land. Yes. To save the gorillas in these elephants and they don't know what to do. They've got everything they knew how to live is gone. Isn't that crazy they're kicked off their land to save animals? Right. Well, you have it, there's no way out. You've got to do that because isn't there a way to not kill the animals and have them all coexist? I guess you could have kept them in the words of national parks so you can't easily have humans living in the national park as opposed you could but they're trying to modernize them. So they put them on this small few acres of land which they're trying to learn how to farm and the way they subsist is through tourism. So I would recommend anyone who's interested go see them, support them by a lot of stuff. I think we bought up quarter of the village. They love that but we're going to go back and do something meaningful. That was awesome. That's awesome. Um, natural. So we're taught, we got went off side track. So you were in Africa which is the most realistic environment. I mean, if you want to really know what nature is all about, you were in the most realistic environment. It's all tooth, fang and claw. It's like whatever survive survives and whatever doesn't become food and there's just this constant cycle going on and you're walking around. Yeah. Now when you're walking, were you walking when you saw the crocodile eat the wilder bees? No. You're in the Jeep. I was in the Jeep for that. Everything worked. Why don't they just jump in the Jeep? I don't understand that. Ah, good question. I asked myself that as they were walking by. Ah, same with the gorillas, they've been habituated to humans. They literally don't even see the Jeep. Well gorillas don't, you know, they're not aggressive unless they think you're a threat. They don't eat meat. They just eat plants all day. Yeah, they're still pretty dangerous. I'm swiped from a gorilla. Oh my god, great back. Ah, we're silverback. Yeah, it's interesting that the the jeeps have been around for so long. They just go under the Jeep Yeah, yeah, that it's as though the jeeps aren't there. You might have six jeeps looking We saw some lines rip apart a Impala right in front of us and they just going about their daily lives. You see it catch it Just missed that we saw them running away. Oh God if I saw them running in real life. I'd ship my pants Well, they're running towards our camp. So we're running the other way I've heard a horrible story about these people that run so far. I camp and this person went to use the bathroom in the middle of the night Apparently, you know, there's cabins and you have to leave the cabin to go to the bathroom and the cats Went in the bathroom and got them and dragged them out the kidding. No, that's the worst way to go. Yeah It's the hyenas you got to watch out for because that'll actually eat you alive. Oh fuck Yeah, the locals don't like the hyenas. They don't have respect any animal that eats another animal while it's still screaming Oh, yeah, they don't give a fuck. They don't try to kill you. They just eat Yeah, that will to be had a broken leg it got away from the crock But it was it's it's pushed me at that point. Yeah But there were people in the Jeep some other Americans cheering. It was like a sport for them. Oh, no I didn't appreciate fucking a man. It was a solemn moment. This animal's gonna die and they're like woo-hoo You know chasing it must be meant right? It was mixed it was girls. I'd be super concerned I don't I think it was a few but girls were cheering. Yeah, fuck him might have been I think was the guys cheering, but hard but they were chasing this pyramal It's hopefully been broken off and it was running on a broken leg and they were chasing it the people The the Jeep and people in the back of the Jeep. Yeah, my kids with me. They were screaming and crying It was it was emotional. I don't want to see that. Yeah. Yeah, I I've never seen anything take anything out in the real world It's shocking, you know, you can see it on BBC or whatever as much as you want When you see it live my friend Johnny Hamilton he works at a ranch in Colorado shot out to Johnny He was Following the trail of this gigantic elk. They'd seen all these footsteps and they seen mountain lion footsteps and Then there was no more mountain lion footsteps And then they followed it about a hundred yards of show or so and they found the cat the cat on top of the elk It had jumped on the elk's back and Killed the elk It's a hundred fifty pound cat a nine hundred pound elk a big bull and it just leaped up on its back and just They got a hold of its neck and that can drag to the ground, but it rode it for like a hundred yards Yeah, the crock did this too to the will to be so elephants are interesting. We saw a lot of those and What we learned was that the old elephants because they've run out of their teeth their teeth way down and at some point They just can't chew anymore so they have to find really soft stuff eventually they die and that gives rise to this Legend that there's this graveyard for elephants not a graveyard. It's just where the soft food is But I was thinking if elephants had technology they could easily solve aging they just get dentures and yeah Why can't we just Trank them and give them some implants. Yeah. Well they do it with people, right? And I think in the zoo They might do something like that. Oh, hey, they do a dog my tea tree built. They're wearing out. Yeah I've seen that before with people. It's cool. It made sense like it's my daughter's teeth But I said to the dentist. I know a change in topic here, but it's funny. I said to the dentist Can you fix my teeth you just did my daughter? They went oh no you're you're almost 50. We don't fix teeth at 50 Excuse me do I feel like you're on your way out exactly? Yeah someone said that to me went in terms of Maniscus I had a meniscus tear and they said well When you're younger you have more blood flow to your meniscus and we would just surgically repair it and hope it would fix or perhaps today you stem cells but Most likely because of your age. It's not going to heal correctly and I'm like okay I'm confused because you're talking about blood flow like blood flow like what is happening? That's different. I don't I think this is like some old medicine nonsense like is blood not flowing I mean I Well, it's flowing and and someone with your fitness is flowing probably as much as a 30-year-old anyway I'm in better shape than I was when I was 30. I do more shit. I do more running You know I'm like my my a lot of blood flowing around man. I'm I think they compare you to sedentary people For sure they do that's the problem with most medicine is that it's tailored to the average person. Yeah We got it to fix that. It's got to be personalized tailored. Yeah measured. I think For sure they do that's the problem with most medicine is that it's tailored to the average person. Yeah We got to fix that. It's got to be personalized tailored. Yeah, measured I think if I wanted to go on safari like that like you did I would have to make sure that I wasn't around any cheering assholes like that I could I would have to take some sort of a solo trip and I'd have to be heavily armed And then wearing armor some sort of armor well, so that was in Tanzania In a flame throw yeah, I bring that he's my pleasure with me right right fuck those things man Did you ever see survivor man? Do you know survivor man? Sure. Yeah, less is a great guy But he's committed to finding Bigfoot now. That's always doing these days. All right. Yeah, but anyway less Did an episode where he did survivor man in Africa and he would the scenario he would create these fake scenarios You know just man made scenarios like what if you were in a hot air balloon and the hot air balloon Got a hole in it and crash landed in these lion infested Territories so he literally did that that's insane in the basket So he had a few items in the basket and the the flame thrower for the for the hot air balloon with him to Ward off the fucking lines so here he is it's nighttime in Africa and by the way He self films everything you know the reason why they came out with that other show with that Who's that other dude the other dude that that got busted like sleeping in the holiday in you got? He's going to the yeah bear grills he was going to the four seasons at night He's like this is how you could do it, but I'm not gonna do it He would he would show you how to do you could sleep in an igloo But meanwhile he would fucking he was getting room service and he didn't stakes and shit. Yeah, that's what I do But less trowd really does it I mean he brings a series of cameras. So this is him and Last went and he so that he pretends the thing crash landed So this is his scenario that he's created for himself But the reality is he really is surrounded by lions and so he has a limited amount of propane and he would fire up look He would fire up that thing which is what you use to get in the hot air balloon and scare the shit out of lions So through the night you You'd hear that look at the fucking zebra's and shit so he'd hear it in the middle of the night You'd have to Fire that thing up. Let's get everybody the fuck away and then after an hour or so that We went off fuck time to fire it up again And so he was out there sleeping in this basket Trying yeah so crazy. He's so crazy And he would also do these things where he would have virtually no food for seven eight days You know and just really just get super super skinny and almost starved to death That's the opposite of being in a Jeep. He's got like a bottle water I got a pocket knife. I got some rope. I did this is how you do it I got a stick. What is that? Oh some sort of a machete type thing? Fucking crazy. Yeah, we went up in a balloon which was beautiful by the way. It's fun. Isn't that? I did that in Italy recently really wild. Yeah, it's anyone who's afraid of heights. Don't worry. It's beautiful But we had a truck underneath us with people with guns just in case that happened. Oh, that's good Yeah, so there's a follow-on people. Yeah, there's a whole industry and keeping people alive. They wanted to stupid shit Yeah, right you can imagine oh sorry the Serengeti burnt down yet with some kind of balloon How many days right how many days did you go there for we traveled for 16 days? I took my whole family and our brother his kids how old are the kids? Two nephews and my kids are 16 14 12 perfect age for this and The they don't recommend you being under a certain age if you're gonna take malaria medication, right? They'll did whoops really I don't I don't I think 12 might be okay But I think it's like under 10 or something like that with these you know The stuff is heavy duty like did it fuck with you? Did you have crazy nightmares? I took the one that doesn't give you nightmares, but my other siblings had that my father came so he's 80 And that was actually the reason we went to his 80s either birthday present. Oh wow. That's a cool. What a cool present Yeah, it was it was awesome. We went Kenya, Tanzania, Tanzania. What did you like best? Tanzania supposed to be gorgeous Yeah, Serengeti was incredible. It was all good. I really liked hanging out with the with human beings too They're interesting species sure for sure. Yeah, I enjoy humans. Yeah So was the origins journey I called it and so we went to we started in old-a-vide gorge Which is where humans the the original fossils were found going back a few million years Wow and started there and then just went through looking at the various Animals we saw the gorillas and we ended up a few days ago as in Jerusalem looking at where we come oh wow Real origins tour. Yeah, that's exciting. That's exciting. Wow. That is so cool So what was the most unusual thing besides Jerusalem is that the most unusual for that? That's the most insane thing where all the religions are on top of each other Touching rocks and blessing this spring and humans are crazy They'll worship anything well, I'm sure you've seen I was in Germany once and We're there for UFC and I was flipping through the channels of the television and there was this live feed from Mecca and This was pre Instagram. I was not on Instagram I would definitely would have because I watched it for hours. I just sat there in my room drinking a cocktail with my feet up watching this these people circle around this What is that? square shaped thing in the center of Mecca. Yeah, I forget what the religious object that I believe I think It says something to do with an asteroid like there's a piece of some Find out that makes sense. This is important to people, but they Watching people circle They're all wearing the religious garb. This is slum at garb that they have to wear and they're all circling around this thing like for hours and hours and hours It's oddly appealing like part of you once ago I Recognize that there's got to be a very strong sense of unity and community and everybody Agreeing that we are all going to treat this. This is a sacred object. There's a sacred place We're going to wear sacred clothes. We're all going to follow this this path and this and we're all going to be together in this Like this like super reinforced sense of community that's actually ordained by God himself Well, we all need that feeling for me in science and the fossils that I and my colleagues believe with the origins Everyone needs an origin story. Here it is How would you say that? Kabah Kabah It's built around a sacred black stone a meteorite that the Muslims believe was placed by Abraham and Ismail Ishmael in the corner of the Kabah symbol of God's covenant with Abraham and Ishmael and by extension with the Muslim community itself Okay, yeah, that this so it is it is actually a meteorite which how how incredible right like a little bit of science And a little bit of religion all wrapped up together. There's a discovery. So this this is what it looks like so you're watching this The channel that I was watching in Germany again, this is probably like More than 10 years ago 12 years ago perhaps and watching this circle around this Like religious spot very very captivating Yeah, the one that I remember most from I think was Jerusalem. Yeah Was people touching the stone where the crucifix was thought to be and they were lined up for hours to just touch it for a few seconds Meanwhile, you know the origin of humans the fossils there's maybe two or three people hanging out no one really Cares admittedly it is out of the way. It's not in the middle of Middle East But still it struck me that humans are more focused on these icons of religion rather than where I believe we really came from Africa yeah, oh, I mean if you look at it and you see it you touch it you feel it It's the only sensible explanation. I mean you can still have religion. That's fine But you know don't tell me those fossils will put there by somebody no I mean I was with no, but it's it is that the idea that a human being Came from some lower homelated which came originally from a shrew is so So hard to follow like if you go all the way back to 65 million years ago to the asteroid hidden in the eucatan And you're like wait what happened? Yeah, yeah big rock Smashed killed everything except like these little rodent things and they just eventually Evolved yeah, but that's what I love about science. It's amazing. It's not only amazing. It's actually true. Yeah, we can prove it Yeah, I mean basically you could really follow the fossil record. That's one of the funny things when people go Oh, what about the missing link? There's missing there's holes in the fossil record. Well, just holes in your education Just not holes. I mean they go out to Australia, Pythagas explain Australia, Pythagas explain explain the various Other human beings, you know explain explain homofluoriensis explain the Neanderthal explain all these different there's a whole Slough of different fucking things that were human like what was that God's experiments was God fucking around? Yeah, I was like let's try to make them super short and wide and thick and heavy like a five foot seven 200 pound person That's way stronger than a person. Ah, those are no good. Listen. Let's get a taller skinny or one But with bigger brains. Ah, huh, right and let's have them breathe That's what we did. Let's bang them. Yeah, everybody bang. I don't know if it was marriage or rape, but something happened I think most rape mostly most breeding was rape until about like 500 years ago I agree with you. Do you know that to this day? There's a country is a Kurdistan What is the there's a country that? 20% of all marriages beginning kidnapping So there's a shame to the the female being kidnapped. She ultimately has to marry her captor Now find out that's is a Kurdistan Kirk Kyrgyzstan I'm not saying it Yeah, how do you say that? Kyrgyzstan? Kyrgyzstan I think it's Kyrgyzstan Silency. Yeah one in five girls and women kidnapped for marriage in Kyrgyzstan how Fucking crazy. This is 2019 religion Shame, but the fact that you could kidnap someone Rape them and then they get shamed in to marrying you. Well, I was shocked in Jerusalem I'm gonna probably have a lot of hate mail for saying this But it's a fact that when you go to the whaling wall as I did and put little note in the wall Which was with great experience by the way? There there is a space for men and women they're separated But the space for men is four or five times bigger than the one for women good Couldn't help myself Yeah, it's always disparity anyway. So so are there a similar amount of women that are going to this wall and they're just jammed into a smaller area Yeah, still 2019 is this some ordained is just some sort of a religious. Yeah, the orthodox it Apparently behind that I checked it out. So there's there's an actual scripture that says men are supposed to have this Oh, I doubt that. Yeah, so it's just ancient sexism. Oh, yeah, and even the wall is just tradition Yeah, right, but anyway the history of humankind is interesting and I did that because while we're there What's all black spots? That's like cold grass at that's like plant material. I think is it yeah. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, that plants growing out of the world Well, oh, it is okay. They're not black. We're just looking at low resolution. That's the women side. That's the men side Do you remember the scene in um What is the world war z when all the zombies climb up the wall they pile on top of each other like a Did you see world war z no fucking great movie? I can say it is that there's a crazy scene It's Brad Pitt zombie movie where although All the zombies pile up on top of each other make it to the top of the wall. You got it James, you're gonna pull it up So they get to the wall and look at these fucking zombie people are climbing up. Yeah Yeah, oh, it's it's pretty gnarly man. You've never seen this movie. I've wanted to there's the novels are supposed to be excellent What the novels written by some famous guy's son Who's who wrote the novel? But this is a great scene like see they're all piling on top of each other and they're They just reckless They they have no concern for their their health or well-being because they're you know Look they're dead. So they're just making this human thing And then the soldiers are shooting into the pile trying to knock them down But they get over the top of the wall and they start infecting people It's a pretty wild ass movie. Yeah, who wrote that movie? It's a wild movie man. This is it's one of those Zombie movies where the zombies move fast that there's slow zombie movies which Come on man like that's why walking dead like I feel like you could fuck those things up I mean they can only last so long. They don't move fast like how are they surviving? They're just kind of like shuffling towards you I feel like if you just have a big sword you can just start hacking away Yeah, so there there is zombie cells in the body and I make that segue because people are gonna say why the hell aren't we talking about aging? Well, we will okay. We hear forever max Brooks the son of Melbury. Ah ha! There you go shout out to max Brooks and Mel Brooks Sorry aging well we don't have to zombie cells Yeah, so what are they we don't talk about now for you and your trip. It's your show because it's pretty exciting It was your show too. Thank you when you're on it. Yeah, you're episode Well, something else. I'm breaking it everybody Go to Africa not just to come back a different person a better human being but also to support them They really need a help over there when you were in the area where the oldest human-like fossils were found What's the feeling like when you're in this air? And like you you really are where the origins of humankind Are from I mean that has got to be a pretty profound feeling Yeah, it was spiritual Unfortunately that the people who drove us there were saying how are you have to go see some zebras like this It's more important than the zebras, but these are the people that are the guides. Yeah, yeah, they don't know what was important to us Fair enough, but I would have loved to have spent whole day there They apparently there are still fossils sticking out of the walls of the gory Yeah, so the reason that it's a belaud to do anything with them. I don't know Well, that happens if you find a fossil. Yeah, it's a contact university to just like shut the fuck up Well, actually I probably shouldn't confess this on Don't I've made it do it bro Tell me later. It's not so bad. Okay. You can actually find a whole bunch of stuff in Africa that's interesting if you look down rather than out And my oldest daughter our oldest daughter Alex She looked down. She's a scientist and so she 16-year-old scientist she found a whole bunch of stone tools Wow, not there not not into all the vigos that sacred but you know just out on the seren gedi or wherever did you get them analyzed? uh Not yet They've recently found stone tools in the United States that they've brought back to 16,000 years ago the oldest known stone tools of any human being and it's sort of they're They're slowly but surely pushing back the dates of human civilization in America And one of the more recent discoveries was stone tools that are from 16,000 years ago So people had made their way over here or here it is I remember I'm about this. Yeah, so you never saw it. I don't know if you saw it yet They said it there's I don't know if they have video of it But they said they saw this monkey sharpening that stone before it was actually breaking the glass with it monkey shadow glass with sharpened stone impressive prison break attempt man fuck keep a monkeys in a cage That drives me so crazy. I hate it I went I took a pot edible once like a real strong one and I went to the zoo It was so depressing staring at the chimps. I sat across and watched the chimp cage I'm like oh my god these things are in hell. They're just in prison even keeping little birds in cage little cages like this But the monkeys are way worse right they're whaling They had some some type of monkey. There was in a smaller cage in the champs. It was just whaling Which is in hell. Yeah, it is It's brutal actually that the stone tools are interesting because again getting to what's natural What's natural for primates is to change their environment to take tools to you know Yes, so what we do what we're doing genetic genetic Engineering well I want to say engineering but we're using genetic legislation Understand why we aren't why we age and why we don't have to it is natural Of course that's what we do all of even all of science is natural You could even argue that an iPhone in your pocket is natural sure humans have created it they exist all over the world I've argued that cities are natural It's a completely normal thing for humans to do to create cities to say that cities are unnatural Well, why are they everywhere and why are human beings making are you saying beehives are unnatural too? Right? A clothes. Yeah unnatural Well animal habitat I mean animals like beavers create beaver dans and they're they're very uniform They're real similar everywhere. They go exactly. Yeah, yeah, the other day. Oh someone said Humans tamed fire 500,000 years ago and I said that can't be true 500,000 years ago that's you know Too long ago. I checked it out. It's true and these weren't even humans. These are pre-human I think it was probably one of the two species back. We've been doing this. We've been changing the environment Using tools using fire for that long the fire when it's crazy, right? Because it's not just manipulating a physical thing It's changing the state Right you're you're doing something whether it's with Flint and You know something the spark and some tender you're really creating changing the state of matter Well, yeah, and we'll continue to do that. We'll continue to evolve and one of the reasons that I wanted to see human origins is In my book I talk about we've evolved to our natural lifespan. We're now at a maximum 122 is the longest-lived human that ostensibly is on record the So without intervention we've reached our maximum But why not now give us what evolution failed to give us? Why can't we be like other species that are at the top of their game? Are there any factors when you look at the oldest people that are alive? Are there any common factors? Actually not really that they do seem to have a collection of Gene variants that predispose them to get to that long There's one called Fox 03 that if you've done your genome we can have a look 23 in me have you done it? I have we should look at it. I don't know what to tell You need an A or a Tier a certain position. I've got one of them out of two my kids got Two of my kids out of three have both so they if they look after themselves might have a better chance of living longer But anyway these long-lived people they tend to live a long time no matter what they do Often they Smoke till 90 years old really yeah The quit at 90 there's a few cases of that and they live another 12 years right? Or more 22 years right you said 122 years that right that's one one lady in France But I one of my friends here's his name is near Barzalay He was with me in Israel. He's got a story of when he asked the Centinarian lady Lady it lived over a hundred that he knew why didn't you quit smoking and she said oh all four doctors I went to told me to quit smoking and they've all died Keep going That's hilarious. What did she do for a living? John Kalman I forget the French lady. I don't remember what she did. I would imagine that would play a part like how stressful your occupation is and yeah She had a great sense of humor. That was probably part of it. She used to make jokes with the reporters all the time One was up How many wrinkles do you have? Jesus I've only got one and I'm sitting on it The the other one I think is even better is a reporter who was young said you know You're 116. I hope I see you next year for your birthday. She says I don't see why not you seem pretty healthy to me Ha ha Wow, and she made it to 122 now have there been any anecdotal reports of people that live longer Well, the thuzler and biblical no, yeah, I'm not biblical like no Not unsubstantiated reports of because I had heard of There's some people that claim to have lived like ridiculously long, but they've never really figured out whether or not it's accurate Sure, there's there's a few of those but even even John Kalman at 2022 There's a big argument now between us researchers whether that's even true. Oh really? Yeah, it's a massive debate. I've got an inbox full of long angry emails from scientists What's the evidence point to the contrary? that to so the hypothesis is that she Her identity was subsumed by her daughter to avoid paying taxes And there's photos of them and there's a blotch on one photo that matches the daughter So there's a lot of forensics going on and people want to subsume the grave and the French government's not or French researchers aren't giving up the blood samples They don't know they don't want to know exactly so it's probably horseshit Well probably a hundred years ago. It could it could be horseshit. I would say it doesn't actually matter god damn French It doesn't matter people have lived 117 and that's still pretty good. That's what we know You know if we can only live that long who's gonna complain? Wouldn't you like to get one of them old old old old old old old people and start doing work on them? Yeah, just pump them up with NAD get them on a drip. Well my dad's already on himself So he's not 100 yet, but he's 80. How's he look? Well, I wouldn't say he looks young, but his fitness is like a 30-year-old and really he's stronger than me We tested out in the gym the other day. No way. That's embarrassing. He can lift more. He's fitter We were going across the Serengeti and he was leading the charge if you saw him if you didn't see his face because he's got gray hair and white physically Put a bag on his head. You'd just you'd say he's 30 the way moves people very weird to put a bag on your dad's head. Yeah, I shouldn't do that Sorry dad You think he's 30 really well. He's he's reinvigorated in life So you know in my family. We've got some Ashkenazi bad jeans. We tend to die young and my grandmother died My grandmother's actually only 15 years older than my dad and she died a few years ago Last 10 years of her life horrible. So we know what's gonna happen in my family probably to all of us We don't know your mother your grandmother had your father when she was 15 years old right? whoa Yeah back in the early days of World War two She apparently was playing around with her boyfriend. She claims to be a virgin but at that point Something got somewhere that shouldn't have and She was during high school right so I was raised by my grandmother She was in her 40s when I was a kid and she was the one that taught me to Always stay young keep your you know adults ruin everything. That's probably why I work on aging Adults ruin everything but what was her advice like in terms of like why how do you avoid what adults are doing wrong? Well, you know she she'd grown up During the depression and then World War two and then the communists came into Hungary and raped a lot of people she had no She had had no respect for humanity. So by the time I came along First of all she put all of her energy into to me and I'm I was a spot brad as a kid So that that was wasn't helpful to me. I think now as an adult But more importantly she Wanted me to do the best I could with my life. She said David Do what you can to make this world a better place Make sure that you leave this place better than you found it and that's what I'm trying to do Wow What a profound piece of advice for a grandchild? She was a rebel she taught me forget the rules. All right, kind of like you do It's I'm going my own way and we'll see how this goes She said so she went to Australia. She said fuck Europe. I'm out of here She went to Australia the furthest place she could find from Europe never went back She went on Bondi Beach Insigni in a bikini which was rebellious and that is she got taken off the beach by by the police Which after we're back then are the full little British thing? Do you down any news? What it? Oh down your knees I think so what do they look like? Maybe it was a full one piece, but it's a little bit show your belly That's what I think but she was a rebel she went to New Guinea by herself in the 60s What year was this where she was wearing a bikini? That would be 56 you couldn't wear a bikini in the 50s Wow Wow, okay like those pin up girls right when you see them they always had one piece suits on Like yeah So I'll imagine you Guinea in the 60s as a woman on a run on the Highlands She claims to have eaten human flesh and She spent much of the time drunk as well. Did you see that article that was yesterday where they were interviewing an Australian A guy who's a doctor or a scientist who's talking about climate change And he was saying that we have to start eating human bodies and that human bodies are very nutritious and that we just put them in the ground and Look it I was reading it. I was like, okay, it's this kind of trolling like what is what is he doing here? Is he a completely insane person, but his advice was our dependence on me is ruining Like in some places where they're You know, they're stripping the rainforest to make room for cattle grazing He was saying that we are getting rid of perfectly good meat every time we put someone in the ground Well, we are but to suggest that is sounds insane to me Yeah, because we throw away how far food anyway at least in this country It was a mainstream publication This guy was talking about like the last thing you want to encourage is people getting used to eating people He's been watching world was he maybe Yeah, I mean, it's just one of those things like come on. I was I was going is this kind of just trying to get attention Like this seems like such a or is it did he was he joking? You know it's hard to tell in text You know Yeah, well, yeah, did you say that not every Australian is sensible? I found the article But I don't see anything about him saying wasting human bodies or me it has been more than Several articles written on it. Maybe someone extrapolated But the idea was he was saying that people should eat meat and if they want to eat meat they should eat human meat because Well, maybe no animal rights activist Maybe just an idiot eat your relatives. Yeah. Yeah, but just the last thing you want is people getting the taste People, you know, right Now do not need to go that far not yet Speaking of the food supply one of things people worry about if we all live longer is we're gonna run out of food and run out of space Yeah, and one of the things I address in the book is what really will happen if you do the calculations if you look at human history That is not gonna happen. I'm of the strong belief that we can engineer our way out of just about any problem Probably the only thing we can't engineer our way out of is if we get hit by a Five mile wide meteorite, but everything else. I think we're gonna be you think climate change we're gonna be able to Engineer away other well, I don't think we can stop climate change at this point. It's definitely happening You can see it all around, but will it wipe us out? No, it will it cost us trillions of dollars. Yeah And so I don't think it's gonna be the end of us, but it's gonna be a challenge to to continue to to survive and and proliferate as a species in the face of all of those costly things and that's the biggest problem of climate change besides species losses The expense and the you know there's only certain amount of human capital that we have to spend and we call that money And that's one of the reasons that I'm excited about extending people's health and lifespan is that that'll save tens of trillions um in the globe each year and that's money that can be put to combating global warming Saving species Besides, you know wonderful people who donate their their ownings as well But really to solve the big problems in on the planet one of them is to solve what are we gonna do with all the frail elderly people that are coming Right every year more and more Make him productive like my father. He could be in a nursing home like his mother was whereas now He's hiking in the jungles looking at watching gorillas with his five grandkids. How cool is that? That's pretty cool. You know what kind of protocols he on? Uh pretty much the same as me although he does more exercise So it's a combination of enemy Metformin and resveratrol and what kind of exercise I'm not sure of his protocol. We're gonna post that On on social media once we're sure written But I know it involves fair amount of aerobic exercise. He does rowing and and walking upstairs So he managed to climb I think it was 40 stairs I know it involves fair amount of aerobic exercise. He does rowing and walking upstairs. So he managed to climb, I think it was 40 stairs in 40 flights of stairs in 15 minutes, which for an 80-year-old was quite a worry. 40 flights of stairs in 15 minutes. Holy shit! Yeah, the guys have phenomenon. What has happened though is that his outlook on life has changed. He was depressed. Not just because he was fearful of getting old and my mother was sick at the time. But now he's looking forward to another 10 years of vigorous life traveling. And, you know, when you're healthy, you're happy. So when he was depressed, was he sedentary? No. No, he was depressed because he was worried about his health. He figured he's going to be like all his other friends, getting frail, can't walk, losing your mind. And it hasn't happened to him. So just a few years ago, he went back and started a new career. Wow. Oh, we talked about this last time, I believe. What's his new career again? He's on a committee that evaluates clinical trials for ethics. Wow. Which is what you want older people to do. Use their wisdom and knowledge to be excited about something as well. Something that stimulates you and keeps you going and gives you something to be interested in. And talk about wasting human flesh. What a wasted is for someone with that knowledge to die prematurely. Right. That's the more interesting thing to me about longevity is look, I'm so much wiser at 52 than I was at 42. I just am. I make less mistakes. I'm more aware just across the board. And I'm wiser at 42 than I was at 32. And at 22, I was basically a champ. So it's like as time goes on, you understand how you're interfacing with the the world. You communicate with people better. You know how to get by. You know what you have to do. And what the consequences are of not doing what you have to do in terms of being disciplined and being healthy and just meditation and making sure you understand the consequences also of not doing the work that you're supposed to do in terms of like the way you feel about yourself, your self-respect and the way you just feel about like your sense of self satisfaction. To me, it takes a big hit when I'm lazy. It takes a big hit when I don't get things done. And I don't expect everybody to do the same things that I do or have the same sort of work ethic or none of you. I don't even say work ethics that implies like some sort of superiority. It's more of just the idea of what you want to accomplish. Like your tasks. Everyone has their own idea of what but if you enjoy doing something and you're working towards something, I feel like there's more purpose to life. You have more satisfaction in accomplishing tasks. And that's one of the things that's been highlighted when you read books on happiness and studies on happiness. One of the things that seems to be most important is goal setting. Goal setting, working towards those goals and achieving progress. These are critical components to happiness for human beings. And without them, there's this aimless sort of drifting of life. People for the most part, obviously everyone's different, but for the most part, people don't find satisfaction and just an aimless sort of drifting existence. Yeah, 100%. I just turned 50 while I was over in Africa. I would just before that. Imagine being 80 and healthy. Like my dad. Yeah, 90 or 100. It must be so nice. It must be so nice. Of course. Of course. I'm so less stressed than I was in my 20s and 30s. And anyone who's listening, who's in their 20s and things that they're way better than a 50 year old, I can tell you from experience like you, Joe. When I was in my 20s, I thought I knew everything or at least I looked at myself as a 50 year old and I thought what an old fart. Yes. Yeah. It's not like that at all, especially with today's health and 50 year olds are just like they were like a 30 year old was. There was no 52 year olds like me when I was 20. They didn't exist. Maybe Jack LaLaine. Right. Well, it's been talked about things in the New Yorker that this movie cocoon. I don't know if everyone's seen it, but it's a pretty interesting movie where these 50, 60 year olds are, we're given the fountain of youth. And they still look old, but it was really supposed to be quite funny to see these older people with gray hair jumping in the pool and acting 30 years old. But a 50 year old isn't old anymore. 50 year olds just getting going. Yeah, that's crazy about it. You know, I mean, if you see old movie stars from like the 1960s when they were like 50, they looked like they were dead men. You know, like we were looking at, I forget what the movie was, but it was a movie where I was like, how old was he when they made that movie? And turned out he was 44. I'm like, that guy looks 100 years old. It looks like he's never worked out. He probably smoked cigarettes all day long. Never exercises. Never it drinks constantly. It looks like a dead man. It's crazy. Right. So in the future, 90 will, 90 will feel like 50 and 40. Well, we were talking about Laird earlier and Laird, I think is 55 years old and just as fucking fit as a human being can be. And he's doing crazy shit where he's got this whole exercise routine that he does inside the pool where he brings like 70 pound dumbbells and he carries it with one arm and swims across the pool and the other. You know, he does two handed dumbbell things at the bottom of the pool and leaps this surface catches a breath of air, drops back down to the bottom again, leaps this surface. Why is carrying these dumbbells? I mean, just ruthless, rigorous exercise at 55 years old. Well, there'll be a time when you can't really tell who old somebody is, especially when we figure out how to reprogram the body to be young again. Yeah. And it's going to be such a great world when people with 80 years of experience can continue to run companies and be teachers and educate the young people. Now that there's a bias though against the elderly, we've always had this in society and we have to overcome that. My dentist was biased against me as a 50. So you don't want to fix your teeth, your dead bro, not fixing the money. Screw it. I'll pay for it. Just do it. So it was a 20 minute argument. Do it. Do it 20 minutes. It was a lot. In fact, the time ran out and she said final do one tooth just to check because she was had all these reasons why it shouldn't do it. It'll break off. I have to polish back your original teeth and I said, look, I'm not going to get angry if it doesn't work. Just try it. And she did it. And at first of all, she said I have to eat crow after it. And then my wife came a week later and she said, man, your husband's a pain in the earth. But he's honest on me and actually she's offering this as a service now to people our age. Yeah, she's trying to make money. I guess. But it has not cracked off and I'm pretty happy with teeth. If it does fix it again. Right. Why not? It takes everything. And we should do that. But here's the problem with some aspects of medicine. When we're young, we don't get the medicines that will prevent us getting sick when we're old. So drugs like Metformin, you're not going to give to a 20, 30 year old. But when you get old, you don't get the medicines that they give the young. Then everyone should be treated equally in my view, as long as we know it's safe for sure. You know, there's the cost. But some of these treatments like Metformin, that's probably less than a dollar a day, cup of coffee and might extend your lifespan. Where are you getting a cup of coffee for a buck? I get free coffee from here. You've layered handles the super food machine. But coffee is even more expensive than that. Yeah, it's the limited idea of what you should or shouldn't do to fix people as they get older. My friend got his ACL torn in the 60. And instead his doctor recommended he just rehab it and don't get it fixed. I mean, what the fuck are you talking about? Get it fixed, man. You want to have a bum knee that just buckles on you all the time? Go get it fixed six months later. It'd be done. Like you'll go through the rehab. Otherwise six months later, you still have a shitty knee. It's like you're, you're called, man. But I'd just get it fixed. Bite the bullet. Go fix it. Right. But his doctor was like, where are you coming on Bruce? Come on Bruce. Let's be honest. We're at the end of the move. Not 20. Any more. Yeah. That's that limited thing. Limited thank you. So frustrating to me. Yeah. I first encountered this when I was 29 actually. I was 29. It's a wrap. They, well, they were. You know, actually, this is the problem with the other end of the spectrum, which is I was too young to get a medicine that could help me when I get older. Oh, wow. This was cholesterol medicine, the statins. And my doctor said, why do you want to get on this drug? I know you've got high cholesterol, but you're only 29. Come on. And I said, look, why wait till I get the disease to treat it? Put, you know, now people use statins more. But in those days, statins very controversial, though, they are. They apparently have a huge health hit. Well, I haven't noticed. And I've high cholesterol. And I think it's worth it. But yeah, if there's nothing else wrong with you, you wouldn't take them. But do you have arterial plaque? No, not yet. I'm perfectly clean. But shouldn't, isn't, but there's some, there's, there's doctors that are arguing that the idea of high cholesterol, the high, where it's LDL HDL, with its good cholesterol, bad cholesterol, this like, this sort of uniform approach, people with high cholesterol need to take something that lowers their cholesterol. And doctors that I've talked to are saying, well, not necessarily. It all, you could be incredibly healthy, especially if you're not sedentary with, with relatively high cholesterol, if everything balances itself out, if you have the appropriate ratio of HDL to LDL, right? Do you have the appropriate ratio or is it out of whack? Now I do. But when I was 29, I was off the charts. I had, I had a blood that looked more like cream. And that's where one of the things apparently where dietary cholesterol does make a hit, it does have an effect on people with genetic predisposition to high cholesterol in certain ways, right? Is that correct? Right. Yeah. Right. But changing my diet had a big impact as well. What did you do to, that was different? I went more, well, I ate less. I lost weight. That helped. Do you do intermittent fasting? Yeah. As much as I can. One of the other guys that was on this tour of Israel with me is Volta Longo. And he's the arguably the world's expert on this. What a great name. Isn't it? He's an Italian guy. Volta Longo. Yeah, like the coffee. So he's a guy calling when you got a real problem. Yeah. Well, he's, he's written a book and he is the probably world's expert in human periodic fasting. Here's for everyone who wants to know about what the best periodic fasting protocol is. There isn't one. We don't know yet. Right on the customer. There haven't been enough studies. But there are a few types. I go through them in my book. So because we won't have time to go through all of it. But there's the, what is it, the 18, 18 hours. Yeah. So go it. If you can go skip breakfast, have a late lunch, that's a good start. That's what I try to do every day. It's not always possible. Like when you're in Africa and they're feeding you massive meals three times a day. But the, that's what you want to do. Be hungry for a part of the day. Or you can go a little more extreme and skip two days. What's the benefit of being hungry? Great question. And this is what my lab and others figured out in the year, you know, first few years of the 21st century. We figured out that these genes that extend lifespan, these sort of two engines are activated by being hungry. In part by raising NAD levels, which we, we, N and men will mimic the effect of. So being hungry actually raises your lifespan in some sort of way. Right. So caloric restriction is what we used to talk about a lot. If you restrict the calories of a rat, was actually discovered back in the early 20th century, we'll make them live up to 30% longer, not in an old state, but it prevents them getting old. So the rats don't get cancer, heart disease, and all of these other good things. And that was the only thing that we knew up until about 20 years ago, even 10, probably. And so we used to think, yeah, I'd be, had to be hungry all the time. And there was a, still is a society called the calorie restriction society. And they were hungry all the time, that very small meals, which is pretty tough. I tried that and gave up after a week. But this new paradigm is that you don't have to always be hungry. Similar to you don't always have to be on a treadmill. You can do it for a short time, make it intense. And then you can let your body recover and go back to a normal life for a little bit. And that's great news. That means that we can have the alkakate needed to, so to speak, as long as the cake doesn't have a lot of sugar in it. Now when you are on this protocol of restricted eating plus metformin, when do you take what and when do you exercise and how do you balance it out? Like what, when do you know what to do what? I use my body as a guide, you know, another I'm 50. I have a pretty good like you know, you know, how your body feels and reacts. I'm also measuring it. A ring that that measures my pulse and my sleep. Is that the aura? Yeah. Yeah. How do you spell that? A? Oh, you are. Yep. Is that uh, isn't Kevin Rose a part of that company? Is that it? Yeah. James says, yeah. Okay. From dig, you know, dig.com. You don't know dig? No, I'm not. How dare you? Sorry. It's a good place to go find cool shit. Okay. Okay. Dig.com. Shout out to dig. Yeah, I go there every day because real interesting stories on the internet. You're always finding cool weird videos and just fascinating science stories, human nature, human interest stories. Sounds good. Uh, I had a watch. What kind of watch are you using? Uh, the Apple Watch. Okay. How does that measure? By the way, they just released Apple Watch 5 today. Apparently it's better. You might want to get it. What does the Apple Watch do? Yeah. How's it? Uh, well, uh, I change his songs and in my head. It tells the time occasionally. Uh, but yeah, what's useful with it is uh, pulse and activity. Mm. And if I haven't moved enough during the day, I've got a standing desk and that's uh, being helpful to make me move around a little bit more. But mainly it's uh, and I also do occasional blood tests to make sure that my body's optimized, um, as best I can personalize. Uh, and using all those measures, you read the data of your watch. Like how do you read it? What would application are you using? Uh, nothing special just on my phone. Have a look. Okay. So you just have a look at what your resting heart rate is. How much activity? How far you're walking? How many calories you're bringing that kind of deal? Yeah. Yeah. Pretty simple. Uh, and I'm happy to say my resting heart rate's really low, which means, you know, things are going okay so far for me, even though I don't do enough exercises. You rightly point out, I think my resting heart rate's about 46. That's very good. It's pretty amazing for a guy that Belly does exercise. Yeah, you must have good genetics. Well, obviously you do your dad's in phenomenal shape at 80. No, we have terrible genetics. So, well, how's he's in such great shape at 80? Well, we don't know. But, but it could be that he's been exercising and he's also been on this pro time. So one of the effects in mice at least of NMR, which is what we're taking is uh, improved blood flow. You get the benefits of exercise without having to exercise if you're a mouse. And those mice, they were running on a treadmill for 50% further because the blood flow and the lactate was reduced. Really? So maybe that's happening with that. That's incredible. Now, what is the difference between the effects of NMR and um, IV NAD, which is very popular. There's people that take IV NAD, and I've never done it, but we've talked about doing it many times and having it brought in here. And sometimes people do it and they do it very quickly when you do it. It only takes 10 minutes, but it hurts like hell. Apparently it gives you like stomach knots and you feel terrible. Right. All right. You've done it? I haven't admitted publicly that I've done it. Um, do it. But I, but I try everything once. I try everything once. Yeah. And uh, so last time I was out here in LA, uh, I gave it a, gave it a shot so to speak. Yeah, how was it? Uh, it was fine. It was fine. Let's get to the science in a minute. But uh, what I found was so it was a shot in the butt with high NAD. So why didn't they do it in a arena? So I thought that was the move. Did it intramuscular really? Right. Right. This doctor is uh, experimenting. Oh, Jesus. Yeah. It was, it was a friend of a friend. So I had a, I had an idea. Come here. Yeah. But here's the thing. It felt, I had tingles in my legs. I felt a little different for a few minutes, maybe 10 minutes. And that went away. Um, but the science we don't, we don't know yet. We're still trying to figure out if that actually works or not. So instead, I'm, I'm taking the molecule that we've studied in my lab, which is taken as a pill. Now there are a lot of people that swear by the IV version of NAD. And when they do it intravenously, apparently you feel phenomenal. And there's quite a few people. I know my friend Kyle Kingsbury's done it several times. And uh, he's very big on the latest and the greatest of health crazes. Uh, well, I know it's been used widely, especially getting in Florida to treat addiction. NAD. Interesting. IV. And I get emails all the time, which is best. But you know, I'm a scientist. I'm at Harvard Medical School. So I have to always be based on facts. And the fact is we don't know if it works yet. Right. Um, anecdotes are anecdote. My father's story is not a clinical trial, right? We need to do more. But what's interesting about this field is that because people have access to information through podcasts like yours and through the internet, now that papers, you can go to what's called PubMed Central and find papers, people educating themselves just like scientists used to. And they can go to the doctor or go to the internet and try experiments on themselves. Now, I don't condone that. I can't. I'm a research and not a doctor. But I find it really interesting that we're in a new phase of society where people can learn more in many cases than the doctors actually know. Sure. And particularly when it comes to nutrition, because that's one of the things that I've found that's shocking when you talk to some doctors and you talk to them about nutrition, particularly supplementation. And they'll say things like, well, you can get everything from a good diet. Like, can you really? Like, how much time did you spend school, motherfucker? Like, how much time did you study nutrition? This is nonsense talk. You can get everything from a good diet. What's your good diet? Tell me what a good diet is? What do you get from that good diet? How are you getting that vitamin B12 and high doses? What are you getting your C? Where are you getting your D3? What are you getting? Huh? Where are you getting your essential fatty acids? What's the, what's the optimal level of essential fatty acids? And they don't have a fucking clue what they're talking about. You know, they're so many doctors that go through their entire, you know, orthopedic surgeons or what have you, they go through their entire medical school with like maybe four or five hours of nutrition research. Right. I have to be careful what I say. I work at the medical school, but I do. I love doctors. Don't get me wrong. Right. We need them. We're not going to do surgery on ourselves. Right. That said, some doctors will listen to their patients and do research. Those are the great doctors that actually stay on top of things, but it's really hard. Right. They're already working 12, 14 hours a day. So let's shoot fatter doctors plus they have to work within the insurance system. I understand that there are only problem that I have is when they say things like you get everything you need with a good diet. You remember our three square meals a day. Yeah. So make sure you follow the food pyramid and eat a lot of grain. Right. Right. Yeah. Well, and don't eat eggs. Don't drink milk. Oh, there it is. Yeah. Eat margarine. Yeah. Oh, there it is. Milk is a sketchy thing quite honestly because you're drinking this dead liquid. It's been homogenized and pasteurized. I find my body reacts very differently to raw milk than it does to milk that has been processed. Well, I wonder if anyone studied the microbiome that might be helpful to you. It just makes sense that it's got all the enzymes in it. That's how the human being or a body, any animals, we'll see naturally process that milk. Yeah. I guess it's mostly sterile. Yeah. But yeah, I use whole milk in my day. It's surprising, right? Because I'm trying to avoid calories, but the benefits in the taste and how I feel that yogurt, I make myself out of whole milk that you make yogurt. Yeah. What are you? Wild man? Why don't you buy it? You're so short on time. What are you doing? Making your own butter to you? Get one of them churners. Yeah. Well, you know, we all have our hobbies. One of my hobbies. Yeah. No, I mean, no, that's a cool hobby. No, here's the problem. I got so hooked on this type of yogurt, which I first made for my son trying to help him. Here's a weight and eating issue. I was thinking that would help him, but I got addicted to the yogurt and so is everyone in my family now. So if I don't make the yogurt, they're like dad, where's the yogurt? Oh, no kid. And so how do you do it? It's really easy. You get packets. There's three different packets. You rip them open, put them in a whole milk, shake it, and stick it in the oven on defrost for 24 hours. Really? I'm in the oven. So what is defrost? Like what temperature is that around? It's 35 Celsius. Whatever. That is a 90. What is that? 90? So you're using like a Dutch oven or something like that? That's right in the oven. But I mean, in terms of the pan that you put in the oven. Oh, you mean, what's the bottle? Yes. That's just a large, I think, mason drum. Okay. And just heating it up with the probiotics inside of it, the bacteria inside it, it just starts to call us. Yeah. And I've perfected it. The first few ones were not great, but now it works every time. And actually the protocol on the internet said you have to boil it, measure the temperature, get it all right, sterilize it. And I just pour it straight in, shake it, stick it in. It's fine. Really? Yeah. So far. Did you ever get it analyzed? No, you're a scientist. You don't want to send it a little cup of it to somebody? Hey, man, take a look at this. What are you worried about? I don't know. I'm not worried. I'm not worried at all. I'm just curious as to whether like how potent it is. You know, there's various levels of, you know, acidophilus that you're getting from, from yogurt. Yeah, I've researched it before I started. And this is a company that makes a yogurt that matches a healthy microbiome. The only one I'm aware of. That's great. And you use whole milk. You don't use raw milk. Right. I don't have good access to raw milk. What do you get? Like a health food store, like sprouts or, you know, something like that. Yeah, I think they have it at Air 1. Maybe Whole Foods has it. That's like, it's really tricky because you, it's not even legal in some places to have whole milk. In fact, people have been arrested and just locked up for having whole milk. Yes. Good. Google that because it's pretty preposterous. When you think about how easy it is to buy whiskey, right? And then think about people buying whole milk that whole milk is apparently for some people. I mean, it might have to something to do with skirting FDA regulations and things along those lines. It gets very complicated for sure. And then there's the reason for homogenization and pasteurization is obviously health, right? We're trying to protect people in also it's shelf life. It stays on the shelf longer. But I've definitely bought it. Yeah, there's a small, what does it call it? A small group food group raw food club. They had, they were rated in 2011 for sharing raw milk. The latest raw milk rate and attack on food freedom, federal agents organize a sting operation against a tiny raw milk buying club and ignore more serious food safety concerns. Yeah, like 20. I mean, how hard is it? Look, you can, I'm sure, get food poisoning from spoiled milk, right? But isn't spoiled milk yogurt ultimately, right? Well, here's what I do with food. If it stinks, I don't eat it. Good move, bro. I think milk you smell pretty quickly if it's gone bad. It has involved unwashed room temperature eggs. The other count unwashed room temperature eggs, a storage method, Rossum members prefer, by the way, when we had chickens for these nasty coyotes, kill all my chickens, we would store our eggs at room temperature. We put them in a bowl. We would wash the outside of the egg and put them in a bowl and they would sit on the counter. And I was eating them all day long. Nothing happened. Healthy as fuck. Agents dumped gallons of raw milk and filled a large flatbed with the seized food, including coconuts. We seized your fucking coconuts, watermelons and frozen buffalo meat. What the fuck? Like, what is this? Agents, who are these assholes that are getting paid government money from our taxes to steal frozen, frozen meat? Jesus Christ. Christopher Darden, who helped prosecute OJ Simpson, appeared at Stewart's arrangement just in time to lower his bail. All right, so Christopher Darden's out there helping people. Whatever. Gross. I mean, I don't think you should, you know, we should somehow or another find out whether there's a way to test if this raw milk is fresh enough for people to eat. But if it is, people live on farms and have been drinking raw milk since the beginning of time, it's normal and healthy. It tastes better. It's way easier for you to digest. Like, I get a little weird when I drink like straight, like if I have milk and cookies, which I love. Um, I don't know what made it so cookies or milk. I might be full shed here. Now I'm thinking about it. The cookies might be what's messing with my stomach. I don't think so, though, because you get this feeling from the milk like the, it's probably both. Another thing about it's both. Well, in France, you get the unposturized cheese. Yes. My friend John Mark used to bring it back in his luggage. He would smuggle back for a rock lot. You know what that is? Yeah. It's like a dish that he would make with meat and cheese. Yeah, that's good. But I don't hear the French dying in droves. They seem to be healthy as fuck. And then I was fat. Right. Yeah. They're bread is better. They have bread that is not from their, they don't have modern wheat. So the wheat that they have is not engineered to have more complex glutens and higher yield like we do. So we don't buy bread in my family. My wife makes it. Oh, nice. Yeah. And so we started. Yeah. A lot of us out there. The yeast is even wild. She got that from Belgium. Friend of ours, hung some, some yeas. What is it? Some some stuff in a tree collected. The yeast brought it back to the US and really shared it with us. Caught it like caught some yeast. Well, he put some wet dough up in a tree and left it there for a few days and caught this wild yeast up in the Belgian forest. Apparently it only occurs. He claims, but we have the best bread at home. It's crunchy. You know, you break it open. I mean, I'm trying to avoid carbs. And this is the hardest thing when you get home in the breads. Just come out of the oven. Why are you avoiding carbs? Well, I'm trying to keep my blood glucose levels steady, not spike too much. That's pretty clear that that's not healthy. And just eating a bunch of bread will be a good way to spike that. One of the things that I've heard about the French and Italians in general is that they eat their bread with either butter or olive oil and that these healthy fats that you're getting along with the bread is one of the reasons why it doesn't have the same sort of health hit. And then the complex glutens, you know, the engineered wheat that we have. When you eat pasta in Italy, it has a different effect on your body. It just feels different. Yeah. Exactly. So there are a number of people that I know maybe people you know too who are putting glucose monitors on their arm here to see what foods they react to. Rata Patrick's been doing this for a while. And actually I asked her what about what's the worst food you've seen in your body to spike glucose? She said grapes. Avoid grapes. Real. Avoid grapes. Yeah. I wish I hadn't asked of that. So now I don't need a different color. And too, right? You think you're eating healthy when you're having some fruit. As I said, what was the biggest surprise? She said potatoes on so bad. Well, there is a thing that you could do with potatoes, right? Will you boil them and then cool them off and then reheat them. And apparently has a profound effect on the way it impacts your blood sugar levels. That it's far healthier when you there's some sort of process. See if you could find out what that process was. Who explained that to us? Do you remember was it run? Probably was. 99% of my nutrition knowledge I get from run to Patrick. But I believe it's something to do with the way the potato reacts to being boiled and then chilled and then reheated again. There's something about it. So the starches are less available somehow. Somehow. And it has a much more healthy effect on your blood group. Something about it. So the starches are less available somehow somehow and it has a much more Healthy effect on your blood glucose levels and doesn't spike you in the way that just a straight up baked potato would this would be coming from Chris Kresser. Aha, even that's the other one percent of my nutrition knowledge It's probably not even it's probably like 64 to potatoes for gut health and weight loss the potato hacks as potato intervention is a short-term Tool to check the reactivity of the gut to resistance starch reset the hedonic system create metabolic flexibility Resolve inflammatory conditions and provide the patient with an empowerment tool to increase the fat loss of their dietary plan It's not meant as a standalone diet, but rather a dietary tool to decrease hunger blah blah blah blah Scroll up there so we can find out what the fuck the potato hack is explanation. Poor potato has been maligned Here's an explanation functional medicine Chris Kresser on the Joe Rogan show. Ha right here that scroll up Magic of this plan leaves his clinical effect efficacy is the amount of resistant starch resistant starch is a type of starch that is Indigestible to us but feeds our microbiome when a potato is heated and then cool the significant amount of its starch is Retro grated into resistant starch This means that the effect on blood sugar is greatly dampened the potato can be Even be reheated and it will still retain its resistant starch content the nourishment to our gut biome and the subsequent metabolic benefits Cannot be overstated I've seen this be crucial and some patients who have stalled on a low carb or keto eating plan But still have significant body fat left to lose historically Resistant starch would have been present in most roots tubers Unripe bananas plantains etc. But is often devoid in our current diets hmm Chris Kresser in the house Yeah, well, you go so what when I was in Africa you reminded me they eat a lot of blueberries And so these colored foods are also good to eat. So his virtual comes on when yams dark things right? Well, yeah leafy visuals, but also fruits that are very colored colorful. So why why is that why is that? Well, I'm glad you asked the so we have this idea called zenor hermises And that's a terrible name for something that's quite simple and that is that these molecules from plants are produced to make the plants healthier These are stress response chemicals And with you stress plants they turn colored Turn on a UV lamp or put a plant in the sun it'll turn reddish, you know Those are stress chemicals to survive and I believe that we've evolved to sense those chemicals in our food supply Oh, so we're attracted to juicy red tomatoes As opposed to pale tomatoes But not just a driver I think we're attracted to it because they're colorful But what our bodies get out of it is that these chemicals go into our bloodstream and they turn on our defenses against disease to survive Why is that good? Why did that evolve? Or potentially evolve? It's I think because when our food supply was stressed We need to get ready for adversity because we probably run out of food and if you're a bird or some other dumb animal Dumber animal or even a yeast cell How are you gonna know if your food supplies can run out? You've got it? No, it chemically So these chemicals are a heads up that adversity is coming So if you eat a lot of these chemicals through say red wine which is stress grapes and other things like that blueberries these chemicals They're not Probably not working mainly through antoxidin activity. They're giving us this stress heads up isn't there there's that's a controversial thing The red wine thing correct like whether or not red wine the the actual Compound of verzvera troll is where we're getting our benefit from them because it's apparently a very small amount of resvera What red wine Yeah, sure. I don't really controversial except when people exaggerate and say that it's all resvera troll Resvera trolls a component of dozens of healthy molecules in red wine course to turn which is good for a number of things there's whole bunch of polyphenols they're called and so resvera trolls part of that cocktail What is it still so the fermentation process because we're talking about grapes themselves with a high sugar content? Actually being something we should avoid right so don't eat the grapes but but wine if you don't have too much of it We'll have a concentrated amount of these Xeno hermetic molecules like resvera troll and corset to is this a parent in red wine It's really only in red wine white wine just for chicks, right? Not as healthy not as healthy actually That's a joke for my friend, but yeah, you'll get in trouble. My friend. No, it's just for my friend, but he loves white wine The mite that's for a chicks bro. I'm joking folks. Just jokes Don't get it touchy. Yeah, so you don't need to So that when we treated mice with resvera troll they were immune to the effect of high fat diet Western diet and We've traced this down to a single genetic pathway that we work on these sort of ones I talked about these NAD Responsive pathways really so there were immune to eating shitty food like the negative aspects of eating shitty food Yeah, this was 2003 that's why it hit all the newspapers because it was the first molecule that was safe and could mimic the effects of fasting or caloric restriction without actually having to be hungry Wow And what kind of dose are you giving these mice? Was equivalent of about 250 milligrams a day and a human. Okay, so it was one quarter of what you recommend people take Right, I don't recommend people take anything. Well, okay. Well, you take right. Let's just say that Yeah, I'll recommend nation sorry folks. Yeah, I'm taking a high dose because I've looked at human clinical data And I think that a high dose may be required to have an even better effect on longevity But the the results are very clear when we opened up these mice Maybe I shouldn't have said that when we examined those mice carefully Put them to put them to sleep for scientific purposes. It was clear that they they were healthier now They were still fat that was interesting that was so fat So we figured the experiment didn't work, but their arteries were cleaned and livers were like a healthy Lean young mouse and when we looked at their metabolism. It was like a younger mouse So let me ask you this then because you take statins if you are Fairly convinced because the research of the positive benefits of resveratrol and healthy aging and healthy metabolism and their arteries Why you take in statins because you know that there are some negative effects of statins Right well if I had five lifetimes, I'd probably try that experiment. Okay. I don't want to you just don't want to risk it Yeah, is there enough? I mean have you looked through the papers the research papers on statins and a little bit There is some correlations with dementia and the brain does need cholesterol so that that might be one of the problems Is your dad on statins? Yes Really we have a whole bunch of genes that predisposed 23 meat said basically give up now Wow It's pretty horrible. So yeah, if I make it to 80. I'm doing pretty well Interesting because um boardane when he was alive um He had made a decision to take statins versus change his diet This is before you got into jiu-jitsu When he was traveling the world and eating the finest foods and drinking wine to excess every night and join the shit out of it Uh, you know, we had a conversation about it It's like I would rather eat well said I'd rather eat well and take these drugs because I know the side effects I know they're dangerous So then we have a conversation maybe two years later. He gets really in a jiu-jitsu His wife at the time was in to jiu-jitsu and you know She had convinced him to try it and he went and tried it and immediately got hooked and He has or he had an addictive background You know first was heroin and you know some other unfortunate substances and then you know cigarettes for a while He quit that and then jiu-jitsu became his new addiction and he got ripped. I mean he really at I think he started training at 58 or 59 Started and then by the time he was 62. He had like a full six pack. It was crazy to see like I'm like look at you man This is nuts like this is an image of him walking down the street and I mean he has no shirt on and he's fucking shredded Got off all the statins got off everything. It's a changed his whole His issue with cholesterol. Yeah, good on him. Just through daily exercise. Yeah, I should try. Yeah, you know I should yeah a little bit of shame that I haven't been able to get off the statins, but they just scare me, man I've just read too many things Well, you know, I could have gone off them when I was on a really lean diet I tried this Okinawa diet from Okinawa Okinawa. Yeah, so just fish mostly and and tofu Hmm. Yeah, how'd that go? I was great, but then I had kids. Oh, you can't feed tofu to kids every day Right, well, you can have separate food just for yourself. I'm not gonna smell all that I understand Yeah, but you're you know, that's the thing is like you're so limited by time You know, you're such an involved Research schedule and life schedule and travel schedule. I'm a pretty average guy. I'm not Militant about what I try my best every day to do what I can But this statin thing I just haven't had the chance to do it, but it was very true I don't think it's sufficient to keep these cholesterol levels down So combinations so far when you first got on how long you been on statins since 29 Oh wow, so you really have been on them for 21 years. Not only that super high dose So it's 80 milligrams. What's a normal dose 10? Oh That's crazy. Yeah, my doctor one of the best at Harvard looked at my genetics and said you're fucked Wow Yeah, I've got all the wrong genes these tiny little lipoprotein particles the ones that oxidize So the fact that my arteries apparently cleanness is good good news for me. Well, that's good news like I said Look good. Oh, thanks. I mean obviously there's a lot of biodiversity when it comes to human beings and some things that are bad for others Yeah, good for some. Well, I'm not losing my mind yet. I still pretty functional when it starts slipping away. What are you gonna do? Ask your wife or your friends or what are you gonna do? Yeah, what am I gonna do? What if your dad's want to tell you? Yeah, that could have a walk right He's 85. Yeah, my David changed my diapers. Yeah, David You asked me the same question three times in a row The way it's going that could definitely happen. Well, do you get a lot of sleep? I do now now that I'm wondering it. Yeah. What's a lot of sleep for you? Between six and seven hours. Oh, that's good. The doctor Matthew Walker Was a guy that I had on my podcast who studied sleep and he was fascinating and it changed my entire opinion about what's necessary There's a direct correlation between limited amounts of sleep and Alzheimer's Direct correlation. He's like it's one of the most established links that you can see between a disease and a cause Yes, quoting it's an association. I always one you know I'm a scientist always have to be skeptical sure as to whether if you're Predisposed Alzheimer's you have trouble sleeping. Oh And you start taking ambient now people say well ambient and Alzheimer's are correlated well Yeah, maybe it's the other way around. Yeah, ambient is a shit out of me. You don't take that, dude Tiny bits. Oh That stuff's nuts because people take it and they say things and they don't know what they're saying Right, well the recommended dose at least it used to be for men is 10 milligrams, which is massive I nibble on it. I take maybe a milligram just to not off your farm desperate with jet lag But yeah, I picked doctors many I know say the 10 milligrams is probably too high But check with you doctor. Yeah, well Matthew Walker says stay the fuck away from that stuff period He said you're not getting real sleep anyway You know going in through full sleep cycles you're just drugging your brain into a state of unconsciousness Probably with 10 milligrams that makes sense for me because I'm monitoring it I know that I'm getting good deep sleep have you tried other Like melatonin things on those lines. I show show not effective. Uh Not as much sometimes melatonin with Milligram of ambient is necessary But what a big change for me has been just don't stay up watching TV get the screens off with yeah Glasses they really help. Yeah, the screens are watching those goddamn screens before you go to bed I love doing it though. I love watching the TV show before I go to sleep. It's probably the worst time to do it though, right? Yeah, it is it really I mean you can watch the show is just put the yellow glasses on. Oh Blue light and knitting you know blocking glasses one of my sponsors movement watches they have They have blue light knitting glasses Need to get those on blocking or emitting block blocking blue light blocking. Yeah Yeah, not emitting. How can a glass of it? You know blocking blue light emitting sickness. Yeah, well, you can have blue light emitting glasses too. That'd be good Well for the middle of winter. Oh, we're getting depressed. Yeah. Well where you live There's no real middle of winter here, buddy. Where you used to you used to live too. Yeah, not too far from where I'm Gaped. Yeah, it's pretty tragic. I mean when try want to kill myself That seasonal affected disorder. That's sure. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, because I'm working indoors Let's see Sun for months. Well that gray sky when it's every day is gray over and over again You see no real sky for so long. It's so weird Yeah, I miss Australia for that reason Mm-hmm. I get reinvigorated if I come out to LA and this blue sky you really feel different Oh for sure. There's a reason why this is a million people out here But what is your strategy for mitigating the impact of seasonal affected disorder? What I do I try to go outdoors and get some some sunny my eyes when I can take vitamin D off for sure Lots of vitamin different. I seem still help make a difference. Yeah, yeah So you have vitamin data. It's it's questionable whether it's as healthy as people thought it was That said I think it at Worse doesn't hurt you some people do sun lamps for that reason they'll go into a tanning booth for that reason right? They will I actually found this season I went to the saunar in the cold Shock bath and that really helped a lot. I don't know if it's related, but I Needed to shock my body in the middle of winter if you're just sitting by a fire and belly Moving around I just felt like I was a sack of shit and so yeah a lot of people get fat in the wear too That's another thing they just they're getting doors because it sucks outside and they never went up doing anything and Then you dealing you're dealing with a depression of being a little bit heavier to off a shore and then you're Gringking by the fire like kind of stuff But it's all about shock your body get your body out of complacency and out lifestyle Everything we do everything we buy everything on TV that's being advertised to make your life better Is shortening your lifespan by making it easier for our bodies to exist? You don't want that you're going to stress it. Yeah What other things do you think that people should be doing on a daily basis that most folks aren't? Well, we covered a lot So there's the the be hungry get the exercise There's all sorts of exercise which are good, but the main ones are stretching and running and lifting okay Cold and hot. We've talked about And then there's the supplements that mimic the benefits of those plus probably more things That's my that's my regimen. There's some other little tidbits that I put in my book which It's a laundry list of things that I found work for me, but those are the main things we've covered This sounds probably pretty boring, but I'll say it again We're sunscreen for two reasons. I mean you'll you'll look better anyway Not that probably young people care, but it'll make a difference by the time you're our age But also because DNA damage Does aid you? We think that it's breaking the chromosomes and that's the major driver of aging That Sun will do that X-rays will do that Maybe even airport scanners are certainly I'm not a real devotee of getting scanned I thought there were radio waves The millimeter and they don't penetrate very deeply so they're probably not too bad But I've looked into it's about the same radiation as you get on the flight and given that I'm doing Probably million miles a year. I don't want to double the amount of exposure So when you go through that radio scanner then the more modern TSI scanners They give you the same amount of radiation as a flight because a flight gives you the same amount of radiation radiation as multiple x-rays Right is it that I don't think it's that bad. I believe it. Okay. Well, let's let's let's find out how much radiation do you get on A five-hour flight and is it comparable To multiple x-rays because I believe that's what I read Well, the x-rays I can say definitively based on our research Would aid you Age of tissues. What's this doing to you? Well, it's breaking your chromosome and causing that Clock that I was talking about earlier that biological clock It took celery. Is there something you can do to mitigate that if you know you have to get an x-ray? Should you do something right afterwards? Potentially potentially you could take an man which we've shown in mail in mice protect them against the effects of radiation And that's one of the things we've talked to NASA about for getting to Mars and back safely So when I'm on a flight I take some anaman in the expectation that it's going to boost my body's ability to prevent those Changes to the clock now is there a commercially available anaman that you would suggest if someone wants to purchase it somewhere Well, so I don't dive old company names and there's two reasons for that one is I can test it them So I actually literally don't know but the other is that I want to stay above the fray and understand not get involved But but there are if people want to go google and go look online they can find commercially available anaman Right So yeah again, I've got number of pages in the book on that so it's it's all laid out But in summary Right here ladies and gentlemen Life span why we age and why we don't have to Thanks Joe. That's my NPR voice. Yeah, you can donate if you enjoy programming like this Putting me to sleep. That's me too man Something happened with people they thought to be intelligent. You have to talk like You're ready to put people to sleep. It's time to get sleepy Anyway, so the enemy So there are people who's selling it on the internet Just just to get the facts straight. I don't sell anything. My name is all over the internet If you see my name with a company, it's BS. Uh-huh Beautiful. That's good Anyway, so the Anaman there are companies that sell it's more expensive than another molecule that's related Called NR or Nickettinamide riboside Which is also what the body can use to boost NAD levels and that's A little bit cheaper And they've both been shown in animals to be To boost the sort to ones and help those animals be healthier in old age and reverse some aspects of aging like endurance loss of endurance That kind of thing Protect protect the eye protect the hearing as well So that we don't know if it works in humans that let's be honest. We don't know if these things work But let's also be honest. We know it's gonna happen if we don't do anything and that's not pretty either Do you have any high hopes for things like crisper Things where there's going to be genetic alterations and they are starting to do some experience You have a big smile on your face right now. So I'll let you talk. Tell me what's up Well, uh, so I'm a geneticist and I'm just down the hall from George Church. He's in my department at Harvard and I'm a big believer in crisper In the sense that it will revolutionize medicine now right now explain it to people who don't know what I mean so crisper is An acronym for basically a system that is from bacteria that they use to Kill and destroy the DNA of Invading organisms like a virus, but we can now use that system to cut and change our own genomes It's basically a DNA cutting enzyme That doesn't cut randomly you can give it a barcode In the form of what's called RNA molecule that tells where that enzyme will cut in the genome. Let's say you Joe Rogan have a Terrible gene that's causing heart disease We take this crisper system We say Here's where you need to go to cut we can tell the enzyme to go and cut it Put it into your cells. It'll go cut it and destroy that enzyme and delete it And you can also use it to cut the genome and insert new pieces so you can both subtract and add DNA at will now not just randomly, but what's important is you can tell it where to go and that's the big breakthrough and They're doing some experiments on human beings. I know there was something that they were doing Believes Somewhere in Asia if I remember correctly. I believe it was China where they Had done some manipulation to people to help prevent AIDS and In the process of doing so they may have boosted intelligence or the potential for intelligence Which was so convoluted that my puny little brain can't understand the study. I was I had to go over the same paragraph Like four or five times just try to figure out what the fuck they were saying am I making any sense? Yeah, you are you are and that was a study that that I don't believe is being published, but it's been reported that He is his name his last name is he he took embryos and engineered them to delete ccr 5 gene which is required for HIV to infect cells now that was we can we some most of us scientists think that that was reckless for the fact that First of all HIV isn't a huge risk in China one in a thousand chance of getting HIV There are plenty other things they that you could do that could be more helpful. Let's say why not mutate What's called psk9 to prevent heart disease which would probably have 50% to kill the boys? a boy so anyway, it wasn't the most risk Benefit ratio Modification that that's one thing, but the other is we don't know What happens when you cut genes in embryos? Does it have changes to the DNA clock did it accelerate their aging? Did it mess without the genes did it cut in other places and scrub those genes? We don't know that yet and so that's why the scientific community had a negative reaction to it But what's interesting is that the scientific community and the press has pretty much gone quite on this Imagine if this happened during the bush era. We We'd have protesters all over the place to be outlawed and that hasn't happened and I think it's because we live in a world with a 24-hour new cycle But isn't that also because it's being if it wasn't during the bush world? I mean Where the protests would really take place if it was done here The thing about things that are done in China or overseas like huh, it's like it's so far away like wow, let's keep an eye on them Yeah, that's true. There is the fear that that some countries gonna engineer an army of deployments. I mean we have the technology to do that right now. Yeah We believe we understand how to slow aging there are genes that Pre-dispose you to to long life we could make offspring a family that would potentially live a lot longer, but it's just something that can only be manipulated in embryos or in fetuses no now we can do it in adults Actually, there's a there are drugs that are in development to actually correctionatic diseases such as vision loss really Do my eyes are gone? I can barely read like print on a laptop. I need glasses to read my laptop All right, so we just put up a study online On a site called bio archive. Anyone can go there and see it just google my name in bio archive BIO R X IV Reason that's interesting is that what we're showing is in mice at least We can reverse the age of the retina and restore the vision of old mice What do I have to do? Well, I think you have to blow me a few more. Hey, come on man Well lose your job. Let you let me crack those kind of jokes. Sorry. How did I was joking? I started it folks. Yeah, it's not his fault What so what would someone I mean is this going to be available to the general public anytime in our lifetime? I Must I my best? We're hoping to do clinical trials starting in two years from now real and what would you do in those clinical trials? I'll sweet reprogram the eye to be young again So we now know that there's a set of genes called reprogramming factors Also known as yamanarchifactors that are from named after this Japanese Fellow who won the Nobel Prize in 2012 these factors are used all over the world even probably in high schools to reprogram Skin cells other cells to be what we call pluripotent stem cells. These are cells that can be used to make new organs or Ublood cells But what people hadn't tried until Recently was can you do this in a living animal or are you just gonna mess it up? And what we found out is that if you do it the wrong way you mess up the animal and it'll die But what we've shown for the first time in this paper is you can do it in a safe way and Not only that reverse the clock Make the cells young and restore how they work and get back vision And what's the methodology right good question so that the current method is using a virus that's on the market These are called avs Adeno associated viruses you put them in the eye They're already patients getting this in the on the market Really yes spark therapeutics is an example of a company that is curing genetic diseases in the eye with viruses We're in a new world most people don't know about it Wow, so what is the company again? Jamie look up this spark genetic in spark. There are chamis already got it. Look at that. Bam motherfucker Chamevary in the house So these folks are already doing this to people so is this for people that are sort of Desperate and they'll try something experimental Right well, they're desperate in the sense that there's no other choice no other cure I mean we're now curing genetic diseases Someone was just treated and cured of sickle cell anemia That's phenomenal and that you know I learned that that comes from Malaria right that was the idea that people were the resistance to malaria Was that trait from people that evolved in the area where they would get malaria was also what led to people getting sickle cell correct Correct, so that I learned that from Tiffany Hinesh by the way Amazing Tiffany shot activity that Lux turn a stuff Is this something that someone I'd me to take right now? No, not easily you're doctor Would need to prescribe it and so if you did prescribe it I could literally get vision back Well, this is not the same technology that I'm talking about it from my life This is inherited retinal diseases our commitment to our IRDs This is gene replacement not not reprogramming the body to be young, but it's the same virus that we'd use to correct So they're using this for certain retinal diseases Were they're correcting it now? What how is this? Bacteria fixing your vision Well the viruses are just by age to get the genes into the cells That's all and these are bun benign viruses. They don't hurt you But they're a carrier and it maybe eventually will have other ways to do this But right now the virus is the best way and in the mice to restore the vision We have this three gene combination of these yamanaka reprogramming genes We put them into the eye And then we turn them on with a drug in fact the same drug that I took when I was in Africa called Duxysyclan Is the same drug we can feed to the mice turns on the reprogramming genes for a few weeks Restore their vision back to a young mouse and then we just take away the Duxysyclan and antibiotic And the mice have their vision back and how long does it take for it starts deteriorating? We don't know yet I think that it's permanent Because the age of the cells has gone back those are young eyes again So you might have a whole full cycle from like 20 or 10 to 40 years old again That's the future that you'll get a delivery of this virus You'll take the antibiotic for a few weeks be fully rejuvenated And the doctor says come back in a couple of decades. We'll fix your again We'll give you some antibiotic in a couple of decades But then it gets really weird if you have it if you engineer your children to have this system If that ever happens, let's imagine it could we could do this right now with technology And you have people engineered to be able to Be reversed in their age or let's say they have an accident and their optic nerve gets damaged or they lose the heat is right now with technology. And you have people engineered to be able to be reversed in their age, or let's say they have an accident and their optic nerve gets damaged, or they lose their hearing from a bomb or something that spinal injury. Give them a dose of an IV of antibiotics and they become just like an embryo. They can rejuvenate, they can regrow their optic nerve, regrow their spine, fixed back like new. The vision thing, do you think that we're going to see that in our lifetimes? I mean, is this something that you're going to see that's going to be available to the general public? Well, so I've got an entrepreneur, as we discussed before. And so one of the companies that I've started is exactly that, raise money to be able to make this virus. We're making it now, it takes a few million bucks. And we'll hopefully, with the FDA's approval, inject it into people's eyes. Now, first it won't just be guys like you. First of all, we have to go into an area where it's FDA approval, which is a disease like glaucoma, which is pressure in the eye, or macular degeneration. That's our first goal. But then if it's safe, why not do old eyes? That's incredible. What about people with injuries? Yeah. Well, yeah, you could theoretically put it into the spinal cord or give it, give an IV, but people with eye injuries. Oh, for sure. So one of the things we also did in this paper that we've put online is we pinched the optic nerve. And what normally happens is it just a grade. I mean, no, it's don't go back right unless you're a baby mouse or a baby human. But we made those cells so young that the optic nerve grew back to the brain. Wow. First time that's been able to... I know, guy from fighting. He's got a detached retinoid. Detached so bad that his vision is right eyes, extremely poor. Shout out to Michael Bisping. Do you think that that's something that inside of his lifetime, they could see something use of this technology that could regenerate his eye? Well, I get a lot of emails. So I'm not really trying to over-promise anything. What I think is possible is that initially it'll be used for disease, a chronic disease, then it'll be used for injuries like that, but fresh injuries. I think it's probably to like, to create a better, if it's fresh. I don't know where this technology is going. I can imagine a lot. We can all imagine that you could get vision back and people walking again. But that's where this technology is going. So I described the discovery in the book as actually what happened while I was writing the book is we're making these discoveries and they were remarkable. And so I wrote them down in the book as we went along. So people can see how it feels to be a scientist to make these discoveries. But it's only been a year or less that we've known about this. So imagine 50 years from now what we can do, even 10. It's going to be a remarkable future. It's very exciting. Now what kind of a timeline are you anticipating for bringing this to people with injuries? Well, injuries already we have a study plan for spinal injury in mice. And that we'll probably know the results in less than a year. And then we could, as fast as the FDA allows us, go into a clinical trial. Now is the same scenario applicable for people with spinal injuries as vision, like people that have a more recent spinal injury, will be more likely candidates than people that have had older spinal injuries? I think so. That would just be my guess that it's easier to fix a recently damaged system, anything in the body that's fresh. But I wouldn't rule out anything. When we first discovered this, the experiment was to have a fresh injury, the pinching of the optic nerve. But then I said to my student, why don't you just try old mice? And he said, come on, old mice, are you kidding me? How's that going to work? Just try it, just try it. So we did it. And in collaboration with another lab at Harvard. So they're the experts. And so Bruce Cassandra is his name. So Bruce called me, Professor Harvard, it's 10 30 at night. I just got off a plane. He said, David, you won't believe it. I didn't believe it. I just looked at the data. It frickin' worked. Old mice are sing again. He said, I want to go down to the FDA and tell him about it. Because right now, I disease is typically all you can do is slow them down. And he is actually a reversal of lost function. Now is this apply to injuries as well? Do you believe old injuries or just old macular degeneration? We haven't tried old injuries. But now Mike, we've done glaucoma, which is an old injury. So theoretically, what we could do is at least with the existing nodes, if they're still attached, we should be able to rejuvenate those and make them work better. Because he has some vision in his eye. So yeah, so that's possible. That makes more sense. But very little, very limited in what I... Yeah. Well, we'll have to see. Interesting. Because you didn't think it was going to work on the old mice. I did. But no, I did. Wow. Crazy. Well, we're literally reversing not just the effects of aging, but aging itself. So if I gave you those retinas, very little retinas, here you go, Joe. And you were a scientist. You could look at that retinol. And analyze it molecularly. Measure its clock. And you'd say those are young eyes. And you wouldn't know the difference. Now, do you feel like this kind of technology is also going to be applied to people's skin? Because, you know, one of the things that for women, it's devastating when they develop wrinkles. You know, they fucking hate it. Man, get a few wrinkles. They kind of look distinguished. You know, but man, when women get wrinkles, they freak the fuck out. They don't like it. Yeah. We're going to try it on aging, on the skin. Though, you know, when I talk about making people walk again potentially, it's probably a higher priority. Oh, for sure. But I think it's feasible. So there's a lab at the Salt Institute, Juan Carlos Belmonti, who may win the Nobel Prize for his work on this. In 2016 and a couple of years since, he's been showing that it doesn't just rejuvenate old mice. It actually is also rejuvenating the skin. If he puts it on a wound that's in an old mouse, that mouse will heal better. Now, that doesn't fit wrinkles, but it does prove the skin can be rejuvenated as well. So there could be possibly some sort of a treatment to skin, maybe a re-enduring, like a view. There's this thing that they do. I think it's called a vampire facial, if you've ever heard of that. They take platelet-rich plasma and then they micro needle your entire face. And then they somehow another apply this platelet-rich plasma to the areas that have been micro-needled and it has some sort of an effect and increasing collagen and elasticity of the skin and tightening of the skin. Have you heard of this? I've heard it for halos. I didn't realize people get it all over their face. For hair loss as well, they're doing that. Sounds painful. So to me, it makes sense that it might work. The PRP, as it's called, is full of factors that we know some of these are rejuvenating in mice. The system where you can hook up an old mouse and a young mouse circulation. Yes. And you get rejuvenation. There are factors that many of which we haven't discovered or identified that exist, that you can rejuvenate. And I would bet that they're working most likely through this reversal of the clock. And so one of the things we're doing in my lab is taking what are called exosomes, which exist in these preparations and seeing if they reverse the clock. I've had exosomes shot into injuries for stem cell procedures. Yes. Yes. Did work. That makes sense. Yeah. I had a full-length rotator cuff tear that's completely gone. Yes, or maybe what's going on is your free program, your body there. Yes. Well, there's it's a weird thing, the exosomes and stem cells. And there's a new product called Wortens jelly that's also very effective and potent because there's not a lot of papers on these things. It's all, you know, the research on it is some of it's a little shaky. But the efficacy, at least anecdotal efficacy is pretty substantial. And I'm one of those pieces of anecdotal evidence. I've had a bunch of shots. I just whenever I get injured, I might shoot it up. Yeah. Well, your listeners may not know about exosomes. So, exosomes are little compartments that are pinched off from cells and put into the body and communicate between cells across. So your liver can communicate with your brain for exosomes. And within these little cargos, there are things that we're just discovering. Little proteins are in a, and they're full of goodies. And drug companies are being built on these exosomes. Yes. I'm glad you brought up the study of the old mice and the young mice where they put the blood and the old mice and then the old mice started behaving like young mice and the blood of the old mice and the young mice and the young mice started behaving like they were tired. Because there's a company in Northern California that's supposedly doing this with humans. Where they're injecting people with the blood of old people or young people rather some sort of transfusion, not anymore. Not anymore. The out of business? Well, my understanding is the FDA sent a letter. Uh huh. I said stop it. That's it. Just a letter. That's all text. Oh yeah. You don't want to go to the links down the street and change a name. Oh, I got another letter. We'll move down the street and change my name. I think that's risky. Is it the check to see if that company's under? Al, Al, I do not remember the name of it. But I remember they were erroneously linked to Peter Thiel and then Peter denied that he's ever used that. The billionaire founder of PayPal who I've met is a wonderful man. They erroneously, someone just some story linked to the said that he's getting it. He's like, actually shut the fuck up. No, I'm not. Don't say that. I've never done it. Not doing it. So it was one of those things where there was a lot of legend to it because of these mice studies. These mice studies get people super excited about the idea that all you have to do is get young people's blood. So you get a bunch of young people with healthy disease free, drug free donating their plasma, donating their blood for X amount of dollars, a quart. Right. You have a blood boy. Yeah, blood boy. Hey man, when I was young, I needed some cash. I was healthy. Come on. You regenerate that shit. Yeah. They quarter blood. I get it back in a couple hours. I think it might work. It's just that we don't know the consequences and the FDA is the job is to protect us. Yeah. Just like they're protecting us from raw milk, bunch of pussies. Recently shut down about a month ago. I missed the boat. Could have been in there, man. But if you did that, that's something that you'd have to do on a routine basis, right? It's not like something you do one shot. It probably give you like a little boost for a short amount of time. Yeah. Well, that's what's different about this reprogramming. You don't want, you come back easily. Yeah. The eyeball thing is very enticing to me because it's so weird watching my eyes deteriorate. Like slowly but surely I'm watching it happen. It's really it sucks. It's a short sign. You get an older. Yeah. Age related, macular degeneration just seems pretty standard. Except my friend Cam Haynes, that motherfucker, he's 52 years old. He could see, like, like 2018 vision at 52. It's crazy. See anything. I dropped my phone on the ground. He's like, oh, you got a crack. He saw it from like, I'm where? Where's the crack? I'm trying to look at it in the lights like right there. And I put reading glasses on. I'm like, son of a bitch. Like how the fuck did you see that? He saw it from like where you are. Like looking at the phone like that is crazy. Well, so let's keep in touch. We will. And if we get this on the market then. Uh huh. Yeah. It turns out he has started up again as recently. But it's not being sold as young blood for plasmid. It's just plasma. Oh, just give it a shot bro. Just hear some. Just no promises. What do you think? Want to go in there with me? Right after we do the cryotherapy treatment. Let's get some blood. Some young blood. Doctors behind failed anti-aging blood clinic tries again. We tried to ask him some questions, but he was very evasive. Good for you, sir. Duck and move. Do the old Muhammad Ali, Rope Adobe. Be like Pronel Whittaker, sir. Yeah, I hope he stays evasive. I mean, it's also like maybe it's nonsense. Maybe it's not. Would you like to do studies on people that are doing that and find out? I mean, well, what they should do is measure the clock now that we do this. Right. Yes, that would be interesting. But based on what we know about how it works with mice, you think it's likely that there is some effect. It's possible. It's possible. I like how you're very cautious. You're a real professor. I like that you're the real deal. I'd like to keep my job. You should stop making those blowjob jokes. Funny that that is actually controversial. Two friends can't just joke. Is there anything else that you think is promising that is on the horizon or that's being discussed or theoretical at this point? Yeah, there's something that is really interesting. And that's called Senolytics. Senolytics. So Senolytics are drugs that kill off senescent cells. So what are senescent cells? These are often called zombie cells. And what I think is to world war Z. Yes, a lot of zombies this podcast. Senescent cells we've known for decades exist in the body, but what was not clear was whether they cause aging. Now it's pretty clear from animal studies at least is that we get lots of these accumulating and that they do cause aging. and one of the best experiments that was done from Mayo Clinic was to genetically delete the senescent cells that accumulated in an old mouse and it became young again or at least it delayed its aging by a fair bit. Now senescent cells are pretty rare though. It's not a lot of them, but they cause havoc because they don't just sit there in the body, but they send out these inflammatory markers and they cause cancer, we think. So you want to get rid of these. I want to mention that in the biological clock when I was saying that the clock is part of the aging process. What we think is that as we get older that and it's detailed a lot more in my book. So if people read it they'll understand a lot more what I'm saying. But this clock is messing up the cell's ability to be what it used to be. What do I mean by that? Let's take your eye. In your retina your nerves are getting older, but your nerves we think are losing the ability to read the nerve genes. So they're forgetting that their nerves. So now they're starting to behave actually more like a skin cell and having a skin cell in your eyes not going to really work very well. So that we call that epigenetic noise, epigenetic aging, reprogramming, resets that. So why is that interesting? We think that the ultimate problem for the cell when it loses its total identity or gets a long way towards that is it shuts itself down because it says, I don't even know what I am anymore. I'm not a nerve cell, I'm not a skin cell, I'm not a liver cell. Sones. Sones means stop dividing, just sit there and tell the body come kill me. Okay. So now they're putting out these panic factors. There's a problem, you get inflammation. The problem is that as we get older the body's not very good at clearing out these cells. They sit there and they wreak havoc, you get inflammation, we think you get aging. So getting back to senolytics, these drugs are designed to be a pill or an injection into your joint to kill off these zombie cells, these senescent cells. And theoretically rejuvenate the tissue and reverse that aspect of aging. And that's another treatment like reprogramming that could be a one shot delivery and take you back a decade. Wow. And how far away are we from seeing those? Much closer actually. There's a few companies. There's one called Unity, there's one that I'm involved with in full disclosure called Senolytic Therapeutics in Europe. And there in at least Unity is in clinical trials right now for osteoarthritis. Really? Now what about the company in Europe? Preclinical still mouse. Wow. So we're looking at like a decade from the general public or? Well, for Unity they hope not. Usually when you're in a phase two study which they're in, it's a few years away if it works. Wow. Amazing stuff. Such a cool time to see all this medical innovation and technological innovation. Well my head's spinning. Yeah. This crisper and then the reprogramming which is new stuff. This is stuff that we dreamed of for thousands of years. And you know, I don't think it's a dead end and it may not be as, you know, we're not going to go back to being 20 any time soon. That said, I think we've had a major breakthrough. The equivalent I like to use is we figured out how to fly. The Wright brothers, Wright sisters. We've got, got include, six is now. My daughter will tell me. Right non-binary people. Yeah. So my daughter changed her name by the way. To what? To Alexander. She was Madeleine. She didn't think that was appropriate. Why? She's a tough chick. She's a day. And so I'm not allowed to call her a she, I don't think. She doesn't want to be identified as one or the other. Interesting. She's 16. Is she changed it at 11? Oh, she's a tough girl. You know, in my family, we tend to be rebels and unfortunately it passed along. I'm getting everything back. Fortunately or unfortunately. Well, I guess I'll be proud of her, but raising her in the last few years of being pretty annoying at home can't say anything without the PR police. She's that hilarious. PC police or PR? Did I say PR? Yeah. I made PC. Yeah. That's interesting. What was I saying about my daughter? Oh, about the name change. Yes. Why was it talking about a name change? I don't know. You tell me. Jamie, do you remember? No, I've got a million people screaming at us. Yeah. Well, you were talking about so many exciting things on the horizon. Yeah. True. Yeah. And so that it's just head spinning and so much is happening in our lifetime that I thought was just imaginary or for the future. Now, the question is are we going to reap all the benefits of this or we're going to be the last generation to lead a normal human lifespan? And I don't think we are. I think that we already have things we can do in our daily lives. Just in lifestyle and in molecules, you can take that give us a very good chance of living beyond what's naturally possible. This is amazing, man. It's so exciting. And the last time you hear was about a year ago somewhere around that range. Yeah. I mean, and think about how many new things you have to discuss now versus then. It's really interesting, man. And I'm so happy there's people like you that are out there doing this. It's just it's so it's just so exciting. And it's so it makes me very happy to know you're out there. Thanks, man. So thank you. And your book, people can find out all this stuff in detail, much more detail than getting a two and a half hour conversation, lifespan, why we age and why we don't have to, David A. Sinclair PhD. Thank you, brother. Always good time. We'll do it again next year. Deal. Yes. Bye, everybody.