[Music] Is it are you a doctor? So is it doctor? I'm a doctor. Doctor. I've got three PhD. Three PhDs. And I'm reading the fourth now. No way. So what are your PhDs in? Uh medicine, uh forensic, archaeology, and ethics. And I'm ruling last one. The fourth in low. Okay. We have a lot to talk about today. Um the reason that the way I discovered you was uh I read um your your peer review on Dr. Ammon Hillman's book the chemical muse and then I got introduced to all of your other work the anthropology the forensic stuff. So I want to cover all of this today but first of all I want to know what is this picture? Are those really Hitler's teeth? Yes. This picture has been taken in Moscow, Russia. And you can see my hands wearing some white gloves and between my fingers I've got the remains of Hitler's mandible in fact. So you can see these tiny remains made of bone of teeth and also some prosthetic element. All of this comes from Hitler. So Hitler really did kill himself in the bunker in April. He didn't escape to Argentina. Exactly. Yes, he died. really died in Berlin in 49 in 45 45 and um you know there were a lot of theories about escaping to Argentina, Brazil and Antarctic. Some others spoke also about the moon but we can read so much theories. So it's absolutely it's a fake. Of course it died. It really died. But we do not know exactly what what was the exact cause of death because we found tiny remains of um powder a blue powder between the teeth that may be related to poison and we found also a big hole at the level of the skull of of it layer that may be related to the exit of bullet from from his bullet. Exactly. So we don't know maybe one, you know, maybe the the poison did not work very well or very quick. So he asked one to to kill himself. So what was the smoking gun evidence for you? And and how did you how were you able to figure out beyond a shadow of a doubt that this was Hitler's mandible? Because I mean from my I I have a there's I don't understand all the nuances and the history of Hitler's escape, the the theory of his escape, but from what I understand there was like out of the top 15 people under Hitler, two through 10 were able to escape to Argentina or to South America and Hitler was the one who ended up staying in the bunker and committing suicide. Um, and some people speculate that that didn't fit his character. He wasn't the kind of guy to maybe go down to go down with the ship the way he did. And you know, it is documented that they did ha they did have escape routes. And with all of those top generals and commanders being able to escape, it's and the lack of evidence of Hitler actually the lack of evidence of his body and other stories that he was buried in multiple places throughout history. Um, so first of all, where did you find this piece and this piece of his jawbone and what was what was the the best evidence that this belonged to Hitler? First of all, you have to imagine the the period we are exactly at the end of the Second World War. Okay, we are in Berlin, Germany. Um, you've got three different armies that are riding on the east front. You've got the Sovietics, okay? Now, Russia, if you prefer on the other part of the of the front, you've got the French, you've got the American, you've got the Canadian and the English. Okay? So, Italer knows that he he will be defeated within the next few hours or days, no more. Okay? So, he's in the chancellor in the bunker below the chancellory to be exact. And um on the morning, we are in the last days of April 1945. um in the morning he will get married with Eva Brown okay which is much younger than him. So they they make the short ceremony they drink some alcohol maybe Porto okay and it's important and just after the the midday they will all commit suicide not only the couple Eva now and Adolf Hitler but also all the Gobbles Marta Gobbles Joseph Gobbles which is a kind of minister of propaganda Gerbles exactly Gobbles exactly and all the daughters six daughters and also the If you want to to know the most precise detect exactly. So they all commit suicide using uh sanid or using poison or using also firearm cyanide. Exactly. Yes. Exactly. The problem is that well the the poor dog didn't commit suicide. They killed the dog. Of course. Yes. Um you have to know that the poison did not work very well. probably because they have eaten many things before like fest for for the wedding maybe because of the portal also. So we can find some uh fragments of the the the tiny glass um that the um it's I'm trying to to find shards of glass. Uh, no. Uh, ampul um, you know, when you you you break it and you drink it, it's a small part of glass. When you break it, you you don't know the English word. Like a f a f or good something. What? What does he think? What? Um, like a like not shards, just like a sediment. No, no, no, no. It's a very it's it contains some medics and it's very very very little very small you know and you break it and then you've got the liquid inside. Yes. How what the name for this in English? You don't remember? Oh, a capsule. A capsule. Yes. Caps. Oh. Oh, a capsule. Okay. Okay. Got it. Sorry. That's okay. That's just Okay. The problem is that the capsule of poison did not work very well. We found tiny fragments of this capsule made of glass with between the teeth of it layer Joe but probably the poison did not work very well because of all the things that they have eaten or drink just before so just after it and ever asked to be killed directly or maybe did they kill themselves we do not know exactly but we've got many many testimony we know for example that um the all the people that were next to Italy on Eva and also the Gobles put all the calivers outside of the Shelery in the ground just outside in two pits made by bombs. Okay. One pit for Hitler and his new wife and the second for all the gobble's family. Over these calver they put some kerosen. Okay. Some petrol over it. Some oil. Some some oil. Exactly. Over the dead bodies. Exactly. Just to burn them. But it was not very efficient. You have to use a lot of oil. A lot of petrol, right? To to to burn a body. But it was just a few lit few liters, not enough. Okay. So when the Soviets arrived maybe five or six days later, Mhm. immediately they entered into the chancellory and they tried to find the calver because it was very important for them from pure political point of view to discover the remains of it and to know if the the chief has abandoned all the army on the territory. Right? So they found some blood. They found also some um fragments of tissues of clothes etc on outside of the shed. They found the pits but when they did something like archaeological excavations or forensic excavations they did not find all the body of it layer. They found just the lower part of the skull and the remain of all the body but not the upper part. So they were able to confirm the identity of it layer based upon the dentistry analysis the exact examination of all the teeth all the medical treatments all the morphology of the the body they were able at that precise moment to say okay this is the true calver of iter at what moment was that 45 so in 45 so that was right afterwards yes just five or six days after the death of Hitler. Okay. While making some excavations in the pit outside of the chancellory. So they were able to make something like a forensic autopsy. Okay. Yeah. On the ground. Um but the the most important part of the of the case was missing. They did not know what was the exact cause of death because they did not had the upper part of the skull. Interesting. Why why don't you think they would have had the upper part of the skull? Probably because the skull had exploded for two reasons. The first one was a firearm wound of course and the second one was because of um an explosion that we know when you put a fire on a body when you make a cremation of the body the skull may explode. So Oh really? Yes. Yes. It's very very current very common. Yes. Very common. So these two reason may explain why the upper part of the skull of Hitler was missing when the first team of the Soviets were excavating the the pit. So so so so he took the So the idea is he took the cyanide. It didn't work because he had a big fat steak beforehand or something like this. Yes. Sugar. Mainly sugar. Mainly because sugar. Okay. Okay. This is why the porto is important. He probably was drinking, right? Probably drinking a lot of liquor and then he shot himself in the head. Mhm. Or maybe he asked one to shot him in the head or or ask somebody to shoot him in the head because he had Parkinson disease or Parkinson like disease. Right. And then he had somebody one of his bodyguards or something cremate the bodies afterwards. Exact. Yes. Making two pits, two different pits. One for the family Hitler and one for the others meaning the gobbles. Got it. Okay. And then so after they he instructed the guards to cremate the bodies, I'm assuming the guards tried to escape or probably got captured. Exactly. Okay. Yes. We don't we don't know a lot about the guard. We never we never had any interviews with guards who admitted to doing this or anybody. Unfortunately, no. No. Okay. No. But we've got some indirect testimony and we've got all the reports by the Soviets when they entered into the chancel. They took many pictures that I saw and describing all the sin all the crime scene if I can say of this this suicide. So some weeks later weeks another team from Moscow came to to Berlin to find the missing part of Hitler's body and they found a skull. Oh just a small piece of of skull maybe 15 cm of maximum length. Okay with a hole inside. It's the left parietal, the right parietal and part of the occipital. So it's really the upper and posterior part of the of the skull. And this part is really important because here you've got an exit wound of a fire arm of of the bullet. Okay. So we do not know where exactly the the the bullet was entered in fact into into the into the skull, but we know exactly where it came out of the skull. Right. Because when you the sometimes the bullet trajectory will change when it goes inside the skull. It will come out at a random spot. Right. Exactly. Exactly. It's not necessarily like in and directly out the other side. No, it's not always linear. Of course, it may it may move a lot inside the body, especially inside the skull. So, if you want me to answer precisely to your question, we are 100% sure that the teeth are really the teeth of Hitler because we've got many testimonies. We've got the testimony of the dentist, of the assistant of the dentist. Uh, one part is in Moscow, one other part is in America. Um, we've got also other testimonies such as radioraph X-rays made X-rays. X-rays. Yes. made uh on Hitler's not body but when while he was living just at the moment of the what what's the name of this operation X-rays made just after the Valkyrie operation oh really exactly because you remember this story the bomb that exploded the bomb exploded yes yes just near his body maybe less than 2 m normally he should have he should have died unfortunately no and Um he said just after that he had headaches or things like this of course. So he sustained some X-rays. So we know precisely 9th month before his death what was exactly the morphology of the teeth and the skull. And you were able to examine those original X-rays. Exactly. Yes. Wow. Exactly. Yes. and we compared the morphology of the teeth and all the prosthesis between the X-rays and what I had in my hands in in Moscow. So I was able to see that it's exactly the same aspect, the same morphology. And this is really important because you may imagine that if Hitler had been taken by the Soviets in in Berlin in 1945, okay, then transported I don't know where in Siberia somewhere for 10 years or 20 years of detention. Of course, the teeth would have changed. He would have some more treatments at the level of the teeth, the mandible, the maxul. So it will not be the same aspect. So we can say that it's exactly the same. So it died really few months after the X-rays. So it it really confirms this aspect and it's not it's not finished. I was able to take some samples of the dental calculus which is between the teeth and to export it to my lab in Paris. True Classic isn't just clothing. It's designed to make you look good and feel even better. Their gear fits right. It feels amazing. Plus, it's priced for the everyday person. What sets them apart is not just their fabric, which is incredible, but it's the impact they make as a company. Being awesome is in their DNA. From their funny ads to their clean, minimal, comfortable, tailored gear. Why make a potato sack when you can sculpt your body with your clothes? It's why I have so much trust in them. Their clothes are designed to complement important areas, giving you just enough breathing room around the body instead of draping or sliding around. True Classic keeps you looking and feeling good from the gym to work to date night. I've been wearing True Classic for a while now, and it's still the first thing I reach for in my closet, and it impresses me every time I put it on. It's so comfortable, it makes me want to cry. Forget overpriced designer nonsense, and skip the cookie cutter potato sacks, True Classic delivers premium essentials built for real life. Whether you're out in the town or working up a sweat, level up your style with clothes that fit any scenario. Grab yours at Target or Costco. But for the best deals, head on over to trueclassic.com/danny. That's t r ue c l a ss i c.com/danny and get hooked up today. It's linked down below. Now back to the show. Okay. So the the dental what? Calculus. It don't tell you you know the deposits that you don't have such deposits. That's that's good for you. Okay. But you know uh when you've got some deposits between the teeth which is calcified we call it dental calculus. Okay. Uh it's a medical term. So I was able to take some samples of them, some millimeters, okay, to take them back away to my lab in in Paris, okay, and to examine it uh under microscope. And we were able to see some fragments of argil meaning that he took some medics because he had uh pain at the level of the gut, okay, on stomach pain, okay, because of ulcer, maybe because of gastritis, okay, inflammation. So he took um Argil which was a painkiller at the level of the gut and the the gastric system. Yeah. And we knew from many files that he had such a treatment. So it was again an argument saying that these remains were the the true one. And one last thing, when we did examine at the microscope all the samples of dental calculus, we did not find any meat fragment. No one meat fragment. So no animal fragment. You see he was vegetarian. Exactly. Yes. Exactly. So his teeth look perfect here. Not so perfect. He had a very poor state of um dental health. The those teeth look perfectly shiny white. And then he has one uh metal golden tooth. It's like a Yes, it's an it's an amalgam. It's made of many many metal in fact. But you can see also the blackish coloration due to the partial cremation of the body. You can see between the two teeth on the left side some fragments of mucosa that are still present. It's the gingiva of course. Right. Right. Yes. Yes. So it's it's really a good for us. It's really a good sample. We can do a lot of thing on such a such a sample. And you weren't allowed to take this out of Moscow. Right. Not the teeth themselves. No. What is this? Is this this is another fragment. This is from the upper maxilla. Upper maxilla. And you can see how complex it is. It's really very complex piece. Um is this is this been polished and like and um it has not been polished. It's been cleaned by the Russians, but just cleaned. And thanks God they they they let some fragments of dental calculus which were very important for us. What was it like going into those the archives where they kept all this stuff? Like how tight was it and what was it like? What were the guards like and what was the process like for you getting getting your hands on the stuff? The teeth were in the FSB which is the continuation of the KJB. Okay. So it's in a very big building in the center of Moscow which is the Lubiana not a very well renowned uh building as you may imagine right uh but the the ambiance was really amazingly uh friendly amazingly friendly okay because they were really open-minded because they wanted um Can I get you a water or anything coffee or you good they wanted something like international and objective expert to do the And previously I worked on some ancient artifacts such as Richard the Lionart, King of England, uh the relics of Jon of Arc, etc. So they they knew me on my lab and probably because I was not sorry American. Uh right. Why didn't they want any Americans? Maybe because of historical opposition. Maybe. Maybe you don't say. And uh well I was French and at this I'm still French and at this period they wanted something which was almost independent. Okay. Not between this historical opposition. Sure. An unbiased. Yeah. And they didn't want also someone from Russia because they didn't want people to say okay you you ask a Russian to study relics which are in Russia so it's not objective. So we did the job and honestly we did it well. But to answer your question again when I had these remains in my hands I really had no feeling no particular feeling because you know when you do such a job you are really focused on your analysis okay you you don't have time for feelings for really sentimental or feeling or something like this after when the job is finished when you get out of the lubian when you are in the street of Moscow okay then at this moment you say wow Oh, such such a moment. It was the the most critical part was between the asking of the of the study and my study itself because I took a long time of reflection before doing it. Um, do I go to Moscow? Do I do such a study? Maybe it's better not to do it because it's not it's not nothing, you know, studying Richard the Lionheart or the relics of St. Louis as I did also or other historical remains. Okay, no problem. Uh teeth on hairs from Pikas. So, okay, no problem. But it it's it's it's really another category of as you may imagine, right? So, before doing it, yes, I had a long time of reflection. But finally, I found that it was really it's part of my job to do it. Uh it's it was really um a huge historical um interrog interrogation because we had as you said before we had so many theories about an escape to Argentina, Brazil, everywhere else. So we wanted to know if this was true or or false. Okay. So this was the only way to know the the truth. So finally I accepted the job. Now, Russia and the KGB and the regime there, they're they have a a stance on before you came in there, they they had already stated that they know for a fact this is actually Hitler's remains, right? Would there have been any sort of backlash or repercussions for you if you would have said, "No, this is not Hitler's remains." They told us, and it was absolutely honest from their part. They told us okay do the analysis and uh we will not ask you to do to go in one direction or another direction do it clearly without any orient or orientation so we were absolutely free of our conclusions absolutely free when I was doing it and here's a bag of cash at a table no seriously no uh but no know uh when we did the examination I had my microscope with me which is you that you can see in the right you I had my gloves my everything so and I said minute after minute all my conclusions to to them and it's true that one minute after one minute all the aspects were gathering into the authenticity of such remains wow that's pretty bizarre man bizarre but you know it's it's it's history of course this man is the most reel one of the most horrible of all human history of course. Yeah. But um from a pure historical point of view it was really interesting. Really interesting. And you know when I do forensic autopsies daily in Paris it's it's the same work the same. Yeah. What originally got you in to decide like when did you say hey I want to start doing I wanted to start doing autopsies on on ancient dead people mummies and people from ancient Greece and these just these historical figures religious figures all this stuff. How did this happen for you? I was six years old. Six years old with my parents. We were in Pompei Italy. you know the ancient Roman city which has been destroyed by the eruption of volcano Vzu and there I saw many skeletons but you know there the skeletons are covered by plaster. Mhm. And it looks like um white ghost. Okay. White ghost. On this days uh I said to them okay this is really the job that I want to do. I want to make these dead speaking but not using uh spiritism or magical beliefs but using science. So using medicine and also archaeology. This is the reason why I made some PhDs uh one in medicine, one in archaeology, anthropology and others too because I wanted to to know how to use such specialties from traveling into into time. In fact, when my when my children ask me, "Daddy, what did you do today?" I answer them, "Oh, I traveled into past because I was studying the poo of King Louis 14 in Versailles." Because I was uh studying the relics of St. Lauron Oul, which is an ancient saint from Ireland. Because I'm each time I I work with and I I touch such relics, in fact, I I travel into time. Why were you studying the poop of that? Uh, who was he again? The king Louis the 14, the leader of Louis the 14. Yes. Louis the 14. And you were stud I think I uh one day we were messaging each other and you said you were in his bathroom. Yes. Exactly. Yes. So what was the what were you guys looking for? Um you have to imagine something like this room u but full filled with poop. Yes. From 80 cm eight. Just the poop of of of the king. Wow. Yes. And this is really interesting because you can investigate all the elementation process, all the disease also the parasites for example, the exposure to toxics and elements such as mercury, lead, arenium, etc. When did he die? 1715. So there was a big room of poop under his toilet. Yes. Because they had no plumbing. So it was like a it was like a a royal portaotti. Exactly. Exactly. So you have all the history the intimate history of the of the king. This is really interesting. This I love. You see latrines. It's one of my best part of the of the job. I remember having excavated some latrines in an isolated island in in Greece which is Delos. The island of Delos. Delos. Delos. Yes. It's next to Mkonos if you know the island. Okay. Um, and it's an isolated island in the Aian Sea. It's in Mediterranean Sea. And here there were there was poop from the 2n century AD. Okay. But a cascade cascade of poop. It was one of my dreams. And what did you find in that poop? In poop, you find a lot of things. Uh, in ancient poop. Not speaking about ancient poop. Yes. Ancient poop. Yes. Paleo poop if you want. That's a great key word. Ancient poop. Ancient poop. Um, in versail I I can't tell you yet because the study did not begin. We are just collecting samples. But for example, in ancient poop from Greco Roman antiquity, we can we can find some um parts of elementation and we can find also fragments of sponge. Do you know why we find sponge? Sponge. Sponge. Yes. In poop. In poop. I have no idea. When you go to the toilets now, you use um something like a stick, you know, to clean the bathroom, to clean the the toilets. But at this period, such stick were used not for cleaning the for wiping their butts. Exactly. Exactly. So you can find some fragments and you have to imagine that there were put in a bowl at the feet of all the people and then all the parasites were going from Sorry to be rude from one ass to another ass etc etc. So that's why and we can find also another thing in latines you see the holes where the people were gathering and people were speaking one next to the other if we were if we had done such an interview but two million before we would have done in the latins okay totally naked you and not totally but half part of the body and like we were peeing or pooping and you would have asked me some questions and I would have answered this way. Okay. But in such latwins we can find also some babies. Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video. Back to the show. When you when you don't want baby, uh you don't put baby anywhere, okay? And you put them in latins. And I remember the case of latins in Israel which have been blocked. The evacuation pipes have been blocked by babies because people did not want it was in a brothel. In a brothel, you see. Oh, God. All the babies from So these were like abortions. Exactly. Yes. All the babies that were not conserved by the prostitutes were put in the latins and it blocked the the the pipe. But my colleague, the archaeologist, made some genetic analysis of the skeletons of the babies. All the babies were male because all the female babies were conserved and educated to be the next generation of prostitutes. That is [ __ ] dark, man. Oh my god. This is archaeology too. That's crazy. And what time period are we talking about with these brothel? We are speaking about late antiquity, beginning of Byzantine time. So something like uh I need a number three to 5th century AD. 3 to 5th. Oh my gosh. So what kind of what what else can you tell about these people like specifically like what kind of foods, what kind of drugs? Um or can you tell like anything else like the age of the person or anything that like that with by analyzing their poop? No. No. No. With the poop you cannot speak about the age of the individual. No. Absolutely not. because it's just material. I had a guy in here recently who was um he he wrote a book about Hitler and Hitler said he was they were constantly anal they were sending his poop off to a laboratory and they were having doctors analyze his poop to see like what was what what was wrong with him if he needed to change anything with his diet or his drug regimen. Um so so it's super interesting why why you know what what other kind of things you can find about people even like that late like centuries afterwards for us uh analyzing poop on latrines it's it's really interesting because we can recreate the elementation of this individual but also all the medics that he that he took medics not the organic one because it destroys year after year but all the medicine. Yes, the medicine. Yes. But if someone takes some mercury for example for dermatological purposes or some exposure to to to lead for example or arenium then we can see it on the poop. But we can also see it with the nails you see with the nails or with with the hairs also. Oh okay. Another specialty that we've got is the analysis of deposits in bathtub. I remember having uh studied the deposit of in the bathtub of the emperor Napoleon, the French emperor Napoleon. Oh yeah. Because I've been excavated in Santena Island which is in the south of Atlantic between Brazil and South Africa. You know he was deported there Napoleon and he li What was the name of the island? S Elena. St. Elellanena. The map of that Steve. Sorry you can continue. Yes, no problem. He'll he's just doing the visuals. Oh, this is the relic of Santa. That's the saint. This is island. And he was deported in Santelena Island for six years. Okay. There he lived in a property that you can find which is Longwood House. And maybe you can find a picture of the bathtub of Napoleon in Longwood House. We studed it because we knew that he had dermatological disease and he was obliged to spend a long time each day in the bathtub. Okay. So, we crashed a little we we scratched a little bit the inner part of the of the bathtub and we analysis and we found fragments of the treatment that he had but also fragments of all the bacteria, parasites and viruses that were at the level of his skin. Yeah. That were conserved like um using mineralization process at the level of such deposits. So you see even if we don't have the body we can study the disease from this individual. This is really cool. How old was Napoleon when he died? He died in 1821. Okay. So he would have been he how old was he? Do you know roughly? He was uh 70 in the No. In the 50s. Sorry. He was in the 50s. The 50s. Okay. Steve, I meant like a like a Google map so you could zoom out. Napoleon House on Santelena. This is the house. Look at that. This is the house. And inside you've got the bathtub. Okay. But if you tap if you I published on it. So maybe you you can find the the image. And is this what he died of? Is this this disease? No, no, no, no. He died of um he died of hemorrage. had access to the autopsy of of Napoleon, the autopsy report, and we can see that he died of a huge hemorrhage. Internal hemorrhage. Hemorrhage. Hemorrhage. How do you say? Hemorrhage. Hemorrhage. Hemorrhage. Hemorrhage. So, it was like an intestinal hemorrhage. Yes. Yes. He had he had something like a ulcer, maybe a a cancer at the level of the stomach. Wow. That's in the middle of nowhere. In the way in the middle of the Atlantic. Exactly. Yes. It's in the middle of nowhere. You can imagine the travel to go there. I know, right? Wow. That's fascinating. So, correct me if I'm wrong, but when you're studying antiquity, the ancient world, there's only so many ways that we can so many lenses we can look at it through. We have the literature and we have this kind of stuff, the forensics. Is there any other way that we can deter we can figure out what was going on back then? Yes, we've got paintings. Paintings. Okay. You can search if you want a painting famous painting made by Rafael which is laarina. Farina you can try forina. Yes for narina forina by Raphael and I will explain you what is icono diagnosis. Okay Io diagnosis diagnosis. Yes. Here she Yes. You can see the breast especially the breast. Yes. I don't know if we can show we can show it. Yeah. Okay. So, the fun arena was the mistress of the painter Rafaelo. Okay. Okay. Uh we are in the 15th. Okay. 15th. Yes. Exactly. So, he was really in love with her. Okay. She was not very beautiful, but he was in love. And he did the painting of his mistress some month before his death and her death too. And look at look at the painting. You can see that at the level of the left breast, you've got two different archos. You've got two different waves. Uh one and you can see also next to the to the I don't know the the name of this. How do we say it? M the nipple. The nipple. Areola. This is a word that I do not often use in English. So, next to the nipple, okay, you've got um a something like blue or dark patch. Okay, you can see it. I show I show it to you. Oh, around the arm. Here. Exactly here. Oh, it's like a Well, that seems like a shadow, right? It's not a shadow because for um the shadow is not here. Okay. Okay. The the shadow I see what you're saying. I see what you're saying. So you've got two different dark patch. One is a shadow and the other is not a normal part of the of the breast. Okay. In fact, Rafael was so precise that he depicted in the painting the breast cancer of the ferina of his mistress. But he did not know that this was a cancer and the cancer was much more important within the next few months. Then the phenarina died of the cancer. Wow. So this is icono diagnosis. You you know he was so precise. He was so so exact in the anatomy but also in the pathology that without knowing it exactly he depicted in the painting all the morphologic all the clinical signs of breast cancer. Wow. This is iconognosis. Iconogenosis. Exact. That's fascinating. So this was in the 15th you said. Exactly. What how far back do uh these sort of paintings go that we can actually look at them and and and corroborate other things that you find pathologically or in literature? In fact, each time I go to a museum, I look at the paintings, I look at the sculptures, I look at the engravings and drawings that they are searching for such pathological sign. You have to consider that I look at you, I'm not searching for disease and you don't have thanks God. But when I look at such paintings, you don't have to consider them as paintings. You have to consider them as patients. Patients from the past. When we saw when we see something like this, then we have to cross um such data with historical knowledge with archives with um autopsy reporting reports when when we've got them. And maybe we we can also exume bodies or skeletons to see if it corresponds to the painting to the description etc. So the best is really to cross all the data one with the other. Have you worked with a lot of um like classicists or uh or or other folks who study in ancient the ancient world and antiquity and collaborate with them on this each time? Yes. because you know I'm a forensic practitioner and archaeologist but I'm not a historian and I'm not a historian of art. So each time we have to collaborate with them because they have to to tell us okay this source this archive is good this painting is not realistic. It's much more symbolist or it's okay. So each time we have to follow the the good path you see. So each time we work with such specialists, historians, historian of arts, sometimes pographs meaning the the one that study the ancient written written parts of archives. Well, that's so interesting because most so when you how do you determine which historian to work with? Because most history books are based on what you're doing, right? Yes. Because that that's where it starts. It starts with the science stuff, the the the the hands in the mud, looking under the microscopes, translating original source texts. But in history, typically history books basically get written based on other history books. So it's like history is this game of telephone. We try to find historians that um did not write upon previously published books. So I always prefer uh historians that did themselves their research. Okay. And I'm very lucky because in France we've got many of such research with original source with um unpublished one yet. Okay. So we've got lasserbon we've got many important universities in in Paris and in in Europe. I may absolutely collaborate also with researchers from America from the states for example I'm thinking about Evovenstein which is a famous dermatologist in in America and we can also work with al other specialists in Italy in Greece in Germany in England in Spain etc. So it's my team is really um international team. My laboratory is made of 33 researchers. Okay. From almost 15 countries. So it's really big team. Wow. And they and their expertises range from our most ancient patient is Lucy the astropitcus. Really? Yes. And our most recent I will tell you the story after. It's really it's really amazing. Yes. On our most recent one is Pablo Picasso died in 1973. What about Jesus? Is he's one of your patients? Not yet. Not yet. I would like I would like So yes, the Holy Should interesting to study. Have you had any people uh have you talked to anyone who may who claim to have any sort of evidence of remains or any hypothesis of where remains could be? No. No. No. With Jesus? No, not yet. But you know um within two days when I will be back to to to France uh I will go to Arjentto because there is a oansion so official presentation of the I can't say the t-shirt but the the tunic of the Christ you know to the shroud the no not the shroud the shroud is the the piece of textile where the body was put in after the death okay but the tunic is something like a shirt. Okay. That he was wearing at the moment of the patient. And this piece is conserved next to Paris in a city which is Arant and there this is it. I will be there. Oh wow. Yes. In two days I will be there and uh looking at it. This is it. This would be something that would be I would imagine almost impossible to corroborate with anything else. Like how how would we I mean this is exactly the kind of study that we can do. Yeah. How would you deter by by studying this? What would you be looking for? It's not a clean u robe. Okay. It's it's really made of many spots, many uh inach, how do you say? Yes. Maybe stains. Stains. Stains. Okay. Okay. It's fulfilled with many stains. Okay. stains for us are really interesting because we can make many examination many analysis on them. We will not study the the textile itself. We know what it is. Okay. And it's not my specialty but my specialty is all the biological deposits on the surface of the of the textile. This is our specialty. So I will be looking at it externally from the outside but um it it may be a very interesting file for us. Will will you will you be examining this under a microscope? Will you be taking samples of it and testing it? All of this is possible for yet. It's not a study for us. We did not ask any permission any permit for it. Okay. Not yet. But this could be a study within the next few years. If it were a study, what would you want to do specifically? What would you want to look for on this some a hypothetical study on this? Yeah. What what would be your your goals? What would be interesting uh would be to study the Poland? Okay. The Poland. Poland. Yes. Is it from European? Is it from Mediterranean? Is it from from Far East or Middle East? This stuff would still be preserved for 2,000 years. Of course. Yes. Of course. Yes. Is it is there any blood also? What kind of um imunoglobin can can we see inside? meaning the exposure to different kind of disease during the life of this individual. Yes, we can do we can do a lot of a lot of analysis. So, was he wearing this the day he was crucified? He was supposed Yes. And you know in the in the patient there is a moment where uh the Roman soldiers captured him captured him but also they they take the the the shirt of the of the Christ and they ask money one with the other to to keep it. This is this shirt when they catch him in the public park. Exactly. Yes. Really? Yes. Tradition says that this is this shirt. Wow. So they they they they took the shirt off of them and then they sold it. Mm-m. Yes. Exactly. Yes. You've got two different The Roman cops did. Exactly. Yes. You've got two different robes or shirt. One is conserved in Germany. This is the one that we can see here in Tri. And there is another one which is in Arto. You can This is the one from Germany. The one from Arant. You can find it. Would this be Would this be a conflict of interest with the church? It's supposed Oh, I don't know if we can speak about conflict of interest. Maybe conflict of authenticity. Would the Vatican send their intelligence spies to come? No, no, no, no, no, no, no. This This is for You never know. This is for a novel. No, no, no. But this one is for German. Maybe you can try to find the one from Arto. Uh, how do you spell that? Uh, Ar R A R G E N T. Argentina. Arjunto. Arjenttoy. Yes, you did it well. Artoy. Yes. So, what's the difference between these two? It's They look like the same, but the one of Arontent um has not um Blow that up, Steve. Yes. It's more It's darker. It's darker. This is where I will be in two days. Oh, wow. On Sunday, I will be there. That looks like a normal t-shirt. Yes. Looks like yours. It looks like my t-shirt without the printing on it. That's amazing. But it's 2,000 years old. I had a guy in here who said he had the bones of Christ in his possession. He was a uh what was he? A knight's templar. Uhhuh. Have you ever talked to any of the Templars? They they claim to have some of this stuff. No. Um so we were speaking also about Lucy. Lucy. Yes. Do you want to know the story? The story. Yes. The true story. Maybe you can find some. Yes. The bones. Maybe focus on the bones. So you know Lucy is 3.2 millions years old. Okay. And the remains were found something like 50 years ago. Okay. by a international team including one famous y man in France which is if copans um we wanted to study it because um rheumatologist from America said that all the fractures all the bone trauma at the level of the long bones so hummeral bone um the tight also the femor so the the tibia also the tibia the femur yeah exactly All these bones are have got a trauma. Um he said this rheumatologist from America that probably Lucy was sleeping in a high tree just to prevent any attack from yinas or lions or animals like this. Okay, which may be true. And did she had a nightmare? Did she move? I don't know. When she fall and she broke the legs, the arms etc. and she died. This was the hypothesis of my colleague from America. And what year did they make this hypothesis? How long how long ago was this hypothesis formed? Oh, maybe 10 years ago. 10 years ago. 10 years ago. Okay. So, we wanted to restudy the skeleton with one of his discover which was if Copas he was professor at at Paris. So we took the bones and we looked at them again and again and we found that at the level of the left coxal bone. You see what it is the coxal bone like like the like the pelvic bone. Exactly. Yes. The pelvic bone. We found that um there were some traces of animal attack. Animal attack. uh what we can see is the negative uh aspect of the teeth from an animal attack like if you were bitten by an animal. Okay. Sure. At the level of the buttocks. At this period I was uh working at the forensic laboratory on um pelvis from surfers from the island of the Reunion Island in the Indian Ocean. Reunion island. Exactly. Yes. Some surfers have been attacked by sharks. Oh, yes. I've heard stories that amazing waves in Reunion Island, but there's some of the most deadly shark attacks happened there. I think there's like there was um Anyways, I know there was I know that's a big political thing with the sharks there, like the overpopulation of sharks and people being bitten there. So, you think that this had something to do with sharks? No. Okay. No, no, no, no. Shark in this. But the attack was exactly the not exactly the same, but it was something like something like this. Anyway, um it made it made me think about an animal attack because I was working on such pelvic bones from the surfers, but I had the pelvic bone of an oropeticus. So, I made the point between animal attack and animal attack sign on the pelvic bone, but it was not shark. Of course, the environment was not the one of shark. Then I look on the medical literature in Forensic Science International and other kind of of specialized journals like like this one. And we saw that in the Everglades, but also in Tasmanian Island there are some attacks by um an alligator. Exactly. And do you know how the alligators do attack the humans? They grab onto a limb and then they spin. Exactly. And while spinning it breaks many long bones of the victim, legs or arms. Exactly. Like the one of of Lucy. Exactly. So our hypothesis that is that maybe she was attacked by I don't know if it's alligator or crocodile maybe. Exactly. A crocodile. Big crocodile. Maybe a paleo crocodile. Um that she was killed this way. This is maybe the reason why some parts of the body are still missing. Maybe they we have to find these missing parts in the fossilized uh part of such paleo crocodiles because in the same layer in which Lucy was found the paleontologists have found also skeletons of crocodiles maybe the one that killed Lucy at the period. 3 million year old crocodiles. So, you know, it's a case. It's a it's a it's a cold case. Very, very cold case. But we were able to resolve it thanks to mixing forensic anthropology and paleontology. Oh, that's fascinating. Where where is are Lucy's remains now? They are in Ethiopia in Addis Alba. In Ethiopia. Exactly. Yes. Oh, wow. In the museum. But we've got precise cast, very precise cast in the museum in Paris, for example. That's incredible. So, okay. So, the dark is the dark part, the stuff that we don't necessarily have. White. Exactly. And the white the white one is lost. The white is what we do have. Oh, the white is what's lost. Exactly. And the dark one is what is conserved. How tall roughly is this? Oh, she's right. Oh, the size of a small child. Yes. Yes. No more than one one me. A little bit over one meter. But she was already a mother. Oh, wow. Really? Yes. That's so cool. That's amazing. 3.2 millions. 3.2 million years ago. Exactly. Yes. It's another humanity. It's a You cannot imagine. It's It's another humanity. It really is. It's hard to imagine what the world looked like 3.2 million years ago, let alone 2,000 3,000 years ago. Um what? So so Lucy is the oldest homminid that we have found. No, we've got older now. Oh, we have older than Yes, we've got tumi for example, which is older. Yes. Yes, we've got I did not study them, so I can speak about it. But we've got older humanid so prehuman protohuman. How what what is the how old is the oldest? I don't know. I don't know. Okay. I don't know. Sorry. Is it is it around the same time frame? Three mill around three. No, no. It's maybe maybe five millions maybe. Maybe maybe five million years ago. Wow. Tuma. Have you ever Have you ever done any uh studies on any stone age humans? Yes, I've been studying. Uh oh, maybe you can show the picture. Chroman one. Croman. You know what chroman is? Oh, chroman. Magnagon. Yes. Chromagnum. Cromagnet. Okay. In French we say chroman. So chroman. Yes. You have to say chroman. Like a French one because it's a French word. It's a French word. Okay. Croman. So chroman or chromagnon for you is one of the Yes. This especially I studied. This is the oldest. This is the exact skull that you studied. Exact. This is my patient. You are looking at your patient. You're looking at my patient. Incredible. And this case is really interesting because when it was discovered in 1860, uh people found uh it in a not a cave but something like a cave and you can see a hole at the level of the forehead. Go up. Go up. Go up, Steve. You can see the hole. Yes. It's 5 cm length. Okay. And people originally thought that it was the water filling from the upper part of the cave that made something like dripping on something like an erosion. You see? After people thought that it was tuberculosis, after they found they thought that it was syphilis. Okay. So veneral disease, stone age syphilis. Exactly. Yes. So in fact everyone thought that it was the disease of its time. Okay. In the ' 90s people thought that it was caposi syndrome. So the cancer induced by AIDS. Okay. Ah, okay. Got it. Yes. But please, what? It's absolutely unrealistic. Okay. So, because they didn't have the same diseases that we have now, they don't have it's it's okay. It's the normal and it's a it's a kind of modern man. We are almost chromagnon. Okay. You, me, we are Cromanag. This is the same species. We are like an alien species compared to these things. No, no, no, no. We are alien compared with Lucy but compared with chromanion similar. This is really similar. This is us. This is us. Okay. But all the disease we are not the same. Okay. Because not exactly the same elementation, not the same environment, not the same microbium or microbiot. It's microbiome. Absolutely different. So we we don't have to think the disease the same way as now. Okay. So we did a full medical examination of this head, this skull. So we did a CT scan but a very precise one and we saw that we were able to put a diagnosis for this individual. The diagnosis was Recklinghousen disease. Recklingous disease. Yes. It's it's a kind of neuropiroattosis. Okay. It's a disease. A neuro disease. Don't be afraid. No, it's I'm scared. No. No. Don't be scared. It's a disease where you've got many binning tumor all around the body on the surface but also in the inner part of your body benign tumors everywhere. Yes. But growing growing growing. So if you type Steve um facial reconstruction chromagnon then you will find our reconstruction of the face of this individual only. Oh wow. Cro-Magnon. Cromagnon. Chromenon here. Here. Yes. And images. Yes. Okay. This is the first one. The first one. This is our study. Oh, so the tumor was eating away at the bone. Yes. Exactly. This is exactly what it looked like. You see? Wow. It looks so so modern. So modern. But we did not want to make uh a strong difference between neodyile which is always represented as kind of archaic form of humans and chromagnon which is a very well-dressed very modern one. So we did this way with something like a dark skin but also with hairs which have not been cut since a very long time etc. And you can see all the aspect of the disease with this tumor at the level of the forehead at the level of the eyelids also the next to the nose etc. This is exactly what chromagnon one looked like and and for people that aren't familiar with the timeline uh the stone age was how many years ago? This was approximately maybe uh uh 60 60,000 BC. 60,000 BC. Yes. Approximately before before language. Yes. You see the it's 40 45 till 10. We don't we don't have an exact sure. Yes. Wow. Is it true that human beings nowadays have the same exact lifespan with um natural lifespan that they did back in the stone age without if you if you want to take out the diseases and dying from hand tohand combat or plague or whatever it is. But if you depending depending when you when you speak at the birth no we don't have the the same uh time expectation. Okay. At at the birth at birth. Am I clear? Are you saying are you saying that um that more babies died during birth? Yes. In fact many baby or many children died within the first three years of life. Okay. If from what um main fever the the hydro rotation because of diarrhea of viruses something now you can take just you make a perfusion and you will survive without any problem or you take some paracetamol or aspirine and then it it goes okay but at this period you did not had this. So for any very slight virus infection you were dying when you were a child. So, so that would still be the same today if it wasn't for all the medicine and technology that we developed. Right. Exactly. So, the time expectation, the life expectation uh at birth, it was really really um short. Okay. But as soon as you are at least three or four years old, then including in prehistoric time, you can expect living 50, 60, maybe 70 years old. Okay. Because the most important part of the of the of the of the death was during infancy. Yes. Of course, when you've got plague, when you've got war, when you've got any epidemics, yeah, you die a lot. It's going to show up. in in a vacuum. If you took a human being from 40,000 years ago and a human being born today, each in individual vacuums, take out all external influences, all external uh ways they can be murdered or killed or die and you project their life expectancy. Would it be the same or would it be similar without or with medics? Zero medicine, zero intervention at all. The same. The same. The same. That's so interesting. That is so bizarre. And this is something that we can say, you know, I'm studying the skeletons from the Parisian catacombs. Maybe you can find some pictures of the Persian catacombs. Yeah. The catacombs of Paris of Oh, the Paris catacombs. The Paris. Yes. So, we've got almost between six and 12 millions of dead below the the the level of Are they baby? I've heard about this. Yes, it's it's really full filled with skeletons. Okay. I heard they were baby skeletons. No, not only No, no, no, no, no. Not a lot of baby skeletons. Ma, mainly adult skeletons. This is it. And we are studying them. Okay. One zone after one zone. So, it's really it's many skeletons. It's 1,000 of life in Paris between the 10th and the 18th century. between the between the 10th and the 18th. Yes. AD. Exactly. So you've got almost 800 life of of Parisian inside. So you've got skulls, you've got long bones and you may make a lot of diagnosis. Okay. Why did they do this? Initially um everything took place in the 18th century. Imagine you were eating in a in a tao. Okay. And uh suddenly next to a huge cemetery which was the cemeter in the center of Paris the wall crashed on all the skeletons all the calver fall on the table where people were dining and drinking wine etc. So at this moment the Parisian people understood that it was really complicated and maybe dangerous from a pure health point of view to have such proximity between the dead and the living ones. Okay. So they asked to take all the cavers from the inner part of Paris to clean the cemeteries and to displace all the skeletons outside of Paris in ancient quaries. Okay. So these were not originally catacombs like in Roma for example. These were quaries for the extraction of stone for the building of Paris. Okay. Wow. So it was fulfilled with the skeletons of all the cemeteries which were initially in the center of Paris. Ah that makes sense. For health reasons. For health reasons. That makes that makes a lot of sense. Um quick I got to take a bathroom break real quick and we'll get right back. We'll be right back. Okay. So Lucy was the earliest patient you had and the latest one that you had was Pablo Picasso. Yes. And how did you get your hands on Picasso's remains? thanks to his um great daughter which is Diana Vidme Ruiz Picasso and um she was preparing an exhibition in Paris at the museum Picasso about all the testimonies about her grandfather and she discovered in her private collections fragments of nails and fragments of hairs from Pablo Picasso because Pablo was really he had a strong magical beliefs and he thought that magical belief magical beliefs. Interesting. Yes. Yes. Yes. And he thought that uh people were able to make some uh black magic using his nails and using his hairs. So we sent them to uh Marit Terz Welter which was one of her lover and uh she conserved them in envelopes with the date exact date of sampling by by Picasso because Picasso thought that if someone took them for example in the in the garden or at the in the shop where you can cut your hairs. Okay. um this person could make some um bad evil to to him because it's a part of him. You see what I mean? They could they could they could make some sort of a potion or witchcraft. Yes, witchcraft. We we say bad bad heavilic you see black magic against him. If I it's like voodoo something like this. So he did not trust all the people around him. And when he cut his nails, he put them very delicately into some envelopes, sending them to Mariterez Welter. And this is amazing for us because it's the possibility for us to analyze the elementation, but also all the toxics that he eventually could have taken for his artistic creation. And we discovered that he didn't had any kind of toxic. The only one that we couldn't find is some coffee. A lot of so very few caffeine because he did not drink a lot of caffeine. Coffee. He did not drink a lot of caffeine. Not a lot of caffeine. No, no, no. But he he was smoking a lot. So nicotine we found a lot. And that's all. And what we found also below the the nails were all the food that you were that he was preparing. For example, we find some proteins of watermelon. Okay. That really Yes. Yes. So we we were and also fragments of uh uh a goat uh hairs goat he had under his fingernails. Yes. Because at this period he had a goat and this goat had all the rights. The goat was was able to come in the atalier to eat some convas and to the goat had all the rights. Yes. And we found it was like a house was like a house cat but a goat. Exactly. Yes. So we find some fragments of these goats below the the nails of Picasso. Oh my god. It's really a it's travel into such artist intimacy. Yeah. It's interesting how you can, you know, discover the the toxicology um and the chemicals that were in their bodies or the drugs that they were using. But like it's so like it gets really interesting when you want to examine the psychology of these ancient people. Like is it is there are there any any theories of of how you could use the matrix of the chemicals and the toxins that exist in their bodies and in the remains of their bodies. to sort of draw an analogy to any kind of psychological illnesses or psychological complexes that these people might have had. It's really difficult to do. So um for the moment we are studying the hairs of Victor Hugo, you know the Victor Hugo Victor Hugo, you know the famous French writer. Yeah. And um we found a lot of um lead um it did not interact with his creativity. Okay. But it may represent the cause of death of Victor Ugo because you don't do it because it's an electronic pen or pencil. But give it to me just one second. Yeah. Victor go when he was writing he he was using the long how do you say a pen pencil what is inside the lead ink ink ink thank you he was using ink which was um rich in lead. So he was writing then putting his pencil in his mouth. In his mouth. Exactly. So lead was coming from the ink to the tongue or the inner part of the of the mouth. Then he was intoxicating himself day after day while writing. Okay. On this we can see it on the on the hairs. In fact it's not hair from the head. It's hair from the barb long long hair of maybe five. Yes. Exactly. So we can see that you know hair is growing 1 cm each month. So we've got hair from the bab of Victoria go of almost five cmters which represent five month of his life. So we can see that the exposure to lead is growing day after day. And this may have be a cause of not death but facilitating facilitating death for for him. Wow. It's called saturnism. We call it saturnism when it's chronic exposure to lead which is toxic level. So out of out of all of the patients that you've examined, what would you say the predominant time period it is that you've studied or is it just all over the place? It's really all over. It's really all over. Yes. Yes. I can study skeletons from the Paleo-Christian period from the Greek Roman from the I've been studying the two two children of King Tut in in Egypt for example. Children of King Tut. Yes. Exactly. Yes. which were dead in the womb of his wife and sister Angen Ammon. And we were able to say that uh they died. They were twins inside the womb of the of Anen Among U. But the twins did not die at the same moment. One twin died. The first then shrink inside the womb and the second died some weeks or month later. Then they were extracted out of the body of of Angamon but with two different kinds of development. You see what I mean? And this was really forensic and what we say fetto pathological examination of the of the bodies. What is it like to examine a Egyptian mummy? It's very fragile. It's very um it's very little because these were embryos. Oh, not umbreos fetuses. uh fetuses. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Exactly. So, it's really And it smells very good. It smells very good. It smells good. Yes. Mummies smell very very good. What What would you compare it to? Because No, not you. You smell good, too. No. No. No. But um I compare it to a kadaavver. That's all. But because when you make a mummy, did you already smell Egyptian mummy? Not yet. Uh not yet. It's on my list. You should because it's you've got bemen but you've got also many aromomas maybe a lot of aromomas. Yes. Aromas. Yes. Like uh you've got salt and you've got um botanical samples that are here to conserve the body for a very long time. And all of this smells very good. Wow. And you know I've got another story to tell you. Yeah. Um, painters at the end of the 18th and beginning of the 19th century currently used fragments of Egyptian mummies to make a kind of pigment which is red turning into dark. It's red with some metallic reflections. Okay. This pigment was called mumia like mummies. Mumia. Yes. Mumia. It's it's a word for mummy. Okay. So some famous painters used such pigments in the end of 18th beginning of 19th century in Europe. Okay. But also in America. So they paid a lot to use such fragments of Egyptian mummy. In fact you take fragment of Egyptian mummy, you crush it, you put some oil with it, you crush it again, then you use it like a pigment for paintings. Okay. I wonder who the first person to come up with that idea was. I don't know. How do you even do how do you who thinks of that? In fact, it's very the color is really unique, but it's also symbolic because you think that um you know an Egyptian mummy does not destroy through time. It's really it was conserved. It's preserved. It's preserved for no not only centuries but millionaries. Okay. So you millennia. So you consider that your painting too will be conserved the same way you see. But during the French Revolution, so we are at the end of the 18th century in Paris mainly, some painters had the opportunity of buying fragments of the mummified hurt of the French kings, which were not Egyptian mummies, but they were hurts that have been mummified and unbold the same way. The hearts. The hearts. Yes. So they bought the hertz of Louis the 14 for example. Mhm. And my lab has been able to track the path of this sample and we were able to find in the Louv museum in Paris but also in another museum next to Paris in Portis two paintings that have been made with the mumified hurt of Louis the 14 and Louis the 13. But the hurt transformed into pigments. So now if you want to see the the hurt of such kings, such French kings, you have to go to the Louvre museum onto the Ponttois Museum. And when you see in these two paintings a dark and red parts of the of the of the canvas of the of the painting, these are the fragments of the Hertz. If you if you want the name of the paintings, I can give them to you. So I was going to ask you, so you you followed the chain of transmission of the the mummified heart of this king and it went to a painter. Exactly. Yes. Yes. It was sold during the French Revolution. It was bought by the painters and the painters used them to make two paintings. The first one is Interior and the second one is V. I can type them and I So, did you have to go and like look up all the paintings that those painters ever created and then and then analyze all them to find out? No, because we've got archives and we know that he did such paintings just after buying the Oh, wow. That's fascinating. If you want to see them. Yes, let's see them. Let Steve pull them up. Oh, we'll type it. Yeah. Okay. Okay. So, punch. Yeah. Zoom that in. So, so all the red is is uh all the red pigments and the darker pigments are are the heart of Louis the 14. Exactly. Yes. The the 13 for this one and for the von which is the other painting it's Louis the 14. This one is the father of Louis the 14. So Louis the 13. And on the other one von this is it. Yeah. Uh, no, no. Uh, the second the second on the Yes. This one. Yes. Here you can see the red the red people. You see this? Oh, wow. This is reason 14. That's incredible. And when we did the microscope examination of these pigments, we saw very clearly fragments of muscles from the hurt. Really? Yes. Yes. It's really It's really clear. Yes. So you took this and put it under a microscope and you could see this. Exactly. Yes. Then we did then we did protoomic analysis and we confirmed that this hurt is where a human hurt and we were even able to find some proteins related to diabetes because Luis the 14 diabetes. Yes. Exactly. because Rhys the 14 was involved by diialetis and we found such proteins in into the into the samples. Wow man that is freaking insane. And he he was uh he was from you said the 18th century. Yes. He died in 70 but he died in 1715. 175. That's more than 80 years old. Wow. Maybe you can show us Louis the 14. Yeah, show us a photo of him. 14. Yes. This is Oh my god, look at that wig. Yeah, the second one. Yes, this one is perfect. That's amazing. So, so was diabetes prevalent back then? We We suspected it. We suspected it and we had the confirmation by our analysis. Yes. and and what would be the cause of diabetes? My understanding was that that's a recent phenomena. It's it's difficult to know. It may be related to elementation. It may be also of um age. It may be due also to familiar predisposition. We don't know exactly. But if you want to know, we are still working on such samples because sorry. Mhm. Because we know that Luis the 14 died of uh an infection at the level of the leg. Okay. Uh it's supposed to be a complication of diabetes. When you've got diabetes, you make strong infection especially at the level at the level of the lower legs. Okay. And especially at the level of the two and temp. Um for him we are still working on the samples and we are finding some bacteria on some fungi also that may be the cause of death of Louis the 14. But understand me well we are not working on the on the kadaavver in itself not the cadaavver. No, no, no. We are working on the remains of the hurt that the painter did not used and gave back to the church um because he he wanted to to to to do it well. So he he just used he just used half of the heart for painting and the second half the is intact and it's now back in the basilica of St. Denis which is at the north of Paris. Wow. So, we are still working on such samples. Have you ever been into the catacombs under the Vatican? Yes, of course. Yes. Really? What kind of did you find under there? I've I've been there for tourist purposes, but not for studying. Not for studying. Yes. But there you've got study anyone down there. Oh, yes. There's a skeleton that is really interesting there. It's the the remains of St. Peter. This the the bones of St. Peter. This one would be really really interesting. But you know everything almost everything has been made on it by my colleagues from Italy. Okay, we know that it's the skeleton of a man of almost 50 years old then died at the first century AD. So it's it fits with all the characteristics of St. Peter. So honestly, I would not had some a lot of things more to the the fights already written by my by by my colleagues from Italy. Wow, that's fascinating. Um, but the study of relics is really interesting. You know, I've been studying also on the relic of what relics relics. Yes, you can type another patient that I had is St. Madlin. Holy Magdalena. Holy Magdalena. You see what she Holy Magdalene. Yes. Holy Magdalene. Yes. Not Mary Magdalene. You see? Yes. Oh, Mary Magdalene. Mary Magdalene. Oh, really? Yes. Yes. Yes. Mary Magdalene. What? She's one of my patients. There is a there is a story in France. We say that um at the beginning of the attack of Christians, a boat um started from Palestine at this period. And on this boat there was Mari Mari Magdalene, Mar Salom, Mar Jacob, Maris Sarah, Lazarus and others. I don't remember all of them but there were many. Then the boat came to Cyprus to Crret to Malta to many island then arrived in Province in the south of France in a small city which is called now St. Mar. Anyway, everyone escaped and Mar Magdalene went to a cave. She spent 33 years in the cave. Then after this period, she get out of the cave and she died and she was buried in a place which is now a basilica in what the name in France? It's San Maxima Santo. Anyway, it's a huge basilica from the middle ages and inside the basilica you've got the bones and the skull of Maria Magdalena. So, we did the examination of these relics. Maybe you can see you can you can find them also and relics. Uh where where are the bones and the remains of Mary Magdalene right now? Still there. They're still there. Yes. Oh, this is it. The first picture is mine. That's for real. How have I never seen this? I look so badass because you have to come to France. That's so this is my patient. This is my picture. It looks like a a golden astronaut helmet with hair with Mary Magdalene's skull in the middle of it. It's a really in fact. And you can see that the most important part of it, which is the face, is still missing. It looks like the cover of a death metal album. It may. It may. Yes. So we did the examination of it and we were able to reconstruct the face based upon the surface of the skull. And if you type facial reconstruction Mari Magdalene, you will see the face that we constructed because this skull is the skull of a woman of almost 50 years old. And you know there is now a methodology very well practiced in forensic anthropology. It's the reconstruction of face. We saw it with chromagnon skull. Yes. On the surface of the skull, you put um sticks um using your computer which represent the common uh thickness uh at the level of the face with muscles with fatty tissue and skin. Okay. So it gives you really the the the surface of the of the skull which is the face. And here we had also fragments of the hairs, fragments also of the skin. So we were able to be much more precise than chroman that you saw before. Um you you will see the the reconstruction. Did you find it Steve? Oh the reconstruction. Facial reconstruction. Facial fac. The bigger image. And look like little angels or cherubs or something like holding her up. Yes. Oh wow. Wait a minute. Here you got the skin fragments. The skin fragments are here. Zoom in. Zoom in on the skin fragment. Dude, this is gnarly. I've never seen this, dude. The skin fragments because when the That's That's That's almost like It's pretty terrifying. No, not at Oh, because you're not forensic practitioner, maybe. No, for me it's terrifying, right? Yeah. I've never I haven't No, it's zoom out. And these fragments of skin come from the forehead because just the symbolism of it and the fact that they have this ancient human skull in inside of a trophy, a golden trophy with angels. It's like I have to tell you the story of the skin fragments. Yes, please. Initially, they were put here at the level of the left for the right forehead. The story is that one uh during the patient Jesus escaped from the grave as you as you know because he was resuscit resuscitated. Okay. And Maria Magdalina was here and she was trying to catch Jesus and Jesus stopped her. May I do it? Mhm. This way. So stopping her with two fingers. Two fingers on her forhead. On the forehead saying in Aramaan, but I translate into English for into Aramaic. Yeah. In Yes. This was his speaking Aramaic. Jesus spoke Aramea. Aramea. Yes. Uh and um I translated into Latin for you if you want me which means don't touch me. So it's really it's a very important part of the of the New Testament. Okay. And these are the two fragments of the skin which has been touched by the Christ on the forehead of Maria Magdalena. And we also have a stick of hairs from Maria Magdalena because later still after the patient she um cleaned the foot of Jesus using her long hairs. She did what? She she cleaned she she cleaned the the the feet the feet. She cleaned his feet. Yes. The feet of Jesus using her long hairs. Wow. Okay. While they were still on her head. Exactly. Exactly. So be awkward. So they were conserved in another really query. So I studied the the skin, the hairs and the skull too. And we were able to produce a facial reconstruction of the face of this individual. This is it. The second one. That one. Oh wow. This is her. This is the face from the skull. I cannot tell you that this face is the true face of Maria Magdalena because we are still missing carbon dating and genetic. But this is the face of the skull presented as the one of Maya Magdalene. So, so, so we don't know for sure if that skull was the Mary Magdalene that's talked about in the Bible. Exact. But we do know that that skull was from the first century AD. No, we know that this skull is uh the one conserved and presented since the medieval period, the middle ages as the one of Maria Magdalina in this tradition. But we So you I don't have carbon dating. So you don't have carbon dating of the skull. Got it. Unfortunately, no. Well, go back, Steve. Go back to that where they were showing the 3D renderings. Oh, wow. That's how they built it. Is there what is the difference in the skulls of males versus females? There is not a huge difference in fact because if you want to make sex determination using a skull, it's really not the perfect bone. The the most accurate bone is the pelvis. Pelvis, you've got 98% of giving the chance of giving the the correct sex for this individual. Mhm. If you use the skull, for example, my skull is a female skull. Okay? But if you look at my pelvis, you will be sure that I'm really a male. Okay? Because looking at the skull, it gives you maybe 55 to 65% of chance of giving the true sex. So, it's not it's really not perfect. What like wider like birthbearing hips? Yes, it's in fact the pelvis is much more induced by in its morphology by um hormones much more than um than the skull. You see what I mean? I say it again. Yes. Um sex hormones hormones. Yes. Sex hormones are much more involved in the morphology of the pelvic bones than the skull. So if you look at the if you look at the skull, it's not the perfect one to be sure. Sometimes you've got a very male one, sometimes a very female one, then you can be almost sure. But in most of the case, you've got a Mhm. almost male, almost female. So making a sex diagnosis based only on the skull, it's not the best way to do it. Okay. That's why we always pre prefer to do it on genetic samples. So DNA and why won't they so they're not letting you take a carbon date of that skull? The authorization of opening of the of the ric was on the office of Pope Francis. So as you know he passed away. No he passed away. He passed away. So we have to to wait for the new pope which is American. Leo. Pope Leo. He's American. Yes. He's he's from your country. Really? I didn't even know that. Please. Pope Leo. Pope Leo's American. Yes. Are you going to ask him if you if you guys can pop open that astronaut helmet and see if that she if that's actually Mary Magdalene? We we will write to him and then we will see. Wow. Are you uh are you religious? I'm Catholic. Yes, you're Catholic. Catholic. Yes, I'm Papist as you say. Papist. Wow. So, I want to ask you um you so we talked about this briefly. you you were the only person the only academic person to do a um a peer-reviewed Binmar peer review on the chemical muse book by Almond Hillman. First of all, how did you come across this and how did you get chosen to do the peer review? How does that how does I don't know how this process works? Um I made some peer review for Binmore um university which is a which is a kind of research center and also it's like the newspaper it is like the holy grail of academ of classical scholarship peer review on classic classics yes so sometimes I make some peer review when the the book is um between paleopathology which is my specialty forensics on antiquity of the period. So I found the title very interesting and the topic also. So I wanted to to to read it first and then to make a very objective analysis of the of the book. Yes. So so um my understanding of what a classical philologist is and correct me if I'm wrong is it's someone who studies the ancient texts ancient Greek specifically um because I believe there's way more Greek than any other language. and they try to use all of the sources that are um all the sources they can to corroborate what specific words mean based on that time period. Exactly. So words can have uh semantic drift. So if you're looking at a one word that was used in 100 AD, it might have a very different meaning 500 BC and at the same period the same word may have different meaning between two different authors. This is also a speciality of antique period between uh multiple authors. Yes, exactly. And there's different also different types of authors, right? You have people who are writing medical texts. You have people who are doing philosophy, poetry, theater, theater, comedy. So, it's really dangerous. Yes, it's dangerous because the meaning is different and the conclusion may be different too. So this is why you need to make a very precise scholarship analysis and studies before writing such a book. The book was not bad anyway. Not bad at all. But my opinion was that maybe it was a little bit uh going too far. Going too far too far. Yes. Going too far. And it was also missing a very important part which was paleotoxicology. I mean analysis of ancient bone sample of what was um inside antique vases for example all this part which is present already in many studies paleotoxicological studies it was not included in into this book and this was for me uh the book was um so the book is in the the what is the word I'm I'm trying to think of right now the the premise of the book, his background is specifically in reading texts. He doesn't he it's not a multi-disciplinary book. That's what I'm that's what I was trying to get across. Yes. Yes. This was for me a limitation of the book, right? And the second is that the author which is absolutely respectable had his own previous ID before doing the book and he used all the arguments for confirming his previous ID. Normally when you do such a book you have to remain and to stay objective and you have to make your own criticism of your theory. You see and in such a book there was only one way of thinking. Everyone was using drugs in past period. This is what he said on you said drugs were ubiqu ubiquitous in antiquity. Yes. Exactly. And sincerely it needs to be to reach strength a little bit more because we've got so much skeletons. We've got so much ceramics. So he had the opportunity of proving history the story using paleopathology, paleotoxicology and please do it. Please do it because it's it's an very interesting theory but you may prove it from a pure independent uh way. So this was really something which was missing for me. So my understanding of it is he wrote his PhD dissertation on drugs in antiquity and the Ph the um the PhD the panel um that was reviewing his dissertation said we'll we will approve your PhD as long as you remove the chapter on recreational drugs. Mhm. So he removed that chapter because they said that uh the Romans wouldn't do such a thing. the Romans, they would never engage in recreational drug use. So he decided to take that chapter after he received his PhD and basically turn it into that book and that book was like based on that chapter. So for whatever reason he felt slighted by the academic institution that the fact that like why would you try to take this out of there just because you have an idea that they wouldn't do such a thing. Now let me ask you this. Do you believe that the Greeks and the Romans would not do such a thing as engage in recreational drug use? I have nothing against recreational use of drugs like alcohol or anything else during the past period. But I'm not historian and I'm not uh but um I do believe that drugs were used in past period on opium for example on other kinds of of drugs and we can see it on with very good examples in that book for example in sanctuaries like the pity in Delus or the cibilus in Cuma in in Italy now. So I think drugs were present. Yes, drugs were really present present. But do you believe do you believe it's possible that they were used recreationally, not just medically? Maybe partially. Yes. May. Yeah. I from a pure um conventional point of view or practical point of view, I don't have any argument against it. But but I would really like to have scientific proof of it. And we've got so many skeletons. You will tell me okay skeletons in bones you cannot find everything remember you've got dental calculus okay and you've got sometimes fragments of blood inside the skull which has been conserved and in that blood you can find many organic material etc. So it's it's really possible to find signs and um fragments of such drugs in dal calculus in remains of blood etc and also in all the uh ceramics that have been conserved from antiquity. So it's it's really possible to do it. So maybe he has to to create a research group about this to to go further. Um, do you uh in your studies of classical antiquity and um Athenian cultures, do you find in your studies any evidence of psychotropic drugs or anything like these? I don't know. I really don't know. I did not search for it, so I don't know. You did not search for no. when you're doing your work, you you work with people who and you know, not saying that this would be necessary, but it would it would be very interesting to see a forensic pathologist and a a classical scholar, a classical philologist team up and try to corroborate things in in um some sort of presentation. This is the best the best is to mix all the sources, texts, iconography, Mhm. skeletons and also everything that comes from archaeological excavations from houses for example but also from latrines uh from trashes also. So when you mix all of this then you've got strong data to analyze all the past populations. M and is it true during this time period that uh plague and and famine and hand to hand combat and were very very prevalent and uh just a part of life in that time in that in those cultures. Was that was that something that was just constantly like I think in that book he mentions that there was a uh there was plagues almost on average like every 50 years I think it was I don't know if it was true plague or epidemics but you had epidemics or plagues yeah yes but you had many often epidemics then war then um lack of elementation uh and you had many crisis we prefer to speak about crisis okay demographic crisis problem of elementation of of food supplementation. Yes, this was really common in the ancient period but not only in antiquity also in medieval period or modern period too. We were speaking about Louis the 14 there were a lot of crisis during his reign also. So it was really common but we were speaking about the use of of drugs. Um I I remember working in Venedia, Italy. And uh in Venice. In Venice. Yes, Venice. And um I stood some uh pipes from Venice. At this period, people pipes. Uh oh. Smoking pipes. Smoking pipes. Yes. Smoking pipes. And people were smoking tobacco mixed with cannabis. Oh, really? Yes. But not for recreative purposes normally rather against malaria bad malaria. Yes. Malaria not the sense you use it for paludism. Okay. But malaria means in ancient Latin or or French or Italian uh bad um air bad air. You see the miasma. We people were considering that in this period uh plague and other disease were uh spread by bad air malaria this time and and um and it was a way of cleaning the air the air that was coming into your mouth as you were smoking pipes mixed with tobacco and cannabis tobacco or cannabis. It was cleaning the air all around you. You see? So how would you discern whether it was only being used for this purpose rather than being used just for fun? Texts only texts. So testimonies, archives, um you have to use such such things but you have also to prove the use by the analysis of deposits inside the ceramics for example. And if you find also uh remains of such drugs in dental calculus in fragments of blood still present inside the skull or elsewhere then you can see that in I don't know how many% of the population you find it. So you need a kind of statistics you need a kind of demographical representation of such the present the presence of drugs in past populations. This is really a key point. You need numbers. You need statistics. How much have you looked into uh Galen uh Marcus Aurelius's physician? Say it again. Galen, the physician of Marcus Aurelius. Yes. Yes. Yes. Galen. Galen. I think his his literature, his medical literature makes up I think what is it like 10% of all classical literature is from him. We've got many we've got many physicians from antiquity. Gallen is one of them. But we've got also Soranus of Ephesus. We've got also the hypocratic um library etc. which is not all from Hypocrates himself but maybe of a lot of people from the same school. So we've got many many we've got also Celsius which is another Celsius. Yes. Exactly. So we've got many texts by ancient physicians but Galinus in fact Galan for you is one of the most most important one but he made he made errors he made mistakes for example he described some anatomical structures that do not exist in men because he did autopsies on animals and he he said that as it was present on animals it was also present for for humans. So it's not uh you don't have to take the the the words of Galen as 100% true. Mhm. And uh I don't know if you've heard uh but um Alman Hillman also talks about the use of essentially like ancient vaccines. You know how we use vaccines to create the the way that we create vaccines is by growing cultures on organisms, right? or on on organic tissue. And one of the things that he talks about is the use of inducing viper venoms into people by impregnating the bandages with the venoms and then uh putting a cut on the human body and then wrapping that cut in this bandage with viper venom just enough to create the antibodies or the antivenenoms. And they were using that to according to Amen to extract the bodily foods from these people and use them to uh treat snake bites and things like this and other ailments. I don't know that at all. I don't know that at all. Sorry. No. Yeah. So yeah, it's uh it's one of the things he talks about along with uh with Galen's Theak, which apparently had like 66 different ingredients. If you're familiar with it, I don't know, but I know it had a lot of different viper venoms, a handful of North African viper venoms, viper flesh, uh various bodily fluids. Have you have you looked into that at all? Have you ever heard of anything like that? No. No. No. No. Because Yeah. When he was reading, uh, you know, there's so much there's so much literature from Galen, so it's impossible to read it all in a lifetime. But Oh, no. You can you can do it. You can read. Oh, yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. You can. I think there's like 11 volumes or something like this and they're all like 800 to 1,000 pages. It's so in one year you do it in one year. Oh yeah. Yes. Can you translate Greek? No. No. No. No. Greek. Latin. Yes. But Greek so only only some words. No. No. Latin. Yes. No problem. But Galen wrote in Greek so no. Right. Right. It's it's just fascinating. And you know he talks about how um h you know according to Galen that Marcus Aurelius was taking a lot of opium and he was constantly having to up the dose of his opium. and and all these things. But we do not know if it was for medical purposes reasonably. Yes. Rather than for um how do you say uh pleasure and they were also doing uh vivisections on prisoners where they were basically doing live autopsies on on people. No, Garren did autopsy of um how do you say it? Sorry. Gar did autopsies of gladiators, gladiators and soldiers too. So he was able to take all the fresh bodies of such individuals and finished to open them and to see what was exactly inside but while the caliber was still hot. This was really interesting. Viv section was performed in Alexandria Egypt. Yeah, because it was not allowed in in uh Rome and there it was possible to to open the bodies of living individuals which were not living for a very long time as you may imagine which were prisoners. Prisoners. Yes. And what was the purpose of doing that? What what kind of stuff were they looking for? It was it their interest was to see the physiology of organs because when we you do an autopsy as I do, I always see dead people. So the organs do not move anymore. Okay. But when you do VV section, you can see the bowels moving. You can see the heart beating not a very long time. You can see it left, right, left, right, left, right. Okay. But when you do autopopsy, the heart is absolutely flat. So you don't need you don't see him moving. This is the reason why they they did such analysis, right? Yeah. such a brutal brutal thing to do to human beings. You have to imagine of course it's brutal for us and of course we don't have to do it but you have you have to judge it from another point of view which is the one of this period. Normally a historian does not judge. He just describe it does not judge because correct another period another context another kind of knowledge and thinking. So let's do as historians do. Don't judge just describe it. Right. So, one of the one of the um recent analysis that Hillman makes, which I don't believe was in the Chemical Muse book, was that in Mark 14, I believe it's the description where we were talking about the the shirt that he was wearing when he was arrested by the Roman cops in the park that he was with a young boy who ran away. Mhm. And when he ran away, he was uh his cloth, his linen cloth that was covering his uh his privates basically fell off. And and the first thing Jesus said to the cops was, "I'm not a lay stace." Mhm. And one of the there's many uh terms for or there was many meanings for the word layase. One of them was pirate, I think, robber, bandit, and another thing that uh it was used for was human trafficker. And according to Helman that human trafficking was a very popular thing during those days. Humans were being trafficked all the time. Uh and in fact according to him uh Marcus or according to many people uh Julius Caesar was kidnapped when he was younger by some human traffickers and he eventually when he escaped and when they traded him he crucified them. So he is claiming that uh these layas or human traffickers one of the common ways of prosecuting them or condemning them to death was by crucifixion and Jesus was arrested said I'm not a layase and then a few hours later he was crucified in between two layas. Mhm. So his uh I don't know if he's he doesn't actually say this, but I mean he's he says it looks like what you know he the fact that he was caught in this public park that he was using this kid's bodily fluids as an antidote to some psychedelic drug or some some uh viper venom concoction that he was using before that when he was in the upper room. and he needed the antidote to the viper venom that he ingested from the kid because the theory is if you give this to young people, young people have the most robust immune system so they can produce the strongest antibodies to relieve you of whatever this death inducing venoms that you're on. And when he was on the cross, it's written by multiple authors. Um, h what was the one I can't the the the one who specifically wrote about the sponge? I can't remember his name, but it's described as, you know, he's dying of thirst when he's crucified. He's very thirsty, and that was one of the side effects of ingesting these venoms. And he when when he was offered the sponge, um there was one specific author who said that that sponge was the antidote to the Viper vent. He denied the sponge. He didn't want the sponge. So, you know, his his theory is that, you know, he was tripping when he was crucified and he didn't want the antidote so he would survive. So, that would be really interesting to have somebody like you try to look into that and see if there's any sort of pathological evidence or anything like that to corroborate this. As you know, Jesus is not yet one of my patients. Yes, exactly. But who knows? The problem with it is it's so provocative sounding. You know, it's it goes against so it goes against every you know the religious people are going to I will be honest with you. Um when we read the gospel and when we read all the texts describing the crucifixion um the process of natural death if I can say of from a crucifixion is honestly very well described. Oh really? Yes. really I already studied two bodies of women which were crucified uh from the island of Delos also and um so I I know the process okay and I've got also more than 10 years of forensic practice on contemporary cases so I really know it when you when you look at the description what the cause of death of true crucifixion vertical crucif fiction. Yes, it's dehydration. It's it's what is that word? Dehydration. Dehydration. Dehydration. Yes. Dehydration. It's um um the the blood that precipitates inside the blood vessels also at the level of the veins but also at the level of the lungs. And it's also one last thing which is tyess of respiration. It's at the end of this position. It's really difficult difficult to breath. When you're like this, you can't breathe. So you sort of suffocate this or this or this. Yes. Yes. It's after hours it's really really hard to to breath. Okay. So when we read it he did not die in 20 minutes or one hour. He died after hours of such a such a process. So honestly when we read the text we don't need any other explanation for his death toxics venom. But he did die early though right according according to the text he died far earlier than everyone else. Yes. But remember that during all the patient he when he was walking inside the streets of Jerusalem he did not had a lot of water. He did not drink a lot. He was suffering. He was uh losing some blood also. So sorry but he has enough reasons of dying without imagining something else from a pure forensic point of view. Sure. In forensic we always prefer the simplest way of dying and very often this simplest way is the correct and the true one. Right? That makes a lot of sense. It's just the when you're when you're relying on the the the biblical cannon for to describe the things that were going on back then and ignoring all of the vast amounts of classical literature that surround the Bible. Mhm. It's like, are you getting the truth? Because you know it's it's a it almost goes against it to like it's like it's you're not looking for the truth when you're only looking at the religious texts and not trying to corroborate the the religious text and the meanings of the words with all of the other literature. Right? This is the problem if it's a problem uh is these are religious text. These are not historical chronicles or um strong archives made by lawyers etc. So this is one problem if it's a problem. But I want to tell you if you want to know the truth give give me the sponge find me the the relic of the sponge. Five me some fragments of blood or I don't know from the from from the body of the of the Christ. Then we will see. Maybe the holy shrewd or something else. Maybe if we've got some traces of the of the of the body, maybe we can find some answers on it. I can't say give me the skeleton of the Christ because normally there is no but um well, who knows? Who knows? This is honestly this is one of the most important reason of the story the study of of relics. When you study relics, first of all, you can say relics. You can say if the relics are the true ones or not. Sometimes they are not true. Um that's a problem. Yeah, that's a problem. Same thing with uh with texts, text fragments. Exactly. Yes. Some are apocryphic, so um written many years after or changed a lot, etc. But if the relics are the true one, then we can work on them and maybe we can have some strong and good informations. Yeah. and and like the the idea of using using uh biological things like like humans or animals to to process new drugs is not that that's not exclusive to any certain part of the world. I believe you wrote a whole book on on the the voodoo religions of Haiti, right? Mhm. And using these these this puffer fish venom tetrototoxina ttx tetrototoxina. Yes. Yes. And and uh toads and venoms from puffer fish. And these people would like bury themselves up to their necks and believe they were zombies. Mhm. Um I've been working on this for years. I made an exhibition in Paris about this. Uh this is absolutely true. This is absolutely true. You put some uh zombie powder inside your shoes, inside your shirt. And but I can put uh something like all of this of powder on your skin. Nothing will happen because the tetrotoxin powder does not come through the skin. So you have to put something that you scratch your skin and the the poison goes inside the the scratch and goes inside your your body. Then between four or 6 hours later you are considered as u a living dead if I can say meaning that you really look like a dead one but your heart is still beating. You are still breathing but very slowly your temperature is really down. Okay. So you look like a dead but you are still living. Okay. Then you are put into a grave the same day and during the night you are extracted from your coffin by the priest which is called a boar and this one takes you out and gives you the antidote. Then you are transformed into a zombie during days, months, years working in rise production in anyway but far away from civilization and you will be giving uh some I don't know barbaric or bzodazipine any drug and also you will be giving um elementation without any salt. So something like brain edma will develop and you will be really like a zombie. So a body without any spirit, a body without any consciousness. Okay? And it will lack for years before one day your boar the priest will be dead because of I don't know an accident or maybe um a traumatic event earthquake earthquake or uragon tornado and uh so you will not have your each day drug barbit or benzoipine or you will be able to eat something and you will eat what you will found and there will be some salt in. So the edma will go down slowly and you will take back some part of your consciousness and this will be the end of the zombie uh state and you will recover a human state day after day. This is true and this is still happening in in IIT. But it's not for anyone. It's not for you. It's not for me. It's for people which are it's for people that believe, right? You have to believe in zombies. You have to believe. Yes, you have to be initiated to voodoo initially, but also it's for people that do something bad to society. This is made by uh secret society which is called Bzongo. And uh it's made for people doing something bad. Um people that are selling uh territories, plantations that they do not really have or people which are raping girls. Okay. So it's a kind of uh parallel justice. Justice, you see justice. Yeah. Justice. It's a parallel justice. Yeah. No, it's it's really interesting like would would these these rituals and like burying somebody up to their neck while they're staring at the stars all night uh under the intoxication of these venoms have the same effect on an individual who didn't entertain the belief system, right? Like how much does the psychology and the the symbolism of the whole ritual play into it? The psychology is really essential and this is really key point and you're absolutely right because you have to believe and you are prepared to this before getting intoxicated. You have a judgment in seven steps. So seven times you are taken at your office. you are put in a in a car and then uh you are obliged to be facing the Bizongo secret society and you are kneeling just in front of them and they are judging you and seven times you have the possibility of saying I'm absolutely innocent or no I'm really guilty again there are also some signs that are placed just in front of your house for example uh chicken legs okay or some uh um um voodoo doll also that is which is made with fragments of your hairs and stuff. So, and inside the zombie powder, you've got also other fragments. You've got um human bones uh fragments. You've got also a scratching from the grave of previous zombies like if you were transferring death or zombie state using this this powder. Okay. So it's really a mix and as you said and it's really true uh you have to believe and this is why also only people which are vodu practitioners in IT may be converted into zombies. If you are not a voodoo practitioner, if you're not a voodoo practitioner, yes, I don't have any other word, then you can then you cannot do you cannot be turned into a zombie, right? Do you believe in uh do you believe humans have souls? I do think so. But I think the soul is not in only in the brain but in all the parts of the body. We say it in French. The spirit together is in the whole body together. So it's a part it's a part of it's a part of everything. It's a part of it's in every fiber of your being. Yes. It's not just in your brain. There is no only there is no reason for the spirit to be only in your brain. Right. Yeah, that makes sense. And what what do you think happens to the soul when somebody dies? I have no idea. I have no idea. You know, I've got some colleagues in my forensic department that are speaking to the cadaavvers. There is one which opens the window in the morning. Speaking to the cadaavvers. Yes. Yes. Speak. I don't speak to my to to my patient. I don't speak. But some people do. Some people some forensic practitioner do speak to their cadaavvers. Um that they are supposed to study. Uh I know one which opens the the the window to let the soul getting out of the autopsy room also. So but I don't do that for me. I before doing the autopsy, you know, like the piano player, uh, I make a turn all around the the the so my patient because I want to see all the aspects of the of the skin, all the scars, all the tattoos, all the deformationations, etc. So when I arrive in the autopsy room, I don't begin immediately the autopsy. I take some time, you see, just to make a turn all all around. But uh it's it's an observation. It's also a kind of philosophical meditation. But it's not religious. Not at all. It's just taking into account the fact that me, the living one, I will be studying a patient which is different. It's still a patient like you, like me. For me, it's still a patient. It's not a calver, fresh calver or not fresh calver. It's a patient. meaning that I have full respect to him. Okay. So I make a turn, I look at it uh her or him and then the autopsy can begin. How many autopsies are you still doing nowadays? And how do you determine like like how do you pick who who to who you want to study or or who you can collaborate with and how does that whole process work and who are you what are you most interested in studying? I I'm making autopsies for justice. Okay. So, for the for the Ministry of Justice in France. Yes. Uh and I maybe did 2,500 autopsies already. Um the most important one for me, the most interesting one are exumations. Exumations meaning that um the body was put in a coffin for one, two or three years. Then there is a justice action and people want to know finally if the the death is natural or not. So we make an exumation of the coffin and the coffin arrives in the laboratory. Then we open the coffin and we make the autopsy. I tell you why this is really interesting for us because it's um it's during the process between a fresh body, a fresh calor and archaeology. Yeah. We can see the transformation process of the calver inside the coffin. The moving of some parts. Uh the deterioration of some the conservation of other parts etc. Uh how do the clothes move or conserve the the body. It's really interesting. So you see it's a kind of it's a it's analys an analysis of the the degradation process of the corpse between forensic finishing in archaeology. This is for me the most interesting part of the of the study. One week ago, I worked on the body of a woman that probably died seven years ago, but she was only found some days ago because she did not had any more relationship with her son. So, she was discovered on only because of bad smell from all the neighbors. Okay. Even seven years later, it still smells. Yes. Yes. And what did you Because there was um electric um stop um and there was no more ventilation. So the body electricity went out. Exactly. Oh wow. Have you ever gotten anybody like say somebody was accused of murdering somebody, right? And they like went to prison. Maybe they were on death row and then you you had to go do more forensics to confirm or deny this. No. This No. or maybe I but I don't know the the issue but what I did is I did autopsies and then uh I was um medical practitioner in jail and I cured I was the healer of uh patients that were prisoners but they were the killers of the bodies that I autoide and this was really interesting because during the examination of these living individuals they told me oh I I already saw you. When was it? At the at my trial at the Justice Department. And they said, "Okay, now I will tell you exactly what really happened. I will tell you exactly how I already killed this individual." And sometimes they told me, "You already did it well, sir." Speaking about me, uh, you saw exactly what I did, etc. And sometimes they some of them told me, "I did this also before killing her. This is exactly how I killed her or him, etc." But sometimes it's really impossible to find it on the in the autopsy. So they it's really interesting for me and from a pure humanistic point of view, it was really interesting also to to manage this. Yeah, that must have been terrifying to be in the same room with these people. There are people like you and me. I did not kill anyone. You can you can trust and I hope you didn't either. But these are people really like you and me. Really? Murder. Oh yes. Jail. 99% of people in jail are people that for one reason one day uh do something. Of course. Extremely bad. Of course. Of course. Right. But uh but there's got to be a certain percentage of them that are just completely nobody's home. Just psychopaths. This is maybe 1%. No more. No more in French jail. I don't know in America. In Yes. That's wild. So, so um why were you so what kind of things were you doing to help these people? I was just their doctor because in jail in France you you have when you enter into jail you have to see the doctor and for three years I stopped doing autopsies and I was a doctor for living people. That's when you are a doctor in France you are a doctor for all kind of of of patients. Okay. the living one but also the the dead one when you are frick practitioner. So I for three years I I was uh dealing with living individuals and this was my uh my specialty. And Wow. And what what kind of like ailments and things were you treating? What kind of diseases were you treating? Infection, trauma, cancer, hemorrho hemorrhage, how do you say hemorrhage? All kind of disease. In fact, in in jail, you've got all kind of disease. But it's a place which is very uh um it's dangerous not for the doctor in itself but you've got a lot of violence. A lot of violence. Okay. What um do you think there's like going to the looking at the evolution of medicine and and modern medicine versus ancient medicine? What do you think the biggest differences are? And do you think um there's there can be anything that could be gleaned from ancient medical practices that would improve medicine today? I think the the most accurate medicine is the one that has been described by Hypocrates in a treatise which is very ancient one probably 4th BC which is um I say it in French leeru meaning um wind water places okay wind water and places in this very short treaties no more than 12 pages. Hypocritus says that you do not treat the same person living for example in Tampa, Florida and uh Cleveland and you don't treat the same person coming from originating from uh South America and Northern America because we are not made physically and physiologically the same. Okay. He does not takes these kind of of examples. He speaks about the slaves and the masters. He speaks about the island on the continent. He speaks about northern Greece and southern Greece. Okay? You can't you can't broad brush medicine. And this is it looks like personal medicine. And this is really accurate. This is what we we only now rediscover. uh we don't we will not treat the same disease between you Danny and me Philillip because we are not born in the same country we don't have the same physiology uh we don't have the same elementation we don't have we don't eat the same things exactly our microbium is absolutely different so this is really important and this is for me a rediscovery already knew it and we are now rediscovering what Hypocrates said to us. Wow. Yeah. I think about that all the time. You know what? One of the things I think about often is the ancient world and the the foods they were eating and the the animals and the plants. Like I I imagine, and correct me if I'm wrong, but I imagine there wasn't foods that were exported from the opposite side of the world and shuttled into one part where they're eating things or had diets that were based on things that were not from their native environment. On on top of that, they probably weren't eating ultrarocessed stuff like that we're eating now. So it makes me wonder that you know what the future mortality rate or what the future of diseases look like and how that's going to how that kind of stuff is going to evolve into the future as we develop more technology and more convenient ways of consuming foods and you know being exposed to the natural elements of the world far less. You know now we're inside more often. We're sitting in front of screens all the time. And we don't we're not getting sunlight. We're not eating foods from our native environments. We're not catching the fish that are right, you know, coming out of the ocean that are right right next to us. We're eating fish that are grown on farms in the middle of the continent. Um the problem is that we are getting sick of what we are eating. We are getting sick of conservative. We are getting sick of antibiotics and of all the exposure also to lead to mercury to antimony and arenium etc. Everything is already present in our elementation and we are really getting sick of all of this but you have to imagine that during the ancient period everything everyone was uh involved by parasites. Parasites. Parasites. Yeah. Exactly. So health status was absolutely different from now. Now you and me we don't have any parasites because of antibiotics, because of anti- uh conservative etc. But in ancient periods you were so much fulfilled with parasites that when you had a small fever when you had a small dera your health was so um fragile fragile that you died very frequently and very easily. Okay. Now it's different now and we can see it with the forensic process. You don't you do not die of just one cause of death. you die of maybe two sometimes three cause of death. Yes. I don't speak about decapitation, bullet. I speak about natural process of death. For example, uh when you've got a cancer, you don't die of your cancer. You die of cancer plus dehydration plus dehydration plus infection. It's an accumulation of things. It's the accumulation. And usually there's one thing that will be the straw that'll break the camel's back. Like I think during the p the recent pandemic a lot of the people that died were people that caught this uh this covid and they had already like a a lot of things wrong with them a lot of hypertension coorbidities hypertension yeah all these things combined which you know which explains it's like a plane crash you know we we say in France that uh when a plane crash arrives you don't have one cause of plane crash you've got two or three causes for which the plane crash, right? Okay. Is the same your health, human death and plane crash is the same. Yeah. And the and you know going like to the technology the te technological advancement of humans and you know coming to the point where now we are we are using these parasites and and viruses as weapons for and and tools of war that could if they got out they could wipe out vast amounts of the population like but you know we have examples of this during antiquity right I've learned about that recently. Yes. With projection of calor died of an infection and these calivers were projected on the opposite army just to provoke an epidemics on the opposite army. So this existed in ancient period and also during the opposition between Americans and Indians like they they were launching infected infected corpse corpses. Yes. human one, sometimes animal ones, but really human ones too. This is biological war, biological war, ancient biological warfare. Yeah. Yeah. There were so and there were so many examples of of the things that they were doing back then and chemical warfare as well. I was I just started reading the book by um this woman called it was called uh I forget her name but the book was called like Greek fire scorpions. Mhm. Um, it talks about all the different ways how they would fill bags with scorpions and throw them on people. They would light pigs on fire and try to get the pigs to run towards the elephants and uh just all kinds of just bizarre wacky things that you would never like just, you know, I it's it's amazing how they came up with some of these fantastical ideas. Reality is much more fantastic than imagination. It really is. And it a lot of it doesn't make any sense. That's it. Greek fire, poison arrows, and scorpion bombs. Oh, she's she's one of the best. Yes. She wrote an amazing book about fossils. Fossils. Fossils. Yes. Yes. Yes. Interesting. Yes. Which were considered by the ancient Greeks as skeletons from mythological animals. Really? Yes. Yes. Yes. If you the first fossil hunters. So, this is about fossils of mythological animals. This is an amazing book. I loved it and I love Adrian Mayor. She describes the fossil hunters in Greek antiquity. People were considering such paleontological bones as bones from all the mythological animals. Yes. Not dragons but something like it like cyclrops for example or sirens etc. It's really an amazing book. Wow. And Adrian Mayor is really a good one. Didn't you do didn't you do some work on like some mythological theories like I did you can type if you want with my name and I Good luck Steve I can do it if you want lemon [Music] in French. Yeah there was a I remember one specifically that I read there was a myth about a woman who was pregnant for five years. Yes. And this is possible. You may be you may be pregnant for more than this. It's called letopedion. Leopedion is when you are pregnant then the baby dies inside the wound and stays it but petrified. Then you can find it maybe 20 30 40 years later. Whoa. Yes. It's but it's really petrified. It's a little pedion. I have failed. Okay. I'm back. I'm back. Okay. Okay. Okay. It's all in French. Yes. Is that like monstrous humane? Yes, exactly. This is this was my um medicine PhD. It was my medical PhD and I was studying I I took one year making a kind of tour of the Mediterranean Sea, Italy, Greece, Turkey, etc. And I visited many archaeological excavations and I did a lot of bone analysis and I saw that all the creatures from the Greek and Roman mythology did exist in um terological cases meaning that in what what was that word? Mal forations, human mal formations, terattology, terattology. Okay, got it. Uh so for example, sir, uh cyclops also ctors, all the kind of animals that you or monsters that you can see in the Greek and Roman mythology, you can find them in skeletons. I saw some of these skeletons and some of them were also described by scholars by doctors by philosophers in classical antiquity. For example, here on the cover you've got an exoto. It's a it's a piece of of stone where one asked to be healed to be cured for a disease. M. So you've got the face of a young man. You've got two eyes. And you've got a foot which is not wellformed because you just have three to three three toes. Toes. Toes. Yes. T is here. Toes because you just have three toes. Okay. So this corresponds to a malfformation process. Okay. And to um the best this corresponds to a medical syndrome. Okay. Okay. Where you've got disease at the level of the face because the eyes are absolutely the individual is blind is a young man but the hairs are absolutely white and you've got a malf for the level of the the foot. All of these corresponds to one syndrome which is the syndrome of shidiacashi don't not eat but it's almost rare but it exists. So you this is a kind of rebus. Okay. And you have to read it like a patient presentation. So we can work on this is icon of diagnosis again like the phone arena of Rafelo in the same way. It's the same way. Soaki. Great. You you type it right. Oh look at that Steve. Yes. Great job. Correct. So it's a uh a rare inherited immune disorder characterized by uh oculoccutaneous albinism, im immuno deficiency and a tendency to bruise and bleed easily. Uh autosomal recessive condition meaning both parents must carry the gene for the child to be affected. Often diagnosed in childhood there's no cure. treatments came. So, so children that were born with these physical abnormalities, people just thought they were like mythical monsters. Yes, exactly. And they ased the gods for a special healing of them because medical doctors were not able at this period to do it. And still now it's absolutely impossible to to cure such a disease. So they were they were asking the gods to to heal them. This is the kind of mal for that we can find either on plastic figurations of human beings or in skeletons and sometimes mummies too. What about like descriptions of uh of like giants or things like these? This is much more the case of the animals described by Arrian Mayor in her book giants. Giants are much more um paleontological case. But if you can type maybe you can type um elephant skull. I will show you something on elephant skull. Okay, Steve, you can figure that one out, right? Yes. Great. The there the fifth on the this one. Perfect. Okay. When you look at this, this is an elephant skull. Okay. When people from antiquity found something like this, what did they think? They think that this was a skull of cyclop. Cyclop. Because they thought, you're right. Because the the hole in the center, which is normally for the trunk. Is it Is it the trunk? Trunk. Yes. Sorry, I made a mistake with you know what? That's fair. Sorry. The trunk. Yes. They thought it was the the eye the globe the central eye of the cycl. So this is really a mis misunderstanding between anatomy animal anatomy and something like a fontas fonty of of mythological individual. Oh that's fascinating. But no evidence of like giant human skeletons. No this. No this. No. This is much more paleontological cases described by the excellent Adrian Mayor. Right. Right. Right. Wow, man. That's fascinating work. Um, what else do you have? What what else do you plan on doing in the near future? Anything anything exciting? Any any any fascinating uh historical individuals that you hope to excavate and examine? What we would like to study within the next few years are the mass graves of French kings. uh during the French Revolution uh all the graves of the French kings from the medieval ages to the end of the 18th century have been opened uh desecrated by the re revolutionist and put into mass graves outside of the basilic of Sandonis which is the royal basilic and 20 years later almost all these skeletons were taken out of the mass grave and put into two crypts crypts y inside the the basilic. We really would like to study all of these bones which are mixed one with the other and give them back to their grave. These are the bones of Louis the 14. These are the bones of IV. These are the bones of Louis I don't know which number. And this will really be very interesting. We are also studying on another thing which are the clothes of Marian Twinet. You know Marian Twanet? Oh. Yeah. And we are studying now on the corset of Marian Twanet on the shoes also of Marian Twinet. And we are able and we are trying to be the most accurate as possible. We are trying to recreate a double of the body of Maruanet. Um that's fine. That's fine. Because we are the corset is really next to the body and we can see how thin she was. But so we already have a three-dimensional reconstruction of her trunk, a threedimensional reconstruction of her feet because of the shoes that are conserved of Marian Twinet. So part of the body after part of the body, we are reconstructing the wall body of Marian Twinet. Oh, that's f. And the last thing that we are doing, maybe Steve you can find it. If you type Henry IVth or Henry for uh larynx larynx uh or mummified head maybe it's better mummified head. Henry IVth mummified head. Exactly. Please. This is the great father of Louis the 14. Oh my god. This is one of my best preserved patient. Wow. This is the head the head the mummified head of this king the French king. He died assassinated by a man Ravayak in 1610. He was he was decapitated. He he was decapitated during the French Revolution. The mummy of the king was decapitated during the revolution. Okay. So later later after his death during the desecration of all the bodies and all the coffins during the French Revolution the head is so well preserved that it's not just the head. You still have the vocal cords. You still have the track, the tracker, the tongue, everything inside. So now we are recreating the voice of this king. And we can and we can already we are able to say a u e o because at that period we did not say you, you say. Uh and next step is making his speaking. Absolutely. So speaking as you as me and this is what we are working on normally in September to do this. Yes we do. Yes we do. But we do we we have recreated the wall larynx on the wall vocal tract of Henry IV and we are using IIA uh for putting some air inside of it artificially and making noise. This is what we are doing now. That's bizarre. So give me six more months and you will be hearing the king speaking. So you see remember our first sentence when we when we met. Uh I told you that my work is uh to make the dead speaking but very scientifically. This is exactly what we are doing to bring them back. Bring them back. But also they have so many things to tell us. They tell us many things using skeletons. Mhm. hairs, nails, etc. Uh, but also they can speak to us directly. Imagine if they could speak their thoughts. This is dream. This is a dream. Unfortunately, this is a dream. Yes. No. No. Well, Phipe, thank you so much for coming here and talking to me, man. This is this has been totally absolutely mind-blowing some of the stuff that you're doing. Um, where can people do find out more of what you're working on or get in touch with you or find any of your work? Uh, you can type you can follow me on Twitter if you want X uh on Instagram also. I will give you uh everything. I'll link I'll link everything below as well. And we are creating a museum about all of this that will open normally in 2028 in an ancient castle next to Paris just over Paris in Slu Royale Castle in 10,000 square meter. We will be presenting all the cases we are we spoke together and many others too. So you will be able to to go there to see all these artifacts, the original one of course and uh there you will be able to hear the voice of the fourth and um we will recreate also anatomical on theater. You will have a restaurant one star at the Mishla. It's important it's important and um no it's it will be a new museum and uh if you are interested in joining us for for this contact us I would love to. Pleasure. Well, thank you again for making the trip down here. This has been this has been totally mind-blowing. I'm going have to watch this podcast back like three times. And uh I'll link all your stuff below. And uh that's all. I appreciate your time. Thanks so much.