Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan. Experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan podcast, my night. All day. Oh, yeah? It's a real. Dude, you've only been here for 20 minutes. You already freaked me out. Joe's freaked out. And I'm freaked out of the fact that you're the first guy that's ever come here that ran a marathon before you got here. You know, wanted to clear my mind. It's a big day. How long did it take you to run it? You got to check online. I don't know. I think it was like three hours, 25 minutes, 330, something like that. That's a good time for a kind of Southeast thunderstorming in Austin, Texas. And then looped around, went back, got some work done. I always do phone calls while I'm running. How often do you run? You said you ran 27 miles this morning? I think I don't know. I just, I turned around. I got it done. I need to get ready for this shower. But yeah, is that a normal thing for you to do? Very normal. Wow. That's crazy. That's a lot of distance, man. There was like a sweet spot pre-having as many kids and more family constraints and work and life is busy. But where I do 20 miles every day. That's crazy. What's the longest you've run? You do 153 miles. Wow. How long did it take you to do that? 33 hours. Spartathlon in Greece. Epic. That's in Greece. Oh, it's crazy, man. You run from Athens to Sparta. This race is amazing. You ever seen only 300 with drug Butler? Sure. So that's the story. A couple of crazy dudes in the 80s decided that they're going to recreate where he ran, fiddipities, to deliver the message. Because in that movie, you remember 300 Spartans defended against the Persian masses. And they frame it as the difference between us having civilization and not. Had they those 300 guys not died while they assembled an army and he delivered that message to King Leonidas? So when you finish this race, if you finish, it's one of the hardest races in the world. Like there's bad water. You know, Goggins, mutual body of ours. But leaders' races, they say, are the hardest? This one kicked my butt. First year, because of the elevation. What is it? Because Europe does not believe in ice. So there's nothing cold for the first 50 miles. You're hot. And then the cut-offs are much stricter. So at 50 miles, you have to be done. You've got a fact check this, but nine or 10 hours. So you have to finish 153 miles in under 36 hours. You need to be running at all times. You can't walk for two hours and start throwing up, which I was puking for eight hours straight the first time I did it. Still excuses. This isn't me just bitching. I should have finished that year. I wasn't mentally tough. But 100% that year, I just didn't have it mentally. And the next year I came back ready to die. I was like, I'm going to finish this race. Yeah, there was a guy in the middle of the night. I won't kid you who looked at me and he says to me, there it is. He goes to me with like crazy eyes. And I've already given up in my mind. You know, like they caught DNFing, did not finish. In altruists, I already wrote the speech of like, I'm going to tell my friends, I learned from that, you know, all that, all that stuff of like, I already gave up in my mind. And I saw this guy at my, I don't know, like 72 middle of the night who looks at me with these crazy eyes. I'll never forget his looks crazy eyes like that, but a hundred times more. And goes, you're going to give up. He goes, if you can't run, you walk. You can't walk, you crawl. You never ever. And I was like, yo man, this guy needs to chill out right now because I've already quit in my mind. But I channeled that guy when I came back the next year. And it was that it was, I'm going to the hospital and you're not putting IV, I'm going to finish this race. And I came back the next year mentally, like there's no way I'm not finishing. Did you do anything different in preparation? Listen, it's all mental. It's all mental. And even who tells you otherwise, physical is meaningless at that point. Physical is meaningless in most points, to be honest. There were guys who I saw when I quit. It was, you know, 2 a.m. who were slower than me. They were older than me. Every objective measure, I should have beat them, but they mentally finished. The next morning, I got a night's sleep, woke up, watch them eight lunge and saw them finish. I was like, I was crying. I couldn't believe the emotions of this guy finished who was two hours behind me when I quit. And I learned that day, it's mental, 100%. The mindset is when you get there, you know if you're finishing at the start. So did it haunt you that you didn't finish? Oh, haunted me every day. That crazy haunted. Like what you did was really hard, but you didn't pull shit hard. It was, I should have finished. How far did you get? I got halfway. So that's pretty hard. No, I got 75 miles. This I quit when it was convenient, because I got to an aid station and I'm like, oh, you know, I got 30 minutes on that. I already decided in my mind I was quitting. Oh, hold on. I got a pause because I walked in here and I told you, before we start, I have something for you. Right. People say, can I read minds? Can't read minds. I read people. Okay. This envelope, if they can't see it in their listening, your logo sealed. Right. This is your future. My future? This is your future. I'm not psychic. I'm not supernatural, but I assure you, I want you to hold this from now until the end of the episode. Okay. That's when we open it. I don't even know if I wanted them with future. No, no, this is all good stuff. Live to 120. Joe's gonna be a two term president. You know, you know, it's not, fuck up. That's not good. I don't want that job. You take it before we even start. Okay. And at the end, we open it. So nobody skips this episode. You buckle up for the ending. I'm here. People will just fast forward. No, fast forward. They'll miss all the good stuff winners. The quitters. The quitters. The people who did not finish Spark Tathlon. That's, so that's insanely impressive, though, that you run that much. When did you start doing this? My sister ran a marathon, shout out to my older sister, and there's a little bit of sibling rivalry. She's eight years old. I have twin sisters. And do you remember when marathon became like commonplace? Before you say anything, I have to shout out to my sister. Cause she got upset that I didn't shout her out before. Cause she ran Burke Crushers 5K. She was like, I can't believe you didn't shout me out. Sorry, sweetie. Love you. Love you. Yeah, she's the best. They all are, right? So it's on my sister's granite. And everyone at a certain point, marathon became like a thing. You remember when Oprah ran one and then everyone's like, I'm running a marathon. I didn't pay attention. Yeah, but there was like a moment where the zeitgeist, everyone started running marathons. This was before the. I believe you. But it wasn't tuned into that frequency. I was, when my sister said she's running 26.2 miles, if she had told me, this is not that she's not fit. She was like a collegiate D1 athlete swimmer. I'm like, what if she had said I'm going to the moon? It would have been equal of like, what do you mean you're running a marathon? And so when she did it, I immediately that day signed up for a marathon just to be like, no, screw that. I'm not, I'm not not doing this. Right. And I was working on Wall Street. I was kind of getting fat and lazy, happy hours. And I go, this is all there is. Like I'm just going to keep, I'm making money. Don't get me wrong. I'm blessed. But I got to have something that fires me up. That's my instinct. And so I signed up for a marathon. What year was this? 2004. Okay. And then I did one Philly marathon, you know, the rocky, the whole thing. And at mile 23, I start, I stop and I'm like crying. Again, this is a common theme. I've cried like twice in my life. My wife will ask to say, but I was wrecked. I was going to quit. I see two dudes walking because I'm going decently fast at this point. I've trained terribly. I see two dudes walking about 100 yards ahead of me. And I go, misery loves company. I'm going to walk up and I'm going to catch them. But they're walking the same speed as me. So I decided to screw it. I'm going to run to them. I run. I get about halfway there. Do you know what they do? They looked at each other and they started running. And I literally screamed at them. I go, fuck you. And I got fired up. And I learned that day anger is a great incentive. It's like something to fire up. And I got so pissed off that my blood pressure, I ran the rest of the race. You know, Goggins takes all of his haters comments. Oh, yeah. And he records them and then plays it back to him while he runs. Oh, I know, David. Well, I've known David going on like 15 years, man, before Goggins became Goggins. I've seen the whole come up. That's your medium. So we trained for ultra marathons together. He was living New York City. Oh, wow. And we go out there and he's shirtless. And this is before now, man, he can't go anywhere. He's just, it's like next level. He still runs on the street. He runs, but man, he's like, that's such a fame that's, you know, we've talked about, but it's, he's, I mean, he's inspired countless millions. Oh, for sure. But you see, I don't know what your version is. But like somebody sees me, I just get like, oh, hey, love what you do. That's it. You know, maybe a selfie. That's it. Occasionally some drunk ass will just like, read my mind right now. Oh, my God. All right, buddy, I'll do it. I'll do it. You know, I don't want to leave somebody behind, but he is is someone comes up and you have to, you change my life. Like I didn't kill myself or rather. Like that's, that's a religious level, fervor. Yeah, no, I've been around him. What I've seen you happen. Yeah. Yeah, he runs on the street. He was running on the street in Vegas. My wife, it was in the car, it's rolled on the window, yelled out, stay hard. Second time he's ever heard that, right? Who's going to carry the boats? He hears all the lungs from the yelled stay hard. The memes that people have put together are just those videos. And he's got a great sense of humor with people. Don't realize he's got a great sense of humor. He's a fun dude. He's a really fun guy. Man, I love that guy. Yeah, he's a fun dude. He's just very fucking serious about, about pushing himself. Did you see the video of him in Israel, Adesanya? Yeah. Yeah, it's crazy. Israel and the sons of world class athlete, world championship fighter. Yeah, cannot compete. Can't keep up with this 50 year old man. Who was the other? Was it was it John Jones? Who was the other one he trained? Tony Ferguson. Tony, Tony, who's like cardio is through the roof. I mean, Tony, that guy five rounds. It's just insane. Never, never gasses out. Yeah, he might over train. Yeah, in my organs. Goggins run him through the washer. Well, it'd have been interesting if he got a hold of Tony when Tony was in his prime. You know, he got a hold of Tony when Tony was at the end of his career essentially. Yeah. You know, well, I mean, that's always it, right? Judge fighter at the prime. Well, yeah, and absolutely. And with fighters, you know, there's just especially natural fighters that aren't taking any steroids or anything. When it gets to a certain point time, the game is over. Just this is how it is. Right. Time is undefeated. Time is undefeated. But fucking Goggins, almost 50 still out there doing it. It's an injured so many times. Not just injured. People need to understand the mental strength. And we've talked about in the podcast where we showed his X-rays. Yep. The work that he's had done as knees. I mean, it's all insane. They do experimental stuff on his knees. Right. His knees are destroyed. I mean, they must be. Yeah, they're destroyed. They're a complete bone on bone. And he just keeps running on them. Like, OK. He crossed trains though. I mean, the dude pull up record his hands, Cam Hainson, right? True. I just want to, man, what a stud that kid is. I've been watching. I should off the oblause. He is, I never met him, but man, he's great. That consistency and that putting that together. And yeah, very impressive. I don't know. Like, I've known him since he was a kid. So to me, it's fun. You watch him become a man and then become this beast. Beast. Yeah, it's amazing. I mean, he did. I think it was, was it 9,000 chin ups and 24 hours or 10 more? I think 9,000 was the record. 10,001. Right. I'm good. 9,000 was the record and he got to 10,000. So he broke the record first and some cat in Australia broke the record, beat his record, and then he just demolished that guy's record. And then I saw his thing, which was a flex, which reminded me of something I did, which was like one of the highlight moments in my running career, which is he goes, I got another personal best in the same week at a marathon. So he ran. So I one time did two marathons a week apart, like six days apart, a New Jersey marathon. I won it. And then the next week I did Long Island Marathon. And I got clipped by some college runner who beat me in the last quarter of a mile. Tim, you won a marathon? I won that one four times in a row. Yeah. That's insane. What's the time? My fast times are 223. Two hours and 23 minutes for a fucking marathon? Yeah, I love Goggins, but every race we've run against each other, I beat them. Well, you have two knees. But yeah, it's insane. That's that's world class. I mean, it's like a fast for a weekend warrior. My claim of failure in 23 minutes. One year at the New York City Marathon. I want to I want to remember it's I got 30th place. But at my shows, I tell you I was the fastest Jew. That's all that matters. That's all that fastest Jew all that mattered. That's super impressive that you win marathons. Well, I won that one. And then six days later, six or seven, I did this other one. And I got beat by this kid who was like 22. Yeah, I don't care how old I was 30s. And he beat me and he fell and collapsed at the finish. And I'm like, again, I'm pretty fresh. And he goes, oh my God, man, he goes, he goes, is that your personal best? And I'll never forget looking in his eyes. And this guy's wrecked. And I go, bro, that's not my personal best this week. And it was just, it was just the most fulfilling thing to say for not having one. But I'd run literally a week earlier faster. So I, that was a great moment. Yeah, but he beat you. He did beat me. True. First loser. It's a weird flux. Yeah. The weird flux. So you were a stock broker. I wasn't technically a stock broker. I worked on Wall Street. But I did do on Wall Street. So I went to school for electric engineering. And then worked like, I don't know, the tech guys who supported the eye bankers. OK. And then how did you get involved in this mentalist thing? It's mentalist thing, right? What a weird thing. So when I was a teenager, I started doing magic tricks. So I saw a guy on a cruise ship. And I, I'd never seen really a magician. I never, I wasn't into it. Didn't know about it. Didn't have a kid's party magician when I was a kid. And I was obsessed. Literally, I was on a cruise. I followed this guy around. The cruise ship. It was a little bit stalker-esque. And there's not that many places to hide if you're a grown man. So I was fine in this guy everywhere to just see more tricks. And I got back home and I bought every book I could at borders. I went to the library. I was obsessive. I'm kind of those types of people who I don't do anything 80% 90% given the running today. It's like 120%. Wow. And that was the thing for about, I don't know, 20 years is more I do in magic. I was always doing magic on the side. I paid for college, doing magic. I really run a couple of businesses, yeah. What did you do? Like, do shows? So I graduated high school in 2016. I like skipped a grade, all this. And then my folks got divorced, long story. And they moved back to Israel. I was born in Israel. So he separately moved back to Israel. So I was a bit of, I guess, I don't know. An adult, like I had nobody supporting me. So when I went to college, I turned 17. I had to pay all the bills. Whoa. So I had, I was doing magic at restaurants. I've been doing magic at restaurants for like 30 years. And that's where I learned how to read people. Just how to go up to a table of people who are like, who's this twerp? Like who's this nerdy kid with braces? Like what are you doing here? Get out here. And how do you win them over quickly? And that's honestly the biggest skill is how do you in sales, read people effectively. That's what I'm selling. I'm selling the thought of reading your mind. Now, did you learn the techniques from books? Did you take classes? No classes. Books and videos did magic. And so mentalism is kind of a field. Like you had David Blaine in here, right? Legend. And growing up like icon. So magic tricks are different because magic is there's a slight of hand, right? So you're deceiving your eye by making you look at the wrong place at the right time when I do a move. And I can practice that move over and over and over until I get it perfect so that when I perform for you, it works, right? OK. Stand up comedy. The most pure art form, right? You and a mic, that's it. Mine is the closest. Magic you have props. Men's lives and there's no props. Like I don't need you to pick a card anymore. I don't need it. I can just tell you, think of a card. And that's where I go with it. So now you start knowing how people think and you in essence reverse engineer the human mind. It's kind of a magic of the mind. And so that's where it kind of went from magic. And I kept doing more of the mentalism, more of it. But mentalism has a very steep learning curve. If you go to an open mic and you suck, how many people get to the level of getting better, getting better, putting in the work, takes 10 years to be funny for most people, right? There's a couple of phenoms, but that's a different story. So most mentalists, they drop off because I'm just going to go back to magic tricks. This works every time. So it's more difficult to learn. Way more difficult. Is it sheltered? Like is the material on it difficult to find? It's like, I think it's more that people don't have the thick skin. Like the same way you said the quitting mentality where I came back to your later, most people won't improve because you can't practice mentalism in front of a mirror. You can practice magic. So when I do the trick on you and it's a card trick, no offense to magic, it's great. But what we're talking about is a much higher level. I can't get it right. And the first few times you do it, the first hundred times you eat, you eat shit, like you're going to get it wrong. And most people don't want to do that. Watch, watch, let's try something fun. Okay. Okay. How about this? If I were to ask you, how long you been married? 16 years? Okay, nailed that question. Well, well played. Thank you. Your sister's happy, your wife's happy. If I asked you, would your wife know your social security number? No. She doesn't know it. No. Is there any way in the world, I can know your social security number. I don't think so. I'm a stalker who knows. Yeah, you can get the information. Maybe online. Agreed. Agreed. I'm skeptical. You're skeptical. Well, especially someone famous. Yeah. Fully. Plus you can't change that. So I'm not going to do that to you. Data dumps. Yeah. If I told you right now to make up a random number, I'd say, get out your calculator. I'd love that. And you've added up and you do a random number. You know, I'm screw-calculate. I want it to be spontaneous. Would your wife know your ATM pin code? No. No. Lie to me. Do not tell me your real ATM pin code. Okay. Unless you want to. Make up a fake four-digit number off the top of your head. What feels to you utterly spontaneous? Or when I say go, one, two, three, four-digit code, random go. Okay. Say it. 2020. 2020. Okay. So you ask me, how do I do what I do? I'm going to write down 2020. Okay. It's weird, but statistically, men will lie bigger, women smaller. Men like fly by saying things are bigger, right? No shocker. Okay. I would tell you right off the jump for me that that means that your first number, you don't have to say anything yet. I would 2020 is smaller. That's what most people do when they're rushed. If I had given you five minutes, you would have done this different than it would know you would have tried. Why would have? Because you would have thought about it and then people go down different path. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Nope. Why would I tell you that on the air? Should I only show this to you? Sure. Only show it to you. Yeah. Can we ask that the first number I got was correct? Yes. Okay. Now, you did repetition. So yeah, I like the fact when people always say to me, it's fake when they watch the videos. They're like, you must have set up. Joe doesn't want this to happen right now. He had no idea since it happened. You used two numbers in repeats. What that means is you probably did the same thing. You also didn't use any of the same numbers. I know there's not a two, a zero, a two in it. I don't think so either. I'm watching you while I say it. You put the hand up. You might as well said yes to me out loud. So now I know. Think of the second number. Okay. Third number, fourth number. Every time you did it, it's a data point. Okay. I'm only going to ask you one more question. I'm not looking for answers. The last number is the biggest, isn't it? Yeah. Yeah. I'm showing this to you. Is there a camera behind me? I don't want to make sure I'm going to show it to you. It's not 2020. How did I do, Joe? Is that your AT&P code? Yeah. That's weird. I'm skeptical because I've got that pin code in the mail. You know, he's calling his bank right now and be like, dude, do you know this? Is this guy been playing the long game? Yeah. I don't like that. It's not 1950 anymore. People, we know our food is different. Highly processed and less nutritious. Industrial farming practices often strip nutrients from the soil and can deplete the nutrients available for us from food. Even the healthiest diets can have nutrient gaps, but AG1 next gen helps fill those gaps. It's a more in one daily health drink to give your body the nutrients that you can't get from food alone, especially in today's day and age. AG1 next gen is clinically back, rigorously tested and trusted by athletes and experts. I've been partnering with AG1 for so long because they really do the work to help you feel a difference in your health. If you want to feel the difference and fill your nutrient gaps, subscribe today to try their newest clinically back formula, AG1 next gen. You'll also get a bunch of other free stuff like a bottle of D3 plus K2 and five of the upgraded travel packs with your first subscription. Just go to drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. One scoop a day your body will thank you. Again, that's drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. Have you ever done that to people with draw money? No comment. Interesting. I'm trying to avoid criminal yet. So I want everyone to know that was correct. That is 2020. Yeah, that was correct. Your wife of 16 years doesn't know what to do. It's 2020 not. It's just because that's the year moved here. It wasn't like I think I know you think that's the case. No, that's 100% the case. That's exactly what it is. What do you mean? You know, I think that's the case. You said a 4 digit number and I was like, oh, the data moved here. Right. 2020. Perfect. I hear you. I don't believe you. It's that we got layers. So like we're peeling through and I know why you think you picked it and I know that you think you gave me no information. But I'm telling you that good luck finding out how in the world could I have found out your BTM pin code. You said nobody knows this. That informed what I did. So had you thought of a different number of your Social Security? You wouldn't have said 2020. But that ATM pin code is one that was assigned to me by the bank. I never changed it. Right. It's not. I didn't pick it. That's even better, isn't it? You picked it. I could have looked this up. That's actually to me more. No, because you could get it from the bank because the bank is the one that fucking sent it to me. I guess man, if I have broken into your bank account, there are bigger things that play than this podcast I feel. I don't keep a lot of money. Watch this. Watch as how many UFC fights do you think you've seen in person or commentated? Boy, I don't even know. I really don't know. What you've seen on the road. UFC 2, what is it? 234 or something? What is it at now? 235 is the next one. But each fight has an undercar. You got the title fight. Sometimes as many as 15 fights. Or as few. What is it? You have C-360 in this now? Coming up on June 7th. What did I say too? Yeah, I was thinking too. It's the first thing I can do with it. Why don't they do? We have 300. I think podcast numbers were in the 2000s. Oh, yeah. That's a lot of podcasts. UFC 3, what? 316. 316. 10 fights per year. So I haven't been on all those cards. But I started commentary wise in 2021. And just as a post-flight interviewer in 97. So 97, I did it for two years. Not as many shows. And then from 2001, I used to do 20 times. I used to do a lot. I was doing most of them. I would say thousands of fights. That was right. So probably. Watch this. Because I love that. I like the way you think and I like their skeptical. Because I'm a huge skeptic. I'm always one calling BS on this. That's how I start doing it. If you think through all your fights and you go back in time, and this is spontaneous, this is impulsive. You have not thought of this before this moment. Have you? I want you to stop and start thinking of different fighters. Past or present could be somebody huge. Could be a legendary figure. Could be somebody more under the radar. Okay. Maybe you've had them on a podcast. Maybe you haven't. Watch. Make sure you think I'm not guiding you. The same way you said 2020. Well, I said that I would have said that no matter what. Let someone jump into your mind right now that you've definitely seen one of his, I guess, or her fights. Okay. Bam. I'm not guessing it. I don't care. Tell us. Was it a specific fight you saw this person in? Or are you just seeing the fighter? Just seeing the fighter. No, no. Go to a specific fight of that person. Try to like contextualize it. Or change to a different fighter right now if you feel like you need to. Maybe. Let me think. Let me think. See, Joe's not going to want to change. Right. Now that I said that, I'm trying to get it crafted. Yeah, get crafted. I've moved along here. Are you going to come up with a name of that? I'm not coming up with anything. I want to see how your mind worked. I'm only doing this because you told me I would have said 2020 no matter what. You think that you had the thought regardless of what I did. And I want you to see that there's causality. Boom. Do it now. Who just came in your head? Okay. Tell us. I'm not guessing. Anderson Silva. Anderson Silva. Legendary, right? Yes. Did he win or lose that fight? He won. He won that fight. Yes. How many people did you go to? So funny said Anderson Silva. Legendary guy. How many people did you think of before you landed on him? Oh, I don't know. I would just scroll the roll of decks. They just all went flying through my mind. If you just give me a guess, how many times does it? Yeah, they did all one flying through my head. Dozens. Yeah. If you had to put a number on it and you actually count them, how many do you think you went through? Yes. I mean, let's be conservative and say like 14. Like, not even say dozens. He was the 14th fighter that popped in your head. No. No. He was in there. He was in the mix. He was in the mix. I was just trying to figure out which one to pick. I was going to get one with a crafty Russian name. Should have. Right. Let me know. Let me know. 14 people went through your head, Anderson. So do you think that at some point in this week, you heard something that got that in the back of your head that made you say that now? Do you think there's any way that that could happen? No, I don't believe so. You don't write? No, I don't believe so. I've just been a huge fan of his forever. I don't think something popped up that made me think. All right. I'm just curious. No trick. I'm just curious why that happened. Yeah. Where do we go for you? We're going with this. Where do you know with this? I don't know where I'm going. You don't know? I do. Okay. But I'm not telling you yet. Oh, okay. No, Joe's flummox. He's like, where do we go? No, I mean, like, I don't know why you asked me the question if you don't have a resolution. Oh, I'm not guessing it. I wanted to see where you thought of why it came to your mind. There will be a reason. I don't want to explain it yet. But you'll see. Okay. Yeah. There'll be a reason why it came in my mind. I think so. I think really is. What's the reason? I'm so on. This is not the stake. So these techniques that you use are these ones that you've invented or these a lot of them. A lot of them. Yeah. And how did you invent them? How did they come to you? I think my favorite form of entertainment by far is stand up comedy. Like straight up, I'm a fanboy of comedians. The people that do what I do because that's I just love watching how you can take any premise and stuff that's not funny. Right? The people that really go, you know, you just like Andrew Schulz, you life. Did you watch his? I haven't seen it yet. You haven't seen it. No. So how do you take infertility? Right? And just it's not really a very funny subject and making it incredible. No, he's a specialist. He's so good. So good. So good. And so I like the fact that how you invent that. So I design with an end in sight. I say what do I want people to remember about what I do? Because I'm not really in the business of fooling you. Honestly. And like entertaining you, all of those are side effects. What do I think I do for a living? I create memorable moments, which is very definable because if you go see a movie, let's see a popcorn flick, you walk out of the movie theater 10 minutes like what happened in the movie? I don't know. I don't know. That to me is 100% like the death of my show. You will leave and you will remember things hopefully for years to come. And that's because I can rework your memory. That's really a lot of the techniques I do. People think that your memory is infallible. That what you see is some sort of blueprint, like a video. And it's not. It has to do with how you feel in the moment, the emotions, the things you can position, the same way hypnosis works. So I can kind of engineer memories in a certain way, the way people remember things, the way they think and create those moments that people talk about hopefully for years. And that's what's been, you know, I guess that's what's been a driver of my business and what's helped lead to my success. Engineering memories. And when you first started getting into mentalism, is that the word? Yeah, mentalism. Yeah. You're a mentalist, but do you call it mentalism? I guess so. I guess so. Did you know that or is it something that I learned it? I learned certain things and I observed them and I didn't understand why they happened. You ever have that? You ever have a moment in a set where you say it's something that you didn't think was funny, but got a huge laugh? Mm-hmm. Do you have that or do you always know? Yeah. Because it's usually not the punch. It's like I didn't know that would be funny right then. Sometimes with a new bit. Yeah. Right. You know, exactly no words funny. Where the beats are. What was the word I said in this way? What was that inflection point? So when I was doing restaurants, I had this trick where I would have somebody pick a card out of a deck of cards. Right? They would put the card back in the deck. They sign it with their name and I used to do this at a bunch of restaurants. They would shuffle up the deck, again, where are the banks? They rubber band that bad boy. And I would take the deck and I would throw it at the ceiling. It's kind of a famous trick. And then boom, the ceilings were really high at all the restaurants I worked at. So now we can peel them. Their card would be a stay stuck to the ceiling. And this was great for multiple ways. One everybody talks about it. And they were like, no, this guy stuck my card to the ceiling. How'd I do that? They would also bring. Their card would be a stay stuck to the ceiling. And this was great for multiple ways. One everybody talks about it. And they were like, no, this guy stuck my card to the ceiling. How do I do that? They would also bring people back to the restaurant. You write to Ching Ching. The manager's love me because we'd bring more people back to see it and point at where their card was, right? Business 101. And so I create a great value proposition to the manager. Why am I there? I'm getting you guys more customers. But one time I'm listening to people that came back in. And they're talking about the trick. And they go, yo man, I picked a card. I put it back in the deck and I shuffled it up. And next thing I know, I look at the ceiling and my card's on the ceiling. And I'm like, yo, that's not what happened. I threw the deck up. The deck fell down and then the card was on the ceiling. So I go, why did that guy misremember it? Maybe it's just drunk, maybe whatever. But I'm trying to understand why did he have a different memory of the same event? And what I realized is that people observe what you have them focus on. Tony Robbins has a great bit. Where he goes right now, close your eyes, tell me everything that's green in this room. You're like, green, I don't know. But then when you open your eyes, I see that the UFO lights are green instantly. But I say close your eyes again, what's purple in this room? I'm like, I don't look for purple. You find what you're looking for. So if I didn't say, it took me a while to iterate and figure it out. But if I don't look up when I throw the cards, when I would throw the cards up and let them fall back down to my head and not look up, the percentage would go 80, 90% that afterwards, people when they told the story, they edited, they clipped out the part of me throwing the deck. And now it becomes a miracle. How the hell's that card on the ceiling stuck? You mean you shuffled it with silence on the ceiling? That went from being a good trick to a miracle. And I kind of learned that about age 15, and I started to realize, how do I do that with everything I do? Because that's a life hack for everything you do. That's not magic. That's life. How do you get people to remember what you want and forget the things you don't want? Wow. That's how you achieve success. You start to highlight your strengths. You find ways and that's a learnable skill. That's not something for magic. That's something in all of life. And what is like when you're thinking this, when you're thinking I'm going to get people to remember something? How are you doing this? Like what's your intention when you're trying to devise like what to do? Well, I guess my intention, well, at the end of the end of the, a competitive SOB, I want to be the best in the world at what I do. Like I'm driven by that. It's like Olympic gold medalists. Like I want to do the best things possible. Most people don't know what a mentalist is. You go on the street, 100 people. How many people are going to say, yeah, I have a second ATM card. Leave that for the end. You want to try it again? No, yeah. I don't want to do the same thing. I got to do better stuff. I want to see it again though. I want to see if you can do it again. All right, before we go, how about that? Not right now. We're in flow. Okay, okay. But I'm trying to throw you off. You could. Listen, I don't get it right every time. That's the other part. A magic trick works every time. This doesn't. I've eaten it on live national TV. A million people watching. Yeah, man, there's no safety net. Like it's not a trick. There's not a cartridge where you put it in. I find it. There's not like that. So how are you doing it? What I mean, I'm telling you, I don't read minds. I read people. I've got a whole host of different skills, algorithms. You name it like misdirection. It's all a wheelhouse of skills that I'm using to create the impression I can read your mind. But this is kind of a weird thing to know how to do weird like in a bad way or good way. Definitely a good way. Yeah. But weird to like you have like an extra frequency. I agree. You're tuning into with humans. Like you're experiencing life in a different way. Cause you're experiencing life through this understanding of like thought patterns. It's you know what the best way. Do you remember in born identity? The first scene, like one of the scenes where he loses memory and he walks in the restaurant. Do you remember that scene? And he's sitting at a diner. Do you remember that one? I don't. He sits there and he turns and he goes, he doesn't remember who he is. And he goes, why do I know? And I'm going to massacre this quote. But why do I know that that guy's 250 can handle himself in a fight? Why do I know this? Why do I know that right now I could run for two and a half miles before my core temperature goes down to this? Like he it's like this amazing superhero spy moment of like how the hell does he know all that stuff? So he's observing life at a much more hyper focused level than most people are. Most people are dialed in an autopilot. If you could set a speaker to autopilot and here's what you're observing, I don't do it in my day to day life. It requires focus. It's not the same, it's kind of like I guess, I don't know, I don't lift weights. I just run. But how much focus is required to try to do, the large bend press you've ever done. I assume that you have to get psyched up, you have to focus, you have to do everything right for that to work. It's just analogy. But for me when I'm performing, you asked me why to run 27 miles this morning? That dials in my mind. Like I'm focused where I thought through everything I'm gonna do today, it's a laser focus. That got me kind of in tune. I could also not run, but that's, I'm also away from homes that I was like my joy. Is a sequel better than the original? We're gonna find out at UFC 316. It is a rematch nine months in the making, get in on all the action at Draft King Sportsbook, the official sports betting partner of the UFC. It's a huge night of fights headline by a rematch between Marab Dwavich-Willie and Sugashauno Mallie as O'Malley looks to avenge the unanimous decision that saw at Dwavich-Willie take the Bantamweight title back in September. First time betting on UFC at Draft Kings, it's easier than you think. Just pick something simple, like a fighter to win and make your pick. That's all there is to it. And if you're new to Draft Kings, here's your shot at cashing in right now. New customers bet $5 to get $300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins. You have C 316 and Draft Kings one night only for a shot to win some cash. Download the Draft Kings Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan. That's code Rogan for new customers to get $300 in bonus bets. If you're bet wins, when you bet just five bucks, only on Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-Gambling in New York called 877-8-Hopenwire, text Hope and Wyatt 467-369. In Connecticut, help is available for a problem gambling called 888-787-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Police play responsibly. On behalf of Boothulk, a Sinoan resort in Kansas, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void and Ontario. Bet must win to receive reward. Minimum minus 500 odds required. Bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance. For additional terms and responsible gaming resources, cdkng.co slash audio. So when you're like putting together a show, when you're gonna do a show, how do you structure it? Like how do you like day one? You're like, okay, I'm getting ready to do a show. You mean some on TV or like what I do for a living? Like like events? Well, either one. Any kind of show you're doing. So for my day to day living, which is I do a lot of like really big corporate events. And then I do, I guess a lot of private parties, things that sort of performances, like live performances. Typically I structure it the same way, I think anybody would. I wanna go out the gate very strong. I wanna very instantly establish credibility. Who am I? What do I do? Am I any good at it? And why should you be paying attention to me? Because all those questions off the jump is like, who the hell cares? I always go into it with who cares? What you can do? Your special, I don't care. I like the thought of, I'm gonna prove to you that this is something incredible and that it's something you're interested in emotionally. Right? If I told you to just make a random number up, who cares? But now it's gonna haunt you that that's your frickin' ATM pin code. So I prefer that. I do something very quick that freaks you out. And then every single thing needs to have a very clear premise. Like I call it clarity of effect. I don't like a trick where I'm like, get a book, get a Rubik's Cube, get it. Like it's too confusing. You need to be able to explain to a six year old what I did in one sentence for it to be memorable. That's the key. The best things you've ever seen are typically stuff you can describe in one max two sentences. Mm. And for TV, for TV it's the same exact thing, but I always like to do new stuff. So I've done a lot of TV appearances and I always structure it based on who's watching. So rather than it being about me and I'm me saying, oh look what I can do and look how cool this is. Right? You do a card trick. Again, I'm not saying that's not amazing but the card trick's about you typically. If I'm on ESPN and I've done hundreds of millions of views doing stuff for football players, you're watching this. You're a football fan. You're like, who cares about this guy? I'm going to do stuff about football players and about what interests you if you're a fan. I don't know if you've ever seen, I did a clip with Joe Burrow from The Bangles where I said, Joe, I ever spoken to you and you're wearing my love, you go, no. Like honestly, the funny thing about that is I wasn't even supposed to use him in the show. They told me he's shy. You don't want to like don't use him in the show. And they said, if you can't avoid him and I got in there, I tried to rile up the gang, you know, kind of peer pressure. And I'm like, should we get Joe in here? And they're like, yeah, get him up. Haven't spoken a word to this guy. I'm like, there's no access. I went in with ESPN, shout out to Adam Schaffter who I love who set all these wheels in motion. But Joe stands up, doesn't know me from anyone. And I say every wide receiver and tight end in the room stand up. And I go, what if I could tell you who you're going to throw that ball to? What's that worth? Right? That's the holy grail. If you're in football, I go catch the ball quarterback. I go, look at everyone in this room and I'll look at me. And I wrote on a huge, huge thing. Showed the camera, throw it to anybody you want. Throw's it, got the first one right. I go, let's do it again. I go, throw it to anyone you want. Anyone I go, anyone, throw's it, got the second one right. Everyone's freaking out. I go, one last play, one last, two is luck. And I write, fakes to Jamar, you can watch the clip. It's the most viral thing I've ever done. Any fakes to Jamar turns around, throws it to another guy, nailed it exactly. Just, and you just see his face. And so I was thinking about how I would do that for two years, two years of thinking of every single way that could work, not work, go wrong, everything about it was, you know, he thought I went in the room and it's so simple. That was two years of me thinking about it. During every run. So for two years, you knew you were gonna do this. Or you knew that you were, I started with the end. You asked me the same way. I don't know how you like form a set, but you asked me how do I design? I was designing with the story people would tell. And so if you don't know who I am, don't know anything. Go, yo, we saw this guy. You see this guy? He's been, he here's told Joe, bro, throw the ball, any people, throw as it gets it right. Throw as it like the story is, I told the quarterback, anybody he would throw the ball to. So it was any quarterback, it wasn't Joe Burrow in your head. Well, I didn't know who would be. But he said you could do it for two years. So for two years, you thought you were gonna be on ESPN and with a quarterback? Well, no. So he was the second season. So when I first started it, I start brainstorming. I'm like, I can't control what thoughts come in. I'm constantly thinking about what I'm gonna do. And I just do notes apps. I write stuff down in the shower. Like when I run is when I come up with stuff and in the shower. Sometimes on airplanes, but I sleep on planes. But that's when it hits me. Like where are your bursts? You must have like where are you getting material? Mostly late at night. Yeah. Right. Yeah, but sometimes driving. Driving? You don't even control everything. I mean, phone calls are usually concentrated on talking to people. Yeah. The times where ideas come to me. A lot of times it's driving with no music on. Wow. Yeah. I've never in the car by myself ever. Oh, really? Family. Five kids. Oh. Yeah. Driving to work. Yep. Usually that's when it comes to me. Yeah. And I'm in New York City. Or there's no sauna. sauna's good. Because you can't be on electronics. Right. Yeah. The phones are killer. The phones like you zap any creativity or boredom. You need boredom. You do need boredom. Yeah. You need boredom for ideas to come to you for sure. Yep. Yeah, that's the problem. But essentially with social media, it's a boredom. You are still bored. But you are occupied. Right. You don't get to sit with it. Yeah. Yeah. Which I think is key. Because that's when they kind of fire off. Yep. And I think that's not to get into it. But like so many kids now have no way to deal with boredom. Yeah. Like it's like panic. I got it in my phone. I got it in my whole feeling of I wish there was a way to do that. They're just completely on a custom to not being constantly entertained. Right. Even entertained by nonsense. It's not even really entertaining. It's just distracting. Yeah. Which is a big part of it. Yeah. So you sat out for two years prepping this thing. No, I didn't sit out. I was just always thinking. It's like a. Right. You know, you set out. I should say, set out in your mind. You had this idea in your head for two years. How do I do it? Yeah. How do you do it? How do you do it? That was the question. Because I didn't know how to do it for you. How did you do it? Million dollar question, right? I wouldn't be in business if everybody knew. Well, OK, even better. How did you learn how to do this kind of thing? So I started with books. And then there's some videos, but it's a very kind of a book. I tell you that's applicable. I think of you a series of foundational things. Like right. Almost everybody who becomes a mentalist star's a magician. It's kind of like if you're a doctor, you've got to be a doctor before you become a plastic surgeon. So there's a course set of skills that you utilize to know how to fool people, right? To know how people think. OK. Right. Think about you. If I taught you a card trick right now, there's always a level of deception. We're all that slight of hand. Well, there's tricks called self working tricks where you don't need to do any slight of hand. OK. They work by themselves as long as you follow the instructions. Like IKEA furniture, like step one, step two, step three. As long as you can work people in a certain way to do the right thing. As versus something like, I'm not doing that. You're like, oh, shoot, I do right now. Right? You have to know how to finesse people. You have to influence people effectively. And so that same stuff within magic almost always applies to props. You need a thing to do the trick. OK. Now, it could be a regular deck of cards in which case you're learning slights, but also there's gimmicks. There's tricks you can buy at stores, which when I was a kid, I'm like, ah, teenage or I'm like, get me the next gimmick. But then to get better, you start being able to do stuff in prompt to. That's when you hit another level where I don't need stuff. I can do stuff with anything. I could do stuff. It's like a good story for my book that I'm writing very now. But it's like where I just needed anything around. I was like, I ended up in jail for a weekend. This is a long story. But like in jail, one weekend, stupid weekend. But I walk in there by myself. And I should have been out that day. But anyway, I got stuck all weekend. And I watched them with cards. And it was like, I had trained my whole life for this moment where I walked up record scratch to like 40 dudes. And I go, can I see those cards? And it was like, everyone looked into me like, what's the guy about to do? And I just did car tricks for the next eight hours. When I went to take a shower, I'm like, am I taking the show aunts? I'm like, oh my god, right now. I had protection. I went to the shower, my cost to county jail in Michigan. And literally I had people being like, go take a shower. We got you, bro. What did you go to jail for? Oh, so stupid. So we had this is so dumb. This almost derailed my whole career. Drunken idiots. I go up to visit a budding college. And we steal from a Papa John's. God, don't ask me why. A broken phone and a college Papa John. Just being idiots. I paid for the pizza. But there was a broken phone on the counter. And you know, this is like me slight of hands. I'm like, I'm just stealing this thing. It's just gone. And it was in my jacket. And then I told my buddies, you guys got to get something too. So they go in the bathroom, which doubles up as the employee locker room. And they take three dirty shirts, dirty shirts from a laundry bin. And we bring them back to my buddy's house, like idiots. We wear them. And we at the party, I barely remember this. I was like, black, I drunk, are like Papa John's who wants a pizza, who wants a pizza? I ended up going to sleep on his futon, right? I had like two AM. And at four AM someone comes in and they're like, yo, the cops are here. I'm like, do it's not my house. What do you want from your guys post videos? No, this is crucial to me. It's a TV, man. No, no, somebody rad it out. Somebody's roommate. I found this out way later. Oh, it goes, yo, bro. There's a bunch of dudes here with a broken phone from Papa John. I didn't know any of this. But somebody comes in and they're like, yo, the cops are here. I'm like, they're here for you. And I'm like, here for me. What do you mean they're here for me? I don't live here. And cops come in the room. And I'm wearing like aggressively small underwear at this point. This is like tidy whiteies. This couldn't have been more of like a bad perp walk. And I, they go, yo, you're under arrest. And I'm like for what? And they're like for stealing from Papa John's. And what am I going to say? I'm wearing the shirt. Oh my God. This is on a Friday night. How old do you? I was 20 years old. And I was just about to get an internship for Merrill Lynch. And while this story is hilarious now, and it's like a funny chapter in my book, it was like God help me. Did I avoid everything? And then when I went to jail, yo, scariest one of scariest days in my life. Cause it's, it's, it's all. How did you get out of everything? So I got out of everything cause I had a clean record. I was pretty upstanding citizen. And you know, not to get in the weeds or something called Holmes youthful trainee act owner, they still have it. Whereas expunged from my record, didn't have to report it to like the Wall Street firm. And they also said they were charging me. They put us in like a drunk tank me into bodies. And they said they're charging us with felony larceny. And I've seen some like law and order. I'm like felony. What is this like? What do we steal? Like 20 bucks for the stuff they go, but you stole things they don't sell. Had you stolen $999 of pizza, it would have been a misdemeanor. And I know they're lying to me. I'm not a mentalist then. And I'm inebriated, but I can read the room. Didn't say a word, knew this was BS. And then they separated us when we went to general population. And it's not like the movies. You know, it's like it was, it was wild. It was wild when I went in there. And I just knew this is my cheat code. It was like everything in life had prepared me for this moment. And the jail was also, again, I didn't know it was very segregated. Like the white dudes are here, the black dudes are here. And I didn't know what, what are you doing? You go in like, what do you do? I'm five foot nothing. I'm like a buck 40 dripping wet. What do I do? How do you make friends right now? And I see the black I was playing spades and I just walk up and it's like you make your move. And I'm like, let me see those cards. And it was just, it's like a moment I have, and I didn't stop for hours. I didn't repeat a trick. Like I know tricks and psychulopitically, I just go all day. Wow. What an experience. It was crazy. And then it was all thrown out. And it cost me some money. It was definitely a very, very stressful few weeks. And I never stole anything since. Honestly, that was scared straight. That was very, very smart. Like I, you prefer to learn a lesson like that for my kids especially without being stupid. But so many of us have to be stupid to internalize the lesson of touching the stove. And I had to burn my hands. But did you always talk this way that way you talk? You talk very fast a lot of energy. Is this your whole life? I think so. Even though, man, anyone on 1.5x, the way I listen to podcasts is gonna be miserable with me. But maybe that's it. Like you listen to the podcast of that speed. You're communicating with that speed. Yes. It's like you're on. You know. And you ran 27 fucking miles. That's true. No caffeine. So I'm not a caffeine. You don't drink caffeine at all? I try to avoid it. Like I'm not a coffee. I missed the boat on coffee. I honestly wish I did. They probably wouldn't be good for me. Given how dialed in I am. But like I just never started drinking caffeine. So I never got into it. Do you ever mess with any stimulants? Not really. No, not really. What does that mean? Like what do you mean by stim? Like I'll have like anything. If I don't sleep. Yeah. And that happens a lot. So if I'm not like getting enough sleep and I've done a red eye and I'm this and that, I will occasionally do like a Celsius or a red bull. But I don't really like it. I do it kind of as medicine because I have to be alive and functioning. But I really try to avoid it. What is it like when you get hit with a Celsius and you haven't been drinking any caffeine? So I only drink about a third of it and then I pour it out. And my kids are always like, why are you pouring that out? And they call everything a brew ski, which is a weird thing they call it just because before I always like, it was always like a brew ski is what they've extrapolated to every beverage and it can being a brew ski. That's hilarious. That's hilarious. That's funny. And so one third just like must hold you. I can't do more in the roof. Yeah. Like if you drink a four loco, I did four locos. Four locos are like, that's something. But it has like caffeine too, right? That's like bad decisions in a can right there. Yeah, like what am I thinking of? Oh, a red line. Is that the one? No, I think it's four locos. It's caffeine. It's one that's like just caffeine. It was fucking crazy. Oh, that was the stuff to take like pre-workout. That was fucking people up. Was that a red line? Something like that. Oh, that was the other one. That was a rip fuel. Yeah. Yeah. So you've always been like this. I got to ask my wife, I think so. Well, I'm more on now because we're doing something. But if I go on certain platforms with TV and I know I want to be slow, then I'll just calibrate down. But I'm getting fired up. Do you, when you plan out a show, whether it's a corporate show or a television show, do you feel like a whiteboard? Do you like put your ideas on? Like how do you, how do you do it? So I take meticulous notes about everything. Everyone I meet, everything at the end of a show, immediately, as quickly as I can afterwards, probably some people record shows. I hate rewatching myself on corporate shows and live shows. I don't mind TV stuff. But for some reason though, as if I've repeated material, because I, you know, it's like muscle memory you've done this before, it irks me to watch again. But I write down everything that happened. Every new one's like paragraphs about everything that happened, which is a useful life hack. Because I remember it all. But also I get repeat bookings a lot. So if somebody brings me back, now it's like a real magic trick where I know everything about what happened. And if you even just recount stuff from two years ago, people think you have superhuman memory or what do they like? People's number one subjects are themselves, their family and their friends. The more you can do that and give them back stuff about them, the more they're like, wow, what a caring individual, right? Being a good listener, a lot of times just repeating back to people what they just said. Right. Right. When you do these corporate shows and you do these television shows, when it goes great. Do you have this idea in your head like now I've got to ramp it up. Now I've got to push it even further. Now I've got to make it even more difficult for me. For sure. For TV more than corporate. Because corporate's not as big of a deal because what does somebody want there? They want to define quantity, right? They don't want somebody. You don't want to work out new material if you're being paid a lot. It's just it's stadium. You're doing new ones. Yeah. Like you're going to do your hour. You're going to do what's solid. So I do a lot of that. And the problem is I don't really have a lot of places where I can do new material. Because I'm just so busy. So I have so many events that I don't really have like anything that I can. Yeah, they're like open mics from mentalists where you can go on practice. There might have been in the past, but right now it's not, it's just not where I'm at. So you just practice on friends sometimes. I believe that. Everything's in my head. Everything. Yeah. So I a lot of things I'll do on TV. I've never done before ever. Real. Yeah. So I'm just thinking through everything that could go wrong. And I go through kind of like a list of what could go wrong here. What could go wrong here? What if they think this right there? What if we change this? I have like Plan ABCDE. I've just a long list of what everything will go. Like a pick your own adventure. And typically I know where to go with it. And then controlling your body and your tension is everything. Right? So you're a hunter. You step on a branch. Animal here is it. What happens? Right? Gone. It's a sense that we can feel we have the same thing where animals. If I get tense when something's going wrong, you can sense it. Even if you don't know it on a conscious level, you can sense it. Right. And now we have a cascade. So my job is based upon me being somewhere the alpha and being in control of the situation. And so if I think about it, if I just said think of your pin code, I don't want to. I don't want to. I'm going to do this instead. I'm going to do this instead. Right? How did you acquiesce to my will? You did what I wanted, in essence. We could manipulate anyway. But at the end of the day, you did what I wanted. And in my show, I'm the one pointing the camera. I'm always the director. You don't get to point where you want. I kind of in charge. And even if I let you think you're in charge, I'm still in charge at the end of the day. Right? I come to my kids. I want them to eat veggies. I don't say you got to eat your veggies. They'll say no. I go, you're so lucky right now. Carrots, cucumbers, or peppers, which one? You're so lucky you get to choose first before your brother or sister. Now I've framed it differently. Right? Anybody with toddlers? No, that's the best way to do it. Don't go straight on. That's not going to work. So the same thing applies. Power dynamics in relationships with people. So I got lost in my train of thought. But in essence, if I am messing up and you know it, it's going to go downhill really fast. And so on TV, some of my biggest mess ups, you don't know. But I am shitting my pants, flop sweat. Like fully, and I can't let you see that. I need to be so calm because if I am not calm, you can actually tell. And it's going to keep going worse. And I can't get you to go back to what I want. And I've lost control of the situation. So years and years, we're spent doing that. I would say it's very akin to a sniper. I'm not a sniper. Don't get me wrong. I'm not military. But how do you calm your heart rate? How do you stay calm even when you're not? And I could have an HRM on me. I'm calm when things are going wrong. Because I must help. The running must help for that. I think so. I'm so your heart rate. Low heart rate. Just in control of it as well. Right. Your heart muscles very finely tuned. Yeah. I think it helps. I mean, it can't hurt us. My friend Cam Haynes, who also runs these crazy ultra-marathons, he's also the best bow hunter in the world. And bow hunting is a lot of it is controlling your anxiety at the moment of the shot execution. And I would imagine for him, his heart rate is completely under control all the time. Because he's always very low. Yeah. Because he does so many miles. Like everything he could stay calm. It's probably a really great tool just for staying calm, right? I think so. I mean, the way I describe the ultra-marathons, because they're silly, right? You just ran a webcam, ran 250 miles. You see that thing? Yeah. My knees. Yeah. My knees. That's a crazy thing to do. It's right. That's not healthy. And I'm in not case who can say that. And for most people, I don't want to do that. And you don't need to. But what is that? What is that really? When you do that, everything else in life becomes easier. The lows that you experience when you do something like that is a way you cannot fake in any other way. You cannot test who you really are than putting yourself. You could be on the couch saying, what would I do and be tough guy and you're pretend to be goggings or hanes? But until you get in that level where you're miserable, you haven't slept in a day. You have all that. There might be another way to push yourself. But that's where you learn who am I really? At my core. And then when you go back to normal life, everything else, the volume is turned down. And when I come back from those races, all I do is get a mirror to put up to see who am I really when things are the lowest? And when I want to quit and I don't? Yeah. I think that's a very strong statement. I think one of the things that you just said there, I've said a bunch of times, that if you can work out really hard and push your body and push your mind, it makes other forms of adversity that you face during the day much easier. And I think that's one of the reasons why so many people are so filled with anxiety. It seems like that's such a simple solution that most people don't want to accept it. Like, oh, there's more to that. There's a mental imbalance. There's this. There's that. Like, perhaps. But everybody that I know that does what I'm talking about, everybody that I know that pushes themselves very hard in the gym or running or doing yoga or whatever, they're the most happy and the most relaxed. And they're able to face adversity throughout the day, much easier than people that don't take care of their body, that don't eat well, that don't exercise, and don't experience any voluntary physical discomfort. Couldn't agree more. It's just, I think it's mandatory. And it doesn't have to be what I do or it doesn't have to be what you do. It's go find, do pickleball. Go play some other sport. Tennis. Do something that's fun. Joojitsu's a great one. It's fun to do. And then you learn how to do something while you're working out. Moitize and other one like that. There's a lot of stuff that you can do that's fun, that's exercise, but man, you should exercise. You gotta move your body. You gotta move your body. Again, I don't want to speak out a turn like medical, but they've shown over and over that exercise is just it's almost as effective in certain regards. And like just being a certain level of healthiness, then antidepressants, and more effective. And more effective. It's unbelievable. Statistically, clinically more effective. More effective. And because it's of course it is. Of course it is. Like this is the reason why people are so filled with anxieties, because your body has certain physical requirements. Your body was designed to fight off predators and to run away from enemies and to hunt and gather food. That's the same DNA as people that lived tens of thousands of years ago, courses through your body. That's the fabric of your body. That's you. Right. You can't deny that. And there's a reason why this sedentary sort of generation that we're experiencing right now, because of phones and tablets and all the sitting in front of screens all the time, it's the most depressed. Right. No, for sure anxious too. Like Jonathan Hayden, like it's wild, the correlation. And it's just so clear cut. But yeah, social media is very, it's one of the things, there's some benefits, but man, oh man, you can't put that genie back in the bottom. You gotta find the right way to do it. There's some benefits in that there's a lot of inspiration. I agree. You know, and also information, you know, I'm not completely off a social media. I tap in and remember, but I've radically reduced it over the last month or so. And in doing that, it's really been much, much nicer. Like life is way easier. But occasionally I'll find something really interesting on social media, so it's like poi. In doing that, it's really been much, much nicer. Like life is way easier. But occasionally I'll find something really interesting on social media. So it's like, boy, I don't want to not know that. I don't want to not find out about some new scientific breakthrough or some new things going on. One of the things that I found that helps me those instead of social media, I just have a bunch of stuff that I curate in my Google News app. And so I'll just like find, any sort of scientific breakthrough or some weird discovery or a lot of really interesting things about ancient civilizations. I just have that stuff curate. So it just shows up on my feed. Where do you get that on your phone? Yeah. It's just the Google News app. It's great because it's like that way I can find stuff out without having to go and just hopefully randomly run into it on X or on Instagram. Right. You know, that's helpful. It's terrible with X. A lot of my friends get news on X. I'm just like, oh, it's too much negative. It's a lot of negativity. And for Instagram for years, I started realizing that it just like a compare and despair is one of, you know that like where I'm like, why am I getting off of this and feeling worse than I did getting on it? And so I really had to flip a switch in my brain to I got rid of that. Anything that I don't like, I don't show. And I stop focusing on what I don't have and what I focus on what I do have. And so it. So did you like used to go to it and you see someone with the giant house and the Lamborghini or something like that? It was material possession. It wasn't material. It was I need to use. So I don't look at people and hope poorly upon them. I look more at it and say I'm not doing enough. So it's like an inferior. You're always going to be lesser than right? You're always going to be someone's going to be younger, richer, smarter, like every ear. But in my case, it was more of I want to achieve a level of success and just seeing other people in my field or other fields. And I feel like I'm not doing enough. Mm. Yeah, try somewhat driven ambitious. So I'm like, right. I'm just not doing enough right now. And it's that constant feeling of I'm not doing enough. Doesn't drive you. It would be better to see. Look at them. I'm so happy for them. I'm going to do that too. Like I it should be a positive uplifting thing. And it's a flip in your brain. It's like multiplying negative one times negative one. And much more of the inflection point of gratitude. Like I, I, you know, J. Shaddie. Mm. J. I don't know. Podcaster, really good, dude. I've definitely heard. or met him last year and he told me something very stuck with me for the last year, which is million thoughts a day. We're on social media. We're all this that he was the only two thoughts. You can't control them all, but try to control two thoughts each day. The first one you wake up and the last one you go to sleep. It's that easy. Those two just try to have the first thing you wake up be one. And before you go to bed, just have one last thought. Thank you. And I they're always for me. It's like, yo, I'm everyday alive as a blessing. Like I literally I believe that in my core. I don't know what's going to happen tomorrow. Like a parent in my school just passed away recently. Shattered like young kids, cancer. I don't know a few people. And you see that and you're like, no, that's for real though. You don't know what will happen tomorrow. Right. So I've hit the lottery. Like I'm plus beyond measure wife way out of my league. Smart gorgeous sharp as a whip. Five beautiful kids. Like I try to focus on everything I have and never on what I don't have. I get to do what I love for a living. Like my mindset is completely evolved. of why would I think of what people don't. And everybody, if you're alive, you should be happy. You do not know what tomorrow will be. And I know that's all like new age you would ever. But that's you don't know when you're you're clocked up. We were just talking about that in the green room last time at the comedy club about gravity. The problem with gratitude is that too many people have co-opted it. Right. And really annoying people. Annoying. Annoying like wooden beads types, you know, like attitude. But gratitude is really important. But no, it's actually what you think because your thoughts create a lot of your reality. Same way I said looking around the room. So if your mind starts to become one more of rather than you see someone, you're like, screw that guy. He's rich. Right. That's how the mindset is easy for you to say they're rich. You see that in comments all the time. I'm like, I think that person worked their butt off to get to where they are. And what did they do? And you know what? That's inspirational to me. What can I learn from that? And so that's just a mindset of I don't see it as a zero sum game. Well, it's one thing that those people that post things like that have in common when you go to their page, they're all very boring. Right. It's really interesting. You see like the expression of their dull mind that's like, fuck them. They got money. Right. I don't have money. They got money. It's a dull brain. And I always wonder like, what is it like to be that person? Is that person? Is that a biological hitch or is it just learned behavior? Like what is it that makes them that stupid? I don't know if it's stupid. I don't know if it's a judge, but I think you project your insecurities. It's a little bit of that, but it's just it's clearly a stupid way to think. Right. Because it's totally not empowering like to complain about someone else's success or be angry about someone else's success is not empowering in any way, shape or form. And so that's inherently stupid. But you find the excuses because if I had that, if I had that and rather than. It must be nice. Well, exactly. Must be nice rather than saying, how do I do this for myself? Exactly. It's much easier, especially if you've given up on certain things. Now, once you've given up, it's better to make excuses and bring someone else down to try to bring you up. Well, here's what's done about it. This is why I said it's stupid. It doesn't get any better when you think like that. Instead, if you can shift your focus and see someone doing something, recognize that these tinges of jealousy that you feel are completely natural, but realize that to get the most out of this, you have to switch that in your mind to inspiration. And that person's success that's kind of freaking you out now becomes fuel. Right. Now becomes fuel and you can motivate yourself, but you have to avoid the fuck that, uh, and look, this book that that doesn't help you at all. That does zero good for you. And in fact, it occupies all of your precious time with complaining when instead, if you you can manage it and it can be managed, you can turn that into inspiration and then go out and try to do something, either focus more on what you're doing, realize maybe I'm doing this, uh, where it's not as efficient or maybe I can have more energy. Maybe I just need to do it more. Maybe I need to be a little bit more disciplined in my approach, whatever it is, but those little shifts will have measurable changes in the outcomes. Huge, huge changes. Major. Especially the big one. Change jealousy to inspiration. Love that. You have to be able to do it. Right. It's a giant key. You know, I remember when I was 21 years old, there was a guy who was going on stage and I was hoping that he bombed. Right. I remember thinking that I was hoping that he bombed. And the reason I've recognized it, I was realizing that I was recognized that he was talented and that he was really funny and it bothered me that maybe I wasn't as talented as him or it wasn't as funny as him. So instead of like seeing him go, what is he doing? Like, wow, this is great. Instead, now all of a sudden I was hoping that he failed. Right. And then I realized like, oh, here's the problem. You first of all, that's just like general bitch thinking that like can enter into your head and you got to figure out how to stop that. Yep. I realized that I was getting to this weird precarious position, which happens to a lot of artists where you get into something whether it's music or stand up comedy because you love it as a fan. You love watching it. Like I loved comedy. But then I, when I became a comedian, I stopped loving comedy. Now I was comparing everyone to myself. Right. That's brutal, right? Yeah. And it's not good for you. Go back to laughing at stuff that's good and not connecting it to you at all. It has nothing to do with you. So when someone's really good, that should be great. And then you should be laughing. Even if you don't like that person, you should be laughing. Right. Just even if you hate someone and they're funny, you should be laughing because it's good for you. Yeah. And it's, I find that it's over time. It's, it's almost it's selfish, but it's selfless at the same time is I like to show love to people coming up as much as possible and try to highlight them and try to kind of pay it forward in a way. Yeah. That's for the new people that are kind of doing what I do or doing different things. It makes you feel good. It makes you feel good to do good for selfish to help people. It is funny. I say that too. Yeah. It's very funny. We think the same. Yeah. I think exactly the same way. It's kind of selfish, but it's also it's, that's what community is supposed to be about. It's supposed to be not just about you and that's the difference between your community and a cult. Right. The cult is like, then you have the cult leader he starts bagging everybody's wife and he wants everybody's money. There's always an inflection point where you're starting to bang wives. That's always where is that in the close. There's always a message from God. Right. It tells you you need more pussy. And you're like, those two right there. I don't know why. He didn't, I didn't say it. I didn't say it for the record. Yeah. He said it. God said it. And then always the part else is there's always some sort of a end point like the world's going to end, but it didn't because we prayed so hard. So we're back, baby. Yeah. Yeah, those guys are great. There was a billboard in Los Angeles, a while back that had the date of the end of the world. Right. And you drive buying. I was like, I can't wait to show up here and take a selfie in front of it the day after this fucking stupid date. Right. Cause those guys are never right. Never right. That's weird. They're the worst mentalists. You know, the, the cult leaders? Yeah, cult leaders, they just never see the writing on the wall. The cult leader has like a very unique where again, there's, there's a fine line between if you looked at a path in my life, again, I don't see myself cult leader, but a con man is very similar in many regards to what I do because that's using these skills in what I would describe as like an unethical way. Right. Don't you think they're the same thing? The cult leaders are type of con man. Oh, I'm saying what I do is like a con man. Yeah, but you are a con man for entertainment purposes. Right. Exactly. It's different. Right. It's like a human mind, but instead of using it in a, in a, you do it for entertainment, which is like a good way to use it for sure. Everybody gets happiness. It's happiness and you're not lying about the premise, which is the premise is I'm starting from the jump. I'm not psychic. I'm not supernatural. People ask me is this like a talent? Or is it a gift? And I think it's similar. Well, yeah, I mean, you've got to have some sort of thing in you to be a good comedian or a good musician or anything like that. You can work on it and get better. But I'm never going to the NBA. You know what I'm saying? That's right. There's like a personality trait that just is embedded in you from the time you're young for whatever the thing is that you love to do. Maybe it was like watching my folks. There was a lot of weird stuff. I was very good at math as a kid, like unusually good at math. And I would do weird stuff. Like I count steps every time I knew every step and every place I went to like some rainman, rainman stuff. And when I would go, this is from the time I was like six, we go to Little Caesars. I'll never forget. I lived in Metro Detroit. And before they rang up the food. I knew the percentage tax it would be. So when they did it, I would instantly say before I'd look and I know what my mom is going to say, you're going to, you're going to get $16.18 to how'd you know that and change? And it was like a weird thing that I got very good at. And I think the boom, dopamine hit, dopamine hit, they would like that. And so it's ingrained where I was good at, again, people become the joker because there's some sort of dark thing in there. Not everybody. And basically there's some, I don't want to say trauma, but you're not going to be funny. You're amazing unless something happened in your life where you have a reason to be entertaining. Right. And so I think there's points in time where I could take people's minds off things. And this was a great way to do it. And also magic, people don't get to know you. They get to know the character, the performer. So you get that nice little separation, which I learned at a young age was really like how to make rejection, fear of rejection, fear of failure. Because people, that's their number one fear. And I learned at 14 how to make that gone, like eliminate that entirely. Interesting. That's interesting. It's also the dynamic of you being in control, which I think you know, you talked about earlier. I think is for whatever reason imperative where you're speaking to people, you have to be in control for them to let you kind of guide everything. You don't want other people, you don't want to ask questions and have everybody like free to talk. No, I don't mind that. I don't mind that. But if they do it, when I want them to, right, it's like again, so the best salespeople in the world aren't the used car sale. You're like, bye this by this. That's nobody does well. The number one salesperson organization is the one who gets you to sell yourself. They're bending over backwards to be like, I got to do business. Right. You get someone to the point where at the end, you don't have to hard close. Right. Every organization I work for. And I go in there and like show you how to do sales training. You want to one. It's going to be the person who gets the other person to sell themselves. That's what you do. You lay the breadcrumbs into the trap. The trap is not a bad thing, but the same thing happens in my show. I am leading you in a certain direction. Mmm. Watch. I'll show you something. How often is Jamie? Jamie when I walked in, I talked to him for like two minutes said he loves magic. It does. Is that true? Is Jamie off mic? Yeah, what's up? It did not. It did not do this. Do have daughters, correct? Yes. So it's hard. I have three girls, two boys. And I found when I named our girls, well we name it together, obviously, the naming of the girls was far harder than the boys. When you named your daughters, was it agreed upon? Were you like shortlisted? How did it go about? Well, I feel like my wife did way more work than I did. Yeah, for sure. So she carries the baby in her body. And I said listen. I would just want veto power. veto. Well, you can't name the kid Apple. So I was like, I don't think it's a fair proposition. That's like literally what I said. I said, and I don't give a fuck about names. And they've got your name for last name. Which is my name there. Right. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. But my name is Joe. It's boring ass stupid name. It doesn't bother me at all. That I have the same name as a billion people. Right. So for me, names don't mean anything. And it meant something for her. You decide. So watch this. What do you know what the most common names are right now? I know this recently. We're like a two week old. But the most common names right now are not the same as when you were naming your daughters as my guess if they're teenagers. Do you know what the most common name right now in America? I think it's six years running. Mom, I did this up. No, no for girls. For girls. Is it though? Olivia. Olivia. Can you look up top 10? It's a beautiful name. Look up. It just came out so security. I know this because like I said, we were trying to figure out names. Is it my right? It should be Olivia's number one. I don't Google top 10. Who do you think of when you think of Olivia? I thought initially Olivia Wilde. Who's Olivia Wilde? Movie star. Do you know what she is? Oh, that lady. Yeah. Oh, she's great. Yeah. I thought of Olivia Newton John. Yeah, that's second. That would have been second. This is it. This is it. I've performed for Olivia Wilde. Never Olivia Newton John. What did you get? Did you find out? Yeah, do you want me to show you the list? Oh, yeah. It's not a trick. I just want to see Olivia's number one. Emma. Charlotte. Mia Sophia is a bell. Evelyn. That's interesting. I would have never imagined that. Right. Ava. You did not hear those names when you were growing up. There were probably no girls named Ava when you were child. None of any of these names. Maybe Olivia after Olivia Newton John. But that's crazy. Sophia's number 10. That's interesting. And Sophia spelled two different ways. So it's technically number one. Jamie. Oh, really? If I ask you, OK, oh, that's right. It is. It's dope. PH and F. Wow. Interesting. That's Sophia's number one, really. Huh. Harper. What's Harper? 11, 12. Camila. Camila number 11. That's nuts. Eleanor. Older names are gone back. Yep. Really older names. Yeah. That's like Eleanor is like my friend Eleanor Carrigan. She's in her 50s. Iliana. Iliana's number 18. That was crazy. What are the odds? What are the odds that you told me is Iliana in the top 20 of names. I'm going to shut the fuck up. Who's names are kid that? I think someone I know. That's not a beautiful name. Love that name. It's a beautiful name. It's not a bad name. It's a beautiful name. But it's like, I would have never thought it was that common. So when you think of how this is happening, watch this, Jamie, I ask you to come up with somebody absolutely random from your past. Absolutely random. A dug deep. You heard it, got it. Yeah. You know what? How do you know this person? Not, oh, you shouldn't have said that. Oh, sorry. You should have said it was. You know what? It's from preschool. Preschool, something in preschool. You still keep in touch? Right, I met him. I didn't know. She said to him. Why do you say him and then her? Sorry, Matt Daim is what I guess I was trying to say. It's playing a pronoun game. What's going on here? You know what? No. No, there's too many giveaways. Just said it wasn't on the list, doesn't this? Right. Let me ask you a question. Let's try again. No, I'm doing something better. We'll switch. Jamie, close your eyes. Close your eyes. Yeah, look at this stuff. You got to look. OK, so pretend you're closing your eyes. I'm going to put you in the spot. Yeah, OK. It's not the preschool girl. I want you to close your eyes, go back in time, and try to picture the face. I was called the one that got your first big crush. Can you visualize her face or you can't see her clearly? I said, you asked me this before. Yeah. It's a tough question. Because the way you started wording, it was like, is this up? First crush, for me, it was like the first person. Like, I knew there was like TV people and stuff like that. Oh, is it a TV person? That's what it would have been technically, I guess. Yeah. Your first crush was a TV person. Sure. Yes, I'm going to nice on TV. Is that right? I think so. OK. I guess. Oh, yeah. Why don't I always that? I don't know. I'm trying to decide. If I were to ask you to look up how popular this name is, why not? No, I'm not going to do it again. It's not top 10. Is that correct? Right, it was. OK, hold on. Look this way at me. I want you without using your fingers to count the number of letters in this person's name. The real name or the character's name? I don't know if that matters. I don't know. I've never had a fictional character as my first crush. This guy got weird. I don't know. I don't know what ever name you went with. I don't say it out loud. I'll go with the picture. Don't say it. Don't say it. Don't tell me what they were in a real person then. So, you know. Well, I don't know. Oh, don't say it. Oh, don't tell. Oh, man, don't tell me. Don't give me any more clues. I'm not going to figure it out. Good. All right. You know what? Do this. Joe, I want you to see this. Should we get a piece of paper right down those mics everywhere? OK. Screw it. Don't even write down. Don't even write down. No, no, no. I was going to have him write it down. OK. 8 or 9. Do me a favor. Count again, but to yourself. Don't do it out loud. Count to yourself. What? Those letters? Yeah, don't do it out loud. But 8 or 9 wasn't the letters. But go ahead. Yeah. So confused. All right. It's got all over the place. Jamie wants this to go wrong. He does. I do. I do. I don't know if this. The real name or the fake name anymore. But before today, and me asking you to think of this person, be honest, would it have been days, months, or literally years before today since this person even crossed your thoughts? Honestly, this would have been a couple months. Couple months? Couple months. Could Joe know it? No. All right. Mix up the letters and stop like scrabble tiles. Freeze and grab out a letter somewhere in the name. Maybe grab one out of the middle. OK. You got it? Sure. He did too. Any switch? No, no. You did shift the eyes. He did this one. And then this one, you didn't do a vowel. Did you? You can tell me. You did a vowel after all that. A-E-I-O-U, you look at me. First one I picked. And you went to the end. Do you think the last letter? No. The last letter is a vowel, though, isn't it? Sometimes. It is. Here we go. I'm going to sometimes why? Yeah. That's the one we had. A-E-I-O-U, sometimes why? Take a look. Don't say it. Don't say it. OK. I don't know. This is who knows. Was it nine letters? The name is nine letters long, isn't it? Heard. The real person's name is nine letters, I think. Yeah. Yeah. And he thought it was person named Muzz. Yeah. I know. I saw it and you switched the one. And I wrote this down. Joe, you see it, right? I can't change it. No trick here. OK. No, yes. What's your name? This first crush, Sarn TV. Her real name is Christine. Christine is what I wrote down. Christine is what I wrote down. Her fake name's Melody from Heidid. You don't have to tell me I know. Christine Taylor. How did you know? There's this. Wait, hold on. Right now, right now. I want to try this. There's someone to try. Joe, how many people? How many people just happened? Wait, where did I put this? Are you an alien? Hold on. Do you work for this? Yeah, yeah. I got to take a leak like crazy too. It was already the bag. Dude, I drank like two gators before I got in here for the run. That was a mistake. What bag? There's a bag. Oh, I didn't bring it. You didn't bring it. No, don't you go peeing. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, I've got to look. I want you to do this. I put together. This is for you. Joe, take these 50 people, chat GPT. Look through that list. Okay. And these are all people. I didn't make this up. I just wrote them down. Okay. Who have been on the show multiple times? Right. And that, or, and that I, how would I describe this? My guess is you have a personal connection. You know these people. Is that a fair assessment? Right off. If there's anybody in there that you feel is not fits the bill, or you don't talk them anymore, throw it away. I don't care. Okay. Yeah, I know all these people. You know these people? Mm-hmm. Okay. Sure. I'm not going to guess who it is. I wrote the list. I knew who they all are. Got it. I don't care. You want to mix them. You want to mix them up or whatever you want to do? Okay. Once you mix them up or whatever you want to do, put them in front of you, please. Like a pile. Turn, kind of, oh, you're not going to look. Because I want them to be like random. Okay. Kind of put them in front of you. Turn sideways. Well, I want to see what you're doing. Okay. And I think we're going to do this together. I don't want them to reach over now. Okay. Here's what I want you to do. Okay. I want you to take. I'm going to do it with you. Is I want you to lift off like a chunk? That chunk. Yeah, like a chunk and put the chunk over. Over here? No, no, no. Like next to you. Okay. Like, I don't know. How do I, can I move over with the mic or no? Yeah, just come over here. Yeah. Take the headphones off. Take them off or leave them on. Take them off. Take this. Take this. Okay. We'll take the piece and I want you to take. And the same way that I'm making a bunch of chunks like this. Uh huh. I want you to be in charge. So take these ones. Okay. And would you agree that's pretty randomized? Very randomized. Okay. And I want to assess right now, there's five of them. Okay. Is take one of the piles and put it like, which other pile you going with? Another pile? Like, point to another one. Okay, this one. How about this one? Yeah, perfect. And I want you, don't show me. I want you, like grab that one. All right. The card. The card on top. Whatever you want. Take it, grab it and look at that person's name. Okay. And don't let me see it. How likely if you were to text this person, do you think would they answer? 100%. Oh, you sure? Yeah, 100%. Most of the list was a guy. Is it a guy? Yeah. Not judging. A lot of dudes on the show. Put them all back together. Okay. Let's assess this. I don't want to who it is. I don't care who it is. As long, I want to see if they're not going to answer. I would tell you to text somebody new. text this person in your own words and say, I don't know. Got a minute and need a favor and see if he text back. If he doesn't, we go to somebody new. We'll give it like, I don't know, 15, 20 minutes. Okay. Can I tell him what's going on? I would hedge and not say yet because I want to see where he goes with it. Because if you tell him, like, I don't care, but I want to, I want to keep this very, I don't want him to know where we're going yet. Okay. Should I tell him to text me back? Yeah, I guess text me back. That works. Hey, brother. Do me a favor and text me back as soon as you get this. It's going to sound like someone's dying, but okay. It depends on it. Okay. All right. And put it down. We'll revisit later. Pressure. Let's see. Let's check back in a few minutes. Okay. Will it vibrate if he did? No, I have it on. Do not disturb it. I'll take it off. There we go. Okay. He's very busy. So he might not be in front of his phone. No worries. If it doesn't go, we'll give it some time. And if not, we'll switch gears. Okay. But turn your phone face down so you don't think I can see it. I don't want to know who, what, where? All righty. We'll revisit. We'll come back. I'll come back. I'll feel it when it vibrates. I'll impel later. I'm holding it in though. I knew the Joe Rogan effect. Down, down, down, down. Okay. We're just going to sit here and wait for a moment. No, no, no, we'll check back in later. Seems ridiculous. Is it? Yeah, because he could be working out. It could be doing anything. So if we get it, it's meant to be. This is, we'll see. Okay. It's not pressing. You have an idea who it is? I don't know. I can look through the list again. It's not Cam Haines. Is it after you said all that? It's not the sole and popping into your head. I'm not going to guess who it is. Not at all. No, because here's the reason why if we reveal stuff, I don't want you to. If I guess like something very specific about this person that will, like, he might not want to know his ATM pin, go to a social security number. Oh, you're going to guess it's true. I don't know what I'm going to do yet, but I don't want you could tip it, but he's going to be pre-pitched if everybody finds out something so I prefer if nobody knows yet. But if we want to, you'll see. Okay. Okay. Take it to the next level. Jamie's in the room. Right. But what if we could just get anyone who you could have picked? Anybody you know. Right. Now it's different. Right. Now it's never been done before. Right. You asked me, what do I wake up with thinking about? How could I do this? Yeah. How are you going to do this? I don't know. Let's see if it works. Let's see if it works. So, okay. You got me. He did. Yeah. Okay. Here's the thing. I think that if I were you, I'd see later, well, texting what if somebody saw something. No, no, no. I haven't had to don't give any clues yet. There's microphones everywhere. We just asked him to think of his first crush, but he did like someone fictional and like that's how we did. Can I tell him I'm in the middle of the show? Yeah. Maybe Sam in the middle of the show. Okay. Okay. And say, we're doing a bit. Yeah. Do you want to call him because if you're texting this, do you want to call him or do you want to text him? Well, if I call him, people get a hear his voice. No, but what if you call him and you just go over there, which one's better? You, which one's more impossible? Where later you go there's just no frickin way. Is it better if he texts you or is it better if he calls you? What do you think is just more impossible? I could have him call me. Yeah. Why not? Do this. Have him call you in a second. Okay. You'll go over there where there's no microphone. And I want you to ask this guy, the same question I asked. Jamie. Do you remember the name of the first girl you had a big crush on? And sometimes people don't remember. I just want you to know I've done this a lot. Should I ask him that? Not yet. I would do it on the phone. Okay. You get screwed. Ask him that. Okay. Do I should have just did it with voice? No, no, because then, well, yeah. Nobody's listening to this. I'm sure. No, but I mean it's quicker. Don't tell me what he says. If he says no, a lot of people don't remember this question. Okay. So then I hedge and I go, well, who's the first girl you ever kiss? Let's see. There's absolutely no way I can see what's on your phone right now. You can't see. Boom, get that tight. I can't see, bitch. Okay. Dad. Okay. Does he know or he doesn't know? Yep. Did he tell you? Yep. No shit. Yep. Ask him. Is it the same as the first girl you ever kissed? Okay. Seriously. Here we go. No. Does you remember her name too? Okay. Yeah. Two weeks ago, right? No, I'm kidding. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. I'm not. You have 50 people that have been on your show that you took anybody. Right. If this person would have texted back, text somebody else, I don't care who it is. There is no conceivable way. This isn't a bank that gave you a number. And if he didn't know who it is, we would have done something different. I don't care. Put the phone away. Okay. How am I going to do this? How am I going to do this? Right. And he said, what happens when it goes wrong? Nothing. I'm not getting paid to be here. Okay. You're freaking me out. Think of both names. They're different. Yeah. The same way that you did 2020 and you didn't know, think of both names and I had a juggle back and forth between the two. The first kiss in the first crush. Okay. And is one name more interesting to you or like they're equal? Juggle back and forth between the two the first kiss in the first crush. Okay, and Is one name more interesting to you or like they're equal or is one name more interesting or not really? Not really not okay, so you don't like if you gravitate. I would have been like go to one. Okay Count the number of letters in the first crush to yourself. Don't use your fingers I guess see count the number of letters to yourself for the first crush. I did it. I thought you out. Yeah I started on those and then count the number of letters in the first kiss. Oh You looked up They're not equal. Can you agree with me? They're not the same amount of letters are they? No, they're not no see I because you had same reaction Do you know when you put somebody in a polygraph test have you ever been polygraphed? No They can't just ask you the questions right away They can't because they first have to get your benchmark same way blood doping You got to test someone's blood against their blood people have different amounts of testosterone naturally So I had to see how you would do each one Mm-hmm and then you did the thing with the eyes to throw me off the first crush is That name shorter than the first kiss Yes, yeah, go to the first crush. I'm gonna go with that one less work for me. Okay One more time count the letters. Okay, and you were trying to avoid it six letters. Is that name six letters? Yes, yeah Mix up all the letters. Okay in that first crush is named forget the first kiss rapid. Okay at pick anyone in your head you got one got it Jamie gave me a gift on a platter thought of a vowel When he did that it was a hundred percent you wouldn't pick a vowel later You didn't do a vowel in the name. Did you no dude? I'm here for a reason right? I haven't done this. I've been doing this for a long time right told you goal to be the best in the world at this Okay, I have watched I know everything you just did second letter. Do you think a second letter? I will mmm M Amanda's the name Amanda. Yes What the fuck did you use you will talk about this for years? Can you figure out the second one no, I'm done man come on showbiz you do your closer You drop the mic and you pick the Mac mic back up never do you want to who it was? No, I don't want to know My friend said you're a witch. He said kill him now Definitely a comedian definitely a comedian after that. It's definitely a comedian. I'll be yeah I got a lot of weird people. Yeah I don't know how to go back to conversation mode am I right? I guess it's his like a race I do I do I do I keep going do we go strong with this no? I'm just saying we'll we're We can't wait. It's always easier to pee is that alright. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's perfect because you don't want to it's too hard to form Sensors and you have to be alright. I'm gonna take a quick break. We'll be rapid fire. Are we back? Lightning feel like a much better. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I know the feeling I was sitting on it You rehydrated and I drank so much gatory right before and I was like oh party foul should have thought that went through I'm gonna deserve a little gatory So do you want to know who was yet? It's up to you I like hanging a hanging thread, but it's up to you But what is the purpose of hanging the thread? No, I could tell us at the end Can you tell me who it is I could but come on. I know I'll tell you at the end Okay, you already gave the comedian you said this Comedian he's a witch kill him 100% 100% that's not Ben Shapiro, you know As you said which did he tell you no no no I took the quickest pee of my life I raced over that you didn't tell No, I don't want to know Curate do you think that there's people that knew the ship act in the days of witches they figured out some of the powers Maybe it not I think that 100% Psychics of the past Used a lot of the same techniques I'm using because when I watch psychics and I have people always tell me at certain things they tell me like oh You know I saw psychic do this and this and this and I hear it and I go to myself You know I could do that same trick and I could no offense do it better But think about it I'm doing this right now from with an ethical compass versus if I go Oh, I'm getting this and I thought about this and this is what happened with your Daniel My god, you know, I'm like well only 25 grand more to have a private session. Let's talk to him a little bit more I'm not saying there's nobody psychic. I'm telling you that a lot of the psychics. I'm watching them like I know how you're doing that That was my other question Yeah, as any if you caught me when trying to get some stuff by you like I don't know like a psychic I mean not a psychic you're buying a car and someone's trying to pull some trickling like I know what you're about to do Well 100% you know not a shameless plug, but like I literally write I wrote a book It's coming on October where it's all about it's called read your mind and it's not me telling you how to be a mentalist because 99.9% of people don't want to guess a first crush not useful to you in your life But what if you could read people more effectively To help you in your life at home at work in relationships That is a quantifiable thing that the tools of a mentalist when not used for entertainment but in life day-to-day are Extraordinary for sure. Yeah. Yeah. I mean you must be Great at all kinds of things because of this Anything dealing with human beings right negotiating. Oh, I never sold the property at a loss. Let's just say that. It's been pretty good so far You get in there. You're like I want to take a dollar or less. I'm like I know you will. I know you will That's funny That's funny what a weird skill to have right what's a good book a good book read on this well on becoming a mentalist or So many of these skills like what did you start with do you remember the book you started with do you mean if you want to learn How to do you remember the you started with when you first started learning this stuff? So the first book I started reading was a book called 13 Steps to Mentalism But man is it gonna be tough for most people because it was written in the 1920s So it's kind of like you know when it's like watching an old movie no offense to old movies But I'm like oh it's hard to get into this with my attention span now because it's antiquated Some of it still applies but you have to really do a big reach to know how do I apply this? Because back then there were no TVs or no phones. There's no it's just that's what I started with but I learned the hard way So much of what I do now is it again. I told you is I don't really do what other people do because I don't explain it's They create different right if if if you are building a house and you have all these tools You're gonna build using your tools does that makes sense So I've got these set of tools. I knew a hammer does this I do that. I create with the house already built So my vision again and why what's been a differentiating feature is I build with that person at the end in mind And I already know what the house is gonna be I know what the memory. I know what you're gonna say like CNBC do you ever watch that channel? I try not So CNBC Fox Business are financial channels I have been on those channels dozens of times How many other mentalist or magicians have ever been on them? Zero Why is that because it's unusual? That's a serious network? Why do you put me on? Because I do stuff around the markets and so if you're watching it you buy in because my stuff's about stock market interest rates All stuff and it's like this is crazy, but ahead to do with stuff. I know so the same thing when I do ESPN I'm creating from a different perspective than most I customize the content like when I do a corporate event I learn in and out your business and when I go up there I sneak in the medicine. So now You're actually your people aren't just seeing a show They're getting messaging and they're getting in a way where they don't tune out because they don't realize they're being spoken to It's mostly entertainment Mm-hmm. I planted those thoughts and you leave there with you know What's the product launch? What's this all those things are now internalized and remembered? And there's 13 steps that was said it was written in the 1920s. Oh fact check me But I think it was the 20s. What did this guy do? What was his job? He was a mentalist Yeah, but there were no mentalists back then there were just a few people But there was mostly they were telling you the skills of psychics They were showing you how psychics did stuff and it wasn't really debunking But they're showing you all the tools the 13 steps like what are the ways that we can read people more effectively And what are the tricks of the trait of what we do? Mm-hmm right like how do you Know when someone's counting something like that right and you're counting the letter You know because it to me you might as well be playing drums do you understand what I'm saying like if you're playing drums And I have an ear for it. I can hear the beats So once you learn how to do certain things they build on top I can if you're counting letters like again Names are anywhere from three to 12 letters. It's not rocket science for me to figure it out And again, I can't do it in a vacuum if you turn your back instead. I'm not not doing anything not again If you control the environment I can't do it as well Right it goes back to that fear thing if I started messing up right now You'd be like what would get an awkward and you would pull back and I wouldn't be in control anymore right like a lot of what I'm doing is is I'm You know showing you how I can read you but also you're allowing yourself to be read right so like when you're saying count the letters You can see me counting them. I can see when your counting I can see when you try to throw me off the count It's like a poker player poker player knows if you really have aces pocket aces or you have two four and you're bluffing the best ones do Hmm, which brings the question up. Why don't I play poker more? Yeah, why don't I put poker? It's just it's too boring like I That's a grind man. I'd rather than do this one and a half speed. Yeah, your whole life is one and a half speed That's wild. That's really interesting. I'm fascinated. No, I think I'm gonna read one of those books I'm gonna probably get that one. I'm gonna send you one. I'll try and find a better one Well, that one's interesting too because I want to I want to read the origins I want to read it like when it first started out like what was it like in 1920 like what did he learn and where he learned it? Is it fine? Yeah 50ish or so. Oh 19. Well, it's also not known. This is the guy So he's born in the 1930s I screwed this up. It was in 1920. You know the other one's 13 steps There's another one by Theodore either and then he did not make his birthplace public. Oh, you fucking sneaky bitch He's a sneaky bitch. He's a first metless and he's sneaky Those believed to have been Mill Hill suburb of London for unknown reasons. He renamed himself Tony Cordenita Corrin So he's born Thomas William Simpson and he renamed himself for some reason Tony Corinda a variation of the surname Conradi When he began working as a mentalist in 1950. He opened up a shop where he sold all manner of stage magic goods But catered especially to mentalists later took over the magic shop on Oxford Street The shop was at street level and thus catered mainly to the regular public so that many of the items sold were either practical jokes or beginners tricks But items for semi-professional magicians and hobbyists were also sold around the same period Corinda had the magic concession in Hamley's toy shop on region street. Interesting. So the book 13 steps to mentalism was in 1961 So he wrote a series of 13 booklets on mentalism between 56 and 58 Each one dealing with a different aspect of mentalism or allied art Interesting. I'm getting you copy. I am. I'm buying. What's it? Is it is it reprinted or is it one of those? Definitely reprinted and see it's it's since become a viewer of the essential mentalism reference book But again, you're gonna have a big problem because you're gonna read that book and if you make it through to the end Which god bless you if you can you're gonna be like yeah, but how the hell did you do all this stuff? It's not gonna you're gonna get to the end of it and been like so it's that's baby steps and then you've got a light Sure, yeah, get to the next level. I'm not thinking I'm gonna get all the information from that But I'm curious as to like what the origins of it was like how did this guy devise these things like how did he figure it out? Psychics so it's again people with psychics want to believe Anyone who's in that room who paid that money to hear psychic has someone they've lost and they want something with them because there's you know Do you believe in any psychic powers at all? So again, I'm not like a debunker because I'm kind of like agnostic in this thing Which is I just believe what I've seen so far and in a lot of instances I've never personally experienced something that I couldn't explain yet But a lot of people have told me their experiences have you heard of the telepathy tapes? Yeah, so that I know you had her in here But that's have you watched the videos. I mean come on. Yeah, that's wild. No, no I'm the opposite. I do not think that's real. Oh. Yeah. Yeah. Oh really no why? Well, tell me about what the videos so it can we show the videos? Well, I don't know if you've got to pay wall again. I don't want to controversial But they're holding in many instances in that form of communication The person knows the information is holding the letters Jennifer said I'm saying so right now if I had shown you a word and you're either touching somebody You could get you know what a two-person code act is no So do quote person code act is like a mentalist thing with two people There's a few that are the best in the world Abicins mind to mind and Dubai like a few really good ones who've done this and what they do is they can be blindfolded in a different area And anything you hand to them anything you say the other person knows it no electronics No, nothing they just look at your credit card and they'll guess the credit card numbers and what the way that's being done is they're Communicating to each other based on Pause is based on like a million ways that you can't think of it's the best code act ever without speaking and you'll watch it And you'll be like there's no way they're communicating but they are and so it looks like telepathy But it's not you get them in the room of scientists. You'll fool every scientist under the Sun What they're doing is like not bulletproof at all with the kids and again God bless if I had a child in that condition I For not one moment wouldn't want a solution and I would want something to know that they're not that they're in there And I could talk to them and I don't want to speak out a turn but from the videos I've seen I can explain that in a minute They're they're moving things around and positioning the letters if you do a double blind study Where the person does not know the word that they're trying to communicate I'm even saying psychic just don't tell them the word the person holding it And only show the word to the person who should be saying it right if you're the artistic child Show them the words there I see it and then have them type that word in and do that for me nine out of ten times And they've not been able to do that. I'm a psychic that's just show the me that you can type the word and that you saw and so When you do like a deep dive on that it's been She offered to have someone come in with their parent and do that would you do that with us? Sure So you could like I don't want to take anyone's I don't want to anyone's hope away I'm a parent and like again. I don't think they're making money on it. No. I like no I'm very I don't like it again when you ask me psychics There's people had real deep experiences and who is it for me to take that away But when I watched that and you're like talking to somebody who's a pro at doing this same as psychics I can see exactly how that's done. But what did you think about their ability to read languages? They've never studied so again, you're missing it so that's again the devil's in the details Okay, it's the memory what you remember the story show me how they did that Would it either of the people their present know that language who is doing it and how was that being communicated? Did the end person who's moving the board around know what the meaning of the word was? Do you understand I mean yes, so like again, you're hearing the the cliffs notes the end edition Watch the video and show me something that I can't there was nothing I saw in that special or that in that Telepathy tape in the videos that I couldn't readily explain really that's correct interesting very interesting So could it be right? Yes. I'm not saying it's not I'm not again They could be 100% right and I could be 100% wrong hubris right I haven't been in the room with them I'm judging simply from videos. I've seen but as someone who is for a living Pretending to read people's minds, but I'm actually reading people I can see how it's being done The method it's kind of like a casino boss. I see how that person's cheating when they're playing cards because I know all the cheating methods Interesting Um The other thing that they said was these kids all have this area that they go to called the hill yep They go to their what do you think of that? So again, I heard it It was unbelievable like the podcast was incredible. I don't know. I don't like I You know, I've heard psychics tell me people tell me I saw psychic and how do you know that my friend died after we saw a grateful dead concert And I'm like well, I don't I'm seeing a lot of stuff on you that looks grateful dead vibes like like if I told you that you're a big Roger Water's fan you'd be like how did you know that right now? So if everyone not looking you're always wearing a pink Floyd shirt like you can you can figure out a lot of stuff based on cold reading I can see what's the wear on your wedding band? How do you behave? What are certain things? When do you pause at a certain moment about certain things? Did you lose someone? I can tell instantly if you're having a feeling of emotion like Anyone good at this and not even great, but like good can notice a lot of things like a psychic just watches you So you can kind of tell like what a person's done that day Well, I think you can get like you can guide them to what you want which is when you get a hit right think of that game When your kid hot cold you hide stuff right right your brother's sister looks around they go cold I think I woke up early today or late. I don't know There's no one demand featured in the show. It's not you woke up early though really yeah Why I think that I don't know just based on when you said it? No, no plate good. I got it wrong I'm happy you'll be like we screwed this guy finally. We got those and it was at the 5050 Oh, so yeah, that was just a random coin flip. Yeah, that was you know, we'll do a coin flip before I leave Okay, who has coins anymore. I brought one coin. I heard that there's a penny that's in circulation. That's worth millions of dollars Heard that too. Yeah that wheat penny don't have to wheat on the side of the body Lewis How is had I saw that on my socially found one really I think so whoa? It's fucking super right millions. I'd be like give me that wheat penny. That's crazy penny worth millions um Okay, so what's in the The one that's sealed that package. No, that's nothing. That's gonna. I was gonna get out But I'll do it later's gift. No, no, it's something silly Why do I not believe you I swear I swear I thought I would have it out, but now You thought you'd have it out, but you don't want to have it out not the right fit What do you mean that was gonna do something you had a lot of books here and I thought we get a book But like yeah, I don't think I'm gonna do it Just doesn't feel right. No what feels wrong self-curious. I don't know it's not gonna work It's not you got to go in six not gonna work. It's not gonna work nope What was the goal to get it to work you could say it now since we're not gonna do it The goal to get it to work was I thought I had some sort of I thought I know if I get you to get a book We have less books in this room. We have books in that room. I just I don't know I brought it in I always have a backup plan plan ABC and this one's not meant for this one This one might be if I ever come back and do another. Okay, JRE we'll put it in the safe. Okay, okay Do it okay, that's a great idea. Yeah, put in the safe put in the safe. I'll never touch it again Okay, we'll touch it either let's make sure that we know it's sealed you know Wix a cocaine you're in big trouble. No, you should get a wax seal. Yeah, you know like game of throne style. Let's do it I love that show great show. Yeah, we can't play this but I found one of the tapes that someone put on YouTube Do you want to it's only a one minute all right? Let's watch it for us. Let's watch for us We can't play it because it's copyright. Okay If you right now got the best two person codec in the world in here they would do nothing She would literally be in another she could be a hundred feet away behind this person's back because she's touching doing Touching moving. I mean like those are for letters. You only have 26 options You have any idea what this is right there somebody effective right now Just this right now and pausing and for they say a word could have given you a full credit card number Insane she's kind of moving him a little bit moving him like if you could if you can how do you compress data? Right like if you do hexadecimal or ASCII you could take a 16 digit number and break it down into three Letters do you see the movie the Martian? Yes great movie right? Yeah, they're Matt Damon reference. Yeah, love Matt Damon by the way Has he been on here? No, it's such a good dude. Yeah, I talked to somebody about getting them on like he was gonna reach out We're gonna do it eventually. I love that guy. Yeah, that's awesome that I'm a couple times love them There's nice as you'd expect so if you can in that movie in the Martian He didn't know how to send data because he only had the camera So he shows a thing where he figured out how to take and compress big things into small What's the easiest way you can make it very small so you can send information in a certain way? I don't want to blow any of this cover, but there is absolutely when I see that I know exactly how it's being done But I don't know if she's doing it on purpose I think they've just learned each other's rhythms and that's an agent. Oh, okay Go to the end of like you gotta have her in a different room Right right right read my mind read my mind through a door haven't they done stuff in a different room though didn't Cardigan stints said in particular that another magician actually told me that they had a issue watching that particular kids videos They thought that those two were doing something funny. Yep clearly But that's what I the other videos. I don't know. They're behind a paywall. You have to get to him That's it. That's the sneaky biz is everyone that sees the paywall I had a couple sent to me and I'm like because people asked me this and they were like what do you think man? And I listened to all the tapes I thought it was amazing It got a little wild at the end if you got to the end like the hill and that and you want to believe who doesn't want to believe that There's a psychic amongst us and especially kind of like the superhero story of all These are kids who nobody thought was in there and they're really in there and they're communicating with each other It's I mean so essentially you're saying that instead of a psychic energy There's a sense of like a kind of microcommunication. You know what and there's people want to believe and so you kind of confirmation bias looking at the evidence You want to believe like I dickens clearly wanted to believe just super simple Have a mentalist and maybe a scientist involved and a mentalist is better than the scientist because scientists So they could watch me and they'll be like I was doing it right? We're designed we're we're literally it's like get a card sheet to beat other card sheets Right so get me involved. Yeah, and then let's do the same thing And I'm gonna say here are the three things I need you to do different and I'm not gonna say how you doing it But do it with these three things and if you do that I'm convinced Okay, we might have to set this up. Yeah One of the problem is is that exact there's very little to gain from that and then also we got bad energy in the room Right that's the whole thing you ever see when urie geller was debunked by the amazing Randy and Johnny Carson And he couldn't bend the spoons. I can't do it with him here. He's got bad energy It's not and it's like you know is it bad energy or is this a guy who knows how you're bending the spoons? And so every time you're about to do a move he's like a SOB was like stop right there. Don't move your hand Keep the spoon right there. Don't know. Don't know. Don't look away. Look. It's like it's like my nightmare I had a guy show me how they do the spoons. Yeah, we had a guy demonstrate magic It's like a tree how to do this one. Yeah, and it was like a different kind of spoon. It wasn't a regular spoon No, you could do three spoons. I could do a spoon. Yeah. Yeah, you could bend it with your mind I mean I again, I don't want to knock it, but that's more of a it's not really it's not a psychic power that falls more into the category of a magic trick where You're misdirecting people you're doing something else where I'm not really bending the spoon with my mind There's not supernatural powers involved. They can't lie to you and say that I'm doing it in such a way where you don't know the method And it's layered, but it's sure it's gonna look like it's bending by itself, but it's not this guy was saying that's a kind of metal That as he moves his hand around he heats it up. Yeah, I lined you He lied because he didn't want to tell me how he does. No. Yeah Damn it. Yeah, got me again got you You must enjoy getting people though. I want people lights on your face when you're accurate It's really fun to watch. I hope it's it's contagious, but I enjoy watching reactions. Yeah clearly that's that's the rush right last Do not love laughs. Of course. Yeah, you ever go into a room and nobody's laughing and you's bomb and you just eat it It's like not fun. How often do you bomb anymore? Oh new jokes bomb so you'll bomb for chunks You'd bomb in segments, you know, you have to figure out how a bit works and sometimes you try a bit in a way like in the middle of you like ooh, this is not the way and then you have to kind of just and You're doing a lot of sets of the mothership. Yeah. Yeah, yeah, and how much do you get allowances? What's the clock for being Joe Rogan before it's like oh no? Let's just see if you're funny as a person. Where does that end? You got to be funny pretty quick people. Yeah, people are good for like a minute. Yeah, they're happy to see you for like a minute Only a minute huh? Yeah, it did not much time man Jerry Seinfeld talked about that one So he in famous buys you about 30 seconds. Oh, I thought it's more that's what he said No, no Especially on a night filled with like really top notch comedians, right? Killers is the mothership every night. It's all a bunch of killers So you got to be but that's also why we do it that way, you know The one thing that's really bad for comedians is when they start only doing their crowds So like they do it on the road and they do large places and Then they have the same opening act over and over again. So they're never challenged right. Yeah, that that makes people soft 90% of the time you made that number up. Yeah, but it's like a high number You know because you get soft right? Yeah, I did this is funny So I used to go to the comedy seller. I totally I love comedy like a fish in hotto I lived in the village for I don't years and this is pre-kids a lot more time I was we used to go to the seller when you could get in the seller like that now good luck, right? and we would see just everybody over and over and I think you had a month Mike Vekyone sure so good. Me. Oh great God. So great guy Amazing super funny and he went on a night where it was just like dropping dropping dropping and he had to follow Seinfeld And Seinfeld goes on and just hammers it and then Mike Vekyone comes on and you know the bathroom in the seller Mm-hmm Which is about the size of like a quarter of this table where you're touching arms when you're taking a leak next to some dude I went in there and I was quite drunk and I'll never forget this I've worked with Mike's hints and I was telling dude You probably don't remember me, but I was such a drunk idiot and we were touching arms while we're peeing and I always felt bad about them So drunk like dude forget Seinfeld you killed it. You're they like stop talking to me while we're peeing That threshold and I tried to ask you know like because we did a gig together And he opened for me and I was like do you is there any chance you remember? It's like dude so many drunk idiots have been next to me at the seller telling me stuff I'm like the night where you drop that you know that that trying to see if you remember it right and I wanted to Apologize for it because I felt so bad and I'm like I was talking to you all your piss in and dude I just loved you so much And he forgot you didn't even know this moment But I'm like I've been holding this weight for a while Mike and I'm a big fan and I'm sorry I talked to you all we both had our dicks out Line in the sand that I have just crossed brother. That's hilarious and he forgot about it It's easy. No It's like when I have gigs where people come back to me three years later like dude Do you remember this thing and I go of course I do yes No most of the most of the time you don't remember you try I remember the best and the worst man I remember like I remember some moments where I bombed so bad that it is Seared in your DNA you know that feeling oh yeah, and it's usually ones where you're not to blame But the buck stops here You know I'm saying like where the setup is terrible the outdoor gig I had one where god it was like the town of Charlotte or some some town hired me some city and I had Insert all these data points about the city and we're like normally we do two or three things I will mention two or three things in the course of a show and if it's ten minutes forget it It's I don't want to be a salesperson up there people tune out if they're like what are you selling me something right now Right, and I had to say eight or nine things about the town of was it Charlotte And they at the last moment we do dress rehearsal go by the way We're all dressing as genies and we're gonna have a life size genie lamp on stage And it's gonna start doing smoke while you're doing something I don't really like any of these things But I was newer to show because I'm like I go with it the whole time I'm on stage The smoke is going Like at 100% more coughing. It's going terrible. I can't see the person who's mind. I'm reading I'm sweating. I'm trying to talk about the Billy Graham Museum I'm dying a slow death up there I get two things in a row wrong and you know if you bomb your opener And your closer like your dead I left apologizing. You never want to leave a stage of pop. They somehow still loved it. I don't even know how But I sweated through that suit It was like I you know when you question what you're doing in life. Yeah, that was like a qu- I'm like maybe I'm not Supposed to be doing this well also you probably say okay never doing that kind of setup again Kind of but me I'm more catastrophized and I'm like yeah, I should just be done But then I came back I came back I picked myself up To yeah funny enough tomorrow's my my my one of my daughters fifth birthday and I'm doing a show at school for five year olds Oh wow, yeah, man, I gotta get back but uh, sweetheart. This is like the sweet spot where they still think I'm cool Before I'm gonna be like don't do this in a barisostad And last year for my oldest son who was at the time of just turned eight I did his school second graders and do date me alive Because I I'm not doing this like this is you know my sweet spot is mentalist I had to brush it off the dust in my kids show which I haven't touched in like 25 years Thank God. I'm not doing kids shows anymore no offense to kids show magicians, but like that's that ship is sailed and man second graders are ruthless Ruthless why second graders because I don't know man like like one kid I I finish this show okay and during the show my wife is in the room recording I'm like don't record and I had I had like look at my wife at one point and I'm whispered Because one kids like it's in your hand show me that show me that and I'm like dude show And I had, I had to like look at my wife at one point and I'm whispered. Because one kid's like, it's in your hand. Show me that. Show me that. And I'm like, dude, shut up. And I'm not good at it. I'm not having done it in a while. Right. So I'm just bombing on tricks. And thankfully, 95% of the crime actually liked it. It was just these two kids who just got me. When I went home, one of my neighbors saw me and he goes to me and he goes, oh my God, what's wrong? Are you okay? Because my face was like, I don't even know what to say right now. Like I, maybe I shouldn't be doing this. I had to at one point tell the teacher. I'm like, I'm actually like, I'm, I actually do this for a living. I'm really trying to try to flex. I'm like, I haven't, I mean, like I, I'm not actually this bad. Like I, that's hilarious. Yeah. That's hilarious. Oh. Do you think comedy is kind of a bit of hypnotizing people? Oh, yeah. The best comedians, you the pacing, the rhythm. Like I was watching the Tom Segera special this morning. I don't know how well you know his, I mean, you know him well. But like he had a bit about flying first class. Do you remember that one? I don't. He talks about, I don't think he's using the two anymore. The fact that he gets upgraded. He buys coach tickets. It was early was years ago. And he gets upgraded so much that he gets first class tickets. And he go, should I not say this bit? I don't know if I want to stick this bit. And he goes, it literally the moment I get upgraded. This feeling of superiority washes over me. Right. Where I'm like, don't, when people walk, they don't look in the U-port pieces. Shit. Like he's just so, it goes, I dare you if you're in coach to try to use my bathroom. If I'm in the front, I will put my hand on your chest, bro. It's, I've seen that a hundred times and it's just is funny. If not funnier every time I watch it. And it's like the timing, the rhythm. I, I learned more from comedy than ever magic or mentalism. Which is more interesting. Because we've talked about it a bunch. Comics, I'm like, I think we're hypnotizing people because I feel hypnotized when someone's killing. When someone's killing, I'm allowing them to think for me. Yep. You're like, they're taking me on a ride. And I'm just, I'm not thinking at all about what would I say? What would I, I'm just in their head or there in my head. Right. And also when you bring someone along and when you have that like, just, you drop just amazing line. Like I just, there's so many, I mean, listen, I, I, I consume so much comedy, but like I love watching the rhythm, seeing where people go with it. The people that are more short for them, like punch delivery. Right versus like a long form, like a Nate Barghat. See like watching Andrew do his things. Shalls amazing. Man, some of these guys are just like, you can't see where the joke is going to come and how you just squeeze every bit of juice out of the orange. And the good call backs. I think that ultimate hypnotist is David. Tell y'all yet, David. David, because David, there's a rhythm. There's a rhythm the way. He's like, you just get lost in his thinking. Right. And he just takes you on the, and he's so effortless. And he does so many sets. Like he's so polished that there's like this effortlessness to his movements and the rhythm and everything. It's like, it's wild. Paul, it looks Sebastian Maniscalco. I'm freaking love watching Sebastian. There's so many, there's so many people that came up now that I've seen, like over and over and over and watch them go up like Sam, Maril, I've been a fan of Sebastian. Sebastian was actually the first guy to recommend you to me. I love Sebastian. Shout out to Sebastian. I love you, Sebastian. Yeah. Was there anyone else after that? Kind of a couple of people told me you were awesome. Nice. Quite a few. Now Sebastian's such a stand up guy. This friend of mine, when I told him that it was a chain gill. Chain gill says, isn't it? It is. Yeah. You just thought that you shouldn't let down your guard. I just knew it. How'd you know? I just, that was it. That was the moment. What did you see? I can't tell it. I went out with, right? When you said this friend of mine, I knew you were going to protect your parks. And I said, could it have been Ari, could have been Mark. And I immediately knew it was going to be Shane Gilles. Because neither of those two would have said, definitely not Mark would have said, kill him. He's a witch. He's, I just knew it. Yep. That's Shane. That's such a sense of humor too. He's a witch kill him. Yeah. That's so Shane. That's so Shane. Yeah. That was a little bit of a giveaway because I said it was my friend. Yep. That is. That was the giveaway. That was the giveaway because I didn't tell you it's someone that I know. You said 100% so now I'm thinking like he must live in Austin. Like there was a lot of, a lot of indicators. Yeah. Whatever. But that's part of the thing. Right. But that's also you admitting that this isn't like super natural. I'm not psychic. So everybody, when people put me on the spot and like, tell me this right now, I literally go, it's not Netflix. You know, on demand feature. Like I, again, that's where these skills, when people like, why don't you win a lot of me? Why don't you like all these things that are silly where you don't get what I do apparently? Do you believe that there is any sort of psychic power that people have? Like when when someone gets a phone call from someone they're just thinking about intuition, right? I think there's, I think there's, I mean, listen, that's like a bigger picture question. Like, you know, where does your mind expand? Like psychedelics? Like where, where, what is there beyond this plane? Right. Clearly, you know, people are aware of there's it'd be silly to think. But how do you kind of get on that frequency? There's no question that people have an intuition. Again, could I call it psychic powers? I've had things happen that I can't explain to you based on the skills I have. Does that make sense? What? Well, I've guessed things from people where I didn't do the normal way I do it. Do you understand what I mean? Like I don't have a, there's a series of steps on how I do it. Kind of like a chess player. Okay. You get a chess player. You get maggens crossing and you get the best chess player in the world. They can literally blindfold, play 30 people and I'm like, how do you, how do you, how you doing that, right? That's like magic to me. Right. But you're keeping track of all that stuff in your mind and you're doing stuff that is indistinguishable from real magic, in my opinion. So you've hyper focused on one skill. That's what I've done. You just think it's a lot of skills. What I've focused on is one thing is assessing what people are thinking and what they give away that they don't think they're giving away. That's all. I just guess secret information for a living. But to make it exciting and retaining, I add bells and whistles to make it interesting. Otherwise, be boring. How many mentalists are out there? Because they're community guys, you share notes? Sure. So there's like a, I wouldn't call it a brain trust, but there's people I bounce ideas off of when I'm creating kind of like you punch up jokes where there, here's what's rare in our world. There's creators and then there's performers. Do you know what I'm saying? Like writers and it's like singer songwriters. How many people have their songs written for them? Right. Some of the biggest stars in the world. Right. And how many are like Taylor Swift style, where you write and this and you get a piece of you in it. Yeah. And there's something about when you write your own song. I'm not knocking people. Don't write their own song, but there's something that you feel different. Right. Which explains the connection Taylor Swift has to her fans? I believe so because you're getting a piece of you that somebody else can't. I'm sure that's the random pop star that gets like some factory. You'll still like it. Like I could love a backstreet boy song. Don't get me wrong. I like it. I wanted that way, Joe. But like when you are with her and I'm sure like Jack Hanson, she has a huge amazing crew of writers that I'm sure get things out of her. And I know a lot of it like music producers, but you feel some connection. So what again, I think is differentiating. There's a lot of mentalists, but it's a really small number that are the singer-songer, the creator performer who have the thoughts and are constantly doing new stuff. Because we are a cover band. Most mentalists are a cover band of other mentalists. We don't need to do new stuff. You could literally do the same thing. This is pretty amazing. I could do this for the next 40 years and make a good living. God bless. And why do new stuff? When Louis C.K. was popping out three specials a year, everyone was like, why are you doing this to all the rest of us? You're so creative. You don't have to. In our profession, you really don't have to. Because you don't have to bury material. If I'm not putting stuff online, if I'm not going like crowd work the Metrite model, by the way, I love that guy. But like it changed the game. Now if you want to blow up on social, you've got to be doing this or do current events, do topical, do things you can burn. But I can't put my real act out there. Right. You enjoy the creative aspect. I love it. I find it boring. If I keep doing the same stuff, of course, I'm on board. Right. And I get like sad. Right. But it's interesting because I wonder how many people you can bounce ideas off of. It seems like you're kind of a lone wolf. In that world, I don't think there's a lot of comedians. Like I could call a lot of comedians right now. Right. Bouncing ideas off of. There's way less mentalists. And there's way more magicians. And then of the group of mentalists, if you were to do the core one. And again, this is not subjective. I'm much more like objective the way we looked at names. How many of them have done certain volume of TV appearance, certain volume of views, like which ones are getting the attention of the world and the zeitgeist. It's a very, very small number because you got to innovate. This is like an attention economy. You have to do stuff that's compelling to the viewer. And for me, I don't think about myself. It's a trick in life. I think about who's watching. Well, that's what do you mean by it's a trick in life? Well, like it helps you in everything in life. Right. My secret sauce is that I hold the mirror up not to myself, but to you, do you get it? Like when you're watching and you're watching a football thing, right? What's intriguing is the fact that your football viewer, if you're meeting somebody and you want to be memorable, learn more about them, start listening more. Like I'll tell you a story. I met Steven Spielberg. I did Steven Spielberg's dad's birthday. And I got in that room. Have you met Steven Spielberg? No. And I'm like, you know, a crazy fan. Like I can't explain to you how many movies he had as a kid that were life changing. And I'm like, dude, closing counters third kind. Like, yeah, he's one of the greatest of all time. Ever. Yeah. And so I'm in the room. I've done stuff for his family. This is not like a big blowout corporate event. It's like 80 people. What would be does it mind sharing this? And it was a great time. Amazing. And at the end of it, I'm like getting some FaceTime with Spielberg. Right. And I woke up to him and we spent almost 20 minutes talking to each other, which is like, I didn't expect that. I thought you'd be like, oh, great job. You know, do you know how many questions? I had a million questions. Do you have any questions I asked him? How many? Zero. Really? Zero. And that's like right there, I learned a lesson in life that applies to everything. That's why Steven Spielberg. He is naturally curious. This guy, wealthy, beyond belief, stories beyond belief, he could make an ego driven. And he could have been telling me all this. And I would have been a hang in on my every word. But instead, he wanted to know more about me. And he kept asking me what I was like, just pause, dude, I have like a lot of questions. Like, come on. And so I learned and I could have just left that in the middle of forgetting any questions in Steven Spielberg. Instead, I realized this is the person at the highest level of what he does. And he is naturally curious. And he lets other people shine. And this is something to do in life. Right. Which is you don't know when you meet somebody who they'll be or what they'll be or what can I'm not doing it from a transactional sense. But why I've had so many TV appearances. And when I go into a place, I'm going to do stuff for the security guard. I'm going to do something for the person who irons my shirt. I'm going to leave that place like a bomb went off of amazement where everyone around there now likes you. And you don't know when they'll jump ship to another network to another thing. And if they like you sales 101, they're going to want to keep doing business with you. And so those people become your champions elsewhere. And it's kind of a lesson where he could have talked about himself the whole time he didn't. So I should neither. When you go to other places, let other people shine. And that's something I've carried with me. And I think that's a superpower in life that most people don't do. They think what am I going to say next? Right. That's kind of the key to running a good podcast too. Because you really want to extract the most out of the person possible. Right. Where you just want that my questions are basically just try to get you expand. And I just want to find out how you think. For Spielberg, a guy who deals in all these stories and narratives and all these characters and heroes, to me, a unique character like yourself is probably really fascinating to him too. Because he's probably like, I don't know anybody like this. Right. What are you doing? How are you doing? And now he's got a new tool in his toolbox. Totally. Because he's got you. Right. Because you have the spectrum of possibilities in terms of the humans that you meet. And then you meet one that's outside of that. You're like, ooh, I hadn't even considered you before. Right. Where? Who the fuck are you talking about? That was pretty much the question. And then he had like, he was interesting because I don't know if you get this, but I get like the 20 questions is what I call it. AirPods. Yeah. Which is how did you get into this? Right. The opening questions, which you can't blame someone if you got a weird job. Right. People want to hide about it. Right. Like, oh, I did something your family do is like, there's all these questions you're going to get every time. God bless people. against them. Mine is always, I'm doing like a sound check for a gig. And then there was like, all right, so we got this. We got this. And I go, don't you know that we have that? Like, I'm like, okay, so just real quick, where's the green room? Like, you don't know already? I'm like, okay, this is just, I just smile. And I'm like, you know, I never heard that one before, but it's, it's, you get that. Yeah. But in this situation, again, it's like he, he didn't ask those questions. He was very uniquely finding questions that weren't like the usual. Of course, because of study, I mean, he studies humans. Right. I mean, to be a great filmmaker, the way he is to do Schindler's list to do that. That's such a heavy movie man. Have you seen that recently? Private Ryan. Yeah. He's got heavy movies. And then, you know, close encounters is one of my favorite movies. Oh, all time. I mean, the, it's interesting, you know, one of the things I really liked about that movie is he, after he became a father, changed how he felt about the ending of his own movie, he wouldn't have the father leave everybody. Oh, wow. Yeah. Because at the end of the movie, Richard Dreyfuss's character gets on the spaceship and leaves the aliens. Wow. He's like, I would never do that. I didn't know that. Yeah. Do they film it or no? Well, he, it was after the fact, like, you know, he made the movie. I believe when he was younger, he didn't have children. And then as time went on, you know, he looked back on it, he like, oh, God, I would never leave my kids to go on this fucking UFO. Right. Nor would I, Nor would you. No. No. Like, but in this idealistic version of who he thought the Richard Dreyfuss character was in the circumstances, like he had to leave, he had to go, you got to go to the aliens. Sure. So I'll get my phone out and try and get good footage for a change. I'm like, right here, good stuff. I like the tic-tic and gimbal, but I want to see it close up and high death. I know. You got anything? Not there. Not something? I have off air, what I think are people bullshitting me. Oh, I do not have to be off air. I've watched these. I can read people. I can tell. On air. Where the snake oil is, but here's it, that's where it's instinctive. Like, I don't have the tools that you have, but there's a part of me that's like, something smells. I told Jamie when I walked in here and I said, this is again, pass the sniff test and pardon my French, but everyone takes a crap, right? Everyone in the world. I don't care if you're the pope. You take a crap. So if they're being held in a facility, someone's taking crap. Right. And who's cleaning it? I don't think the scientists are. There's a janitor. There's someone in that room. So are you telling me that there's nobody in there that's got a 401k health insurance, some sort of how is someone not getting? Tell me explain to me what NDA they're signing or what they're doing that if they found this out, someone loose lip syncship, somebody would have told somebody who works in that facility who's not the scientist, who's not the military person, and where it gets out. How is that buttoned up tight where nothing gets out ever? Well, for 50 years, you're telling me there's a basement somewhere in this country. Eight stories down where they got those things and no one else knows who's credible and can release it. How? Occam's razor. What do you think? I think the government can keep things secret for a long time. I think they did with the Manhattan project. I think they've done it with other projects in the past. I think it's possible. You think it's possible. It's just silo. Nobody knows all the info. Because people do talk. There's a lot of people talking and people share similar stories and they have for decades. I think there's something to it. I just don't know what it is. I think we had Jesse Michaels on yesterday who has this amazing show on YouTube. Probably the best YouTube show on aliens and UFOs and UAPs. He's very agnostic in his thinking and he's very objective. He also is very, very, very thorough as far as his understanding of the information. Even he is baffled as much as he knows. He knows more about siloed technology than pretty much anybody does in regard to this UAP phenomenon. He points to this guy, Thompson Brown, who was working on gravity technology in the 1950s. They had working models. He thinks that they have some sort of a gravity propulsion device. But then there's things like Roswell where the crash. If all those stories are true, that's two early. It's 47. There's two early. There's no way they had working models of these devices back then. He thinks it's possible. He's not a, I know this is true. He thinks it's possible that it is both United States government secret projects that people are seeing and there's probably quite a few of them. We actually pulled a few of them up and showed some of them that look like UFOs that probably is part of what people are seeing. But he thinks is also probable that there's some other things and these other things could be from anywhere. Then there's just the Fermi paradox. If they're all out there, where are they? There's so many planets. There's so many galaxies. Well, that's gotta be the case. It has to be the case. It's the question of whether or not they have visited or whether or not they're here. Then there's just weird Peruvian mummies that we went over, these tridectal mummies, that they take CAT scans of and you see the tissue and the bones and they were all found and what is it called? What's the kind of earth that they found that these things are? The dye something, do you remember what it is? Whether you're all dried out? I know exactly which is the description, but I don't remember the word. Something earth. I know the word. I can't. It's escaping me right now. All this stuff is very fascinating. So all this and ancient on depictions, on cave walls of these things. We pulled up these tapestries, there are a thousand years old that had these three fingered creatures. Very weird. Very weird. But that doesn't necessarily doesn't mean they're alien. We talked to, we talked rather about all the various versions of human beings that are finding now, from genosovans to the island of Flores, Hobbit people. There's a weird variety of humans that went extinct. And these tridectal things could very well have been that. Yeah, it was Christopher Melanon, right? And that was my favorite one. Because I think I don't want to butcher it, I think you call it ultra terrestrial. It makes the most sense, which is think about right now if you just drop the bottle in the ocean. Right. What are the odds you ever run into that bottle in the ocean? Well, that's what time is. If we've been run for 13 billion years, sure, there's aliens. But how do you, we've only been around for a few thousand, like it's such an infant, it's a grain of sand in the whole beach. So what if, what would you do right now if we had technology a thousand years from now, 2,000 years from now, right? AI multiplied out the whole nine. What would you do? You'd send these things everywhere. Sure. Just like sci-fi and you'd plant them and you'd come out every now and again and check what's up. Sure. My likely thing is, I don't think there's any biological beings or aliens. I think you've just got automated drones in essence that are running patterns that have some sort of, I don't know, that makes way more sense. It certainly could be that. I mean, that's what we're doing currently on Mars. Right. What we do with probes, with James Webb telescope, a lot of the different things that we use, we just send a machine out and get information from them. And then also I think at a certain point in time, we're being realistic about what we're doing right now. We're going to have biological beings and then we're going to have some kind of digital being. We're going to have some sort of a, whether it's an actual physical robot or whether it's just an artificial intelligence that's a signal that we can send. And it has enough compressed information where it can compute and calculate and do it. It's a technology beyond our wildest dreams is a thousand years away from now, right? A thousand years away we have a God. So would, if you extrapolate where we're at now with quantum computing and the ability to calculate things that if you turn the entire universe, every molecule of the universe into a computer, it would take you so much time according to Mark Andreessen that the universe would die of heat death before it could solve an equation that a quantum computer can solve in minutes. Right. This is, we're talking about nuts. No, it's crazy. And this is just 2025 stuff. You know, if you looked at the internet from 1994, it's like archaic, 14 form modem. I remember, I remember on that generation, you know, that's 31 years ago. So like what are we talking about when we're dealing with 31,000 years? So conceivably a life form has existed and gone through the same stages as us without catastrophes, without nuclear war, without all the things that could trip us up. We could be dealing with things that are beyond our imagination, literally beyond our imagination and they're probably around us all the time. I had an idea that I wondered. I've always thought, what if ideas are life forms? Right. Because we think of life as being it has to breathe, it has to have cells, it has to. But everything in this room and everything in this city and everything on this planet that's a man-made physical object came out of an idea. And the idea is compound upon each other. You know, the more people working on these ideas, the more competition, the more the ideas will flourish, and the more the ideas will be more complex and more efficient versions of this idea. Like it has to, but it has to start as a creative thought inside someone's head. And either a creative thought that you could apply to existing creative thoughts or a completely unique one, like Francis Crick or, you know, when they're figuring out certain aspects of biology or certain aspects of quantum field, whatever they're doing that's breakthrough thing. Where is that coming from? Right. Coming from an idea. And then these ideas, they manifest itself in physical form through human labor. Well, it's, Schrodinger's cat, right. Does it happen if you don't observe it? That's the weird thing about quantum physics, right? It's completely, you can't imagine it. But if you don't open that box, nothing's happened yet. Hasn't happened until you observe it. Right. They prove that. Well, that's what it gets really weird. You know, when people, there's a lot of people that are deciding now that to approach it, approach it as if consciousness is the reason these things exist, not consciousness is seeing that these things exist, that they only exist when you're interacting with them, which is like what? Some of the stuff when you read that, like I've read books about string theory about quantum physics, you're just, they're two, it's too hard to process in the real world when you write the table, but the table's actually empty space. There's almost nothing in it's solid. Every atom, I don't even know what the numbers are, like Neil de Christ is, but how small is the nucleus and the actual physical items out of it, they're empty, everything's empty. Everything's empty. And then you get to subatomic and you're like, okay, well, now this is just pure wizardry. Right. Yeah. That they exist and they don't exist. This is something Michael Jackson said about ideas, start like right here. Philip says we went and met with Michael and Kenny said, Michael, you've got to stop. We've got an incredible show. We don't need any more vignettes. Michael said, but Kenny God channels this through me at night. I can't sleep because I'm so supercharged. Kenny said, but Michael, we have to finish. Can't God take a vacation without missing a beat. Michael said, you don't understand. If I'm not there to receive these ideas, God might give them to Prince. Incredible. Just an incredible Michael slept one night. That's why purple rain exists. Did you know that? Little red Corvette was going to have a totally different meaning with Michael Jackson. Isn't that crazy? Too soon. God might give them to Prince. Yeah. Wow. Wow. Well, songs are interesting like that. You know, I met last year. I was in Sweden. I did this conference brilliant minds. Amazing. And I met Max Martin. Do you know who that is? No. Max Martin is you should look this up. How many hits he has? So Max Martin has I think more number one hits than anyone, but Paul McCartney. Check that if I'm right. I got there. There's so many interesting people as amazing conference. And I was ready to geek out with him because I'm just so curious. It's the creative. Like how does somebody come up with something is fasting to me? And one of his recent songs was a blinding light by the weekend. You know, I want such a massive hit and I just love that song. And I just like just like perfect sounds like a movie track in my mind. And how did you do that? Like how, you know, where did you start? Did you guys have a beat? Did you know the lyrics? Like I'm just so curious. How does that happen? Is it like 10 minutes? Is it months? And he just walked me through like he had a vision. We have this. We have like all this stuff that we sit down and then the first the music then that I'm like just wow, it's so amazing to create something like that that a billion people now listen to number one in every country in the world. It's like how do you manufacture something so kind of perfect that everyone in the world likes it? Yeah. And is there for it? Do you know it's going to be the hit before it is the hit? That to me is the most like how many bands get stuck for the rest of their life playing in a song that they fricking hate that they didn't know was going to be there, especially if you're one hit wonder. Yeah. You're like dead in the eyes. You're like, I got to play this again. Yeah. I got to, you know, come on. I leaned like I love that song. I love a song and the artist doesn't want to sing it anymore. Like oh, and then they start singing in a different way at a concert. And like why you doing this weird, I can tell a brow. I want to hear like the radio. Yeah, that's that's interesting. That's kind of the difference though between musicians and anybody else because musicians you want to hear the same thing over and over again. Exactly. Yeah. I have that a little bit where if I get clients who book me over and over, they'll, I say to them, do you want me do something different? Cause it's like jokes, right. You know, it's like I've seen Gaffigan, you're going to do hot pockets like people call it out. And I want you. Yeah. But you know the punch line, right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Yeah. Or people are pissed. For me, I need at least two of the things to be the same because people want to see thing catch it the second time. Got it. So there's a level of they heard about it and they're like, Oh, you gotta do that thing with the thing like you know. Yeah. And so if I do everything new, yeah, they're kind of happy, but they still want a greatest hit. Right. And it took me years to learn that cause they used to be like, Oh, I can't do the same thing. I gotta be, you know, unique. And then I learned that that's not better. You know, I was just thinking like, mentalists would be the best. best police interrogators. Right. My naughty report style, right? It don't you think? Like if someone, but don't you think of a police interrogator learn the skills of being a mentalist? I think they could. But again, it's the best analogy that I can give you is a director holding the camera. I'm always holding the camera and pointing it at what I want. Does that make sense? What police interrogators are going to say, okay, to the purpose. Think of where you were that night. Look this way. Look that way. Do you like you? They're not a stupid. Do all that stuff. Right. This is done when it's done under the guise of entertainment. And if they do do that, you're kind of leading the witness. You could lead whatever people are going to it's not a it's not a show. So you're not going to have a willing participant. You can't be hypnotized against your will. Most stage hypnotists, they do compliance testing first. Do you know what I mean by that? They have never in the audience hold your hands together and imagine in like who can't get their hands apart and the person who goes like this right away, they're like, I'm not bringing that on stage. Right. They're not doing anything. Right. You have to be able to be hypnotized. Which would be suggestible. Mine is in this or suggestible. But mine is a maze where every time you hit a roadblock, I'm moving you around until I get you to the spot where you go through. And so that's why you asked me why I didn't do this. It wasn't going to work. I knew it when I have I have more things planned than you know right now. Okay. I've been thinking about this for a while. But I'm not going to do them all. Okay. Because again, how you structure an act, you leave the best for last. You never leave your own, the best going on the home stretch. Are we are we home stretched? Are we at the final moment? We were almost at three hours. So yeah, wow, it was fast. Huh? Flue by. Remember when you asked me did I wake up early or late? Right. Do you know what I think I got wrong? Right. Right. Except well, he said the vowel, but he thought of melody, but I either why was that you know, I mean, that was a little bit tricky because A I you anyway, it doesn't matter. Here's what I want to do. You said 50, 50 coin flip. Okay. And I brought one. You said who was coins? What do we got here? A coin. What is it? Candy half, right? Yeah. All right. Let's go. I feel like one is not exciting enough. That's like a football game. Here's what I do. I don't know if you can see me from over there. Let's do three tosses. Okay. Statistically, how many we get right? Two. One and a half. All right. Either way, call it in the air. Okay. Can you see me with that? It's the tables real busy. Okay. Call it in the air. Tales. You going tails? Yeah. What do we get? Pets. All right. All right. Whatever. Over one. Okay. You felt good about it when you did it? No. Okay. Let's do it. Tails you going tails. Yeah. What do we get pets? All right, all right Whatever over one. Okay. You felt good about it when you did it. No, okay So I really put it in my head. No do what I mean It's a queen flip. It's not a trick. Okay. Now it gets in your head Because you guessed it and you're like didn't work the first time, but I nobody cares nothing right not right You're ready call it in the air. What are you going with tails? You're going tails again. Yeah, you're going tails again. Yep I can't I see I that time I would never change his head over to All right, all right third try his charm. Okay, you think you got it. Yep. What are the odds on that? So this is gotta be your shot Call it tails tails tails. I was what tails never fails. What do we get you? You're over three heads again. You're over three you done? Nope You want one more sure you insist. Yeah. All right. You're not done. I said three. Okay. Check over here Has that envelope been there the whole time? This envelope. Yes, we sealed this right the moment I arrived at this studio, right? Okay, you're gonna get it this time just for the okay Cails tails. Yeah, oh for four. Are you doing this? I'm not doing anything You're not making it land on heads. Oh for four. Do you know how to do it? I like do you have a method call it? Oh, whatever you want tails. So did I do it? You said it was it? It's heads But that was an encounter You just bad luck. Is that five in a row? That seems odd. Let's try one more Do it yourself do it yourself double check what you will check the still tails on there still do okay But this doesn't count because this one's yours Put anyway doing table. I just didn't have room on the table But did you guess tails? Yeah, okay? Just kept going. It's not a trick. It's statistical. All right Bit cents is probably five in a row of heads. It seems I said to you. I hope everyone stayed along for this journey I said this is your future Right, but I lied Past present and future. Oh my god. I'm gonna come over there. Open up. It's you. You'll see what I mean But I don't wait opening you open it up There's two things in there now freeze right there. Okay Show us what you have But not one's on envelope It's kind of folded piece of paper one is Manila envelope. Is it all right if I come up is it's tape is it taped everywhere? Yes taped over here. I'm coming over. Okay You want to do it? Can you guys hear me? We're gonna open it. Where am I is it camera here? It's just my but I have the there's a camera over there. Okay, you tell me. Okay, I'll go around you I just want to see this All right Joe Looking side, okay, I want to look inside and before you got it. No, no, no look look look look look look Okay, I'm looking and tell me you see it says two words. Can I show this around? It's a joke. It's a joke and it's a joke and and I don't want touch Well, you do it. I won't touch grab that one that can't go down and read to us. Grab that. That's your pass Hold on to this. Okay, read out loud. That's been in there from before we started It says Joe Rogan will get three coin flips at a row wrong insist on doing one more and then get that one wrong too The present you can't change that The past Joe take out what's in there. Okay, tell us all look around the edge is this is staple Like I usually use to lick stuff feeler like do this brings the right way to see look look I don't want touch. I just want you to like look around. Yes, it's staple. Is there any When I walked in here Joe I made a big thing of it. I said I want you to have this before right sealed. It's been here the whole time field Yes Impulsive spontaneous in the moment got it and I said you did something get in your head who earlier when I said any fighter You've ever you've ever seen what fighter came to mind? I said Anderson silver yeah, and how many fighters rip it open? Okay, how many fighters? Did you say cycle three and I said be very specific how many fighters do you think cycle through your head? I? Don't know I said of dozen at least it's he did he say a dozen before you said 14 Read please open that I'll take that out. Okay, and I want you to please read what's been in there from the moment I walked on this set It said Joe will have 14 fighters go through his head but with Anderson Silva in the end and a fight that he won Past present and future that's insane past present future the other piece of paper. There's one that's got literally insane Because at first I was gonna go with the beat Zabeet magma magma. I'm sure off do this grab the other piece of paper It's got a paper clip freeze right there. This is the future stop stop. Don't move. Hold it right there in your hands Nobody knows the future nobody knows the future. It's true. Nobody does right imagine right now best magic trick in the world boom I throw a smoke bomb right disappear disappear right? Anyone ever Someone famous though otherwise. I want to see my grandma again Up here's right here instead imagine you literally I don't want Jamie do but you pull up a photo you show me this person's photo Got it say it who do who do you see right there in that chair say it? What's their name? Miles Davis can ask you a question. Yes, cuz I like this. I here's what I always like to do I always call it the grass is greener. I can see when people's eyes shift When they have one person and like I want that person, but that's the front of their mind I can always get in the front but for this to be a legendary ending who isn't the back? Who is the person you thought of before Miles Davis tell us mom and Ali? Muhammad Ali right that's right. Look the gold standard the reason you're gonna talk about this for years It's cuz you change your mind the last moment that's been in there for when I walked in here. Look at what's in there right now Muhammad Ali How's that possible? That's insane You are which we're gonna have to kill you lock the door. Jamie Bam that's really insane man. That's really weird. I want to ask you how you do this But you're not gonna tell me y'all camera tell you everything you show me where Bob Lazar is hiding you a foe I wish I knew I wish I knew that's insane dude That's crazy. It was Anderson Silver versus Rich Frank Rich Franklin. Oh, what a good fight. What a great fight This you keep this you keep you locking the safe for when I come next time assume the clothes. I will I'll be back on the safe This is a really nuts man. I don't know how you did it. It's really crazy the coin flip the 14 Different fighters like all of it. Thank you fucking nuts. Change your bank pin code right now. Change it. Yeah. I'm going to Jesus Christ Jamie anything to add to us? No, I don't know. You should have locked up when you just decided to send it there This is like pure wizardry dude. I don't know how you're doing it. Appreciate that. I don't think you're ever gonna be explained to me either Thank you. I appreciate you man. I'm a huge fan for many years And I love what you're putting out in the world and I'm telling you I just I love it and thank you so much I'm honored to be here. It's an honor for me too. This is like truly insane I've been blown away before but I don't think I've ever been blown away this much This is really nuts and it's like shattered my worldview I have to rethink how I think about everything and what signals human beings give off and like how someone could read some point that Pretty nuts. Thanks, mother. Thank you