That's hilarious. This episode of Joe Rogan Experience Podcast is brought to you by stamps.com. If you go to stamps.com and click on the upper, there's a photograph of an old school microphone. You know, the kind that everybody likes to use in photographs. Nobody likes to use those stupid things in practice because they suck. But for whatever reason, there's a certain piece of nostalgia that's connected to one of those old school microphones, like the birth of the beast. Like that's the origin of it. So for whatever talking into a microphone, people love that. But click on that thing. It's an icon and enter in the code word JRE, just for Joe Rogan Experience. And you will get a $110 bonus offer, includes a digital scale and up to $55 free postage. Stamps.com is an awesome thing to have if you are running a personal business. If you have a small business and you work for yourself, maybe you're an artist, maybe you send things online. Go into the post office as a huge drag for people. And with something like stamps.com, you can buy and print official U.S. postage using your own computer and printer. If you buy any of Brian's kitty cat t-shirts, those desk watch shirts at deskwad.tv. He sends every all the stuff for like anything he sells, bumper stickers, t-shirts, all that stuff goes through stamps.com. And he used to have to do it at the post office and waiting in line. It's a huge pain in the ass. So it's really easy. You do it all on your, your own home computer. You have a digital scale. You weigh everything out. But the postage on it, mail man picks it up. Boom, you're done. And again, use the code word JRE and you'll save yourself some cash. We're also brought to you by hover. Hover is a domain name company that's owned by the same people that own and you know how much we love them. Hover has the same sort of principles. Hover is a really easy website to use. Very intuitive. I actually have domains that I have personally registered through hover. So I have actual experience doing it in a fun monkey like me. You can pull it off with no hitches. You can too. They also offer good stuff like they give you free things like who is domain name. I identity guard or your anonymity. So you don't have to, the actual word is privacy. Who is domain name privacy? But it's that's basically what it is. Like so if you have some freaky website and you don't want people to know where you live, which is probably a good idea. They will do that for free whereas other companies who is domain name privacy is actually something you have to pay for. It's kind of silly. If you go to hover.com forward slash Rogan you will save 10% off your domain name registrations. All right so go there you have freaks. And we're also brought to you by on it.com as always. I've always searched for a way to describe what on it's supposed to be. And it's like a human performance website. What we sell is all stuff that we find to be beneficial whether it's for fitness like kettlebells and battle ropes and weight vest and medicine balls and chin up bars and all sorts of things that I think are very beneficial for fitness to to get your body in shape to do things to foods like hemp protein powder and walnut almond cashew butter. We try to just sell you a bunch of healthy shit like whatever hemp protein bars which really delicious and nutrient dense. And I think the idea behind the company is just sell shit that you would use. Sell shit that you would buy and you would use and that's essentially what on it is. If you use a code named Rogan you will save 10% off any and all supplements. See that quick I can get through that shit Jamie. That was quick. That was like professional. Alright ladies and gentlemen, Graham Hancock is here and I can't tell you how fucking pumped I am to talk to you sir and cue the music. Let's get this party rolling. Good job Rogan. Experience. Powerful Graham Hancock. Oh he's sir. You've you've kicked the green bench. Yes. Yes. After a 24 year intense relationship with the green goddess or the green bitch depending on what mood she's in. I had to stop and I've come in for some criticism for this and I feel it's important to say that I hugely value and love cannabis. I think it's a wonderful herbal ally and I think that I don't think that I would ever have written my books of historical mystery. If I had not encountered cannabis rather late in life I did not smoke any dope until I was 37 years old and I'm now 62. Wow. And roughly rather about the age of 38 that's when I started getting into historical mysteries for that it was all. Of course it's total stoner stuff. Absolutely. Before that it was all carried the fairs you know. Right. So but suddenly something opened up for me and I'm very and I'm very grateful to the herb for that and initially my real I again I need to emphasize this. I think the problem I eventually ended up having with cannabis it's not the fault of cannabis. It's the fault of Graham Hancock. I think my relationship became abusive with her but it was not initially. Right. And initially it was something I would do evenings and weekends. I would not try to write while I was actually stoned. I would do my days work and then chill out in the evening with a pipe or a joint. That was that was how it was for me for quite a while and I went through my first big historical mystery book The Sign on the Seal which was published in 1992 with that pattern. In other words I would I would be smoking only after I downed tools at the end of the evening and I was ready to chill. And that worked fine but then when I started when I started writing fingerprints of the gods which was the biggest book I've ever done a five million copy bestseller all around the world. When I started writing that I thought I'll experiment. Let's see if I can be stoned and right and I discovered that I could. I could be stoned and right. And I like being stoned so much that in a way it urged me to just write all the time because then I had this incredibly good reason to be stoned all the time. And took away all the physical boredom of sitting there in my chair in front of my computer screen. Just everything went away and I went and drifted into this space where I could explore ideas and manifest those ideas down on the page and I literally that's when I began what was to become ultimately an abusive relationship with cannabis which was that I would fire up in those days my joint or my pipe at 9 or 10 in the morning and I would I'm a hard worker. I worked 60 hours a day very often when I'm writing so come two o'clock the next morning I'd still be there smoking away. And as the years went by this became a permanent daily pattern for me whether I was writing or not. I would be stoned from the moment I got up until the moment I went to bed and most people who came by my house or talked to me on the phone they would have had absolutely no idea because I was completely in control. I didn't seem high. I could hold a rational conversation. I was just fine and I just felt really good and this is how it went on for many years and later on about in the early tooth at run about 2005 actually I think perhaps a little earlier. One of my kids told me that you know this stuff this smoke is you don't need to have combustion products. Why don't you use a vaporizer? So I bought myself a volcano and I'm the internet and and and then I heard that the British government was going to ban the use of banal peripherals so I bought myself two more volcanoes. Well, okay, that's quite expensive but that shows how dedicated I was. Yeah, to make sure that you covered your bases. I had to make sure that I covered my bases and and then I would be vaporizing from nine in the morning until two o'clock the next morning seven days a week and and increasingly strong strains and this is one thing that I would say if we lived in a regime in a rational regime where there was no attempt by the government to police our states of consciousness we could have much more choice in the kind of cannabis we get holder. For example, I would have liked to have cannabis with much more CBD and maybe less THC. The varieties I was smoking were very very THC loaded. What's the difference in effect? Well, okay, I mean, depends how much you buy into the research on this but but the lot of good science has been done and the suggestion is that THC can promote or reveal. I don't want to blame the herb anything. It can reveal certain psychotic tendencies in oneself and this is the well-known paranoia which many people associate with smoking cannabis. The CBD is an anti-psychotic agent so the natural herb is balanced with CBD and THC and it looks after you very well but where we go into intensive breeding of the herb focusing on the element that makes you really high which is the THC then we get a get a herb that is somewhat unbalanced as a result of the interference of humanity and and but you get more bang for your buck, you know, that's a very that's a very strong herb and I began to like a particular variety called cheese. I think it's called cheese because it smells like you know old socks or or stilting like a blue cheese and I found a grower who lived local to me who who was just had an amazing green fingers and I would buy from him and and I would sometimes have you know five or six ounces of the herb in my house because I was blazing through this stuff at a tremendous rate. That's enough to you where you could get in trouble for the reason. Well, that's so that's where the paranoia starts to become legitimate, you know, because actually they can though they can't break down your door and they can confiscate your home and take away your liberty and fuck you up forever. You know, they can do that and and so every time I had to ring at the door or you know a car came up the street I would I would you know get paranoid and you were high so that did not high. Did you get paranoid when you were high? Well, this is one of the reasons why look what happened to me was that run about 2003 I started for reasons of research initially working with ayahuasca, the the vine of souls. This is the the powerful psychedelic brew which has been consumed by shamanistic cultures in the Amazon for thousands and thousands of years and it's not called the vine of souls for nothing. It's it's it's an extraordinary portal into other realms and in some ways those realms are associated with death and perhaps what waits for us after death nobody knows the answer to that but in ayahuasca you have certain experiences relating to that. And right from the beginning when I started to drink ayahuasca I mean this sounds not to anybody who hasn't done DMT or who hasn't drunk ayahuasca but you do meet intelligent entities and more and more around the world people drinking ayahuasca are meeting this goddess figure. She might appear as a serpent, she might appear as a woman, she might appear as some kind of panther or jaguar. Very powerful, tough love kind of lady who reveals to you the truth about yourself and just says you know you fucking deal with it because that's how you are. And and what the truth that was revealed to me from quite early on was my relationship with cannabis had got out of balance and I needed to get it back into balance and of course I ignored those messages completely because I was so I was so much in love with my cannabis relationship. My wife said that really it was like I had a mistress you know who I spent all my time with was the cannabis rather than her. And this went on for many many years now the paranoia aspect okay I'm gonna bear my heart here and you know I believe in being honest the paranoia aspect began to affect my relationship with my beloved partner Santa who I just love from the bottom of my heart and she is the the best the most the most pure haunted generous spirited loving lady it's possible to imagine. I started to develop all kinds of suspicions about her which were completely groundless. I started to imagine all sorts of stuff were going on and then I started to act towards her as though those suspicions were real and all of this was also related to my consumption of cannabis. It was not caused by my consumption of cannabis. I think this is a latent aspect of my own personality it was being revealed by this over abuse of the cannabis her. And therefore I was making my beautiful partners life a misery sometimes not every day but sometimes and she was patiently putting up with this but she was suffering and we went down to Brazil in October 2011 and if I had been told when we got on that plane and went down to Brazil when I came back two weeks later I would probably never smoke cannabis again I would have laughed in the face of the person who told me that but the encounters that I had with the spirit of ayahuasca whatever that is I'm willing to accept that there is no spirit of ayahuasca that it's all something we generate out of our brains but for me she manifests as a real like a goddess and the encounters I had with that and I do think she's real that's just my personal belief system right and those encounters that I had were incredibly powerful and she took me to a place that was something like hell and she took me to a place that was something like the judgment scene in the ancient Egyptian religion now the judgment scene is a place where your heart is weighed in the scales against the feather of truth and harmony and cosmic justice and you do not want your heart to be heavy in those scales you want to be able to look back on your life and say I did good I did not add to the misery in the world I did something worthwhile with this incredible gift of life that the universe gave me and everything you've done every second every minute of your life is completely transparent every thought every action everything you did from the moment you became conscious until the moment of your death is laid out before you and there's no hiding from it like we great at creating illusions about our own behavior and persuading ourselves that we're behaving just fine in the judgment hall of Osiris which is also called the hall of mart where the scene takes place all of that stripped away and you confront the truth and I was put there and I confronted the truth about myself and I saw the way that I was behaving towards my partner and and and and I was shown that that this had to stop otherwise otherwise I was going to pay a huge price for it and it I had a series of terrifying terrifying experiences which my partner Sansa shared with me because we were drinking I was get together and at a certain point entities came to her and and she had the experience of her heart being pulled out of her chest and the entity said to her and she thought she was going to die and the entity said to her we're going to do this to you to teach Graham a lesson and Santa communicated that to me and I would rank that as probably the single most terrifying night of my entire life and I've had some terrifying nights that was just absolutely scared rigid and I and I came out of that with feeling a very clear feeling in I was going to have shareings the next day after you've drunk the brew you share with the rest of the group you've drunk with the experiences you had the night before as much as you want to share and what I shared because I still didn't believe that I could stop smoking cannabis what I shared was that I was going to change my relationship with cannabis and to get to a place where cannabis was serving me again rather than me serving her and and that's what I believed but when I got back to England long flight what's the first thing I do I get out my vaporizer get out my stash fire up the vaporizer and fill a nice bag of vapor he said sort of statically well I miss it I miss it you know this was a beautiful cannabis is such a beautiful sensual ally if she's used right so do you think it's just an imbalance issue with the CBD THC ratio let me just let me just finish with what happened to me so I fill up the bag and I'm down there in my basement and I take the first and I take the first draw and I'm suddenly filled with the most intense feelings of horror and loading and it is exactly like I'm back in that space that ayahuasca took me to and I try a second puff and I can't do it I physically could not continue I knew that I just I just could not continue I expressed the vapor out of the bag I crumpled up the bag I put it away and the next day I got rid of several ounces of cannabis yeah I know I know it's terrible it's a terrible thing to do but but for me it was the right thing to do 24 years non-stop relationship with cannabis definitely abusing the herb I had got to the point where the only rational course of action was what I was shown in ayahuasca which was to stop and I don't know whether it was because there was way too much THC and not enough CBD or whether it was just me not being responsible for my own behavior I go around you know saying that I believe in adult responsibility and I do but I don't think I was being responsible I don't think I was using the herb in a responsible way I don't think I was using it in a respectful way and I paid a price for that. Well that's very honest in forthcoming of you to talk about it and it's very uncomfortable for people to to discuss mistakes they've made or passive gone down that they didn't for whatever reason I got caught up in the momentum they didn't see where it was headed until they hit the wall it sounds like you have a legitimate like chemical reaction to it it doesn't just sound like it doesn't just sound like an abusive relationship because the effect that that it was having the extreme paranoia effect and the unease do you take care of your body do you work out do you do any exercise? No I did not enough not enough I do some I do some calisthenics I don't I don't do a whole lot of fuchsia do yoga how do you not do yoga you should do yoga man grandma hand cart yoga has your name on it oddly enough somebody's come up to me recently and and suggested I join a yoga yoga class listen man you have to join it yesterday for real it's for for a guy like you because it's a way to get high without doing any any drugs I've gotten there's only one time in my whole life I did it but I got so high after a yoga session that it was like I just smoked weed like I felt exactly like like I just smoked a lot of weed now sitting there in a hotel room like this is incredible like I would swear I'm highest fuck right now I hadn't smoked in days okay okay and it gives you um it's a reset it gives you a reset it gives you like a to me like it gets rid of the excess and balances things out like dude you can you know there is one people have road rage and the reacting so strongly to nothing what a guy got in front of you and it's gonna take you three extra seconds to get where you're going you go crazy and fuck you and yeah that is not him and that is not this the guy yes maybe he shouldn't have done that but does it be bothering you? does it me anything people make mistakes like I got in front of you what's the big deal that's it's built up it's built up and there's imbalance there's energy and balances and people and yes we were stuck in cubicles or doing jobs that we don't appreciate and people blow up and the best way to avoid that kind of stuff to me is yoga yeah well but what about all the the stretching and the you know the joy like my my knees and my hips I've had my hip replaced six weeks ago oh my god you did six weeks ago yeah six weeks ago you're walking around like you're fine yeah six weeks ago I was in hospital I got a massive scar down the outside of my right thigh wow I replaced my replaced my hip but I guess I one could start gently and just sort of build up now you would have to talk to an expert about that because I don't know what physical limitations yeah the other the surgeries gone well and wow I'm all such it's all you you're running I can go running I can go swimming I can do anything yeah wow that's incredible that's incredible and it's like it's a serious operation a serious operation I know it's a serious operation because I opted to stay awake during it oh my well I'm a writer you know I have to have to have to write about oh that's hilarious and tell them that yeah I did yeah and so what they do is they give you a spinal so it's never do it's a bit like a georal that women get when they're giving giving birth right it's slightly different but that's basically what it is and that freezes the lower half your body you use that use of your legs you paralyzed and there's no there's no pain whatsoever but then because they regard the operation as a the surgery is a kind of scary procedure they then give you massive dose of sedatives and you kind of go off into dream land so I declined those and they wouldn't actually let me look they put some kind of curtain device between my face and my hip but I heard the sawing oh my and then I heard the hammering oh man I felt like he's pretty sure the carpet is bed you know it was it was I heard them talking it was interesting it was an interesting experience but then very nice to come out of it be fully awake afterwards and gradually the feeling comes back to your legs and I spent four days in hospital and initially I thought it was going to be very tough and I thought I'd be on sticks for a long time but I did the physio and I just carried on working working at it and I'm okay I stayed awake for my first knee surgery right and while the guy was working it was really weird because I was half in it and half out of it and he was you know he was just a guy that was like tired of being a doctor like really wasn't into people or whatever it was I mean he fixed my name it still fixed his day it's a patella tendon graft where they take a slice of your patella and they open you up and take a piece of bone out of your shin and a piece of bone of your kneecap and they used that to replace your anterior cruciate ligament right and they he puts it in there and like moves my leg around and goes well better than it was that's what he said like I was awake right like I don't know if he just forgot it was awake or I thought I wouldn't remember but I remember him moving around like well I don't know it was like that's it not we we've got it done yeah beautiful job this young man will be up and walking in no time just better than it was that's the limit of his ambition he was attitude was just like so he didn't give a fuck and I remember I'm visiting him to get it looked at like after you know he would like want to check up to see how it was like months later guy like the guy just didn't like people you tell he had the thing it's just done just done there was no bedside manager he was courty yes he wasn't yelling at you or anything you were just another piece of meat on the table yeah it's it's weird to watch though isn't it your body getting operated on it's a very strange experience to undergo yeah in my sense in my case as I said was not able to watch it because they put up a coat but I heard it and and and the particular things that I heard were sawing and hammering I saw that screen right I didn't I didn't watch it I couldn't watch it in front of me but I saw what was happening on screen it was crazy it was really weird they'll they'll open you up like a fish yeah but the hip replacement is a gigantic one that's the big it's a big surgery how is it six weeks later and you've walked around like you're great well you just have a limp at all now I guess I guess in some ways I I must have been reasonably fit and and got on you know that's good got got back that's very important yeah because I know for folks that are like overweight or you know have issues already they're allow like a hip injury let them get overweight yeah that's a big reeking you know rehabilitation it's a big it's a big big thing and it is major surgery but I think top the end of your bone off right so so we made in a way our bodies are like machines and we got this ball and socket joint in the hip and and so the ball is on the end of the long bone the the femur I think it is and they so they chop that off that comes off okay and then the socket in my case there were cysts in the socket which it were hollow spaces that had come in there because of the the the ball joint was out of was out of kilter and it was rubbing in the wrong way and this is why it was I was in severe pain for a year before this happened wow and and so they put in a what they do is they put in a titanium unit there where the socket is and they put a titanium shaft that goes that they hammer down into the bone but then but then on the top of the titanium is ceramic so the actual bearings both the titanium socket is lined with ceramic and the bearing that moves around in it that sits on top of the titanium shaft that's also ceramic so there's no metal rubbing against metal which has caused problems in the past people get fragments of metal into their bloodstream and so ceramic on ceramic bearings and and it's very good you know it works well and I'm not in pain and and that very bad period of not being able to walk more than quarter of a mile without having to sit down and recover it's all gone it's incredible I mean how long is it going to be before we have bionic bodies well what's already happening yeah we're already getting bionic bodies and this and this is one of the good things which medical medical science has done some terrible things but one of the good things it's done is I mean this is this has happened 50 years ago I would have been crippled at the age of 62 I couldn't have gone on with my life that's what eventually did in Hunter Thompson right who's in constant pain hey I believe he had hit replacement too but it was like old school yeah they didn't really they've got a lot better a lot better yeah that's the image right there but we're looking up on that screen there we go oh god grandparent card that's what happens it's Louisus yeah whoa I think to look at it it's crazy the idea that you're gonna run around that that's a fake fake joint and you know I asked him when you hammer that titanium shaft down inside the bone is there any danger that you can split the bone and he said yeah sure we're sometimes split the bone and he said then we just we just find it with wire oh my god you just what you fucking tied up with duct tape yes they so crazy the hammer a piece of metal into the the center where the marrow is motherfucker does it danger the leg does it uh aren't they not that's incredible it's good it's good stuff and then the body just absorbs the titanium or part of the body bone tissue forms around as well and you're all set and mates to it right yeah yeah wow that's incredible so I'm I'm you know pleasantly surprised by the way that this has that's turned out I thought I like I'm here in America now I thought I would have to take sticks with me on this trip but I wow I haven't had to do so you planned on taking sticks I did wow but in the end I decided not to it's incredible you're just walking around totally no I don't want to I have neat screws in both knees I don't know why I'm so surprised but I just for whatever reason hip replacement seems like incredible yeah it's kind of intimate as well you know it's right in the center you know it's kind of it's right next to your jump that's what I said I mean that's incredibly intimate it feels you know that's what it is there's a vulnerability it's yeah it's inches away from your penis and they're sawing you know that's Jesus plus I mean well since we're in the business of revelations here they have to the other thing that they have to do when you when you have the surgery for the 24 hours after the surgery is you have to have a catheter you know through the penis and then right because for those first 24 hours you cannot get up out of bed and you can't lift up to use a bed pants right so they they stick in a catheter wow and I felt I felt I wanted that out as soon as possible I wanted it out as soon as possible I wanted to return to autonomy over my body yeah quickly as possible I did not want it to be subject to the whims or fancies of others I want and I made a big fuss about this I wanted the catheter out the next morning and and they said and I literally was up on a zimmer frame that by midday the next day and hobbling hobbling to the to a toilet so how many days was it before you could walk so I was walking the very next day on his butt on a zimmer frame yeah and they tell you to do this yeah you have to get going you know just sit there and do nothing you got to get going so I walked on the zimmer frame then I walked on two two sticks and then I then one stick and how long did one stick oh I only got rid of the one stick about 10 days ago okay so it was how long in before you could do one stick let's say four and a half weeks four and a half weeks you're just walking around with the cane yeah wow yeah worth it worth it yeah I'm very happy to I'm very happy that I had it done and I don't have to suffer the pain because I had severe osteoarthritis I don't know why I mean we all think we're young you know what I feel I feel young I'm happy that I had it done and I don't have to suffer the pain because I had severe osteoarthritis. I don't know why. I mean, we all think we're young, you know what I'm. I feel, I feel young. I mean, I'm 62 and I don't know why I was afflicted with this at an age. Most people who go for hip replacement, they're into their 70s, you know. So I don't know why it hit me so hard. I like the line from the ages of the last dark, you know, where Indiana Jones is all beat up sitting in the ship's cabin and some cabin and the lady with him comments on his appearance, you know, and he says, it's not the years. It's the mileage. And I think I've done some mileage over the years. Well, I know a lot of martial artists that get hip replacements. Mark Coleman, the former UFC heavyweight champion just tweeted that he's going in for a hip replacement. Actually, he's already done it and I believe Chuck Norris has hit replacements. It's very common. Yeah. Yeah. And I have a buddy, my friend, Shoey, who is a Muytai instructor. I believe he was in line for a hip replacement last time I saw him. It's a weird joint sometimes. We're good news is it's doable. And after a few weeks of pain and discomfort, you're back on your feet and fully functional. Unless the surgeon screws up, which they do sometimes. I wonder about guys like Bo Jackson. He was a football player that was injured really badly and he had to get a hip replacement. And it basically ended his career. Right. He was playing football and baseball at the same time. He was a super athlete, like incredibly athlete. But if they could have fixed him with this back then, it seems like he could have continued playing football. That's insane. Football with an artificial hip. But why should I be shocked? I mean, we have metal tubes that fly to other countries. Why should I be shocked that they can fix your hip? And what that comes down to is they can, where your quality of life has deteriorated because of pain and immobility, you can recapture that. You can get your quality of life back. And that's what I value about it. It's another place where cannabis is a beautiful drug. When you're injured, it just gives you a sense of ease of your body. Yeah. It's for people that are in pain. People have back problems. Cannabis is a wonderful thing. I have to say that I did wonder, and I still do wonder whether the fact that I quit cannabis in October 2011 and started feeling severe hip pain just three months later in the early part of 2012, whether there's some connection or whether the cannabis was either in some way protecting me from the onset of severe osteoarthylone. So that's when I started noticing it. So your body was just out of alignment. The hip was out of socket or something. It was wearing it a funny way. Yeah. It was wearing it a funny way. It seemed that that ball socket joint was not quite the right shape. Oh, it's just a natural, some kind of natural thing. When you talked about the ayahuasca experience and you talked about the goddess of the body, the goddess coming to you and that you choose to believe that it's real, my thoughts on this whole, what is real and what is not real thing. What I've been thinking lately is that it doesn't really even matter. Yeah. Because what it is, it's about the experience itself. And the best parts of psychedelic experiences are the learning parts. It sounds like so boring to people because they think like, oh no, I thought I was going to see amazing things. And I was going to watch elephants fly and it was going to be, you know, mad hallucinations, which yeah, does occur sometimes, but that's not what it's really about. What it's really about is about a learning experience. It's about massive leaps in development of your personality and your psyche, your worldview, your personal view. And these massive leaps that happen through psychedelics, they happen exactly the same way if you really do encounter a goddess. Or if this goddess is just conjured up by your imagination in incredibly vivid detail, either one is the same experience to you personally. I think that's a very important point. It's a very important point because yes, it might be hallucination, but it is immensely beneficial. Or it might not be a hallucination and we might not have a full account of what the fuck goes on in a human consciousness, especially during altered states. And to go one way or the other, I think is absurd. We don't need to say that. We don't need to say that. Here is an incredibly valuable experience, which is available to us and which lets not forget that humanity has had a long relationship with these plants. This is one of the problems, again caused by the war on drugs, which is that it sought to intervene in that relationship and demonize and make it dangerous to use them because you might get sent to prison. You can get sent to prison for a very long time. People live in fear. What we need is a nurturing society, which makes it possible for people to have these experiences in the safest, most loving environment. The love is key. If you're feeling threatened in your head at a particular time, if you're in a space that is uncomfortable or difficult for you, chances are the psychedelic experience will also be uncomfortable and difficult. The more that you can control the space, the more that you can be surrounded by others who love you and have your best interests at heart. The more likely you are to have a very beneficial experience from that. Those beneficial experiences can and frequently do include painful moments when you come to realization of actually who you are and what you are. This is absolutely fundamental with ayahuasca, is what I call the life review, where you see the impact of your behavior on others, which previously you had insulated yourself from. When you see the pain you'd caused, you might have felt perfectly justified at the time. When you see it and you see it with that clarity, it makes you strongly motivated not to do that again. It's a very important learning experience. They call them plant teachers. They call them teachers in the Amazon. That aspect that learning from your past mistake aspects exists in a lot of psychedelics. It's a core factor. It's a core factor of all psychedelics. I always felt like it's really ironic that law enforcement works against psychedelics because nothing would benefit law enforcement more than psychedelics. If psychedelics were legal, there would be so many less crimes. First of all, the drug crimes would be out the door and then it would be a matter of how many people are on mushrooms are going to rob your house. How about zero? I don't mean they would ask you for food. They were that starving. I just think that we have this incredible ally that our culture, our society, we have this amazing plant thing that we've discovered in several different forms. We've made all of them outside of our reach. We put all of them outside legal reach, which is insane. It's insane. What is going on? Why is society on this self-destructive trip right now? This is, I believe, and this sounds crazy, but I believe this. I believe that psychedelics are here for human beings to take to move to the next level of consciousness and make an elevate us away from our war-like ways. I think it's the only thing. I don't think ideology morality shifts with understanding, with the exchange of information. I think morality escalates slowly but surely all throughout culture. And eventually, we may get to a term or a time in the future where we're not war-like at all. But the best way to do that is through psychedelics. The people who are involved in the running of things most likely are ignorant to the experience. So what you're dealing with is someone who is 50, 60 years into a lifelong closed-off ego trip of death and destruction. And they're the ones that are running the world. Unfortunately, that's the running the world. That's why we're so fucked. We're not so fucked because humans are evil. And when you look around at all the nice people that you meet, you get really confused as to how the world can be so fucked up. How can it be so fucked up? Because they- People are basically good. Most people are good. But the people that are running shit, most of them are not good. And they get like into personality types. Like, if you want to run shit, then right there you've got a certain kind of personality. Yeah, anybody that wants to be president should not be allowed to be president. Exactly. That's really the instant disqualification. You should be absolutely not wanting that job. It should be like the lottery. You know, like the public, like a new president comes in every month. You know, if you do a good job, you know, you get to keep, many people get to vote whether they keep you for a few months. And it's just a person. Yeah. Just to appropriate you, you have random qualifications as far as education. As far as your background. Not some power hungry, ego maniac who wants to push you around, which is unfortunately the case. And the old boy network, the thing that comes into place when these guys, the cronies, and they all help each other out and hook each other up and communicate with each other. And then there's lobbyists and special interest groups. And they all want to make sure that this keeps going so they make sure that the laws continue to stay on the books. And they allow them to deal with stupidity, especially when like Congress can't be guilty of insider trading. Have you seen that? I didn't see that. Oh, let me google that because I want to make sure that I'm correct. Congress not guilty of insider trading. I think you can't accuse them of insider trading. Yeah. Yeah. Oh, dear is the right way to say that. Let me google that to make sure that that's true. Congress. So basically they get immunity. Yeah. Hold on. I'm, I'm broke it the wrong. Can't be, maybe, can't be guilty. Immune to insider trading. Hmm. Let's try immune. Yeah, there's something. I'm looking at some articles on this here. Well, politicians are always cutting themselves. All the slack there is, you know. That, if that is exactly what it is. Congress believes there are, there are immune to insider trading laws. And there's, there are legal professors that are debating them. And the legal analysis by law professor Donna Nagley of the Indiana University suggests that members of Congress may not be immune to insider trading laws after all. Apparently there's a 60 minutes piece where they went on about this. So it's one of those legal things where apparently there's probably you have to go over with a fine tooth comb and then find out what, what exactly the stat, you know, how it's written. It's all crazy. What's your corrupt bastards on that? Crazy fucks. You know, that's it. They wanted, they wanted, they wanted, they wanted to do that job. Because they like controlling other people. But just the fact that they can say that they don't want to be prostitute for insider trading. It's like, why is that? How much are you doing? How much insider? Guess what? You can come to me all day and you say, hey Joe, do you think the insider trading should be illegal? I'll say yes. And if I do insider trading, prosecute me. But if I'm coming out saying, I don't want you to prosecute me for inside trading, definitely got something to hide. Yeah, you're going to do it. What the fuck are you doing, man? Yeah. That's why you wanted to be a congressman. So you can just profit off of the stock market, you creep. So I thought, and I've made this proposal several times that what, you know, what I would like to see is anybody running for high office, they first start right off, they got to do 10 Iowa concessions. It's a great idea. You know, that's it. That's the first, that's the first hurdle. They got to do that, they got to go through it and we'll see how they feel afterwards. Could be 10, you know, strong mushroom sessions, so it would be just as good. But, you know, they got to be able to do that. You know, it's really crazy. The solution exists to a better world. It exists. It exists right here. It's not like we, wow, imagine if some benevolent race from another planet came down here and gifted us with some space fruit. And if we eat the space fruit, we'll see ourselves for who we truly are. And then that's our potential. And there are many people who hold their letting go of their responsibility for their own lives. Yes, yes. But if you told people that that you would go, wow, that would be great, but it's science fiction. Yeah. Well, the exact thing exists with ayahuasca, which is like a mushroom. It exists. And for whatever reason, you know, discussing it is a very controversial thing. Very controversial. It's very controversial. I've like had producers like ask me like, why are you talking about like TV shows that I'm working on? Why are you talking about illegal drugs? Why I've been asked, I've been asked to stay away from those subjects. Of course. Don't talk. You can un-fuck up this whole thing. It was ancient archaeology. I think you're on a something ground. I think you've done some good work. But we're the mushroom down, put it in the next. Exactly. Come on. I've had that conversation. Come on, Graham. You don't need the mushrooms where I get some money over here, Graham. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It exists. And I think that was part of the problem with my TED talk too. We could live in a narnier world. We could live in a world like Avatar. If everybody was doing ayahuasca, we could pull this world together with a rapid quickness. If they just broke out ayahuasca ceremonies all over the globe. If it became the next big thing, sort of like cell phones. Everybody's got ayahuasca ceremonies on every corner. You could change the whole world within our lifetime in an astounding loving way where people would abandon so many of their ideas about the controlling resources and killing people. And you know, the amazing thing is that it is actually happening. It is actually happening admittedly on a small scale. But for me, this is one of the mysteries of ayahuasca at a time when the amazon jungle is under such terrible threat. That out of the jungle emerged these two plants, one of which is a vine, which then begins to spread her tentacles all around the planet. And to call out to people. And people are drawn to ayahuasca. I can't tell you how often I get asked. Where do I go for a good ayahuasca ceremony where I know I can trust the shaman. If you get it again, it's happening everywhere. It's happening in Japan. It's happening in America. It's happening in Germany. It's happening all over the world. And so you get a small but growing group of initiates who have had this shared experience. And we kind of know each other when we meet. And we know each other when we meet. And we know each other when we meet. And the initiates that have had this experience are talking about it and more are coming. Exactly. It's building and building. And the ayahuasca tourism in South America is gigantic now. So it's really, which I can't do. And again, a number of times I stand up and I'm giving a presentation somewhere. And I'm talking about ayahuasca. And then somebody stands up in the audience and don't you realize that by promoting ayahuasca you're leading to the depletion of the rainforest. Quite the opposite is that the ocean is a very important place to the ocean of the rainforest. Quite the opposite is the case. What's happened with ayahuasca is being massively planted in the rainforest now because of ayahuasca tourism. My ayahuasca tourism is a really good thing for ayahuasca. It's not causing any depletion. And ayahuasca can be grown in many different parts of the world. And it is been grown. That's the divine. It's really a fascinating subject. The fact that something does exist to give you that experience. I've always said about the DMT experience that like if you could just show someone like what you see, if you would out taking it, if you could just show someone they would want to do it. They would want to go wait a minute. It doesn't hurt you. No, it doesn't. It's not going to get hurt. But most people probably shouldn't do it though. That's what I think also. And I think if we lived in that ideal world where we as adults had the right to make sovereign decisions about our own consciousness, I think most people wouldn't choose to do it. Yeah, I think you're right. Well, if you look at how it is in the Holland where marijuana is essentially legal and nobody, they look down upon people that get high all the time. And they also look down upon hard drugs because of the fact that you can get most things. They understand with great clarity what's dangerous and what's not dangerous. And people are always going to make bad mistakes. You know, you just have to treat people as adults. Yeah. And you have to understand that some people will make mistakes and there will be problems. That should not be an obstacle to what has to be a fundamental freedom. But what about allowing people into your community that sell them, allowing people in your community of friends and neighbors that profit off of the addiction of others? Because there's certain drugs like meth. I'm not saying that meth should be illegal. I don't know whether or not, I don't know whether or not there's a way to handle it or you get the maximum benefit. I don't know whether it's making it illegal, decriminalizing it, making it so that people can't get prosecuted for using, but they can get prosecuted for selling. Complicated area, some of these substances are very harmful. Personally, I don't want to smoke meth. But if you were next door to a meth guy, like you would not want that guy in your community is profiting off of enslaving people. Yeah. Chemically enslaving people. So this is an area where more work has to be done. But I think that if we approach the problem from a spirit of love and from a spirit of respect for the sovereignty of other adults, it will be a whole lot better than the way we're approaching the problem right now. And as we know, making these toxic substances illegal doesn't prevent their use. Yeah. It absolutely does not prevent their use. The use has gone up and up and up and up and up and up over the decades. And it's kind of unique. One of the properties of psychedelics, whether it's like some for some works, some folks I begame has a great result for curing addictions. And ayahuasca has a great result. And the people that are doing these very things and selling these very drugs both participating in both sides, selling and dealing. Could both benefit from my officer. Like if you're a meth dealer, you're an asshole. Like what an asshole? You're selling something that fucking kills people. Yeah. Makes them pull their skin off of their face. Yeah. Yeah. And what are you doing? One of the first ayahuasca sessions that I went to in Brazil, there was a guy there from LA who was a heavy smoker of Chris O'Math. Oh, Jesus. And he came there in a state he was just so wired. And he, it came out as we were discussing as we were talking. It came out that he had been, he had a rival in love. And he'd gone out and got a gun. And he, and just before he left LA, the best decision he ever made was to leave LA and come down to Brazil and drink ayahuasca. He was getting close to the point of majoring of fellow human being. Wow. Two weeks in Brazil, five ayahuasca sessions completely turned him around. Completely turned him around. And he revolutionized his life. And he became such a loving, positive, warm spirited person. And all his anger was gone. And he moved on in his life in an amazing ways. And I've seen many, many, many, many, many examples of that. I don't want to pretend, however, that it's all sweetness and light in the garden. There are problems also with ayahuasca. People should be aware of this. There are shamans who are abusing their power. There are, you know, if you go to a place like a keto sin Peru, you'll find there's two types of shamans. One type are the curan deros, they're the healers. The other type are the broohos, they're saucerers, actually. And they will use ayahuasca to gain power over others. And there have been one or two horrendous cases that occur with this. So I do think the intention of the individuals who are involved is also an important part of this. And psychedelics, I agree with you that the single one-stop shop to transform our society and make it a better place, a far better place than it can be today is the correct use of psychedelics. But I would be wrong to say that psychedelics are a magic potion because they're not. And there have been societies which have misused psychedelics. But I would say that the Aztecs in Mexico were one of those. What did they do? Well, they used cyloside bin, but they did not use it for gentle consciousness exploration. The Aztecs used cyloside bin preparatory to rituals of human sacrifice. The Aztecs used cyloside bin as a vehicle to communicate with their deities. And those deities included characters like Witsula Poshli, who was the war god, who spoke to... What isuma was the last Aztecs emperor. And that's 1519 when Cortez appears in Mexico. And what isuma was in daily communication with the war god by means of psilocybin mushroom. And what the war god was telling him to do, you know, there's demons out there as well as angels. What the war god was telling him to do was to kill people and to stretch them over a stone and cut out their hearts. And there was a horrendous situation in Tanashtitlan, which was the capital city, which is now Mexico City as a matter of fact. When they inaugurated the Great Pyramid, reliable accounts, 80,000 people were sacrificed to the god of war. In four days. In four days. And this is a bloody awful thing that was going on there. And psychedelics were involved. I'm not saying that psychedelics caused it. And again, we come to this issue. Is it's are these entities that we encounter projections of our own minds? Or are there, is there some other realm or level of existence where non-physical entities that communicate with us at the level of consciousness exist? Which ever it is, whether it's a projection of our own minds, as you rightly say, or whether those entities are real, is less important than the effects on our behavior. But if what is being projected from our own mind is very dark and negative and wicked. Or if those entities also include evil angels as well as good guys, then you can get cultures misled down this path. And I do believe that's what happened with the with the astro. Yeah, there's also recently, and again, I think truth is really important. Truth is really important. So let's be truthful about this also. There have been some tragic cases with with ayahuasca, most recently in Chile, which actually involved a human sacrifice, which actually involved the burning to death of a baby on the instructions of the so-called gulu or shaman, who formed the kind of death cult, but their sacrament was ayahuasca. This is very rare, but it does happen. And I think people should be aware when they enter ayahuasca space that one of the things ayahuasca does is it makes you more suggestible. It opens your heart. It makes you, it makes it, if a powerful, strong, negative personality comes along and says to you, do this, do this, do this, do this, do this, do this, do this, you might just do it. And that is also their possible. So you have to, you have to be strong in yourself. You have to be clear on your intent. And if you're not going into this with good intent, then bad things also can happen. Well, I was also wonder what would it be like to introduce psychedelics into the insane war-like environment of Aztec Mexico and the 1500s? I mean, what would it have been like this living back then? And what would it take to become a personal royalty, an emperor or king in those days? It was the insane bloodshed. And they were in the same bloodshed. They were a very dark and demonic culture. And unfortunately, that demonic aspect of Aztec culture was without any shadow of a doubt mediated by psilocybin mushrooms. They were called them tail-n'anacto, which means the flesh of the gods. And they were used for communication with demonic entities. And we cannot pretend that that was not so. This was the case. And indeed, if the Aztecs had not been those people who murdered their neighbors, who used their neighbors as a sort of farm, I mean, if you imagine a society which was run by serial killers and in the interest of serial killers, actually Aztecs' society in 1519. So they would have neighboring tribes who they would prey on. They could easily have completely defeated them, but they preferred not to completely defeat them. They preferred to use them for warfare every year, make war on them, take captives, bring the captives back to Tenoch Tittlein, and cut out their hearts. And this is why there's karma. There's such a thing as karma. This is why Montezuma was brought down. I mean, 490 Spaniards turn up on the coast of Mexico and destroy a standing army of 200,000 men. Why does that happen? It happened because the neighbors of the Aztecs hated the Aztecs. They utterly hated them. And they were looking for liberation from that horror that was being inflicted on them. Well, isn't that a better, it shouldn't say a better, but isn't a possibility that what you're dealing with is a bunch of sociopaths and a bunch of crazy people. And if you introduce Cilasab and into their system in this insane war-like world, that what you're conjuring up is their imagination. And it is the inner, I mean, the desire to manifest these things that would ask them to do horrible things. This is a core behavior pattern in human beings when they get in control of armies. Yes, it is. Absolutely. Absolutely. Our favorite behavior is not only is it beneficial, but it's necessary. It's applauded. Yeah, it's applauded. It's necessary. It wins your metals. And if you don't do it, someone around you's going to do it, so you have to do it. Yeah. So there's the interesting question right there. I mean, we have armies now in the world today, which are going out doing murderous stuff. Right. And so the question is, if we were to be in such a position that we could massively introduce psychedelics into those armies, would it actually make them worse or better? This is, I'm not sure what the answer is. I'm not sure what the answer is. I'm not sure what the answer is to be honest of you to not be sure. Yeah. And that is the, I think there's no way to be sure. We know that the Vikings, they berserkered on mushrooms. Was it Ammanina, mascara? I know they were too scary. Yeah. I never had much luck with that. Me neither. Yeah. That's what I hear from a lot of people. Me neither. So weird. You want to have luck with it. You've got to pass it through urine. You're in. You can pass it through a reindeer or through the bladder of a shaman. Yeah. Daniel. Oh, how convenient. You have to drink shaman piss. Yes. Yeah, that's the thing that they always say. You have to recycle urine. This is though the body functions as a filter. Yeah. And it removes certain impurities, which then allow the good stuff to remain. And that comes through in urine. Apparently you can pass it through seven human bodies. It doesn't lose. Hey, easy. I know a buddy who did it. He was on mushrooms and they told the drinkers. He's like, I am so high right now. I do not need to drink my urine. They're like, trust me, drink your urine. And he said he drank his urine. It was like just getting shot through a cyclone. Boom. He said the whole thing just took some incredible path. Yeah. From drinking his own urine. Yeah, I must say that's not an experience. I've had. Oh, it would welcome. But that's what they're saying shows. I have drunk my own urine once I've located. Have you? Yeah, just to see. Because I read about urine therapy. So I wanted to find out what it was about. It was a big thing. It is. Yeah. Does it really make you feel better when you're sick? And it did work. But it might have been totally might have been placebo. I don't know. But there was one time when I was second, I took it. I called my friend Yana, but I'm like, dude, I drank my own piss. It worked. It was crazy. Because he was like big on it. You know, big on your urine therapy. It doesn't taste nearly as bad as you would think it tastes. The idea is a lot worse than the actual reality of the urine. The idea is hot to gross. Yeah, but it's just warm water. It's not horrific tasting. Gag a little when you smell it. You can't believe when I drank this. But once you're actually drinking it, it's really, it's not that big a deal. I may have done it in a long time. I want to say like Leo de Machido, who's a famous UFC fighter. He drinks his own urine every morning. There's another guy, one Manuel Marquez, a fan of mine. One Manuel Marquez, a famous boxer from Mexico. Same thing. He was drinking his own, I think he quit. He gave up a dude. He might as well have some mama need to mascara in there. Yeah, you might as well. And even then, yeah. I wonder if when a person goes completely psycho, when you're living in war, and one of the things about the Mexicans, the Aztecs, rather, as I don't even think they had horses yet. No, they didn't. This is one of the reasons, again, I am a relatively small force of Spaniards were able to defeat them. Yeah. Was because the horse had been extinct in the Americas for 12,000 years, from the end of the last Ice Age. And so when the Spanish turned up with actually only 16 horses, 16 heavy hunters that were trained for warfare, European armies have had thousands of years to develop strategies to deal with men on horseback. And there were definite, specific tactics and responses that you used when you were charged. But the Maya and the Aztecs, they had no idea what they were looking at. They actually, if you look at their accounts, which I've done, you'll find that they initially thought that they were dealing with supernatural beings, which were part deer, actually, because that was the nearest animal that they could relate to a horse, part deer. and you'll find that they initially thought that they were dealing with supernatural beings, which were part deer actually, because that was the nearest animal that they could relate to a horse, part deer and part human. And they didn't know how to handle these things. And they're coming down at you at 25 or 30 miles an hour. They're covered in armor, the horse and the man. And it's a pretty terrifying prospect. And they broke armies of tens of thousands of men were just fled in terror at the site of these entities, charging down on them. Eventually they learned, and there's a famous case that one of the tribes in Mexico that fought most vigorously against Montezuma, where people called it Lascarlans. He used them for human sacrifice, and they're very independent spirited people, great warriors. And you would have thought when the Spanish came into Mexico that the first people who would become their allies would be the Tleskarlans. But in fact, the Tleskarlans had a heroic character called Shikotenka, who was their battle king. And he saw the future, and he saw what Spain would eventually do to Mexico. And so initially, and very hard, he fought the Spanish tooth and nail for over a long campaign that lasted about six weeks. And during that campaign, on one occasion, one of his warriors actually took the head of a with a single blow of their weapon, which was a bit like a sword it was made of wood, was called a májuital. And it had flakes of obsidian lined along the edges of the blade. And that horse was not wearing armor that day, and the horse was beheaded, shocked the Spanish. It was the first time suddenly there was proof for the people in front of them that these animals were not supernatural, that they could be that they could be killed. And but eventually, Cortez was a terrorist. He went around massacring called villages. He burned people at the stake. He fed people to dogs. And eventually the Tleskarlans did the calculation. And they said, we better join this guy rather than carry on with this. And so eventually they did join forces with him. And suddenly he had a hundred thousand auxiliaries who were ready to take Kermok-Dizuma on. Jesus Christ. Can you just imagine living back then? Extraordinary time. And I have to say, although I really detest a lot of the things that the Spanish did, I have to say those 490 men, they had balls of steel. They had balls of steel. I mean, to turn up on this distant coast with no resources, no reserves, nothing to fall back on. And to know that you're confronting an enemy that is a militaristic power that has hundreds of thousands of men under arms that sacrifices you if it catches you and still to go for it. That takes tremendous courage. Cortez actually scuttled all his ships so that his men could not flee. The ships were scuttled. What does that mean? It's called sunk. He sunk them. Put holes in them. Yeah. Put holes in them and sunk them. Oh, gangster. And then he said, this is it. There's no going back. Jesus Christ. We conquer. We conquer. Or we, or we die. What a fucking psycho. Yeah. So tell Psycho. So it's been interesting for me because this is my latest writing effort has been, has been a novel about the Spanish conquest of Mexico these days. I do novels as well as nonfiction. It's been interesting for me to get inside the head of a man like Cortez to get inside the head of a man like Mok-Dizuma and to figure out what drove them and what made these characters, what they were and I have a witch in the story, a young Aztec witch and I have a famous woman called Malinar who became Cortez's lover who had a grudge against Mok-Dizuma. History doesn't tell us why, but I give her a motive in the story because he tried to sacrifice. That's kind of cool. You can do that with history. You can do that with history. And you can't do that with fiction. And so she's a key player in not just in my story but in the story of history because she became Cortez interpreted. She was very clever. She learned Spanish very, very fast and she would be, so in the paintings from those days you always see her standing beside Cortez and coming out of her mouth is the glyph that means speech and she gave the whole story away to Cortez. She told Cortez how to defeat Mok-Dizuma and that was to play on the myth of Quetzalco Athol of the headed serpent who would return and bring in a new age and overthrow a wicked king and she had Cortez filled the boots of Quetzalco Athol. Wow. How did you get so involved in the Aztec culture? It's so fascinating when it was so responsible to enjoy the winter story. This is the book by the way. War God. Yeah. This is it. When I was researching fingerprints of the gods back in the early 90s, I traveled extensively and widely in Mexico as part of my research because Mexico is a fascinating place from the point of view of a lost civilization. You know we have the all-mecha culture. We have for those gigantic stone heads from a site that's thought to be three and a half thousand years old. I think it's probably much older than that on the Gulf of Mexico. Heads in the form of African heads which is very puzzling and weird. But also images of people with very strongly caucasian features with massive beards and definitely not American Indian faces. And there they are. So I was wondering are these the remnants of some lost civilization because history does not explain how individuals with that appearance ever turned up in Mexico. And inadvertently as I was researching fingerprints of the gods in Mexico, I inadvertently traveled the root of Cortez. And I found myself again and again crossing the path that Cortez had taken from the Gulf of Mexico up to what is now Mexico City. And I began to realize there was a fascinating story to tell here in a story that had never been properly told. And I used the accounts of some of the conquistadors, men like Bernard Diaz who give us eyewitness accounts of Aztec society. This helped me to under because the Aztecs were late comers in the civilization of Mexico. But they don't exist as an empire for 200 years before Cortez came. But they revered earlier cultures and particularly the amazing pyramid site of Teotihuacan, 30 miles north of Mexico City. Which means the place where men became gods. So I was investigating the possibility of a lost civilization. But I was kind of imbibing the story of Cortez and of the Aztecs at the same time. And I felt this kind of Paul of sadness that hangs over in Mexico. This feeling that something terrible happened there. And what's it the heart of my story without giving too much of it away? Is this notion of demonic influence that Montezuma and I accept it could be projection of the individual's mind because he's just a particularly wicked evil individual or it could be that there are real demons out there. So Montezuma is communicated with an advised by Whitzel of Poshley the war god and Cortez is well known and had believed he had a special relationship with St. Peter. And that and he in dreams encountered St. Peter and St. Peter advised him to carry out some of the horrific acts of genocide that have been ever recorded in the history of the Americas. And so the... The speculation of the novel is that both the entity that appeared to Montezuma as the war god and the entity that appeared to Cortez as St. Peter were actually one in the same demonic entity seeking to multiply human misery because that's what demons do. And if we think it was bad under the Aztecs let's be honest and accept that it was a thousand times worse after the Spanish took over. The population of Mexico is calculated to be 30 million in 1519. Within 40 years it was one million. 29 million people died. Gigantic horrendous genocide. And the Spanish were monsters. They would use people to test the edge of their weapons. Let's just see if we can chop off somebody's arm here. Let's see what this acts will do. Oh the dogs are hungry. Let's just throw a bunch of people to the dogs. That's where the phrase throwing them to the dogs comes from as a matter of fact. So they were awful people. And it's been a dark story to write but I've also found that in this world in this realm at that time there was the capacity for love. The word decent people who did that best. My dad is a pretty sensible guy. He's never for weirdness or spiritual shit. He's just nothing kind of guy. But he was telling me about going to Gettysburg. Yeah. And he said that was a horrendous battle. He said he could feel sadness in the air. And he said it was inescapable. It was overwhelming. And he said I just didn't expect that. He said, you know, I didn't I mean I don't know what it is. I don't know what it is. Maybe it's the knowledge of what happened there. He goes, but I don't think so. Just like, he goes, it was like it was in the air permeates permeates the atmosphere. And you felt that I thought that very strongly that there was this terrible. I was always high. You could have been that right. Were you high in Mexico? You fucking gangster? Yeah, that's dangerous. I wanted to ask you about this because there's a guy in my message board. His name is Frodo Swagens. He sent me a cool link to this new thing that's been found under Teotihuacan. They found a Jade mask from an earlier era and some some building, some work underneath there that they're investigating now that they believe was Olmak. Yeah. Doesn't surprise me at all. I think I think we're going to find the Teotihuacan actually goes way back. Not just to the beginnings of the historical epoch, but far deep into prehistory and the Olmak, this so called all makes of Central America may go back 10, 12,000 years. They may not be. I don't think we should just limit them to the last three and a half thousand years. So this is the case with many of these sites. It's the same, by the way, if you go to Chitinica. If you can get inside the pyramid of Kukan, Chitinica and Kukan is just another name for Quetzalcoiril. You'll find that it's built on top of another pyramid, which is inside it, an old pyramid and preserved completely inside it. You can even get inside that old pyramid. And I think it's the case all over the world that sites have been built on top of all the sites reincarnated in a way. So there was an ancient sacred place and later cultures came along and honored it and built new monuments on top of it. But the mistake they are, the archaeologists make is that the origins of the site are the later culture and they don't take account of the earlier culture. Well that was one of the things that John Anthony West was suggesting about Egypt when he showed that very different construction methods that coincidentally are below the ground. Like you have to dig out the sand to pull these things up and oh, low and behold, they look different. Yeah, that's like the Assyrian in Abidos, in Abidos, which is 50 or 60 feet lower than the temple of Seti I and was actually covered with 50 feet of sedimentation until our children just dug it out. But they still insist on giving it to Seti I. It's a fascinating thing. The denialism that's involved in Egypt, it is. That Zawi Hawas dude is a trip just to watch him talk about them. So like how are you in control of how this thing gets labeled or discovered or researched? It's an extraordinary thing. He's rise to power and then he's subsequent fall. Is he in trouble now? Is he in jail? Deep shit. Is he going to jail? Yeah, what did he do? He's corruption. So well, no, his main thing was that he was closely associated with the Mubarak family, particularly with Susan Mubarak, the wife of the deposed president, hosting Mubarak. And they protected him. So he could do whatever he liked while Mubarak was running Egypt. And therefore he was one of the closest to Mubarak in the Egyptian regime. So when Mubarak fell and the whole new system came into play in Egypt, Zawi was one of the first to go. It was a shocking, the John Anthony West series, magical Egypt. It was one of my famous DVDs series. John is such a brilliant human being and he's honored his life to exploring the mystery of Egypt and the magic of Egypt. This is what our kill just never do. And if he's listening, I owe you an email dude. I swear to God, I'm going to email you back quick. I'm just crazy busy. I had the email for it. Even like stage with John today. I've been so swamped with this new TV show that I'm doing that. I'm behind on everything, text messages and emails and all that. But I'm a big fan of that guy's work and that magical Egypt thing is just one of the most stunning documentary series I've ever watched. It's like 10 DVDs or something. It's immense amount of work. That's right. And incorporating John's just vast encyclopedia knowledge of the mysteries of Egypt. It's all expressed in there. So John is about to be vindicated, I would say. See and Robert Shark from Boston University. This was John's work initially and Robert Shark became involved in it, which was the, you'll remember the argument about the Sphinx. There's very characteristic erosion marks, both on its body and on the trench dug around it. And that those are the marks of precipitation induced weathering of exposure to thousands of years of heavy rainfall, cut a long story short. No such rainfall in Egypt in the last 5000 years. You have to go back 10, 12,000 years to end of the last ice age to get that kind of climate. And then you have to have thousands of years of those conditions to create that kind of erosion to get that to get that weathering. So when John and John Anthony Weston, Robert Shark dropped this bombshell on Egyptology in roughly 1992 that the Sphinx actually might be thousands of years older than the Egyptologist's imagine. There was a huge outcry and Egyptologists became very, very angry about it because they were threatened in the core of their being. And one of the arguments they made, which they thought was the killer argument, was look, you're saying this monument is 12,000 years old. But there are no other large monuments anywhere in the world which are 12,000 years old. Unfortunately for these Egyptologists, that's no longer true because there's just the most amazing site has been discovered in Turkey called Gobekli Tepe. Yeah, we talked about the lab that the last time you were amazing and incredible. And it was deliberately buried by the people who made it. 14,000 years ago. No, it looks like it was made 12,000 years, 12,000, deliberately buried 10,000 years ago. And that means that no later culture has tramped over it to confuse the dating record. And therefore, we have a pristine site. And when a site is pristine and it's approached by a mainstream archaeologist such as Klaus Schmitt from the German archaeological institute who's the excavator, he has to honestly put his hand on his heart and say this site is 12,000 years old. And if Gobekli Tepe is 12,000 years old, then there's no reason on earth where the Sphinx shouldn't be 12,000 years old. And if the Sphinx and Gobekli Tepe are 12,000 years old, then I'm sorry, we have to rewrite the history books. There was a real weird moment. We'd ever documentary it was that showed Robert Schock presenting his findings because he's an academic and he is the only one that they would allow to present. And John Anthony West is not an academic. He's an Egypt expert. He's a guy who's immersed himself in Egypt his whole life. But I don't know what his formal education is. But the fact that guy hasn't given some sort of at least like someone test him and give the guy a fucking degree because like who held knows more about ancient Egypt and John Anthony West. And it should obviously his credentials should be examined. I mean his words should be checked. But I'm sure that he's on. I mean he's on. I've never heard a single thing about any of his translations, about anything less than Kantie if they were negative. Like it didn't make any sense at all. I think he's a pretty astounding person when it comes to his knowledge. I think that he's brought a unique insight to ancient Egypt and he's done far more for the exploration of the past than any credential Egypt told you. So now that go back to the topic has been clearly established that at least 10,000 years old. That's one of the most 12,000 years old because the best stuff is the oldest. 10,000 years old. 10,000 years ago like a time capsule date, buried. And by the way it's only 5% of it has been excavated. A huge vast area of manning to be. So who knows what the hell they're going to find in there? Are they going to find artifacts or what have you that explain things a little bit better? But we know people were capable of doing that then. That's 100%. And therefore if they're capable because some of those maggillists weigh up one of them weighs 50 tons you know. Go back to the tapi is a stone circle. There's a circle series of stone circles. And therefore we're looking at a culture that 12,000 years ago was already capable of doing that. In other words we can't say that they just made that up overnight. There has to be a long background to that that got them to the point where they could do that. And that is why go back to tapi is the single most important archaeological site in the world because it could not have appeared by magic. It had to be the result of a culture which had figured out how to work with large and heavy blocks of stone and to quarry them and carve them and move them around. And that we are as opposed to being hunter-gatherers, living in small groups without any large scale organization. Go back to tapi gives the light to that. And there's a very sophisticated carving method employed on these beams, three-dimensional carving methods where instead of carving the image into the stone itself which is the easy way to draw something they actually left the piece of stone like if they drew a lizard. It would cut away everything else and leave the lizard to stand out. Exactly. That's very difficult to do. It's extremely difficult to do and again it takes practice, takes a culture that's worked on that. So we have to say there's a background to this which goes thousands of years earlier than the site that we found. And as more excavation is done I believe more and more of that is going to come out. One of my favorite quotes of yours is that we're a civilization with amnesia. It's such a great way of putting it because when you keep digging holes and finding things that are like old as fuck, like go back to tapi who's found by a farmer, right? He was just putts it around and he was like what the hell is this? He moves it around and he's like this is weird. He starts digging and boom. It's one of the most important archaeological findings ever. But none of this existed while you guys were dealing with Zali Hwas. I was watching that and the other thing was the other academic who he was communicating with, whatever that guy's name is, no need to even say it. Such a country human being. The way he was laughing. The culture we're talking about that existed 10,000 years ago. Why is that funny to you? Let's hear him remain name. Yes, I know who you've been remaining. Yeah, they pour scorn on these ideas. Intellectual scorn. Not all of them. Most of them are doing amazing things. There's why you have an incredible hip. Bad motherfuckers in academia. Absolutely. I'm not insulting science as such. Just humans. Just shitty ego humans. There's just some shitty, good-driven humans and it happens that archaeology is one of those areas of study which is very territorial and where scholars have stake their reputation on a particular view of the past and they get very angry when anybody threatens that. They're very, very obnoxious to one another as well as two outsiders. They've told this story and given degrees based on what they've taught for decades, decades after decades after decades into all of a sudden step in and say, we were wrong. There's no way this guy, it's very difficult to do. It's very difficult to do. And in saying these negative things about Egyptology, I also do want to say that they also do great work. There's a fantastic work has been done by Egyptology and I don't think that I could have written any of my books if I hadn't been able to draw on the huge amount of data that Egyptology has provided but sometimes I put a different interpretation on it from the one that they put on it. So I don't want to put them down completely. They've done great work but they're narrowly focused on a particular reference frame, a particular idea of how human history evolved and they should let the evidence speak for itself rather than impose that. And we should point out that there is a small group of people that, not a small group, I shouldn't even say, I shouldn't quantify them. There's some people believe that the water erosion feature was actually wind and sand. I've seen that argument and I'm not a geologist, obviously, but when I saw Robert Shock deal with that argument, it doesn't seem to hold water. It doesn't. I had a shock, it's got an excellent answer to all of that and it is not. It is not wind weathering. So it was not sand. Anyway, this thing was covered with sand for very long. The way it comes like cuts down and in, it looks like water been pouring down for a longer time. Cutting, cutting grooves into the roof and groovy. I mean, I don't know though, I'm not qualified. Well, that's why Shock has made a marvelous contribution to this whole field because he is a credentialed academic. He is a geologist and he's been prepared to put his reputation on the line and say, I'm sorry, I think the sink is really, really helpful. What bothers me about the people that debunk it is they claim to be correct. The people that look, it's very obvious that you're dealing with some pretty significant erosion. So why is it so different looking than the erosion the outside of the Sphinx, which looks like wind sand? Why are you dealing with this enclosure where this thing was buried for so long? Like, why is it different here? Is it the type of stone? Is that what it is? I mean, what is it? Or is it evidence of an older time? Is it possibly something that was built into some malleable stone a long fucking time ago? And then pretending that it's not possible is kind of silly. It's kind of silly because you don't know, we don't have really accurate map of what happened 10,000 years ago? How do you know the history of science is such we know for again and again that that fixed and rigid views about how the world is do get overthrown. Yeah, do get changed. But reluctantly and some are likely with a fight, but eventually the new evidence overwhelms the old. And I think we're in the realm of ancient history, we're poised on the verge of that kind of revolution. I think it's going to happen. With Zali, who lost out of the picture, is it possible now they can excavate some sites that they weren't allowed to before? Like, I know there was something where they wanted to do something under the paw of this fence. They had found some chamber and that's a needed project, which needs to be done. I don't know. I don't know whether the new authorities, right now Egypt is just so busy surviving and so busy, so busy trying to figure out where it goes next. And they've had a major political change. But many of the old God are still in place in many, many ways. And there is this popular uprising in Egypt, but it's disorganized and unplanned. It's right now the last thing that most Egyptians are thinking about is ancient history. My take on that part of the world is a comedian is that if that's the birthplace of civilization, that's the cradle of civilization, that those people right now, that's the townies of the world. That's the people that never left, that people that literally are living with the echoes of the behavior of people that lived 10,000 years ago in that very same spot. And while everything's so clear, in particular, Egypt's Coptic population, who number out of 60 million, I believe, roughly six million are Copts. So they are, they are practicing a particularly ancient form of Christianity. Their language is structurally very closely related to the ancient Egyptian language. And they are the direct inheritors of the ancient Egyptian traditions. So when ancient Egyptians were converted to Christianity around about three or four hundred years after Christ, that was the beginning of the Coptic Church in ancient Egypt and the Coptic people are the true inheritors of the lost wisdom. Fastening of ancient Egypt. And I bet they suck to hang out with. I bet they're really annoying, but they've got some crazy rules. They do a lot of weird stuff to their people. What? Well, they're good. Are they involved in general manipulation? No. No. Who's doing that? Oh, the first university. Oh, very, very much. Six million of them. Yeah, but out of 60 million in an area which is involved with Islamic fundamentalism. Very much it's difficult to be a minority in that. That's a choice. So what are you saying is better, it's better to be a Christian in that area? No. I think that all three of the world's monotheistic faiths, whether it's Christianity, Judaism or Islam, have been responsible for just a vast amount of misery in the world. And I think if we're not going to move on as a human race unless we actually move on from that time where we don't accept that something is true just because our parents or some guy with a beard tells us that it's true. You know, where we look for direct experience of the spirit and the divine. This is the problem with all of those big religions. I don't care whether they call themselves Christians Muslims or Jews, you know, is that they're hierarchies, they have bureaucracies, they have power structures. And they do not offer a direct experience. So that's why all of them persecute the use of psychedelics. They don't want people to have direct contact with the divine. Are you hopeful about things when you see like Arab Spring, people were rising up and trying to remove dictators and what happened in Egypt, getting rid of Mubarak? And I am hopeful. And I think it is happening all over the world. And I think the internet has played a part with it. And it's happening in America. You know, I come here as a foreigner, I'm British, I come to America often. I have family here in America. I feel very closely connected with America. And America is a paradox. You know, it's a huge paradox because on the world stage, America is a very dark and malignant force, which does tremendous harm consistently and has done for a long time. But at the individual level, there's a tremendous spirit of awakening in America. Look just what's happening with cannabis laws in America in the last 10 years. That's unimaginable in Britain. We can't make changes like that. Why is that? Because we don't have this spirit of independence. We don't have the structure where individual states can make decisions on key issues like that. And of course, in America, there's a conflict between state law and federal law. The federal government is not always respecting state laws and is seeking to persecute people who are using cannabis. But I think that that in itself, the fact that a number of states have decriminalized or even legalized cannabis, is a sign of a sea change that is underway at the moment. And what it reflects is an awakening of the American people. So even though huge negative forces are still at work and are still sitting in the seat of power, I think there's a tremendous hope for the future in America. And that comes from the awakening to consciousness of the American people. And maybe it's small right now, but it's growing. And in that sense, far more than any other, I believe America is leading the world, that there is this possibility for awakening here. And maybe it goes back to the founding fathers on the frontier days and just the sense that people should be able to make decisions about their own lives without government telling them what to do. That's the step we all need to take. We need to move ahead. We need to set aside our commitment to these large monolithic religions. We need to set aside our commitment to large monolithic states. We need to run our own lives and make decisions for ourselves. And it just happens that that is very close to the heart of what America is all about. What it should be all about instead of what it's all about is we're living inside the balls, the dick that's fucking the world. That's really what it's all about. But living in track the balls, you're in a position to give that dick this fucking world a real pain. Well, what even betters if the dick would just get it shit together? Yeah. Yeah. It's not. It's only good to be done by the American people. By the awakening of the American people, that will say enough is enough and we will not accept this crap anymore. And slowly, but surely the old guard dies off. And then there's a huge industry of brainwashing, which goes on, makes it difficult for people to think for themselves. It's very interesting. Well, through the media, I mean, through the control, so there's this whole ethic that our lives are supposed to be about production and consumption and nothing else that we define ourselves in terms of what we own. We're prepared to go into huge debt to own a shiny car or, you know, a better house. And that's supposed to be right and proper. And then we're supposed to be defining ourselves in terms of our consumption. And we must work hard. We must go to the office every day. We must all of these, all of these things are brainwashing. And then there's the TV. We can have a little relaxation. We can enjoy some fantasy. Maybe we'll win the lottery one day. All of these are mechanisms of control, which, which keep people quiet in society. And distractions, distractions from the great beyond is just there's too much out there to really stop and think about about the fact that your body's going to slowly expire. The even the sun that heats the world itself is going to die out. And I think the possibilities when we really consider them all are pretty terrifying. So we watch storage wars, you know, you have storage wards? No. And I think the possibilities when we really consider them all are pretty terrifying. So we watch storage wars. Do you have storage wars? No. One of the best shows ever. Not really. It's terrible. But I mean, it's hilarious. They go to storage units that people haven't paid for. Right. And they open up the door and they find things in there. Like, whoa, what is this? And they bid on the door. Like, there's like 10 people sitting around and they all bid on the contents. And if you get lucky, who knows? There might be gold bullion in there that someone saved. Right. Not. So these idiots go and open up these boxes and then pull shit out. And then it turns out that it's not even really what the contents were. They added fake contents to these storage places. Right. But people watch it and they just extract it. It's a distraction. So if we're going to wake up, we have to overthrow these systems of mental control, which are in place. Right. So take responsibility for your own time. Because those distractions are just their money extractors. That's what they are. They roll money. They roll money. Yeah, they're so untied or toil to trucks or whatever the hell they're selling. And they're just putting on this thing because it's a machine that they can press. And it's like an automatic program that runs and extracts money. It's not really necessarily a work of art. It's just, you know, you've made a hack. Terrifying prospect. But it doesn't, you don't have to do it. You know, I think what people really need is what people really need is, you know, it sounds crazy, but people really need is guys like you to talk about things. Guys like you to put ideas out there that makes them go, yeah, what am I doing? Yeah, what is this and what is and start the ball rolling of rethinking their thought process? Rethinking is badly needed. It's really that. Right. And it's everything. And I do think that something I bang on about a lot is the issue of sovereignty over consciousness. Yeah. You know, that is to me just one of the very, very key issues, which a lot, a lot of people have been persuaded not ever to think about. But once you start thinking about it and you realize that this mysterious, if we don't even know what consciousness is, you know, I mean, there is no, there is no clear science on what it is or to explain it. But we know we've got it. And whatever it is, it's the essence of ourselves. And why can we not make sovereign decisions over the most intimate and personal part of ourselves is crazy? And when you put that to put that to people, even to arch Republicans, you know, they get it. They suddenly realize that even that they actually legalizing psychedelics is a Republican issue. I'll tell you what the problem is Graham Hancock is the children. Well, you're ignoring, you're endorsing drug use to children. And I think that's incredibly irresponsible. That's exactly what Ted said when they banned my talk. What if they're, what if they're, what if they're statements they said that we can't allow this talk to be on the air because some young man might go off to South America and drink ayahuasca. That's so hilarious. And Ted cannot be seen to be endorsing the drinking of ayahuasca. Is that the, what there was a huge issue with you? And by the way, your issue was after Eddie Wong came in here and he was a long-told his gross story that makes you just go ew, Ted. And apparently John Anthony West has a Ted story as well. And I think that there's a lot of beautiful things that come out of Ted, a lot of incredible tools. But it seems like any organization, once people get into power and once people have the ability to tell other people what's cool and what's not cool, it's not getting weird and you start telling Eddie Wong, he has to attend all these different things and meet all these donors and like some kind of freaky cult. Yeah, that's what he felt like. You value it was really strange. Now your, your thing got pulled and what was the scientific explanation for why they got pulled? There was, you, you had an exchange with one of the guys on Ted. I read the comments and you presented all the things that he had said and said, please show your example of when I said this, I never said this. What were the, what were the things that he accused you of and what was the response? Two of us who got our talks deleted, Rupert Childry, Rupert Childry is the other. His talk was called the science delusion. My talk was called the war on consciousness. He can't be shit on science like that called the science delusion. Rupert, how dare you poke the fear behind me? It was as though Ted felt that these talks must automatically be wrong and that they had some kind of preconception about what we were saying. So they didn't even bother to sit down and listen to the actual 18 minute talks, not that much to listen to, you know, before deleting it from their YouTube channel. They just said this is pseudoscience. It's full of, and they listed a series of false statements that we'd supposedly made. But the problem was neither I nor Rupert had made those statements. So they never even bothered to look at it. They just read complaints and then respond. They can play some claims. They responded on the basis of those. So when we challenged them, okay, please go through, in my case, go through my talk and find where I say that ayahuasca allows you to communicate with an ancient mother culture. Where do I say that? I never said that in my talk. They never said any such thing in my talk. They actually couldn't do it. And is there something you've said before? No, I've never said that. I've never said that. Just said it right now. I heard you. Well, what did you take on a clip of that and what I talked about was the mother goddess. The experience of an encounter with a mother goddess, but I never said it allows you to communicate with an ancient mother culture like a lost civilization. They knew I'd written books in my lost civilizations. So they thought I must be bringing the my lost civilization beef into the into my tech talk, which I did and didn't have anything to do with lost civilization. It was a talk about talk about consciousness anyway. And the real original version was giving up the green bitch where you were talking. Originally, I originally called the talk giving up the green. That's what I wanted because I was giving my personal story of why I gave a cannabis. I changed that title because a lot of people pointed out to me that that's deeply disrespectful of cannabis and that for many people cannabis is a green goddess. And cannabis was a green goddess for me. And I accepted that. Well, to those people, I'd say fucking relax. Okay, because I love cannabis too, but it didn't bother me. Yeah, it is something we got really upset. I realized that to be upset. I realized that there is in fact a cannabis orthodoxy as well, which I, which by, which if I'm talking about my, my quitting of cannabis, I had upset this orthodoxy. But when I looked at my talk, my talk was much more about the war on consciousness than it was about that. And that's what it was really about. So for example, I made the point that our society doesn't object in principle to altering consciousness. I mean, what happens when you put a kid on ritalin? You know, that's a powerful, pharmacological drug, which is altering consciousness when you, when you overprescribe Prozac or Sir Roxette for conditions of depression, that those drugs are altering consciousness. We value alcohol. We invest, you know, have a bit multi-billion dollar alcohol industry. So don't primarily drink alcohol because of the taste. They drink it because it alters their consciousness in a way that they like. And so we don't object to altering consciousness in principle, but we object to altering consciousness in certain kinds of ways, which threaten the status quo. And that's what psychedelics do. They alter consciousness in ways that lead people to ask profound questions about the nature of the society they live in. And that appears to be the line that I crossed. So Ted tied to try to dress it up as pseudoscience. And when I called them on that in the end because they realized I think that they were, they'd got themselves into some kind of danger. And it's still there on the, on the webpage that Rupert and I call it their naughty corner and they created a naughty corner of the Ted website where I thought we'll put back on line and with all their reasons why they'd taken them off. So first thing they did was they crossed out all their reasons. So you can find that everything they said has actually been crossed out and then they published our rebuttal. It's deleted. No, it's, we insisted that they accepted that nothing they'd said was true. We insisted they leave it there on the public record, but put a line through it. Oh, wow. So that they did that? They did that. They did that. Oh my God. They did that. That's kind of a cool victory. I know. And they published our rebuttals in full, but it wasn't a complete victory because what they didn't do, which is all we wanted was for our talks to be reinstated on the Ted X YouTube channel. No, no, no, no, but you can't put your talk online yourself. Well, no, I have put my talk online myself and so have about 100 other YouTube channels. Oh, beautiful. And I think Ted took such a massive beating over this because he clearly was an act of censorship. However, they tried to dress it up that they've decided not to go and pull the talks from YouTube, which probably they could do. So I mean, my talk had 132,000 views on YouTube on their channel when they pulled it. And since then, it's had hundreds of thousands of more views all over the internet. So you know, they, the rather than actually suppress the talk, I think it's called the Streisand effect, you know, rather than suppress the talks. They ended up multiplying same with the same with Rubik's talk. How was that a Streisand effect? Apparently, apparently that's I think it was my response and tried to stop some public statement that had been made about here and it ended up multiplying the statement. You know, when you try, this is the great thing about the internet. When you try to suppress something, it grows. It doesn't get suppressed. The internet is. Including dick pictures. Got one of those out there coming back around Grandma Hancock. You're going to find you. I've never had my dick photograph. Congratulations. How about you? I plead the fifth. So now the page got pulled. You're your talk got pulled. It got reinstated. They crossed the line. They don't want to. And put up in the naughty corner, but at least it's on YouTube as well. Yeah, all over YouTube. Is it possible that this is what I know? Okay. I really love your work. I've been a fan ever since fingerprints of the gods. It was a fascinating book that really changed the way I looked at history. I think you're a brilliant God. But I take more shit for you from the like extreme science dorks. I take more shit about having you. Well, it's a brand man. I'm going to come on your podcast and pump out his pseudo science. Yeah, like so many people get so twati about you. And it's a science thing and it could be mistakes that you've made in the past. We all make them that they want to chirp on. It could be the whole Mars thing. The whole face on Mars thing. I look cookie with that. I look cookie with that. Still think it's an interesting phenomenon. It is interesting. There's a lot of interesting rocks on Mars. It might have at one point in time had a culture. We don't know what they are. No. We need to do we need to do more work. But yeah, I do. I have a noise scientist. I tell you what it's not actually I've certainly made mistakes. Right. What about a junk DNA? There was something about the contents of junk DNA. There's one thing that they keep hard to do about that. You've erroneously stated something about the knowledge that we have of junk DNA. Well, yes, I said that 97% of DNA is defined as junk and maybe it isn't. And that there may be data stored on DNA. And the matter of fact, this is now being done. Data is being stored on DNA. So you just were misinformed. I don't think that I was misinformed. I think that I was exploring an interesting area of inquiry. And it's true since I published on that in 2005 that some new workers can be done on junk, so-called junk DNA. And it is found to have an important biophysical function. But what I reported, and this was in my book Supernatural in 2005, was a study published in the magazine Science by Eugene Stanley, which looked at the language-like structure of junk DNA. The junk DNA has a structure very similar to all human languages, certain patterns that repeat in languages that appear also in junk DNA. And this, I simply wanted to speculate on this, is it possible that junk DNA is some kind of archive? I was looking, you know, in when I wrote Supernatural, I was looking at this connection with entities that people have in altered states of consciousness. And I was saying that kind of place I would bet on is that in some weird way these entities may be real. That is in itself a very annoying statement to make to any materialist scientist. But then I said, but maybe there's another possibility. Maybe there's an archive of information stored on all our DNA, all around the world, and maybe in altered states of consciousness we gain access to the archive. That's maybe why people from all different cultures, at different periods of history, see the same thing. And I cited the work of Francis Crick, who was the discovery of the double helix form of DNA, in a book that he wrote called Life Itself, where Crick speculates that DNA did not evolve on this planet. This is the Nobel Prize winner Francis Crick. This is not Graham Hancock who's making this statement. Crick suggests a phenomenon called directed panspermia that the reason that life exploded so rapidly and amazingly on this planet within 100 million years of the planet being cool enough to support life roughly four billion years ago. The reason that it exploded so suddenly was that he came here from elsewhere. And he suggested that there had been some advanced alien culture on the other side of the galaxy that faced annihilation. Perhaps a supernova was going to go off in their vicinity. And they looked desperately for some way to preserve life and their first thought was could they get themselves off the planet. And they realized that yes they could but that they could not travel through interstellar space for thousands or millions of years to reach other possibly habitable planets. So in the end what they did was they sent bacteria out into the universe on the spaceships. And they genetically engineered those bacteria to make them incredibly hardy. This was Crick's suggestion, not mine. And the only thing I added to it was if his theory had be were right and that life spiraled up on this planet because one of those spaceships hit the ancient earth and spilled out its cargo of genetically engineered bacteria. Well maybe they wrote a message on the DNA of those bacteria. And maybe that message has been preserved, highly preserved and there are certain strands of DNA that are preserved for hundreds of millions or billions of years and passed down into modern human beings and maybe it's a message for us about that lost ancestor culture that made the DNA that or rather didn't make it but engineered the DNA in the bacteria that started life on earth and that eventually evolved into us. And it was just an interesting inquiry. By the way this lens credence to the idea that Francis Crick did a lot of acid. Why would she certainly did? From the night, it was me and she would cry with me on earth. Francis Crick was a big user of acid and so was it. Supposedly. So were many intellectuals in that period? This is essentially the Prometheus story. I guess it is. I guess it is. So I thought it was an interesting area to inquire. Yes. For me, I feel my role is to inquire into interesting things that are forbidden territory for scientists. And when I inquire into them, it doesn't mean that I'm insisting this is a fact. What I'm saying is this is something that we need an alternative point of view on. And let's look at and consider what this might mean. And I may be completely wrong, but I think the exploration is worthwhile. That's the position that I take. It does annoy science. I think the other reason it annoy scientists is because I don't mean to pat myself on the back, but I'm not particularly lunatic. On a day-to-day basis, I'm not particularly kooky. I'm moderately rational. I can make an argument. I can express things. And I think if I was an obvious nutcase, they wouldn't need to get so angry with me. But because I'm fairly reasonable and open to discussion and persuasion, it makes me more dangerous. It's the same with John Anthony West. John is a very reasonable man. He's coming up with extraordinary ideas about the past. But he's arguing them very, very well and very coherently, and based on evidence. Intellectual ideas also are the battlefield of scientists and science thinkers and science dorks. I mean, proving someone incorrect is a huge feather in your cap. Being able to point out inconsistencies and correcting mistakes. And that's how science works. That's what's good about science. On the one hand is what's good about science, which is what you would call destructive criticism. Here is a new idea. Let's figure out any way we can to destroy it. Anything is left after we've exposed it to that fire for a decade. That thing that's left is probably worthwhile. And that is the scientific method. I think there's room for another method. Here's this extraordinary idea that somebody put over. Let's look for what's good in that idea. Let's see if we can find something good in that. If there's something possible. Yeah, see if there's something possible there. Same approach just in a positive way rather than a rather than a negative way. So I think that both are both are possible. It's the same attitude essentially. You're trying to find truth. Yeah. They're just saying, is there a possibility of this? Is there a truth in here? Is there a benefit? That's what a real Egyptologist would do. If they examine a sphinx, it would say, this really bears some consideration. This is really unique. It's unusual. And geologists seem to be pointing to this. Let's discuss this a little bit. This is where a rather than just get rid of it right at the beginning of the last story. What culture are we talking about from 10,000 years ago? Exactly. Exactly. And so with this destructive method scientists seek to destroy each other's reputation. And so many great individuals have suffered most painful experiences as a result of this, but have ended up later to be proved to be right. Sometimes. Sometimes. Sometimes. Not in some countries. But there are. One of the things I'm doing this new show on the Sci-Fi channel. It's called Joe Rogan Questions Everything. And eventually, I would like to get to the mysteries of ancient civilizations, whether or not there were some sort of Atlantean type civilizations. I would love to talk to you about this. But what I'm seeing when I'm doing this show is how important science really is. I'm getting a massive dose of the reality of how many people are really cookie out there. And I have some really cooking ideas that they cling to like a cat stuck in a tree. And they won't let go of these fucking cookie ideas. And no matter how many experts you bring in there that are true experts on whatever subject it is at hand, if that person has a cookie idea that they've clung to, they are not letting that fucking thing go. No, they're never letting it go. That's why science is so important. Now, science is incredibly important. It's the ego of science. And science is a problem. And I'm sitting here in this chair with a pain-free hip as a result of science. Yeah. That is science. Science gave me my legs back. Science gave me my mobility. Science is how we're doing this podcast. Science is how we're doing this podcast. It's a wonderful thing. It's an incredible instrument. We should not despise it in itself. But we should, I think, be open to the view that there are other modes of inquiry into the nature of reality, which should be also considered. It could even be done scientifically. Scientifically. For example, psychedelics are a marvelous tool for inquiring into consciousness. This mystery of consciousness. And we could have detailed scientific studies. So here's the hypothesis. With psychedelics, we reach in the receiver wavelength of the brain and get hypothesis mind you and gain access to other levels of reality parallel universes, if you like, which are inhabited by intelligent beings. Okay. Let's explore that hypothesis scientifically. How are we going to do that? Psychedelics, very best way. Put people into deeply altered states of consciousness on cue. And then get them to compare notes. Get them to ask questions of those entities. See if any new information, any novel information comes back that couldn't possibly have been known. That kind of thing is being done interestingly with near death research. There is, you know, there's another area where most materialist mainstream scientists will say nonsense. There's no possibility of any kind of survival of death. But people report these astonishing near death experiences. And they report seeing things that they should not have been able to see. So now in operating theaters in emergency rooms. In a number of hospitals in London. But also I believe in the United States as well. They have created shelves up at a high level. Where they have placed certain images. And they are recording the data right now. When people have a near death experience. And they have had the sense of leaving their bodies and being up around the ceiling. Have they seen these images? If they've seen those images and it can be documented scientifically. Then, you know, we have to think again about consciousness. So they're putting the images up there specifically to catch people looking. Yeah. So when the guy comes back, when he flat lines and he's considered to be brain dead. And they bring him back to life. And this is happening more and more with advanced resuscitation techniques. Many of them report having experiences out of their body. Well, now he has a scientific way to test that. Is that imagination or is there something real going on? And what's the data so far? Have people seen those images? There's some quite compelling data. But there's an elusive nature to the phenomenon. Which is that very often when somebody hasn't heard their experience. They've had it in the one theater that didn't have the images on view. So they're looking for a way. Oh, convenient. How convenient. They're looking for a way around this which might involve using like iPad devices. Which can be moved around very rapidly and placed in certain spots. Were they resuscitating people? Were they resuscitating people? I don't think, see, I think this is part of the issue. You know, when we say why doesn't science do this or what if science did that? I really don't think of science. I think science in a scientific method are awesome and very hugely important. I think it's people. I think the issue is people, it's personalities. It's people's style of communication. It's people's styles of interaction and the sense of competition that they have with exchanging ideas and with exploring ideas. There's a massive amount of competition involved in being intellectually correct. Getting those points. The points for being correct. It's a competition forum. I've seen it on my message board. I've seen it on Reddit. When you're writing something, you're not just writing something. You're also sort of expressing yourself in a way that you would like to get brownie points for. You would like to be powerful. For yourself, you're a good name. Yes. You're asking into what you say. Right. And you would like people who don't want to be like. So when people go to battle about ideas, the real issue is ego. It's humans. It's not the scientific method. The scientific method should most certainly be applied to psychedelics. It should most certainly be applied to every aspect of the known world. And in fact, if that was the case, then more people would probably do psychedelics and we'd have less of an issue in the first place. I would rather think so. So you're not an anti-science guy. You're just an anti-ass whole guy. I think that's a really good way to put it. I think, but there's a label that people like to throw on you that you're anti-scientific. I think it's one of the ways that this TED thing built momentum. Yeah. And when they do like to throw that label as a matter of fact, pseudoscience. As a matter of fact, it's one of the reasons amongst many why I've started to write fiction as well as nonfiction. Because if I explore extraordinary ideas in the realm of fiction, I'm not actually then making a claim that this is fact. Nevertheless, the ideas are there to be explored in what I've written. So it becomes possible to enter into an inquiry into the nature of reality without having to create this huge superstructure of defense against attacks by scientists. And I think it's a very useful way forward as far as I'm concerned. Because I did find that writing nonfiction more and more, because I've become this target figure for scientists, required me to bulletproof my arguments in ways that make them frankly a bit boring to read. And I quite like the liberation of not having to do that. Yeah. I agree. I think your ideas are always very novel and you're very interesting too. But I think in a lot of ways you're sort of a bard, you know, you're a great storyteller and you're an excited of the imagination and an inspirer of questions. Thank you. I feel that's what I'm supposed to do. That's what you do best, man. That book, fingerprints of the gods got me looking at so many different aspects of our culture. And then questioning how we got to this point in the first place, how it is that I get up in the morning, I get in my car and I drive to work as I was doing this after reading your book. I was thinking how strange it is that we live in this society where I was born in 1967. I was, you know, we've this the cities have been here since I was a baby. Cars have been here. I've assumed that they've always been here. But then when you really stop and think about what a short period of time, 2,500 BC is or what a short period of time, even 30,000 BC is. That's nothing, man. And the history of the world, it's all a blink. It's a nothing. And we are in the middle of this. We wake up. Yeah. Being born is like waking up in the middle of a trip. Like, where are we? Where are we going? Yeah. And that's the entire collective culture. And that was really probably the first time I really considered that was in reading your book. And that made me so excited about history. I wasn't excited about history from school. I mean, I took the obligatory classes. I'm really glad to have had that effect. And it makes me feel good. And as I'm getting on in life, one of the things that makes me feel good is the feedback that I do get from. people who've read my books, which I've sweated blood in order to write. And I've taken a lot of attacks from doing that. But I find this is the new thing for me, you know, Facebook. I mean, I'm a novice at Facebook. But I've started to interact really quite strongly on my Facebook pages. I enjoy the interaction that I get there. I enjoy the new ideas that are put to me by others. And yeah, frankly, it's really nice when some people get into the book. And when some kid in his 20s writes to me and says he read fingerprints of the gods, and it changed the way that he looks at the world, that makes me feel I've done something, I've done something right anyway. In all the mistakes I may have made, I've done something right. You've done quite a bit, right? But one of the things I think that you haven't done yet that you could totally be amazing at is your own podcast. You're a wind up guy. I can press you. I can start you up. Tell us what's this ayahuasca stuff? Bang, press play. No, you will do the dance and captivate with amazing descriptions and very in transiting and way of communicating. Interesting. I think that's the people like that are really important in culture. And most scientists are boring as fuck. And even though they're doing amazing work, and we wouldn't be communicating over wasn't for some boring scientists, the reality is you're not going to excite people with that shitty personality of yours. And it's not all of them. Feynman was legendary lead charismatic. I was just going to say again, Neil deGrasse Tyson is brilliant in that regard. He's a brilliant man and he's brilliant. He's captivating and entertaining and he draws you in. And they're very important as well. There's a lot of... Well, I will look at the podcast, my friend. Now that I've kind of initiated myself into the internet world and got talking to people on Facebook and so on, and my website, you know, all of these things are way... And the one thing I haven't done, I do have a YouTube channel, but what I don't have is a podcast. And it might be something I've had. Massively important. It's the best way to communicate with people because even in writing, sometimes things are lost in tone and tone. And the way you could be sarcastic and joking around, you actually have to write it just kidding. You know, you have to actually quantify it. Whereas people know in the inflection of your voice the look on your face. That's why we like to do this. Even though most of the people listen to this podcast, we like to have an iTunes version, so you can see sometimes we're making silly faces. We're joking around. I think for you it would be an excellent way to explore new ideas, things that come to you, and also respond to people online. Instead of sitting down writing everything out, pick a few emails every week and respond to them. Very good. I will take your advice. It's perfect for you. What was the argument against Rupert Sheldrake from what I read online was a bit stronger than the argument for you. No, I don't think so. Again, they attributed statements to him that he didn't make. So it was a more the same type of thing. What was his controversial? Well, he's saying that science is locked in what we call a materialist reference frame, which is that it seeks to reduce everything to matter and that there cannot be. So therefore, the idea of telepathy, for example, is an impossible idea as far as mainstream science is concerned. Because if your consciousness is simply something that's generated by your brain, how can you then pick up the thoughts of somebody else across a continent or on the other side of the world? How is that possible? And so he was questioning the materialist reference frame of mainstream science. And since the month... How is that possible? And so he was he is questioning the materialist reference frame of mainstream science and since the most vocal advocates of mainstream science are materialists who do they do believe that consciousness is an accidental epifinomenon of brain activity that there is nothing there is nothing else to it than that He got under a lot of skins Well, there's also the one that don't believe that and haven't clearly defined what consciousness is but saying if psychic abilities do exist Show them. Yeah exhibit them. Yeah. Well, that's precisely what Rupert has done over here. Yes But what is he done clearly that shows in your opinion? Well, for example documenting the sense of being stared at the people people know when they're being stared right and he's done Experiments which document this and prove it at a level of statistical significance couple percent, right? Yeah A couple of percent Why does your dog know when you're coming home has that been disproven ever no no even though? The owner of the dog varies the roots comes home by a different route in a different way Every day your wife. Yeah, that's probably something Hello Oh, it's your neighbor. Oh, yeah, she's here. Okay. We'll have someone come out and get it right now. Thank you very much All right, Jamie just brought in teller. We'll wrap this up. Yeah, that's our neighbor. Yeah She must have printed knocking on the door. This is this is the great thing about a live discussion. Yeah, it's beautiful It's a yeah But the door She's got a telephone. Well, it's it's cool because people know that it's not some etiquette Yeah, you know it's not edited and polished it. So it's a real conversation in that way You know like we couldn't have this conversation afterwards and you say, you know They're thinking about science. Maybe I said something. Yeah, can we cut that out? Exactly. No. Yeah, it's raw. It's real and And and and and it works Can I can I say a couple of things which I like people to hear sure one is I This this is an odd thing to ask because I've been very I've been very successful as a non-fiction author But but I am hoping that people will pay attention to my fiction Right, and that people will listen to my fiction. It's very very difficult for me to be published as a novelist The publishing industry want me to stay in my box as a successful non-fiction author and they don't want me to explore The fictional side of things so I've managed to get a British publisher from my novel which we talked about earlier Wargot about Spanish conquest of Mexico, but so far I don't have an American publisher And I have been helped a lot by my Facebook community many of whom are Americans who have gone to Amazon UK and bought the British edition of my book From America, and it will be delivered to them here in America in a few days because the book is published on the 30th of May And if anybody's interested in that story I would appreciate if they'd make the effort to go to Amazon UK and pick up the book because what that does then is It gives the book the possibility of some success in Britain and if it succeeds in Britain then it will be picked up by an American publisher So it's only the resistance is just that it's non-fiction. Yeah, that's right publishing industry the things in terms of brands and I am branded as a non-fiction author. This is your second non-fiction second is your second Is your first one so well? My first novel vanished without a trace because it had that was called entangled Uh-huh because it had absolutely no support from from the publishers at all It sold a few thousand copies, but really it was completely ignored and The same thing is going to happen with with war guard as well And unless if people find and what I've done is I put free chapters free to read chapters online on my website And that is gramhandcock.com and that's www.gramhandcock.com We got a fix your Twitter man. There's a double underscore is confusing Well, I know it is but I can't I couldn't get that name. I could get at Graham Hancock I got at Graham who is Graham Hancock who's the at Graham Hancock? Well, there's another guy with my name. His name is Graham Hancock His name is Graham. He got it first. So nothing could be nothing just a double underscore Couldn't you just do something else like Graham Hancock in one word? No, that's what he's got he's got it. Oh well. How about Do you have a middle name? Bruce Hancock Graham be Hancock. Yeah. How about that? No, that's stupid. Yeah, forget it. Forget what I said No, great. Yeah, you know my my mother bless her when she gave me my name She had in my so my initials are GB Hancock. Okay, right when she gave me my name. She was thinking of yeah That's what I use on my email address. She was thinking you fucked up someone's gonna hit you with email With emails anyway. It's okay. She was thinking in a rather grandiose way of George Bernard sure, you know Gb so she called me gb hunger not realizing that gb H also stands for grievous bodily harm, you know Oh does in Britain in British law. Yeah, that's a that's a particular That's a particular crime, you know that you've committed an act of grievous of gb H Somebody so that's my that's that's my initials. I don't know what to What to do about my Twitter name? Maybe we just have to keep a name. We'll just double underscore This is so there's an underscore Graham Can I introduce my sauna sure if she wants something come here hi something What's up? He's also happy now that he quit quit weed. We're gonna completely Are you happier? No, we're weirdly. Wow. Thank God That's hilarious. Yeah, no because he was abusing the right Yeah, I understand yeah, it was the substance controlling him Oh, yes, we went deep into it Interesting stuff do you have this on Kindle and yes, but you have to buy it in England And I think there's some things that make it difficult for Americans to buy the Kindle edition They can only they can only buy the hard the hard back edition That's so stupid There's links on my website which go to the right place to buy it and there's chapters to read so people can make I'm not asking people to buy it blind people can make up their own minds reach out as if they hate it don't buy it Well, Graham Hancock one of our sponsors is audible.com Is audible. Yeah, do you do you have an idea? The year edition of my first novel entangled is available on audible, but right now I do not have did you read it? No, I didn't it was read by somebody else. Yeah, do you like the person who read it? Yes, that's got to be weird meeting you are hearing someone read your words It's weird if they don't do it well, but in this case it was done well Yeah, you don't want to buy Stephen King's when he reads them that's only If I read you buy not have that I'm a huge Stephen King fan Me too. The Stephen King is brilliant. It's amazing his a his book on writing is equally amazing He's the king on writing. All right. Yeah, if you're a writer There's two books you need the war of art and Stephen King on writing those are the only one is state Stephen Stephen press fields Yes, yes, and his new one turning pro it's equally But don't ever get an audio book that's Stephen King reads He's fucking boring a shit. Okay. I'll put your right to sleep. I mean the guy's the greatest author ever as far as I'm concerned Yeah, I agree. He's he is he is the best he writes just a just an amazing narrator the amazing stories He's got the gift fantastic gift of writing a story. Yeah, I remember reading some of his stuff And I was a young teenager like thinking like Jesus I shouldn't be reading this. Yeah, what the fuck Yeah, like his descriptions like that they boarded on creepy like some of the sexual stuff Yeah, he's just a beast. Yeah, yeah, but he's also Being given a gift by the universe. Oh, yeah, right amazing stories that make you want to keep Turning the pages and you write his book on writing for anybody who aspires to become a writer That is the first place you go is read Stephen King on writer. Yeah, it's a brilliant book and he's so forthcoming about all those trials and struggles and yeah, he's amazing and that's my favorite kind of movie is or his books like where it's just fantasy I don't need things to be real in my fiction You know, I enjoy fiction, but I don't need to see like a really depressing movie where everybody's got cancer And oh my god, so brilliantly acted stop entertain me make show me an evil car that kills people Yeah, you know show me the dude next door neighbors were wolf You know show I think that's the that's the righteous first task Yeah, the fiction writers first task is to entertain did you you mean you said witches in this? Did you throw some supernatural shit? Yes, well, war god is is full of the supernatural and and I was able to bounce off the fact because The Aztec Society has been rightly described as the last magical civilization They were they were involved in in magic and witchcraft in a huge in a huge way And that but they also persecuted witches just as European society in the Middle Ages persecuted witches So there's strong supernatural elements in this in this story And I and in a way I think it's only possible to understand what happened between 1519 and 1521 when you take the beliefs in the supernatural into account It sounds like they were I mean what your description of a nation of serial killers is that? Apps that's what the Aztecs were that's what the answer and and here's the thing is he I mean my my two Set central female characters meet in what's called a fattening pen So this is what the Aztecs did their human sacrificial victims. They would first of all they would fatten them up in prisons Why would they fatten them because they wanted to present them to the god plump? Oh desirable So they would fatten them for months on end and can you imagine living in that's your situation? You've been put in the fattening pen. They're feeding you this high-calorie diet and at a certain date You're gonna be marched up the That takes that takes some courage to resist that's you to a con Sacrifice of four days of 80,000 people I told that to my friend Steve Rinala and he didn't even believe me. Yeah cannot stitch land by the way Tennache titt. How do you say it? Cannot stitch land that was the ancient name of Mexico City used to be an island in the middle of a lake approached by causeways and the temple was called Teotihuacan Well, no, that's actually 35 miles north of Mexico City. That's a place That's the the pyramid of the sun the pyramid of the moon and the pyramid of quets are collateral Which the Aztecs revered as the place where men became gods that is what but they didn't know who made Teotihuacan Teotihuacan was already remotely ancient when the Aztecs came into the valley of Mexico and encountered it So the pyramid of the sun the completion of that was when they killed 80,000 no, no, that was the pyramid of the war god. Oh the pyramid which is why my novel is called war god And that stood that stood in the heart of what is now Mexico City and when the Spanish Took that city the very first thing they did was to take that pyramid apart stone by stone Did you see what happened in Belize recently? Yeah, so an ancient Mayan pyramid is used as a construction material by some asshole Yeah, firm who used diggers to just break down the body of the pyramid and use it to make roads How crazy that sums up everything that's wrong with our culture? That's not our culture. Well, that's the that's the place where John McAfee was living. I remember that whole yeah Yeah, yeah, yeah, absolutely. I refer to global culture global culture. You man reduction in consumption Yeah, yeah, it is it was astounding that someone would be willing to do that You're destroying an archaeological site for just for its limestone. Yeah, like whoa like that is some short-sighted assholes Yeah, it's incredible But doesn't that short-sightedness that the pursuit of short-term goals which might be immediately profitable Even though long-term massively damaging doesn't that actually? Completely sum up everything that's wrong with global culture today I mean if you wanted to take one act which kind of expresses it that would be that would be it You know you don't think long term. We don't think in terms of the sacred We don't they Amazon jungle nobody considers you know when they when that when it's being exploited does an economic resource Right what that means for our planet in the rock in the long run if all of those trees come down short-term Some money might be made out of it long term. We're losing the lungs of our planet Well the pattern is that the real issue with human beings is our ability to do things in large numbers that would be horrific if we did Singularally, you know the diffusion of responsibility that comes from acting as a corporation or acting as an army or acting where horrific things can be justified because you're only a part of one huge group of people that are doing these things There's been some we talked about science there's been some interesting science done on exactly that point Which is that they set it up with actors you put a situation where somebody is on the street and there in jeopardy Woman is perhaps being attacked if there are two or three people walking on the street They were almost always intervened to prevent the attack Yeah, but if there's a thousand people walking on the street nobody intervenes. Yeah, well, I think That happens most of the time it can happen, but I think a lot of people would intervene Yeah, you know, I think that's a what's one of those weird things that is like a psychological principle that gets brought up and as a Sort of as a matter of fact. I don't necessarily think it's a matter of fact because if I saw someone raping someone I'd kick their ass, but you might be a try at least you might be the the extraordinary exception I don't think so. I think there's a lot of people who jump in But you hear stories like that all the time people save someone from this and did something there I think it's more likely that cowards would walk away if there's a thousand people, but they're still at a thousand people Somebody with guts who's gonna do something Somebody who realizes we're all in this together and I wouldn't want to write I Share your faith in the human race. I think we have amazing Potential amazing capacity to love amazing capacity to give Amazing generosity and decency. That's what I encounter day to day Yeah, for the most part right mostly people are awesome. Yeah, it's just a few of these Monazuma motherfuckers Yeah, well around killing everybody and throughout history there's been you know giant groups of people Led by serial colors. Yeah, that's yeah, big part of that part of reality that the ones who go for that Joe Yeah, I'm a big fan of this podcast called hardcore history that I talk about all the time but I've been listening to it lately it's been Talk about the Nazis and World War II and but it's when you when you go back and Pay attention to some of the things that happened in history and you see the amazing level of ruthlessness that people exhibited Against their enemies just throughout the history of humans There's been groups that flared up whether it's the Mongols or the Nazis or you know the Romans or the it's been so many groups of Ruthless people still happening now Joe Yeah, I mean, you know when when a drone flies over a village in Afghanistan or Pakistan and the 120 people get slaughtered Yeah, it's a bit remote It's a bit distant. We're not getting our hands dirty, but people are still being killed Well, it's crazy to be big deprived of their parents children are dying children are named and the numbers are so skewed in in the favor of people who were Casualties that were innocent There's way more people that are innocent that are getting killed by these drones Then because and then they say well, that's because these terrorists they do things in highly populated areas well Well, then you can't do that. You can't just say we're gonna kill That's that is one of the most un-American things you could ever do terrible Un-American thing the idea that you could kill all these oppressed innocent people just to get this one bad guy It's painted the obviously wrong and yet at the level of government nobody seems to have got it yet How wrong it is it's to fuse number of responsibility in a digital Technological form of warfare form yeah completely I mean no one's even there. I mean this is what we can do instead of doing some horrific war crimes We send soldiers in there to slaughter all these innocents to get these bad people instead of doing that Which is totally unacceptable? Well just do it this way where you're not even really there Yeah, like some guys sitting in a control tower playing a computer game really why what the fact they're gonna give them medals That was one of the big things they're they're gonna give drone pilots metals and people are like what are you doing? Like this is getting but no I just courage is involved Well apparently there's been new scandal where four Americans were killed in a recent drumster drone strike and now Obama is Trying to restrict the the use of drones and trying to say that they can't be used on Americans Whatever we live in strange times We live in strange times is it because our humanity has not yet caught up to our technological capabilities that we are we're Evolved technologically so much in the past several hundred years. We've like literally changed the world entirely But yet the tissue the DNA the The echoes of the past that lie in our our language and in our cultures is really not caught up by any stretch of the imagination That's a good point. I think that's I think that's a good point. We've got these We've got these incredible toys, but we haven't learned to play with them responsibly yet We've got this barbaric mindset that's still in place to to run shit if you want to run shit You got to be a fucking savage the mindset hasn't changed that much in the last Thousand or 500 years, but yeah, we're hopeful But we're hopeful and I and I remain hopeful. I think It's a wonderful thing to be human. It's a great gift to be born in a human body. We have this You know that's part of it actually is the What the human predicament is the predicament of making choices between Alternatives between good and evil between dark and light and the world. Our world we live in today is filled with Darkness and with light but the one thing that all of us can do as individuals is we can make the right choice Rather than the the wrong choice. We don't have to add to the misery in the world not even one tiny fraction We always got the the choices we make those are our responsibility alone And we cannot devolve those on others. We can't say it's the government's fault the choices we make are our choices And that is the message of ayahuasca isn't it? Yes, that's the message of ayahuasca That's why everybody needs it. Yeah, yeah, because your choices your choices are yours and your choices Will define it isn't it funny that that would be one of the single most Powerful changing elements in this in this culture. All of a sudden ayahuasca center started open up And we we started exploring it scientifically. We started to Figure out those those centers were run by good-hearted people by good-hearted people who had the capacity to love and Wanted the betterment of mankind rather than who was seeking personal gain or personal power through the evil ones in the Peru and where have you I think taking it as well. Yeah, so they're taking it and doing evil things Once they take it. I'm afraid so. Yeah, wow So you do you think that they're just psychopaths that got a hold of some ayahuasca and then you can't fix that kind of crazy Finally, yes if you if you come to this medicine With wicked intent Then bad things can happen. So you really believe in the idea of entities being evil you believe in the the the communication of evil entities I think it's a I think it's a very interesting possibility which explains a lot in human history Demons. Yeah demons. I think it's I think that's a simple shorthand for it just as just as they're also Angels I think that the reality is much more complicated than we imagine that that there are huge unseen realms which impact upon us in important ways and We are interacting with them whether we like it or not and in certain states of consciousness That interaction can become conscious and we can and we can gain access to those To those realms and furthermore I would say I Believe ultimately in the unity of all things But right now in this particular learning experience that we're undergoing in a human incarnation I think it's really useful that those choices exist what after all if everything was all good and Rosie and perfect and They were that were not possible to do wrong What could we learn from this experience of life if we don't have the opportunity to make mistakes if we don't If we are not faced with fundamental choices What what would we benefit from in living this this life in a human body? Well, you know, that's one of the main arguments for computer simulation theory Excellent argument Yeah, one of the main arguments is that we've got ourselves to a point where life is fucking boring because we've solved all the problems We've eliminated all the stress and conflict that's breathing to the true We haven't solved all the problems, but that this is a computer simulation The life we are living that we're in the roaring twenties of the digital era. We're in the simulation Yeah, where it's indissernible. Yeah, well that it's quite possible to imagine Virtual reality even in our technology today getting to the point where you wouldn't know that it was virtual where you're totally immersed in that reality And for all we know Joe that's exactly what you and I are That's the area Yeah, and at the end of our life span our 70 or 80 years or however many years we get You know, we're at the relevant in that we're gonna step out and find ourselves in a room And we've been where we've been playing this game all along and then we'll be scored on what we did you know and and and and did we did we actually fulfilled the objectives that we set out at the beginning of the game with there you get there you get actually with that idea of a computer simulation You actually get to the you find yourself coming full circle and meeting very ancient spiritual ideas like that Thing that I called the weighing of the of the soul. Yeah, the ancient Egyptian system That's where that's where you get scored on how you performed in the computer game and how you maybe how you performed Was not you know how much money you made or how much power you had Maybe it was really how much love you gave that was the that was the thing you most needed to do Is it possible that the the the sort of the fractal nature of reality Manifest itself in the idea of these demons being that in that you you must reinforce good And you must punish bad and the only way these dumb people ever really completely understand is that they feel a physical manifestation Of the evil that they've caused and that's what a demon is so it's just sort of a guide rail that you bump into something that's supposed to steer you towards The positive the very reason why you evolve after like a psychedelic trip seeing the bad that you're doing Yeah, seeing the evil as manifest as an actual being where it's most terrifying your common enemies that you have in real life Whether it's predators or enemies there are physical Manifestation absolutely so we don't you know we don't know the answer to these questions these are these we were touching here upon a great mystery People all over the world have these experiences and report remarkably similar encounters with Entities Island demonic or angelic and this has been going on throughout human culture Right and it's a feature of the psychedelic experience as well and we don't know what those things are This is this is just not clear. Would do they have an independent existence from us or are they part of a teaching program that we need to encounter As you're suggesting just now I think they're very interesting questions to examine, but I don't know the answer to them I've always had an issue with the the possibility of archetypes to that people have already established That archetypes that people already have in their heads so that they you know when when you have an abduction experience What you think is an abduction experience? You sort of fill in the blanks with whatever these entities are all though All that's something to become these gray guys a big black eyes because that's the cultural archetype that we've sort of subscribed to and in all these stories Why do we find them painted on cave walls 25,000 years ago? That's good question Which ones did we find well particularly on the walls of in fact on a little alcove and a ceiling inside Peshmoal cave in France there's a fantastically Recognizable depiction of what we would call a gray today. Can you put that up? How you spell in the the? The wounded man sometimes he's his peshmoal PECH M E R L E Peshmo and he is pierced through the body with a number of spears and he has this kind of high domed forehead and narrow pointed chin and Just a hint of large dark eyes. Do you think that these things are actually Physically visiting or do you think that there's a chemical doorway that's open through psychedelics or through some technology and that that's how they're appearing? I Think it's a chemical doorway. I think that we have a I think we have a hidden doorway inside our minds Through which we can project our consciousness into other levels of reality I can't prove that but that's what I I think maybe maybe going on That's what it feels to you when you experience you that's what it feels to me like that I'm entering a Seemlessly convincing parallel world and again I want to stress the point that because you've had this experience these these are true experiences If they're just a hallucination a byproduct of the mind that is impossible to prove You're still having the exact same experience. Yeah, you're still having the exact same experience So there you come back to the point we made earlier that what you then learned from that experience and if you grow in some way through that Experience it doesn't really matter whether it's free standing reality or whether it's you know something you project And as we become more interconnected with our ability to communicate and our our our idea that the human race really is one gigantic super organism. Yeah as we accept that idea More and more it opens up a lot of other possibilities. It opens up a lot of possibilities for Just our overall view of things. Yeah Yeah, sure this is this is the the new Copernican revolution that we've poised on the edge of you know at one time It was considered that the That the Sun went around the earth and that all the stars revolved around the earth and the earth was fixed and still in the center And then some people started Having experiences or if you like finding data which contradicted that and eventually a whole worldview Was was thrown away and I think we're you know at the edge of moving into a new into a whole new revolution about the nature of reality That it is just much more complicated than we've imagined and there Yeah, that's a that's a kind of sketch of the peshmill figure That's not the original cave painting and I'm afraid the only You folks that are actually present are the ones above the individuals have the other two are not there in the past Let's go see if you can find the original one Jamie cuz I don't look like shit. That looks like an animal too You know who knows what they they were really terrible at drawing to They've been like using a drawing some of them were some of the cave paintings are absolutely stunning Yeah, I wouldn't pay for them. I mean I would if I knew they were really old You haven't seen but it's like some new dude scheme along and that was his version of a buffalo a village bitch You haven't seen what is painted inside Shovel cave. Well, I watched that documentary. Yeah, the word in hers Art documentary. Yeah. No, it's amazing. I'm joking around obviously as you can but still there's rather by an Alex great painting think it's true It's cool. Yeah, I like some Frank, for Zeta. You know, that's art to me. There's no Frank for Zeta on cave walls Right Okay, you know, I mean the caves This is what are the great experiences we can have as human beings is to go into those painted caves and Going in silence and in darkness and just get a sense of the atmosphere there transformative spaces They knew something about set and setting in those times and of course I'm convinced they were using psychedelic and that was the caves in France were caves in France caves in Spain Yeah, what are the oldest ones? The cave in very oldest is Fumani cave in Italy, which is 35,000 years old Shovel cave about 33 32,000 years old They they're they're pretty pretty fucking ancient So do you think that those were people that were living in those caves that would be making that artwork? Never lived in those caves never lived in them. No, no, they didn't they used them as sacred spaces They visited them in small numbers often Separated there might be an interval of 2000 years between one group went in and one another group went in So our idea of cave art as the laypersons ideas is cavemen We're inside this cave and then at nighttime they would light fires and draw cave art. That's not what was going on They never lived in those spaces. They lived outside. They lived in you know in portable structures like teepees They were they were hunter-gatherers and they used the caves as sacred spaces They communicated their most profound ideas about the spirit So they were a lot more sophisticated than we like to believe we just as sophisticated as we are was there ever a time But before that that we know of where they weren't where like the endertals supposedly are being They they did some cave art as well. Yeah, this is the new discovery that some of the very oldest cave art was almost certainly done by Neanderthal So the Neanderthal image is due for a complete Rehabilitation very very very soon the Neanderthals the image that we have of Neanderthals is completely wrong but There's a thing I call six million years of boredom which is you know from the last common ancestor with the chimpanzee is completely wrong. But there's a thing I call six million years of boredom, which is, you know, from the last common ancestor with the chimpanzee, through until well after the emergence of anatomically modern humans, our ancestors were very dull, judging by what they left behind, judging by what they produced. They were not thinking laterally, they were not creating, they were not, they did not have spiritual concepts or ideas. And it's rather like a light is switched on in the human brain all around the world, somewhere after 100,000 years ago. Really 40,000 years ago that we get this amazing explosion of symbolic art and suddenly you recognize that the creatures are just like us and that we are dealing with people we could communicate with on a symbolic level. So something happened to our ancestors and I made this case extensively in my book supernatural that what happened to our ancestors was encounters with psychedelics. That's what took us out of the dull and boring zone and put us into the realm of imagination and creativity and spirit. Well, it's a fascinating idea and it's a weird one to dismiss because we know that the impact of psychedelics on the mind is so astonishing. It's very poo-pooed and marginalized because it's thought to be frivolous and silly, but that's only by people who haven't done it. It's one of the weirdest things where it's persecuted by people who really need it more than anybody. Well, exactly, exactly. I mean, for those who've never had a psychedelic experience to put down others who have had it and to tell them that that experience is wrong. I mean, that's like a celibate, you know, telling somebody not to have sex. The celibate has no experience of the thing that they're talking about. How dare they make judgments about that. Yeah, it's a good point. It's a strange, but I think that people like you that are brave enough to speak out about this. In fact, even write books about it, that's the ripples that sends out this information and the universe picks it up and the internet grabs it and duplicates it and throws it up on Twitter and then boom, we're off to the races. New ideas are introduced into the minds of the young people who I think that's what gives me hope. That's what gives me hope too. There's a fantastic growing community of alert, intelligent, awake, aware young people out there. They grew up with the internet. They grew up with the internet and that I'm not going to put up with all that shit any longer that comes down from a hierarchical, controlling, dominated culture. Boom, Graham Hancock just dropped some science. That was a beautiful conversation, man. Thank you very much. We've got to do this more often. I agree. When are you back in America? Oh, late October. So if people want to buy war god, they can go to amazon.co.uk. Well, what the easiest way to do it is to go to my website, okay, Graham Hancock.com. Okay, you already have the Canadian and the UK link. Because that's the two places on the site. I was in Canada or amazon, UK. Hopefully, if all our friends at audible are listening, hook it up, bitch. Get something to read it. Come on. I'd love to have that in my car when I'm driving around. But I'll pick it up as well. Support. Thank you. Thank you, sir. Is that the original K-word? Yes, it is. You can see that high domed forehead up there. Could just be shitty art. That's awesome. You can see the dark eyes. Well, what you could be, you know what? I'm sorry. What's that up in the sky up above it? I mean, what is it? Let me tell you something. I got a three year old and she draws people. They look exactly like that. She's not trying to depict aliens. She's just shitty at drawing. This is, you know, it's the problem with this is this is too. I mean, it's too ambiguous. It's like that's not good art. And so I don't know what that is. Is that a spider? Could be a spider. Could be a crab with it. It's a human body. The thing in the upper left, I mean, with spears pierced through his body. What about that thing in the upper left? What the hell is that thing there? I know nobody knows what it's fucking shitty spider. That guy sucked. I hope that guy was way better at killing buff looks. No, I think he's a dog. I need to send you into the painted case. I think I'm joking around completely. I mean, this I'm not that impressed with. I would like to look at it. I'm thinking it's fascinating because it's so old. Actually, as a work of art, it's not impressive. It's subject matter. What is being depicted there is rather interesting. I sort of disagree. And this is why I disagree because the thing in the upper left, it might be a spider, shows me a really rudimentary level of replicating what they're trying to draw. That looks like shit. And so this looks like shit too. I don't know what it is. It might be a bug. It might be an animal. It's like the guy sucks at drawing. He's not that good. So to try to attribute anything to it, I think it will be a little disingenuous. So those archaeologists that you know, are trying to figure what this thing out is, you just guess it, man. Same sort of images found all over the world. It is. The image of the gray head. The image of the theory anthrop, which is the creature that's part human and part animal informed. That is found all around the world. Often I've seen virtually identical images in the painted caves in France and in canyons in Utah, for example. And you feel that that is directly related to psychedelic music. Absolutely. You speak that in that world. And I think this is related to psychedelics as well. I think that's a painting of a vision. And the vision might have been, you know, not very clear, but that's what's being paid. I think some of they gave a three-year-old colored rock. And that's what they drew. That's what I'm thinking. But my three-year-old draws of telling you, man. The idea of the morphing of... If you look at Google, call out Chauvet Cave. Images from Chauvet Cave. I want Jo to see some beautiful images. Oh, no. I will. I will be very impressed. I'm just joking around. I'm being completely joking. And silly. But you're right. That image is rudimentary. What are the best images, the best images, depictions of aliens to you that you've seen? First of all, let me make it clear. I don't think that we're dealing with aliens. Right. Quote, unquote. Well, I mean that gray. I'm sorry. I agree. I think we're dealing with a mystery. I think we're dealing with a phenomenon. And I think we as a culture or certain members of our culture are jumping to the conclusion that creatures a bit like us, perhaps looking slightly different in very high-tech craft, are crossing interstellar space. That is beautiful picture from Chauvet. It's not bad. Across interstellar space. And I'm coming here in technology. But I personally think, again, I can't prove it. But I think it's more likely we're dealing with interdimensional contexts that these entities are not high-tech aliens from a planet a bit like ours. But they're coming to us from literally the other side of reality. Well, my unfortunate labeling aside calling them aliens, I meant that archetype that big, that you say repeats itself over and over yet. Yeah. We think that's a good example in the darkest big mountains. But they're just like that. Is that the best example we could pull up right now? So we just, I don't think you'd be able to pull this up. No, they don't have those images online. No, you might find it. I'm not sure. Everything is on your internet. I'm not sure. They not have that online. I have it in my books, it would be natural. But what is the best one that's online in European? I honestly couldn't tell you. Okay. I just wanted to get some. I've seen some really fascinating ones. One crazy shaman. It's very strange looking creature. It looks like it could be from shaman cave in Texas, possibly. Is that what it is? Maybe. And those are those Native American depictions. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But then you find similar things from, from Tassily in, in Algeria. You know, these kind of glowing figures that seem to, it's very easy to construe them as alien visitors from other planet. Why do so many drugs, like whether it's ayahuasca or there's other ones that have archetypes that are built in like snakes and, you know, jaguars, what do you think that is? Do you think that's the experiences of the people that have taken it before you? Well, first of all, I don't think it's that we don't know what an archetype is. Right. There's this idea that the human brain has all these patterns and shapes just built into it, archetypal. But I think just as easy, just as possible, is that there are other levels of reality in which entities are able to look like that, shape-shifting entities that can take on many different forms. The experience is very universal. For example, everyone who drinks ayahuasca, pretty much everyone, if they persist with it, will encounter serpents. And those serpents aren't like your everyday serpents. You know, they're 500 feet long with, you know, mouths, the size of cars. And richly coloured and paladin and intelligent. You know, now why is it that somebody who drinks ayahuasca in Tokyo and somebody who drinks it in New York and somebody who drinks it in the Amazon, that they all encounter these serpents, intelligence serpents. Why do you think this? Well, I think that there's something out there which chooses to manifest in that form. And I think that it's being witnessed just as if three different explorers went into the jungle and met the same previously uncontacted tribe and came back and drew us images. And I think that there is some reality to it. But I can't prove that. Right. I just think that that's what's going on. And I've had enough encounter. So like Rick Strasman's work with DMT, which I know that you're familiar with because you presented the DMT, the spirit molecule documentary. Yeah. You know, that a number of his volunteers encounter entities who say to them, we're so glad you've discovered this technology. Now we can communicate with you more often. Right. Yeah. Yeah. I always wonder about those trips, whether or not that's just your imagination, a hyperdrive, creating these incredible properties. And that will probably be the right and proper that you should wonder about. Yeah. But there's also the possibility that no, it's that you're communicating with something. Yeah. But either way, again, like we said, same experience. Yeah. Yeah. You're a bad motherfucker, Grand Hancock. Thank you. I think that is a compliment. You should. You should. I'm glad we're friends. I really, really enjoy our talks. Some of my favorite podcasts, ever. Thank you very much. Thank you, Joe. Pleasure to sit down with you. So war God, people can get it. Go to gramhandcock.com and on Twitter, he's gram double underscore Hancock. Thank you. And thank you to everybody that tuned into the podcast. Thanks to all sponsors. Thanks to hover, please go to hover.com forward slash Rogan. Get yourself 10% off. Thank you to stamps.com. Use the click on the microphone on the upper right hand corner and use the code word J R E. And thank you also to on it.com. Go to O N N I T use the code name Rogan and save yourself 10% off any of all supplements. We will be back on Monday with Dave Asprey. Well, a lot of people really enjoyed his first talk. And he's got a lot of new information. I know a lot of folks have questions about the whole bullet proof exec. Go to bulletproofexact.com if you want to prepare for this and find out what the fuck Dave asked me all about. But he's a brilliant guy and we look forward to talking to him on Monday. All right. Thank you, everybody. Much love. Big kiss.