The general gonna experience the other thing I like about this place is that we were talking about before that It's a blue city surrounded by a red state. I love that. It keeps it in check sure You know, there's there's something about that and It's just uh this whole town. It's like Texas itself is a very rebellious place Mm-hmm. This is where kennison started and this is where Bill Hicks started sure and there's something about that That's like it's baked into their appreciation for comedy I mean those guys put Texas on the map as far as comedy because people thought about comedy that thought of New York Thought of LA maybe San Francisco. Maybe Chicago Busted for sure, but they didn't think of Houston and two of the best of all time Came out of Houston. There's a great comedy city and also you look at the you can tell their Texas comics because Religion is such a big part of both their acts. Yeah, and you feel that that's like the Texan and them. I mean I I connect I mean Bill Hicks is He's like the biggie smalls of comedy. Mm-hmm because the amount of work he did it's gold and he died so fucking young He's like five albums dude. I think he died like 34 something like that pancreatic cancer and you re-listen to those albums dude Those albums whenever comics call Bill Hicks overrated. I'm like you're fucking idiot Bill Hicks is great and and you know what's great about Bill Hicks so many comics now with his ideology would only perform in like S.F. and Portland and Burlington Vermont that dude's doing taste taking that act to Alabama That's fucking cool. That's why he's bombing so he did the road constantly. Oh, dude the flying saucer tour When you're like he's those albums I'm dying laughing you you're listening to one of the greatest comics of all time Bombing and he released this for us He's fucking bomb and he's he's calling the crowd dumb. Yeah, and it's not like just some comic who's so it's a great comic calling Crowds dumb. There's something beautiful about that. He's so fucking angry on stage, but it was like beautiful anger It was earned anger. Well everything was interesting even if he was bombing what he was saying was interesting Brilliant yeah, it was just in that was like one of his tenants of comedy is even if you're not gonna be funny Be interesting He was lenny Bruce for us. I listen to lenny Bruce and I'm like it's a little it doesn't resonate for me I understand that he's brilliant. I understand that we need him But like Bill Hicks was like that for guys like us. You were like we he made it he made it cool, you know He made you feel like a hack Like you were just telling jokes and he was up there talking about young man on acid thought he could fly, you know It's a great about positive drug stories. Yeah, that's a brilliant bit. It's a brilliant bit It's a pro drug bit from a guy who was cleaning sober at the time You know, he's talking about the great times that he had what he's doing drugs I mean it was also everything was so well-worded. It was so smart You know it was it was just a completely interesting kind of comedy and it changed so many people's way of comedy to the point where The punchline in Atlanta when you had performed there in the green room somebody wrote on the green room quit trying to be Hicks Yeah, yeah, he had his rules of comedy and he also some of them I'm like all right He was like never asked to cry how they're doing I'm like that one's are we can get we can do that That's so many people imitated him was what the point of quit trying to be Hicks was of course They were all trying to do that they were all trying to be him You know, and they would go on stage with some fucking half-big point The government or taxes or something they they it's like so often with great comics You miss what the beauty of them was is that Hicks at his core was silly and funny and when he got self-righteous That's kind of when he lost me sometimes when he was like kind of condescending the crowd I was kind of like I don't love this as much as when you're just doing great jokes like I love the bitty does I love you know, it's in his half hour on HBO when he's like I hate when I love watching people and ask been Smoke cigarettes not knowing they're done in a lane and he does the act out and he just keeps blowing because of the smoke and it's like That's a great fucking bit. Yeah, that's a silly observation or joke and you're like oh that dude was great at political stuff social commentary Religious stuff, but then you could just do a fucking observational bit. Yeah. He's one of the all-time great So when people write him off as being overrated. I it's it's all in the context of time You you have to think about it that way if you go and listen to Lenny Bruce It doesn't make any sense to us because everything has already been understood and covered Like all the things that he's talking about that are groundbreaking back then they were people like what is oh my god What is happening like this guy's breaking down society no one can do this No one to done that before but now everybody does it so when you hear him do it and then the things he's saying The world is moved on so much from 1963 today that it's impossible to like it's impossible to He still had some jokes that work today. He had one joke. He goes You know, it's against the law to be homosexual. So what do they do they put you in jail? What a bunch of men Who want to have sex with you? It's a great bit. It's a great bit and that's a bit from like what 65 or something That's the thing It's like it's like watching basketball in the 60s and you're like seeing Chamberlain and you're like well There's no Jordan without this shit and you know who's Jordan Carlin prior right? Yeah, so you got to take prior Also, I love that he was like a cool Jew like so often like Jews are like oh boy. I'm fucking no I love when how often did cool Jews pop up and show but like he's one of the coolest one of the coolest Elliot Gold I was like grateful for Elliot Gould and my guys like that. I'm like we're not just doing the oh Shucks my my fucking I'm so nervous and I have allergies. I'm like no be fucking be like be yourself Be cool. He's just go bloom Jewish. I don't know I'm a Jewish. It's fuck. That's a Jewish name. He's a cool guy. He's a very cool guy. That's what's gonna get to great Fuck smart science guy. I've been rewatching Larry Sanders and he's so fucking funny. Oh, he's great. No, that's a great show He's great as the scientist and Jurassic Park. Yes, he's Jewish. There you go cool Jewish guy cool Jew Yeah, but but lenny Bruce was like He was a he was a real pioneer like there was no other I mean there was Mark Mortzall who's doing political, but he doesn't get a shine no He just passed away. I mean he he's like saw yeah, yeah, Mortzall didn't get a shine because he was so of his time like the guy holding the newspaper Right like lenny Bruce broke through was Mortzall. I guess you know the problem is sometimes you live too long You you ain't shake of our if you live till fucking 78 right So your shake of our when you die in your prime and your and your young picture is shown everywhere Right, but when you live too long sometimes it ain't cool. Yes, it's cool So a guy like lenny Bruce died in the most romantic way possible heroin overdose on the bathroom floor That's what you want from that kind of you want to go out like Hendrix or Janice Joplin That's when you become fucking this shit I mean Bill Hicks too like who knows maybe he would have had a shitty podcast Maybe he would have been great who the fuck knows how people age right I Think he would have been great. It would be great. It was never not. I don't think I mean imagine if he had like a like HBO show Where he just did like like almost like Bill Mars style where he just did that like wall that'd be fucking cool Huh, do you know who had a great story about him? Carrot top really because Bill used to make fun of him in caretops act Or in Bill Hicks exactly make fun of caretop brother and he had this bit about he goes he had caretops for people Think he goes up Gallagher's too heady was just a prop joke yeah and Carrot Scott caretop is the fucking sweetheart of a guy. I heard he's the man. He's so cool and I Always felt like he got fucked with for no reason like his act is funny It's funny shit, but he was always like a punchline to comedians like they did was a not one of us not a real comic fuck And it was always like people would shit all over caretop. I don't think Norm did him any favors in that interview And he just kept trashing him because Norm was so cool that I think like when you see a guy as cool as Norm doing that Right, I think it hurts well it hurts if you're sensitive, right? Like if you're a comic and someone's trashing you it should be funny. Yeah, there should be some humor to it You know the mean yeah, but sometimes guys get isolated and he was very Scott very isolated You know he's out there In the world on his own not really connected to comics in the same way so Hicks before he died was really sick and he Came to want to Scott's shows so caretops doing a show and Hicks came to the show and he was one of those last few months of last forever. He's I thought you hated me He goes down man. I don't fucking hate you. It's just jokes. I'm sorry