You, the other day, made a comment about 9-11 in which you suggested that the US government had not been wholly forthcoming about what happened that day that they're a bit lying by the federal bureaucracies. That seems obviously true. The response was unbelievable. It was immediate. You were attacked as a conspiracy-monger, as a lunatic, but not just by the left, also by the goons that the Wall Street Journal editorial page wrote a whole piece about how you disqualified yourself, but you've been asking that question. What were you saying? And why was the reaction as fierce as it was, do you think? It was fascinating, Tucker. I've had many of these moments in the campaign where they said, this is the campaign ender. This is over. He just blew it. This is one of them. This is like the fourth, fifth of those. But what was interesting about it was right, this was not a left-wing chorus. This was mostly actually a right-leaning chorus. And Mike Pence, and he was deeply disappointed. Chris Murphy, this Democratic Center guy, says something very similar to Mike. Yes. And so it's fascinating. It says there's something going on here. So in fairness to Tucker, I didn't suggest it. I explicitly said that the government absolutely lied to us. Yeah. I had 11 commissioned lied. The FBI lied. Now, am I, is this a core point of my campaign? No, it's not. Actually went on a comedy show where some guy asked me was the moon landing fake, I said, I think it was real. Then he asked me did the government tell us the truth about 9-11. I said, no, they did not. So in response to a question, I'm going to answer honestly. Yeah. And the thing I had in mind was the facts. There's this guy, Al Bayumi, who replied back to 9-11 in the pre-9-11 day. Think of how ludicrous this story is. A 42-year-old graduate student, and there's nothing wrong with being 42 and going back to school. My dad went back to school much later in life. But he's a 42-year-old graduate student who receives the two terrorists, two of the terrorists who flew planes into buildings in the United States of America, not that long later, receives them at the airport in LA, takes them to his house, spends lots of time with them, integrates them into the community. But the account for what he said happened was he met them randomly at the airport. That doesn't make much sense on the face. It's kind of happened to be an LAX and really exactly. Exactly. And you look like guys we might get along with and then suddenly become fast friends at the airport so much so that he takes them up. It's just a little suspicious. But hey, the 9-11 commission and the FBI looked into it at the time. They said his account is accurate. Yeah, sounds legit. It sounds super legit, right? Now, there was two people. Thank you, that's right. You know, these guys came from Saudi Arabia. Does this guy who received them have any ties to Saudi Arabia? That's where they landed. But now 20 years later, in 2021 and 2022, the FBI quietly declassifies documents. They have to 20 years later as the deadline that suggests that, oh, wait a minute, they did know actually that this guy was a Saudi intelligence operative. Interesting how that works. Just slips that right under there 20 years later. Now, there are real consequences for this right now because there's a federal case of families of victims on 9-11 that want accountability, that are determining answers. So they're suing the Saudi government. And the case turns on whether or not this is true because you know, there's attackers who are from Saudi Arabia. The Bush administration, you'd have the 9-11 commission, bipartisan. You have the fact of the FBI, CIA, everybody saying that, no, this guy was really just acting independently here. But now we say is a Saudi intelligence operative. There's really the question of whether the Saudi Arabia owes damages to these families. So this is a relevant question. So is this the main point I'm focused on my campaign? No, no, we have to focus in the future of the country. But if I'm asked a question and I answer honestly based on the facts, I don't think they would have come for me if this was false, if this was ludicrous. Of course. They're relying as never punished. Lying is never punished. But it's speaking the truths you're not supposed to speak. That's what actually attracts the immune response. But why? I mean, you made of, I thought, a really wonderful point in one of your responses to this in which you said it's not okay for the government to lie to a Soviet in a democracy. It's poison. And it corrodes the system that we refer to democracy. So, but why would the Wall Street Journal take time out of its busy schedule of defending low capital gains taxes to attack you over this? You know, what's interesting is I think that there's a bipartisan consensus in this country right now that we the people we can't handle the truth. It's like Jack Nicholson at the end of the movie, right? You can't handle the truth. You need me on that wall. My view, my basic view in this campaign is no, we don't need you on that wall. And yes, we can handle the truth. COVID-19, what was the origin? What do we know about the vaccines before we mandated them? What do we know about Hunter Biden's dealings before we systematically suppressed that story? What do we know about the truth of what happened on January 6th? What do we know about that Nashville shooter manifesto, the transgender individual who shot up a bunch of people in a Christian school? So I went to Nashville not that long ago because Bill Lee, a Republican governor of Tennessee, now wants to pass a red flag law in Tennessee without releasing that manifesto. The whole point is the public can't handle the truth. And so I had offline discussions. And we were talking with, you know, big donors in the Republican Party, big folks in media, executives and otherwise who said, hey, listen. Okay. Even if what you're saying is true, this is not helping you. He said, why is that the first question that should go through my mind? Right. I mean, personally, I think the way I'm running this campaign is I'm not thinking about what's helping me or not before I say it so far. At least that actually that approach does seem to be helping me. Yes. We're doing all right. But even if I were, I'd rather lose some election than to play some political snakes and ladders of what we're supposed to say. And I think that that's really one of the questions at issue today as it was in 1776. Do we believe that the public can be trusted with the truth? Whatever the truth is just give me the hard truth. And I have a friend of mine. Her father died recently. She talked about actually her experience of her father having heart attacks even when she was a kid. He went on to live as far as he did. But she said, the one thing she just wanted from the doctors, from her dad, etc. Is, you know, she's 12 years old at the time. I can handle the truth. Just, just tell me, like, is my dad going to die? Is my dad likely to die before he goes in for the next procedure? Don't just tell me he's going to live because you think that's what I need to hear. Just tell me the truth and I can handle the truth. I think most of us are this way. I think we as free human beings, badly what makes us human beings not animals is the belief that we can believe in something bigger than ourselves and that we can handle the truth from those who are in power. And I think that's the moment we live in today was the moment the American Revolution that we the people can be trusted. And I think we now live in a moment where the government and not just the government, but a broader establishment in our country believes that citizens of this nation cannot be trusted with the truth. So when you describe the way that people who run the country feel about voters are describing the way parents treat small children, that's right. That's right. I think that that's actually worth understanding because there's one school of thought that says the government and the people in charge are fundamentally hostile to the people. If only we're so easy, actually. I think the reality of what's going on is far more dangerous where the people who are in charge have actually what they think of as a benevolent view of the people that we're doing what's actually right for you, for me, for the populace at large. And then if you look at this throughout history, Tucker, for most of human history, that's how it's been done. For most of human history before 1776 in the old world, the vision was the people cannot be trusted to sort out their own differences. One person, one vote that's that's a laughable idea. It has to be church leaders and labor leaders and business leaders that decide in the back of palace halls. What's right for the rest of society at large? And then we had this weird departure in 1776. That's in and out. Actually we the people can be trusted in a system where every person's voice and vote counts equally with free speech and open debate in the public square, whatever it is. Sometimes we might get it wrong. Sometimes we get it right. Whatever it is, that's the way we do things in this new thing we call the United States of America. But then every once in a while, and we're in one of those moments that ugly monster rears its head again that says, no, no, no, no. The people can't be trusted. It has to be now in the back of palace halls in the back of three letter government agencies in Washington, D.C. or in the back of BlackRock's corner office on Park Avenue in Manhattan. Whatever it is, it's that the enlightened have to make sure that the public is protected from the truth just like a parent protects a child. And I think it's that parental instinct. It's not the kidnappers instinct, right? It's not the guy who wants to, you know, kidnap and kill the child. No, it's actually almost what they think of as being the instinct of a parent who's doing for you what's better for you than you know for yourself. And I think that's what gives it actual staying power because it's not what somebody thinks of as evil who's committing evil. They think of it as actually a moral obligation to the public which explains the bipartisan nature of when somebody speaks the truth about what really happened on an 11. No, hush, keep that under the rug because Republican or Democrat, we know that the people can't be trusted for that. It's not good for the people. The children are listening. Lower your voice because it wasn't. Yeah. The young people say the news is full of wine and Canada is motorcade. We want to do it and 39. We don't know the death of Jeffrey Epstein.