So you've been flying for a living since 1991. So that's almost 35 years, which is amazing. For the rest of us, we're about the same age. It seems like commercial air travel the United States has declined in like at a shocking Love rate. It's just much worse. Every a lot of things have gotten better. We have the internet iPhones Why is commercial air travel in this country? Not on the world, but in this country specifically like much worse than it was. What is that? Well, I think legitimately there's been a corporate change in this country. ESG started to take over. You've got the Larry Finks of the world that are driving corporations or CEOs toward Issues that not necessarily are customer oriented. Yeah, yeah So when ESG doesn't help the customer. Not the internal customer. Yeah, hey, so as we go through this process to slow creep those need to to set an investment score People with different ideas of customer service and what's important are able to drive Forward their message. So we get away from customer service. Airway is run on three things right to run on fuel planes and people When we start taking The people out of the mix right because it's all about by more airplanes It's about driving that score so we could drive the share prices so that we can then get the lower financing rate to get airplanes We go away from that time when a Gordon Boothoon or or a herb color her Said you take care of your internal people. They'll take care of your customer. So everything's bottom line now, Tucker And yet ESG is not really like strictly speaking bottom line. It pleases Larry Fink It was probably done more than any person to really hurt this country, but side bar But it you know for your average customer you're like well You get the feeling that like incompetent people are in air traffic control incompetent people are In the cockpit. I don't know if that's true or not, but it shakes people's faith Scares the crap out of people and then planes start crashing. You're like that's why That seems like against The core interest of the business I would agree but because People at the corporate level want to drive the interest rates down to be able to grow because it's all about expanding Who is the biggest right and so they have to follow some of those mandates? Yes And so then we start looking at a particular CEO who said in 21 50% of my incoming pilots will be women or people of color First of all that number is impossible. They don't exist But when you take merit out of it and you start hiring people based on an attribute that has nothing to do with flying airplanes or controlling them You start moving down a path of incompetence and it breeds itself all the way down throughout every Um, department in the airline Nice to put I should note the obvious Just the URL woman You started flying you said commercially in 1991 The year I left college so There can't have been too many female pilots flying commercially in 1991 The original 21 Female airline pilots broke the glass seasoning. I didn't break it But it kind of crawled through because of them and you know on we go But in all of my career. I've always been one of the guys I'm an airman. I'm proud to be an airman. You can't call me an airperson I've earned it because I've done exactly what everyone else has done And so when a passenger comes on and they look in the cockpit now today They look a little sideways that there's a woman up here Definitely I just specially if I might be sitting next to a Hispanic or an African-American They're wondering how we got our jobs. Yes. That is absolutely right DEI hurts That weren't a product of it as well and that's unfair to me and to my co-workers. So have you noticed this internally? You said a CEO of an airline Announced four years ago that we're gonna hire 50% female or non-white pilots, but do you feel that as a pilot? Do you notice the standards changing? I don't know that I noticed the standard changing, but I know what's expected of me has changed quarterly we have a computer-based training and it was kind of insidious the way they crept it in here first it's a little Don't discriminate against people the next thing is a little more At my airline last year I was asked in the DEI training to certify That Tom says Who is now Kathy? He's a woman? Therefore, he's always been a woman Now wait a minute. I'm a faithful person. He's a dude in the dress I am not going to agree that I will believe that he's always been a woman So I said no several people said no we had to apply for religious accommodations and then we were asked to do what we always do which is just Treat people's dignity respect. I've done that forever. You know, I don't care what who you love Right, but I do I will always treat you with dignity respect But only because of the pushback now this year's training. They've dialed it back But they're trying to creep the things in that don't matter talker what matters is how to fly an approach Do you know the regulations? Are you safe? Right this other stuff is distracting and it's distracting at the FAA as well so How has anyone explained why it's relevant the color of a pilot? No, I have no idea So it started with like we have you know, you're probably racist. We have to make you non-racist And then it goes from there to It's really important the skin color of a pilot is really important somehow But no one ever says why no or you know whether they wear a dress or pants right in my case so You know in the US 96.4% of all pilots are male Yeah, right, so there's like less than 4% female airline transport pilots We can do everything and I'm advocate for doing everything we can to get people interested in the job But Tucker there are some people who just don't need to be doing the job either And you can't fit a square peg in a round hole. I can teach anyone to fly short But there's some that I would not want to hide my family. Have you seen those people? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Like you made an example One of my first students female I tried to teach her how to fly. She could fly But she just couldn't put it back together. You know when you go around It's pushed the power up and it was dainty It was just just some skill sets that they just don't have an aggression and you know A willingness to get out there and learn it. You know don't manhandle the machine, right? Yeah, you have to be in control especially an assessment right? Yeah, you know It's not like my auto throttle big 767 auto pilot etc But the bigger problem we're having today is Because it's a lucrative career a lot of people want to have been talked into getting involved And so they see the money. They might not be quite fit for it I'm I'm also a college professor. I teach human factors for Indiana Wesleyan So I deal with a lot of the undergraduates and the people coming up People quit their jobs mid-life. I'm gonna chase the money I don't realize what they're doing and and it's a different generation and my son is of that generation So I don't want to speak badly of them but the priorities are different Right and so to get them to understand the commitment that it takes to succeed in this career and to get all the way through it and Then to have them Kind of entitlement if I can say that. You know and they grow up And I don't want people to think I was saying, you know I walked a mile in the snow to school there for you're not qualified, right? Right, but airplane technology has changed. We learned to manhandle those sesna 172 and from that We learned how to manhandle the next biggest airplane These kids are growing up in glass cockpits with computers. They're learning to fly with their fingers When they get to the airlines, it's not an aviator that's coming there It's an operator and so when they take off Put the autopilot on if I do autopilot with auto throttles to landing Ask Al Haynes and Sioux City, Iowa How to fly an airplane without an autopilot? He saved a lot of lives that skill is not there And it takes time to build that skill. We could even take those young 1500 hours and we're doing it But it takes a long time to mentor so We've got pilots now that are coming in at minimum skills having learned on glass cockpits And in a year upgrading to captain I had 12 years of watching the good in the bad of the airline world And I took the good from them and I left the bad behind and I think I'm a pretty decent captain now But those kids are jumping so fast and then they're running the unions because they're young and they're eager And so as old people are saying hey, you know what? We're at a critical moment where we don't have qualified pilots. We'd like to keep them a little longer We'd be willing to work an extra couple of years But they vote and they say no get out of my seat old man or old woman Excuse me. Um, they don't want to raise the pilot age So the airline pilots association is complicit in the problem It feels like everything is fine until there's a problem So you read about even now even now You read about plane stalling, you know something happens and the plane just falls out of the sky and I've read a number of times of trained pilots who You know apply the straw point upwards as it's stalling which I don't think is the right No, they opposite right you're supposed to do but they panic under pressure So That seems like a huge problem if you're not screening carefully for temperament ability to think clearly under duress And you're not allowing people to accumulate relevant experience before turning over the cockpit to them. No I would agree Like like describe if you don't mind since you've flown for so long Um a scenario where something goes wrong unexpectedly and you have to Think independently from the autopilot Well the most dangerous part of your flight most people don't know it is takeoff in a jet Yeah, why why is it most as we get to the end of the runway at critical Speed fee one we call it fee one lift off the airplane is at full power and you have an engine failure Now you have a symmetrical Thrust and so it's very critical to lower the nose do the proper steps and a lot of times there's critical terrain So we have a path we have to fly a lot of things are happening very quickly And so doing it by the book. It's what we train for over and over and over again Losing an engine on takeoff. It is the most critical point of your entire flight And so that's what we train for That's what they pay me for Yeah, they don't pay me for for the simple stuffs of the landings and crews at altitude and all that they pay me for that be one cut Really V1 cut yes right at the speed we call it V1 velocity one So at that critical speed when we V1 Rotate the airplane off the runway engine failure a symmetrical thrust kicks in a whole bunch of rudder to seven six It takes a lot You know you stand on it get it straight and fly it up to roughly 800 feet lower the nose worth of checklist And it's a two man job. That's critical reason. We can't go to single pilot How to the two man job because somebody's got to read the checklist and somebody's got to fly the airplane I can't fly that airplane looking down at that checklist I mean that does happen right? And everyone we've had I can remember speaking extremely successful Really? So people survived them all people survived last actual death in the US transport category Outside of the commuters 2005 southwest and it actually wasn't on board the plane it was at the gas station across the street of Midway So we have an incredible safety record But we have that safe safety record because of the people up front Right the systems kind of working against us though I don't know if you've seen the preliminary results of the DCA midair No, we have a serious problem. So describe what you think happened there. It's not what I think happened So DCA the plane that helicopter over the helicopter the airplane DCA being the in towner We're talking to speak in Washington Reagan National. Thank you No, I know what I know from watching the NTSB Press conference and chairwoman Was speaking she explains several things. It's only preliminary. No blame was assigned at this point I have my personal belief on blame But the design of the system failed those passengers Okay The way that route through there was designed They looked back for 11 years 945 plus 1000 potential Incursions In 11 years my teeth hit the floor. I mean, I thought we had air traffic control to prevent that we do but the problem She detailed is the design of the system That approach if the helicopter is in the right place the perfect ideal place The clearance between the approaching aircraft in the helicopter at one point is as low as 75 feet The room on watch her watch her deep reef. I was astounded The rotor blades on a helicopter are like 30 feet radius Holy cow and now we know the helicopter was outside of the ideal place and obviously 75 feet tucker when I pre-flight an airplane My first officer and myself the regulation says they have to be within 75 feet. So right there we've taken out the protection But in the world was the FAA doing And this is in the nation's capital and these are military helicopters and commercial aircraft All eyes are on that airport. The airport has all kinds of restrictions on it after 911. You know better than anybody You know no private aviation all this stuff. They really pay a lot of attention It's like 10 seconds from the White House So if they're that sloppy at DCA of all airports Right what the hell are they doing in Santa Monica or wherever Yeah, which are you know, yeah, who knows? Who knows? Where's the data go? The problem is the FAA is Two-fold master right a regulatory body a promotion of the industry so What is I'm sorry? I don't know what that means promotion the industry the charge to the FAA is to promote air travel in the United States and to regulate it Huh? So that's better mandate from the beginning. Yeah Really? Yes. So they're the policemen and the PR agent I guess because how did Boeing get the right to self certify the max Right? What does it mean self certify the minute? So an inspector didn't have to go look at the 737 max Boeing had the right to certify itself That's been pulled back Everything happens in aviation every regulation happens as the result of blood Right and so nobody's being proactive in this agency now. I love I love secretary Duffy I love his attitude and it looks like the new nominee for the FAA administrative great But the question is the next level bureaucrats These are people who have for their entire careers be it at A lot came from the military. They like sitting behind green government desk and drinking green government Excuse me drinking government coffee and so You know to like have to get up and go over there and look at those reports or do something with them That's that's got a change So last year you get home in all these boxes in the kitchen I wonder what these are open up one and they are tortilla chips made by a company I never heard of called masa Masa chips are not like other tortilla chips in that they are all natural They're only three ingredients in the chips and there are no seed oils What so ever my wife had ordered these because she's a healthy person and so I immediately hit them hard and they're Delicious and not only the delicious. They don't make you feel bad. You hit any kind of chip on the market in the United States Eat a whole bag of them for example and man. You do not feel good I'm not gonna get more specific, but you just look it's like a head injury You eat a bag of masa chips and I can confirm this because I did and you feel great It's totally fine because it's real food. There's nothing weird in there They're no weird chemicals at once again. There are no seed oils. Just three simple ingredients And so I thought well, this is a pretty amazing company making a snack food that's not gonna kill you And you have to feel bad about it. It's like basically what your grandparents ate So we reach out to Masa and said hey if you ever Do advertising we'd love to advertise because we love the chips and they said sure and so that's what we're doing right now We're telling the truth about something that we eat and love and we think is great and recommend it strongly On the basis of more personal experience and I want to admit in public, but they're really really good. So you can go to Masa chips.com Dash discount slash Tucker to start snacking well you get 20% off your first order We enjoy them. Hope you do too. So here's what we know just to go back to the DCA crash for a minute because it's And all I know is what she said in her press conference. It is it was astounding Why don't we know who was flying the helicopter? I'm sure they do based on I mean The voices one was a female one was male right so the flying pilot is never the talking pilot So just listening to the tapes you could tell If it's a female voice then the male was flying. He feels a male voice female flying. So I don't know Why the hesitance to assign blame all these people died. Oh no no, it's not hesitance to assign blame This is the initial right. This is just the fact piece. It takes up two a year to go through all the the flight data We don't know if she was off her location because of mechanical failure Right, you know We all want the answers to why But we in the industry want the fix of course so so was that or the Al-Temeter's off was it a training issue was somebody in the wrong place Was a very traffic control etc. So we've got to go through all of that and they'll recreate it Superimpose and flight in a simulator and check these all these different pieces and parameters and then they'll start looking at blame Your point is the structure itself was reckless and crazy System was broken and it should have never happened. There was a plane in I know you saw this in Canada I think in Toronto at Pearson That came in really really hard on landing and flipped over Remarkably everyone survived great job by the flight. It's in it Right That's my point wherever you get to the stage where you're relying on the flight attendance to save you Yeah, but that's what they're trained to do so that was of course And God bless them of course, but like how do we get to the point where Like how did it flip over? How do you flip over a plane on our runway? I don't understand that they haven't given out the preliminary I had my personal opinion is only opinion of course and your No, the female was flying all right because the radio calls I'm a human factors expert part of that involves vision so I'm thinking that they were coming down and You've seen the snow kind of swirl across the road a little bit for sure I think she was looking at the point and she was ready to transition her eyes and land and she got a swirl And I think she lost a little bit you know essay situational awareness with the runway That's what I think because she flew it right into the runway Heart so that that was the core problem. She hit too hard She hit too hard and it collapsed it broke the gear and one wing went up High wing is flying low wing is not and it slipped right over Damn remarkable some people think it is involving you know a gust the last minute shear But I don't see the other ones moving on the wings to counteract that so I still think it has something to do It's just a little bit of situational awareness that then we'll know So if you're moving people through the process At accelerated speed both for ideological reasons and for practical reasons. I just got a fill seat. Yeah You're and you're hiring on the basis of a relevant criteria then inevitably you're gonna get a reduced skill level like how could you not? Especially when the pilots are worried about their rough videos and they're part of a click if you've seen it The girls that endeavor embarrassed me who I'm I miss you didn't see the video No, but I could tell I'll be open. Yeah, there was some promo video done by a bunch of young ladies and they were talking about All female crew and I think it was a recruit recruiting video, but it was embarrassing to those of us who worked hard What airline was this that was the airline endeavor? I think it was the one that flipped in Toronto Oh, sure And they put out a tick tock at life for that girl power tick tock girl power tick tock came out And of course it broke the internet After the accident and so I want to fly with professional adults not children and that was kind of embarrassing If you personally ever flown with someone who you thought wasn't quite up to the job. Yeah Oh wow. How can you tell? You can tell if their heads in the game. I had one young man who had a broken heart We saw that problem. I had him replaced on the next trip. He was a little distracted um Some guys kind of all over the place with a stick It's interesting to watch your military single seat guys transition to transport category You're gonna want to do this, you know, but they settle down um Most recently and the most scary one I've had I was flying and I was flying a visual approach into Houston and We're 1500 feet Romulites in sight. We're all set And he'd watched me fly for a little bit and he says can I ask a question of course it's sterile cockpit you're not supposed to But I go yeah, he goes what are you looking at when you fly a visual approach? I was astounded The ground On the ground we'll talk about this. No, you're cross-checking your instrument you're double checking the eye last There's some outside light indicators. There's only inside outside that To deviate an airplane right and you check in your speed and he really didn't understand and I said Why do you not understand? He said because in the simulator they told me Fly the auto pilot to 50 feet. Click it off. Look up in land Almost fell off for cover And I've talked to a lot of people about this and I don't really think that that's what they were training I think they were they were trying to train Was how to do a visual approach in a simulator that doesn't allow it and they just need to check the block So you'll learn this out on the line You know, this is how we're gonna teach you to fly the simulator only but he understood that to be how you would operate in an airplane So the disconnect is there because the experience level wasn't there So if I have a pilot approaching me saying what are you looking at when you land an airplane? That's a problem So I think for you know non pilots civilians like me The expectation is that All your pilots either come for the military or Embry Riddle or school like what? It's cool like sure or school like Embry Riddle being the most famous My alma mater You know, a matter um, but that they're all kind of like aviation nuts and they like bug their dad for lessons at the local air Plus the airplane for exactly and that they have a lot of experience in small in systems And that that's really relevant because the basics of aviation are just so obvious in a little plane, right? Do you ever get pilots who who don't have that experience No, most have that experience or at least come up through the civilian world military is getting harder to find right We're not the military short-handed as it is people aren't leaving, you know, we haven't had a war recently so they don't they're not Leaving the military they're all less the military right because of the because of the policies and they're here already There's no one in the pipeline And so that's a problem. It's Who's out there? You know, and so People that weren't necessarily The crime to the cray crum now we're stuck with what's left and it's we're trying to feel seats. I will say Well the economic demise of something like a spirit is a bad thing for those people We're now starting to get them coming to the big airlines and so that's good for the passengers It's good for them. They do have experience but but that rapid desire to grow Post-pandemic We My airline went from 10,000 pilots to as of last week 18,000 Two and a half three years. Damn that changes. Where'd those new pilots come from everywhere the internet? Microsoft flight somewhere now Mostly the you know the regionals We'd already drained the military so they're coming up as fast as they can and they Out of college restricted ATP at 1250 hours Flight of 1500 interview and right in the door right in the right seat of a 757 and two years later you're a captain And you're talking about 26 25 Ooh So that that that slowdown judgment isn't there either the hardest thing I have to do it work tucker is Explain to my new first officers When you see on your your your papers the van leaves at eight o'clock That's go not show To show up and then pay your credit card bill and all these things They're young. I don't want to generalize this and say That whole entire because my son's a dead generation and he's responsible. They're just irresponsible. We'll want to do it their own way Right. They're just green at life Sip piloting their green at life. They haven't dealt with responsibilities and things and you know They don't want to fly they call fatigue Half hour before the flight. It's like dude. You had better be where you need to be. That's what they pay us for Right you've had people crap out of half an hour before Saturday night in the work and I was a passenger. Yeah No way Like just too hungover to fly. No, he'd flown a flown from one airport in an orchid started at nine o'clock at night So with 30 minute flight they were gonna reasside him to cover the late flight And he just said no, I'm fatigued Oh wow, so that becomes a problem too So so all of these reasons that we need to maybe hold on to our senior pilots to mentor our senior pilots a little longer They add up What just to Finish it up from what happened to the kid who asked you what you're looking at what you're landing We talked about it. He's good. He'll be just fine And I've talked to the training department and explained to them that we have some questions out there So I'll see you begin shortly on another trip and We'll talk about it again, but I'm sure he's in all these decades of flying have you ever been afraid in a plane? Never not one time matter Don't have time to talk her Instinct takes over. Gentle and takes over if your parents afraid they probably shouldn't be there. No, that's right In fact, everything just slows down As fast as I go and I am you know, most people say sir, you talk too fast I say you listen too slow, but you know when it comes down to the the emergency Everything just stops That's what you want. Have you had emergencies? I've been blessed. No my husband. However has a black cloud over his head really? What happened to him? I'm looking at him on the corner of my You look very calm. I must say 98 on St. Patty's day yesterday was the anniversary of his almost near death It was a near-mitter Newark, let's see is that a rapid decompression an explosive decompression a full hydraulic system failure And he took one of my flights because we were on the same airplane this time and he flew to Santiago Chile and he had a complete Stand-by-power system failure, which is something that should have never happened in a Boeing 767 So what what does that mean? It means? The arm de auto pilot for the approach and explosion came out of the dash Everything goes crazy the first officer flies. They have no auto brakes. They have no speed brakes They have no number one radio Everything is gone and he landed the airplane and stuck his big cowboy boots on those breaks is the airplane little sideways blue Six trucks, I think melted the wheels to the runway or to the taxiway and they shot him with water for My two hours and he called me up and he goes you owe me And I went to a way me up for another hour, but I had no idea what had happened He was on the Brad the news. It was crazy, but what was the cause of it and it figured out Sort of electrical short out in the system But do you ever worry about fire It happened. He was on the the news. It was crazy. But what happened? What was the cause of it? And it figured out. It was sort of an electrical short out in the system. But do you ever worry about fire while you're flying? That's my biggest fear. Fire is the one thing you don't want to do. But does that ever happen? Have a scene in a while. You know, what was it Air Transat? Or was it Swiss air? Up in the North Atlantic going in, they diverted into Gander, one of them. They didn't quite have to get that out. So because of fire fire. We take lithium batteries very seriously. Right? Because we have containment bags. If your laptop lithium starts to go because, you know, that's kind of an uncontrollable fire. We want to get that out. So, you know, again, everything happens happens in blood. And we change the rules. So what are the rules now on lithium batteries? Boy, you I'm not sure for familiar. It comes with the dangerous goods report. But you know, you can have whatever you have on the plane. But if you check something with a lithium battery and you don't just go that it's a big deal. I guess, you know, all of that, as long as we know about it, they package them properly. Like a wheel chair or something like that. But they just want you to disclose it. Is there any way for them to know if you don't disclose it? I don't know. I think there's a sad. So that's your number one fear. Yeah, fire is it. But, you know, I also worry about the mental health of the person flying next to me. There've been a lot of pilot suicides. Well, I mean, relatively speaking, trickish air. Yes. Maybe Malaysian air. Yeah. You had German wings. That was a big one. And that was in 2016 in the pilot, you know, Captain left the flight deck. And the first officer punched to hold me out and took everybody with it. And that's a bad thing. But the worst thing now are the fear of mine is as we're moving through this whole Kathy says she's a man, a woman, but she's really not. The CFAs certification process. And I still question how those people with the new executive orders, it says, you know, burst gender has to be on your medical certificate. It has to be on your pilot's license. I don't know if that's been done yet. But I question how these people got certified to begin with. So we go back and we do a little history 2012. Some lobbying. They lighten the requirements for psychological testing if you're transgender from massive amounts of reports down to one or two. Seriously. Yeah. Blobbing. Do you know who lobbied for that? There is a particular female pilot irks. She's a transgender pilot who was able to get some folks in Congress. But it gets worse. In 16, when the Federal Air Sergeant Dr. Michael Barry was distracted about pilot mental health dealing with the outcome of the German wings, the several transgender organizations and another pilot really pushed. And they got Barney Frank and Congressman out of California to take up their charge. And the way they did it was pretty brilliant. The diagnostic statistics manual of the American Psychiatric Association, the DSM, had changed from revision four to five. The definition from a gender dysphoric disorder to gender dysphoria. Now they did it for a reason. They wanted to take the stigma off for the poor transgender people, right? But they couldn't fully pull it out because there wouldn't be a diagnosis code and they could not then use their insurance to cover their surgeries or their home role replacements. There's articles all over the internet about it. Right. That's fascinating. You were playing the game because the American Psychiatric Association of course supports all that. So they're absurd. I mean, and I mean this with the full pejorative connotations, they're crazy actually. The psychiatrist or not. Yeah, exactly. The inmates are running the asylum. So they did this move on and they buried what's kind of looking one way or maybe he was on on it, but this was under the Obama administration. So we're just starting to see this push, right? And so the FAA changed the rules. And they said, well, you've got to have a little bit of testing. But if you're five years transitioned or five years on hormones, you can just go back to your regular aviation medical examiner and just get your six month check. No special issue once required. Wait a second. At the time that was going on, there were studies out there that showed exactly what you indicated. In fact, the statistics from the National Transgender or something with their own statistics. They had surveyed over 27,000 of their members. And I believe it was 39% said they had suffered serious mental health issues in the month prior to the survey. 40% said they had attempted suicide in their lifetime and 7% in the month prior to the survey. That was available. 7% in the laugh. It's tragic. But 7% are to kill themselves in the last month. In the last month of 27,000 people do the math. I mean, somewhere in there, there's got to be an airline pilot applicant, right? So why could the federal air surgeon not like look at some of the data that was available? You don't want suicidal people flying commercial airplanes. I don't people flying airplanes. But even more importantly, studies have been done since then through even worse. Now we look at the medical side of it in the hormone replacement therapy. Yes. Right? Do you know what it? The number one thing, the FA Aeromedical Department is pilot incapacitation. Right? That's heart attacks, that's deep vein thrombosis, it strokes. Everything that we go through is pilot side from our ability to hear and see is to ensure that we will not becoming incapacitated in our seat. Right? I'm not going to fall over because I have diabetes or something like that. So I think it was 2020 and it was updated in 23. They conducted a study of males transitioning to females on hormone replacement therapy. Now they're not just pilots just in general. 80 to 90% increase for DVT, hard attack and stroke. FA is a risk of versus agency. Seriously. Seriously. There were physical threats, not just like a person becomes suicidal, but the person. That's the big one. That scares me. The model was by agree. If the FA is a risk of cardiovascular effects. I didn't know that. If you're a risk of versus agency and you won't even consider a drug I might be taking because it might possibly indicate that I might have a heart attack. Yes. Why are you allowing these people who have an 80 to 90% increase chance for that to be in an airplane? Because they're taking hormone replacement therapy. Well, it's so wrong to do that to the public. But there's no research arm that I fund at FA because they're enjoying their coffee and their green desk. Nobody's reading peer-reviewed studies. Nobody's looking at this going, you know, we might want to walk that back. It didn't. That's scary. So what drugs are you not allowed to take as a commercial airline pilot? There's a bunch of them, right? Yeah, but you know what? They don't publish the list. So you don't even know. Only your aviation medical examiner knows. But you could, but I know from no one's hiding that you can't take many. So like you probably think about you think about your health, you think about the drugs that you take because they can't take anything. I'm, you know, I use holistic stuff for colds and things. Good for you. I'm with you 100% but but you could take like radical doses of male hormones and that would be cool. Well, you have to disclose it. Yeah, on your medical, but it appears after five years of taking radical doses, they don't make you, I mean, they do disclose it, but they don't really care. If you can go five, that was the key of the 2016 change. If you can go five years, welcome to the club. It's like, so you have to report it, you know, and you have to have exams for that. But but even then, all of that was just about the mental health. Nobody is considering what these hormones do long term, but it's even more criminal. That's just a transgender issue. If they are a medical, when it comes to the COVID Vax, the FDA approved commutatory, what, six o'clock at night on December 18th, the next morning, same federal air surgeon approves of worldwide use in airline pads. Who was the federal urge surgeon? At that time, it was Dr. Michael Berry. He retired a week later and went to work for a pilot insurance company. But the criminal actions happening. That sounds like a crime. I mean, as he spoke to assess, it's effects on the millions of Americans who fly. Well, at least take a look at maybe do a longitudinal study on the transgender issue, but when it comes to the COVID situation, the effects of altitude, pressurization, and we work in a very dry humidity. We don't, this is e-way product. It's never had an e-way product ever, ever certified for use in pilots. And he'd written many articles on the drug certification products to ask. Because what are the effects on your health as a pilot of spending 35 years in a cockpit? Because it is a long ago. It's dry. Yes, it's dry. So hydration, cosmic radiation, that skin cancer coming through the, well, it's cosmic radiation. This is what you fly above the tropopause or up in that area. Right? So there's radiation all the time. It's not just when the sun's shining. Right? It's exactly what the astronauts suffer up on the space station. You know, it's radiation that's up there. So a lot of your pilots, high levels of prostate cancer in my male pilots, breast cancer in my female pilots, through the roof. Really? We're not in a shielded environment. You know, hiring you fly the stronger it is. So when we look at those sorts of things, yeah, take care of yourself, folks. But we don't know what those, what those drugs were doing to people. And we don't know pressurization, humidity, and altitude effects on them. Only three things are absolutely certain in this life. And you know, two of them first is death, second is taxes, and the third unfortunately is getting ripped off by your cell phone company. If you're a Verizon AT&T or T mobile customer, you know, exactly what we're talking about. But there is an option. You could save a ton every month by switching to the service that we use. It's called Pure Talk. Pure Talk is an earnest friend of the show and they are the answer. If you become a customer of Pure Talk, you get unlimited text, talk, and five gigs of data, which is enough for most people. On the country's most dependable 5G network. And here's the punchline. It costs $25 a month. So the average family of four we did the math saves over $1,000 a year when they switched to Pure Talk. $1,000 a year. Plus, it's a great service. Their customer service team is based in the United States. You can switch hassle free in as little as 10 minutes. You even get to keep your phone and your phone number. To find out more, go to puretalk.com slash Tucker to make a switch and you'll save an additional 50% off your very first month. Pure Talk. Wireless by Americans for Americans. Yeah, because it is a totally different environment from the one the rest of this live in day to day. So explain what happened with COVID. So just if you don't mind telling that story because I think it's interesting from the mandate perspective or from a mandate perspective. Okay, well, not from the Wuhan Live. Yeah, no, Fauci funded. No, well, I mean, it's interesting, Tucker, because I really never thought I'd ever get into any of this fight. I'm just a mom. I'm cruising along through life and New Year's Eve of 2018, I look to the rear of your mirror and the lights were going off and I pulled over. I got busted for DUI. Oh, yeah. Greatest thing never happened to me. And God, I questioned him and my darling husband said he never gives you more than you can handle Sherry. And I didn't know at the time, but he was preparing me for the fight of my life. I had to fight to get my job back. The FAA wasn't straightforward because my former union work, I believe that you know, maybe it was a little more difficult than normal at my airline. But I succeeded and I got all my back paid everything I needed. But it taught me how to navigate against a corporate conglomerate. So I'm back to work in on August 6th, the CEO of my airline announces that there will be a vaccine mandate or you'll be fired in a month. And I'm sorry, I'm 2021. 2021 August 6th, crazy day of my life. I'm coming best friend. She's also a captain and she's known around the airline. It's kind of the mom type. And she's the head of vaccine injured family member. So so Laura Cox and myself, along with the wife of one of the pilots who's an attorney, Danielle, the three of us got our heads together and we said, how are we going to get through this because I'm not going to violate my faith and take a product that derives from aborted fetal tissue cells, etc., etc. And that was my... I think that's just a conspiracy theory. That's not true. Shall I throw the glass of water now? No, no, no. It's just so funny. It's like for that whole period, I try to think about COVID and that whole chapter in our country's history and in my life. But you would hear people say, why I'm getting a religious exemption and the known or S Y. And if you ask why they'd be like, well, there's some connection between the vaccines, the COVID vaccines and abortion. And then you'd hear someone in the background and say, that's a lie. And then just sort of move on and no one ever talked about it. But those vaccines were derived from aborted babies. For what if these old tissue cells were used in either the development or the manufacturer of all three of the US approved drugs? So I think I haven't checked because I try to read Wikipedia because it's just CIA controlled lies, but which it is. But I bet you to this day they deny that. But that's just a fact. It's a fact. It's a fact. As Secretary of Health and Human Services, he'll tell you the facts. Yeah. So that was a no go for you. No go for me. It was no go for my husband. It was also a no go for Laura and about eight that well at the beginning. There's probably 20,000 people at United. It was no go. And so as it progressed, the pressure got put on us. They set postcards to our house so that in our case were married. It didn't matter. But they would send a postcard to your house and that would say, you know, you only have 22 days left to get the vaccine or be terminated. Well, the wife won't open your mail, but show each a postcard. Right? So she reads it's because honey, we're going to lose everything. People would act with us. They told people that you would lose your 401k if you don't leave the quantity or get the shot. I mean, the mid-level managers, you know, there's. Did you lose your 401k? Yeah, I have a recording of a pilot being told that. You can't have your retirement. You can't have your own money. Right? It gets better. But these pressure was just intense, right? And so people would fall off. And the whole reasonable accommodation process was onerous and in corrupt and itself. And there's thousands of pages of discovery documents on our organizations website. Say, if anybody wants to read about, but they wanted to put like garlic ladders on our ID badges for the unvaccinated. I mean, so the other people would point and pick on us. It was crazy. But the three of us got together put our heads together. We hired the best law firm we could find. Sure, Jeffy out of DC. And we filed for an injunction. And we still didn't quite get there in November of 21. Every one of us were put on unpaid and definitely basically fired. What did they say to you? They didn't they just said you're done. And how long had you worked at the airline at that point? It hired 1998. It was 2021. That's crazy town. So you spent your like most of your adult life there. Never had a problem. No. My life was a union rep. I've had my share. But yeah, in general, no, I've never crashed away. Gosh, no, never failed to check right. Never have done anything like that. And they just can you without sionara. See you. But we kept moving. I want to attack your seat. I don't want. I used to work. There's not one to make your life. I mean, it's in the press. We all know there were three airlines and mandated the vaccine Hawaiian, Caled it or cargo and United. So that's it. That was it. The rest were mandated eventually because nobody would follow along. Right? They knew that. United was the only domestic. Well, Hawaiian's domestic, technically. not friends. Let's be honest. You know, but you've seen the big carriers. Right. Delta, American. No, they were. When nobody followed, then the president, Joe Biden, instituted the oce mandate. Right? For contract. If you have more than 100 employees, you have to mandate this or the government contractor mandate. If you do work, and everybody flies the mail, right? $4.6 billion business every year to the airlines and flying US males was a contract. You had to mandate it. But the guys at SW Freedom Flyers in North, me, up in Dallas, they, you know, they did a little pushback, the American boys, the Delta folks. And so the exemption process for them was just kind of a paper mill. Their bosses were cool about it. They were just like whatever. And eventually both those mandates were returning court. But that was the way to play it, by the way. Yeah, behind the employees, 100%. Firing long time employees, because they don't want a vaccine. I mean, it's like so cruel. But it played into a marketing campaign. Who did that? Who made that decision? Well, it was made by the CEO. I mean, it's in the court testimony. And the judge ruled that it was a pretextual situation whereby there was a marketing campaign at the bottom line. So there was a desire for that CEO to be able to come out publicly and say, in my opinion, at least, that they were the first fully vaccinated airline. If they could do it by the holidays of December, maybe people would come back. But fly on the first fully vaccinated airline. I don't want to fly an airline with vaccinated pilots because it's dangerous. So that's my view. But I guess a lot of people disagree. So this was a two is credit. His argument has always been it's been about safety. Safety for my employees. Look, I'm an adult. I can make my own medical decision. So I don't need my CEO deciding my safety situation. But that was his argument. I want to just get that on the record. Because if you get the experimental COVID vaccine, you can't get or transmit COVID. Like we know that, right? Do that turn out to be true? I've never had COVID. Does this CEO you have to name if you don't want, but is he still running their line? Yeah. It doesn't have a board, I guess the company. I'm sorry. There's no board. Oh, you have to board a director. But, you know, it's also crazy. No one's. But everybody after the pandemic, remember, after this one way and then we got, we won in court and we get called back, oh, we're on to the next big thing, which is, you know, pilots, male pilots, you know, are you going to be male flight attendants with beards wearing lipstick or whatever the issue of the day is. So, you know, that's over. That's over. Don't worry. So what I keep stepping on this story. No. Tell me, okay, so this comes down. You go to court, try to get it at an injunction. We don't get the injunction. Don't get it. And then you're laid off. We're out. Bad husband. You're husband too. Everybody. No, but in your case, you're in your mind. My house too. Yes, two of us. And my son got blessed him, you know, he was going to school and dealing with two pilots being home, which is unusual for him. But, you know, we're all families unemployed in one day because of this. And certainly overnight. Well, that's kind of heavy, actually. How did you, I mean, it was very heavy. You know what happened? 2000 people came together. Rampers, mechanics, flight attendants, pilots, we became a family overnight. I mean, over the last three years, I consider that my dear is most wonderful friends. And I want to say thank you to every one of them for the support. I mean, to me, servant leadership, it's the real deal. I agree. I led them. They blessed me to the ability to lead them, right? With my son, with my friend, Laura and Danielle. You know, these people are incredible. But we've been to birth together. We've been to marriages. We've been through deaths. And I will tell you those 2000 people are more important to me than anything in this world. And they're there for each other. We had battle buddies. Somebody was feeling bad. You call a friend. We kept chat groups. And in those the time, they're pretty prayerful. We've debated books of the Bible. I mean, we are just like this. Amazing. So how many, so was 2000 people in the end got fired? Yep. And that was down from the initial number of people who said I'm not taking a 10, 20,000 down to the 8,000 down to this, you know. And, but in the end, it was 2000 people. That was a strong. Plus, you might as well. see a 2000. Anyone fake getting a vaccine? I have no knowledge of that. I know a lot of people who have in my community, not not at my company. My husband, PA says, her mom and dad walked in and they somebody said it on the counter and there's a trash where you're done. I mean, you know, we have doctor friends that are saying that so. Oh, and everyone in it takes I had a fake Vax card proudly. And I want you to get in the next time there's tyranny. I'm not there's only one way to get fired from my airline is to lie. Other than that, you can write. No, I'm not going to do it. Well, but you also make it, but it's also wrong to lie. And I lied in using a fake Vax card. It's okay. So you were able to live your life and good job. Yeah, but no, you're right. That's a moral compromise. And I probably should have done that. I don't know trying to think about it too much. But no, but you're I think you're taking a really principled position and saying, I'm going to say clearly what I believe. I don't think I should be punished for it when I am punished for it. I'm going to take my lumps and fight back. So I admire what we went through the EOC process and then on through the courts. And right now we sit in the fifth circuit on appeal. So I couldn't be rooting for you more fervently. But thank you. So what okay. So what happened then? So 2000 are fired with no support like you. No, in fact, you should have been able to tap your 401k and emergency situation, right? I locked us out. What? Like your credit? I couldn't access my 401k. They said, well, you could apply for another job in the company. I'm 57 years old. I'm going to go throw bags. Well, okay, if you want to pay me my start. Oh, no, no, you're going to do it for a baggage rate. I'm going to have to drive it the airport every day and go through. You see, it sounds like a pig actually. Sorry. That's my view. You're not saying you're welcome to the right. That's my opinion. It's one of the clear, but he sounds like a pig. If you know Mike Barry in Houston, he has some, he's a radio man. And he's just sounds like an awful man. And I hope he's punished. He will be. Anyway, so uh, but we get called back because we won in the fifth circuit. And how long was that? It was I think it was around February 17th that so we route November to December, January 4 months. Do you get any money trouble? No, you got no income coming yet. We have it. You know, we're old enough to have had some savings. You're saving. Right. So you're burning reserves. Yeah, we are burning reserves. I mean, but you know, we don't live a grandiose lifestyle. So you know, cars were paid for and things like that. You know, we were able to peak. But there had to be people. Oh, there were people that were selling everything. Laura has been sold his dream, which is a small fishing boat. I mean, it was not like a anything big, but Atlas is dream because they needed to pay their bills. You know, people were selling everything. And some were taking a job. Make me emotional health side of it was scary. You don't understand the number of people brought on myself talk to us. It was tough. But we made it. So of those 2000, can you just roughly break it down what they did? How many pilots? 360 plus or minus pilots. There's about seven. Uh, let's see. So that's 350. There was about 50 to 100 what we call agents, you know, ticket agents. And the balance would have been flight attendance. The mechanics, the stores, people, the majority of the agents that worked in larger cities, avionics technicians, management, they were able to work with a masking and testing regime. But it was punitive. It wasn't masking. It was a 95 respirator for the moment you pulled on property to the moment you left. You ate outside. It didn't matter if it was snowing raining cold. You put it back between every bite and sip wearing a yellow star. The whole time. Oh, that mask was the yellow star. And then you had to be tested on a rolling every seven days. And it didn't matter if you were out on family medical leave. If you got hurt at work or were on vacation, you missed one test to terminate. And this is the one where they stick the stuff up your nose. And that's a whole mother. I never did that. I would never do it. No. So it was all punitive. And it was all punishment. But they justified it in that those people didn't work on board the airplane. So for safety reasons, they were away from those 2000. Of course, you can't really know. But what's your sense of the percentage of Christians among? Well, in our organization, I know I have seven Jewish members. Yes. I have a hand. Religious. Very much so. The seven Jewish people are religious people. Yeah, very much. Very faithful. Good for them. One is actually fighting a battle to get an accommodation for wearing a very tight beard. So we have those seven or so. We have at least one or two Muslims that I know of. One of our lead plaintiffs was a Buddhist. The majority Christians. But I mean, observe it like, so everyone of these people are observant. So all 2000 were religious people. Very well, I take that back. We had a handful of people who were very observant, but that had a medical issue and their doctor told them, don't get it. And so they applied for a medical accommodation backed up with a religious because of their face. But I would say 99.9% are having. So what you're saying is that when you bring down a vaccine mandate, you really are getting rid of the religious people. Yeah. Because I mean, this was done at a national scale. So I think it's fair to, you know, if the outcome is the point of the exercise, it seems like they drove religious people out of government service. That's what it looks like to me. The military, the airlines kind of crypto since you fly the mail, but you're not. It's not really government. But yes, you know, anywhere where they're. But they're punishing religious people. Anywhere there's a large group of employees, places. Yes, I would agree there. But it's also religious people also happen to believe in the constitution. They also happen to be three free thinkers. I've noticed. And, you know, I think there's even more insidious things than they were after the religious people sure, but they were also after anybody who would not stand and would comply. Right. I think to them, it was a test to see how they could trample people's rights. That's my personal question about it. That's absolutely. But I do think we've spent too little time celebrating the people who are willing to really have their lives reordered, willing to be punished and suffer for what they believed like those people are heroes, I think. I know 2,000 heroes. Yeah. Well, that's my totally they're not. Yeah. So, so then what happens? You go back to work. And we're, we're invited back to work eventually because of the court ruling. But then we're told, but you can't fly anywhere. You have to be careful. You can't fly anywhere. It wouldn't let us. We had restricted cities, right? Because countries might require a vaccine. Well, of those restricted cities, there weren't any countries that wouldn't let pilots in. But it was a big battle. We had to fight through this until Canada dropped the mandate for passengers. And so there were just things that were done, the constant retaliation pieces getting called in the office because of Facebook avatar or just dumb things. They were the office because of Facebook avatar. What does that mean? So Laura and I had changed our Facebook, you know, symbol to the star of David. It said unvaxed on it. Right? Because we felt like we were being abused. You know, I didn't want to make any light of previous situations, but you know, it was out there. And some pilot who disagreed with us anonymously reported us to the corporation. And we had to go to the office and do the carpet. Danssen explained why that wasn't discrimination. But how would it be discrimination? Because we offended the Jewish people because we we co-opted their their their star. So my first thing I did is call my seven Jewish members and say does this offend you? They're like, no, we stand with you. Okay, fine. But it wouldn't. I mean, it's not mocking shoes. Isn't it standing in solidarity with anyone who's been singled out and oppressed? Exactly. Exactly. So it was like about as positive and identification as you could have. But it was one more reason. Four times, five times in one year, I had to go sitting there and explain myself. It just goes on. I got one coming up. What is that? What you do wrong this time? This time two years ago, I was trying to be kind. Explain myself. It just goes on. I got one coming up. What is that? What'd you do wrong this time? This time two years ago, I was trying to be kind to a very famous elderly person. We were going to do an engine run and I couldn't leave them on the jetway with the engines running and doors open. And so we got the person up to the top. And unfortunately, then she wrote a nasty letter. So I have to go do the corporate dance to explain why you can't sit unattended in a jetway with a door open in the engine running and mechanic with an arm and an engine. So we'll get through it. It's just constant. One of the greatest changes of the past six months is you can finally say loud and proud without the threat of going to jail for it that you're for babies. You're for the unborn. And that's great news for preborn, our partner, which operates a clinic network across the United States. Preborn is the single greatest threat to the abortion industry. It's rescued, rescued over 67,000 babies last year alone. These abortions still claim thousands of lives every year. It's one of the great tragedies unspoken most of the time. It's not a right. It is a tragedy. So the goal is to rescue all these babies. They need your help to do that. Assisting and providing ultrasounds is a great place to start more knowledge, more information for expecting mothers. It really makes a huge difference. Once a mother realizes that the lump in her belly is a baby as a child, she becomes twice as likely to choose life to let that child live. One ultrasound costs only 28 bucks, meaning that five are just $140. So $5,000 is good for enough devices to cover preborn's entire network for a full day. It really, really helps. You hope you'll join this cause. Dial pound 250, say the keyword baby that's pound 250, the word baby, or you can visit preborn.com slash Tucker to make a secure donation. Preborn.com slash Tucker. How did the other pilots who like obedience, he took the needle? How did they treat you? I've never had anyone come up and say, you guys are causing a problem. Now there's keyword warriors on certain social media sites. But at work, nine out of 10 have said, I wish I could have stood with you. I'm sick. My friend is sick or something. I will never do it again. I've never ever ever. And I'm sorry. I didn't stand with you. It was poor people. I know a million vaccine in people. I've never heard anybody say I'm glad I got the vaccine on a single one. No. And I feel so sad for a lot of them. I love so I feel so sad for them. I'm sorry to make fun of them. I shouldn't. They were the victims too. They're victims too. Some are just stronger than others. But the COVID vaccine turned out to be so dangerous. It killed so many people. It's a fact. I mean, it's in the Fingers program. These are not conspiracy theories. It's like that's a fact that it does make you wonder like what would you want? I don't want to find a point with vaccine in pilots because I think it's too dangerous. But are there numbers on this? Oh yeah. So tell me what they are. So I had a lot of free time there while I was off at work. And I'd been working on my doctoral dissertation and when this started to go down, I shifted gears. So my organization, airline employees for health freedom, we started getting phone calls. I know somebody that's sick. Or I know this or I know that. So we just put a data collection, link up. And it got so intense. And I said, you know what? I'm going to stop everything. I'm going to write my dissertation. And I'm going to study the vaccine injury amongst martial airline pilots. And so almost about seven months of data collection. 1600 plus respondents across the industry. And understand the population is about 80, 20, that's right. My study actually came out about 50, 50 because a whole bunch of my undecksinated friends wanted to help, which watered down my numbers. But it actually makes them that much more powerful because at 50, 50, if I found this, what would I have found at 80, 20? And what I found is commercial airline pilots in the United States are suffering. Pericoditis, and myocarditis rates exceeding the CDC's national average. And I proved it to a 98 percent plus or minus four in that regards. That was one of the implications for myocarditis in an airline pilot. Back to that incapacitation thing, right? You know, pilots going to have a healthy heart. But what it really means for the short term, we're losing pilots. It's anecdotal. It's in my dissertation, but I have the charts from American Southwest and from the Union at United, the disability rates post December of 21 shoot through the ceiling. Right? They're off the charts and they're getting worse by the day. So pilots are going on long term disabilities. One more way to get rid of those high dollar workers, I guess. I don't know. And we just, that way we have to have more young people come in. And so where it goes, I don't know what I found things from kidney stones to serious, mental, excuse me, neurological problems. Cardiac, it's really scary. And nobody wants to know about it. And the problem is I went to the Union and I said to the national president in an email and I have it in my dissertation. It's published online. I found this. We need to address this. And he said, oh, no, no, you know what? That's in the past. We don't, that might be disruptive to unity. What is the point of union seeking? I totally forgot. Is it take care of their members? And before Marirab, I've seen the sausage making from the inside. We were quote, a professional organization that focuses on safety. That's their number one point. Secondly, it's collective bargaining. I paid a lot of money for them to abuse me. But if your job is to take care of your people, that's, that's what a union is. Right. It's we collectively bargain. We're in this together and we're looking out for people who have not enough power, which is the workers against management. And they're not interested in people dying or being disabled for like, I don't know what it just did in them putting us on the street. They stepped back and said, company can do what they want. What? No, it's not in the collective bargaining agreement. That is a term in condition. That is an EEOC problem between you and airline. That's disgusting. What's the name of this union? The airline pilots association, Alpa. And Alpa is working against helping the pilot shortage by opening the age. Alpa worked against all of us in any of the airlines. I can't say that because actually, you know, Alpa people at Delta, they worked with a bastion and they actually came up with a pretty good system during this mandate piece. But ours washed our hands of us. Are you required to be a member of the union? Unfortunately, yes. So they take your money and they do nothing for you and they collaborate with your creepy CEO to oppress the workers there and that in the union is like, oh, I'm going to even get it's better. They take my money and they have a DEI committee. It's staffed by a transgender pilot who then sends me emails explaining what my language should be. I'm trying not to use the effort. This is my, this is my lentin challenge. But it's almost sneaking out. So we don't the union sends you that. So your union exempt exists to lecture and torment you and steal your money. Let's just say they, we have people in the union in the legal department who are not the best and brightest. So you would obviously work at somewhere others in a union. But the rumor is I've been told that I'm just a fifth rail. I don't even know what to say. It's the third rail, right? So trust me, the union and I don't get along really well, Tucker. And you were a union wrap. I was. So it's not like you have some ideological problem with unions as a theory. I had a desire to go in there and help people and clean up the mess that was. Yeah. I mean, I speak for myself. I'm totally in favor of unions. I have a friend who's the labor leader and I like the idea of unions. I do. I like solidarity. Someone needs to push back against power. I'm all for that. It's just that in practice in this specific case, but it also it seems like they're collaborating against their members. Unions are in this case. At least I use the phrase unions are like the tick on the dog, right? They suck from the dog, but they can't kill it because that's the way they live. So in the case of the early and padded association, they collaborate a lot with management, they get what they need, they get the dues from it, and they'll do a little bit, but they can't do too much, right? Because they need the company to stay profitable or they'll be gone. Okay. Well, that's I mean, I don't think that's unreasonable, but they shouldn't be the disciplinary arm of the airline and what the best in a lot of cases they are. Everyone hates the teachers unions. And I of course, I do too. I think they've helped direct education. However, at least in New York City, like they stick up for their members in a very unreasonable way, even when their members like child masters, they'll defend them. Yeah, which is bad. Yeah. But the idea that you stand up for the people in your charge that leadership means laying down your life for the people beneath you. I believe in that. And there's nothing worse than a collaborator. Well, that's really disgusting. Yeah. Watch their hands with all of us. And it didn't happen just to the airline padded association. It happened at the AFA association of Flazance, right? They happened the team stirs. No, it wasn't the the dispatch union leader was the only one that fought back against the mandates, right? All the rest of them just rolled over. So what? I mean, our airline people political and how does the how does it break down politically? Airline people. Okay. So we have a few of the hardcore union people of course that are going to lean left, right? Airline people are of the ilk of where they live. Okay. Houston base is very conservative, very Texas, very red. I see in the San Francisco base a much more liberal opinion. So I think it's they're just people. I don't think it's we're not in the days of fighting Lorenzo, right? So I don't think it's really a political thing with the airline people. I think they're just part of their community. But there's something about aviation because it's I mean science basis, it's it's engineering that every airline pilot I've known in millionaire line pilots and they're all they have the same kind of logical, truly analytical temperament and they believe in like the facts because they have to or the plane crashes. Bernoulli is the fact, right? Exactly. Exactly. And like a thunderstorm will pull your wings off. So don't fly into it. Like these are just facts. We're not control week knowledge them and we and we're risk of us, right? So we're going to be conservative and take the most conservative way. So I don't that all still are some liberal ones. Are they really? How yet? These are the big union dogs, you know, the high power ones. But I can't I can't get my head around someone whose job it is to obey the laws of physics, like unflinchingly, but you know, it's like that's a fact we have to obey that law because it's we can't change it. That person believing that you can change your sex, which is the most irrational thing you could say. Most of them are not faithful at all to to what as well. I mean, they're not faithful as well. They're a people religious people. Oh, I have. Of course not. Well, of course, the whole idea is to give a finger to God and proclaim yourself master of the universe. I could change my sex. Okay. Can you control the weather now too? Like John Kerry? Um, but no, it's not even that, which I do a problem with to be clear. It's that's irrational. That's what freaks me out. That's irrational. So if you believe in something that irrational, I don't want you to find my airplane. No, I mean, I don't want you flying next to me in that airplane because I have to get up on a 10 hour flight and go take a break or go on to bathroom. What? How are you going to behave when I'm not here? You know, we got pilots that are asking those questions right now. They're saying, you know, I'm not comfortable leaving the flight deck. Oh, come on. When we're flying with somebody of that nature. Can you go to the company and say, not no, I'm on a 10 hour flight because so you're a veteran, obviously a veteran pilot. You've got to be one of the have some of the most hours of 10 percent. Yeah. Right. So that means traditionally you're flying the longer, better more fun routes to the prettier capitals. Like that's what I have noticed. So be your final long flights. So you have to get up at some point. Well, I'm required legally to go take a break. I mean, I have to go to bed for over eight hours. You have to take an app. We rotate. We have three pilots and we rotate three. Yeah. So but can't you call the company and say, Hey, I'm not comfortable leaving my copilot unattended? Like that seems like a big thing for me. For me, it's, you know, it's anecdotal because they haven't flown with one yet back except when I was on the 737 years ago, there was a captain who, by the way, was a terrible pilot. A transgender captain. No, a terrible pilot. It's more focused on other things. What kind of things? It would be funny, but making sure his voice sounded right or, you know, there was a lot of distraction. He was just known as not a very great pilot. And so, you know, I did a lot of the flying. But that was years ago when I was really young, former airline before the merger. So but so I haven't in my world, there hasn't really been any in the in the 767, but a lot of dear friends in the more junior air point 737 airbus was just like, I'm not comfortable. You know, they don't fly the long haul so they can usually get to where they're going. They can hold it. Yeah. Thank you. But yeah, they just didn't want to leave when I sure what could happen? They've read the same studies as I have. Damn. It's not just here. It's across the industry. Meaning in Europe as well. No, I'm meaning in domestic airlines. It's not just my carrier. It's pilots from a lot of different carriers. Because that's like, and what would happen if you called up airline HQ and said, this is just two nuts. I think it's the threat to safety. What would they say to come into the office? Let's have another carpet to hand. It's for real. Yeah. Now. So the thing is you have to observe a safety concern. You must report it as well as a blower than it might get changed. But I haven't actually officially observed it, but I can understand where we're going. I mean, it might not be as dramatic as somebody not wanting to fly with somebody. But one very real piece is you can be called in the office and get in trouble for the same as gendering somebody. We're using the wrong pronoun. Actually, yes. Unfortunately, I work in a safety sensitive world. I have a common safety language. If we're in the middle of a massive emergency at altitude, and I pick up that, and I call the back and I say, hey, guys, prepare the cabin. Wait, was I supposed to remember was a guy or a girl or what? It's just a word I use. In the heat of battle, I don't want to have an abbot and Castello who's on first discussion with the person at the other end of the phone. No, I mean, he knows she's at four door one. No, he's at door three. We have something to do and deal with. And I don't want to have to stop and think in my job before I react the way I've been trained. Oh, did I say the wrong thing? Am I going to if we survive this have to go answer for it? And not some very real piece. That one is one that pilots worry about probably more than actually flying with a train. So I think big picture, it's very obvious that safety centers have fallen dramatically, maybe not literally not rewriting the safety manual, but safety is distracted. That's what I said. That's not the top concern. Clearly it's not the top concern. Clearly. So I mean, how long before hundreds of people die? I hope never again in my lifetime, because the people at the front of the airplane, me and my partner, we're going to do what we know how to do. And it doesn't matter to me if I get called in because I misgendered somebody. There are still good people out there. But we're getting to that critical mass point where we need a little time, we need a pause. We need this new incoming FA administrator who I've read a lot about. I really like him. He looks like a very faithful person and he's going to fit in the administration and be a confirmed rather quickly. We need to get the pilot age up. The standards do not need to be lowered for the incoming. And then we're going to need to take some time and mentor. And I think we can get there with the clock sticking. So the Trump administration, I think, is on the right track to fix four years of complete dismantling of the US aviation industry. I hope I pray they can get there. But I think they've got the right people in place. Are you should you never been nervous flying? Have you ever been nervous as a passenger? I'm sure I have. I'm more nervous when I stand on like the edge of a tall building or I'm scared of heights, Tucker. Absolutely. Absolutely. Absolutely. We've used to go to the Grand Canyon. I won't do it. What's your cruising altitude in 767 long-haul flight? Depends 28 to 38 somewhere in there. We climb as we burn fuel. We get lighter. So we climb. But 36, 37, 38. What is that? Almost seven miles high in the air and passengers think about it. You're sitting in a chair doing eight to nine tenths of speed of sound. That's a pretty awesome thought. What's incredible, isn't it? Where we are? Yeah. I think the whole thing is absolutely wonderful. What do you think of the new planes? Well, I fly the old planes. I'm a Boeing girl. My husband flies at 787 and he likes it. I mean, you know, technology is wonderful. It just goes further, faster, higher. We'll see. I'm more worried about coming technology with regards to single pilot or autonomous flight. I don't know about you. I'm not getting in an airplane without a pilot. A autonomous flight? It's coming. You're making me feel uninformed. So there are, like, this will solve the union problem. Just get rid of the people. So there are planes planned with no pilot. Well, we have them now. I mean, I guess they're called drones. I mean, they're in Houston. We have pilots. They're in the Garden Reserve. They get in their car in the morning. They drive down to Ellington. They walk into a trailer. They're flying a drone over an Afghanistan bombing the bad guy and they drive home. I mean, it happens all the time. It's not coming this generation. We have cars, autonomous taxi cabs in Austin, Texas, right? They drive around and you just jump in one and it charges your credit card. First time I saw it, it was crazy, but they have it. So what's coming is, first of all, is the move to reduce one pilot in the cockpit on a commercial airliner. So it'll work most likely. They said aviation space magazine had this about four or five years ago. They'll have a control room, drone wrappers, me, when I retire, all these people will be sitting in a control room. And you'll take off. Remember that old V1 rotate engine failure we talked about? You'll just push the Boeing button and I'll come on. I'll say, hey, Captain, I've got the airplane. You get the checklist. So a room of people can work the whole thing. Would you just put some of the cockpit? Wouldn't it be? You know, the old joke, we have a dog in the cockpit, right? You know what? The dog is there to keep the pilot from touching and you say, bite him. So yeah, that's the first step. They're going to start, it little starting cargo carriers and trying to push to eliminate one body. And then for cost reason, cost reason, because you can only control the price of the airplanes, the place of the people or the price of fuel. All right, fuel is pretty set. Airplanes, you can get the better financing if you play the game. But we cost money. That's just absolutely crazy. I will pay a premium to find a airline with two pilots. Oh, well, but it gets better. The next generation to it might go there. But at the same time, the drone world and I think they call it VTOL vertical takeoff and landing whereby you Tucker Carlson can have your own VTOL and you can fly yourself to the airport. And then you can get on the big airplane. This stuff is all in the crazy works behind the scenes at the FAA. I mean, you can read about it. It's there. They're they're establishing corridors and plans and it'll start with pilots operating. But eventually they're looking for an autonomous situation where you just the Jetsons you walk out, getting your little hovercraft and go to the airport, getting the big hovercraft. Yeah, I'm hoping I'm going when this all happens. I surely will be. I'm sure that was really wonderful to get the benefit of your decades of experience and your honesty. So thank you for for the opportunity. And I really pray for the president, Secretary Duffy, the incoming FAA administrator that we can get ahead of this before it gets out of control. Yeah, before people die. Thank you. Thank you very much. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing this show on one level. That's not surprising. That's what they do. But on another level, it's shocking with everything that's going on in the world right now. All the change taking place in our economy and our politics with the wars when the customer fighting right now, Google has decided you should have less information rather than more. And that is totally wrong. It's a more what can you do about it? Well, we could blind about it. That's a waste of time. We're not in charge of Google or we could find a way around it a way that you could actually get information that is true, not intentionally deceptive. The way to do that on YouTube, we think it's to subscribe to our channel. Subscribe. Hit the little bell icon to be notified when we upload and share this video. That way, you'll have a much higher chance of hearing actual news and information. So we hope that you'll do that.