Go, Roman find him. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan, podcast my night, all day. Good to see you, sir. Thank you for having me, brothers. Big honor. Thank you. In order for me, too, very excited about this. Very excited to talk to you. There's so many different things to discuss. So do you know what is going to be released? So supposedly, this is the week of some kind of disclosure. Can you give us any insight as to what's going on? Oddly enough. I got a call that tomorrow at 3 o'clock. I'm going to be briefed over the phone by, I think, one of the head-cissed top dogs is going to go over some stuff with me that they've got. And I have no earthly idea. I don't want everybody to get their hopes up. I don't have a lot of faith in our government. President Trump's always been great to me. He's never lied to me. But I don't know that he knows the right questions to ask and the right people to talk to. Because I mean, this thing's been covered up. At least since 1947. And I just don't think they're going to, they don't give up that easy. The war pamps at the Pentagon and everybody else. They just don't give up that easy. How did you come to understand all the stuff? What was your understanding of it before you got into government? I had pretty cool parents. Now they would, that it was an old World War II Marine and mama flew an airplane during the Second World War. I mean, they were bad asses. Then they were good Christian people. But my daddy was a stone-cove killer. I mean, he was a real deal. He was on pill, loo, and Okinawa, and the Marine Corps. And of course, mama's oldest brother, Roy, got killed, fighting the Nazis. And mama did her part, just little country girl didn't have electricity till she's a senior in high school. So I've kind of lived the American dream. But they would let me get bluddied up. And then they would patch me up, let me go. I could ride my bike to the library or the library if you're from East Tennessee. And it was about a mile from the house. And they'd go in there and they had these books set up. And they had all this stuff on wild stuff. And there was a book on UFOs. And I just picked it up and started reading. And I probably wasn't, I don't know, seven or eight years old. And I just always followed. The magazine articles. And I'd go out at night and hoped to see a UFO. Never did, never have. until some of the briefings I've been in. But and then I'm walking down the street. And can I mention another new source? Is that OK? I was walking down the street. And TMZ was, there was a guy there, a splack fella, his name's Colin. He's a buddy of mine. He doesn't work for them anymore. But he was filming. And he said, hey, Congressman, he said, you want me to come in on the UFO thing? He couldn't get anybody to come in. And I said, well, sure. I said, they're going to tell you, they're going to issue your report. And it's going to be loaded. And everybody's freaking out. It's going to be the greatest thing. It's going to be total disclosure. And then they're going to put something out. It'll look like somebody shot it with a dad gum 12 gauge. It's going to have holes in it. It's all redacted. And I said, and they're not going to put it out this week. It'll be weeks later. And that's exactly what they did. They had a report. I felt like had some information in that was new to the public. And they did what they always do. They hit it, covered it up. And then everybody saw that interview. And I said on that, I said, does someone we were talking about bases in the ocean? No, no, no, no, no. That's a different one. I was just totally different. I'm just just sat on the street corner. And then I started getting calls from people literally all over the world. I mean, I've talked to legislators and Russia over this issue. And then people start, just stop me on street corners. And so hey, man, I really appreciate you going for disclosure. I have doctors telling me this. I have lawyers, engineers. I have military people that have seen things that they can't describe. I've had members of Congress. There's a few bullies in Congress. They'll make fun. I mean, say smart, elick stuff. But put it out there to your people. It's over 55% of American population feels like we're not alone. I mean, seriously, you go out there and look at those. Every night, my dogs, they got to take a leak. They never want to take a leak at like nine o'clock. It's always three o'clock in the morning. I look at those dad gum stars, man. And the light from those stars left there before the time of Christ. And the light from some of those stars, the stars have already combusted. I mean, they're not even there anymore. Light years to us is something that's hard to understand. And we are more, we are just one grain of sand on a billion beaches. And I still don't think we're the best that God can do. I just can't imagine where His shining, we're the one they put on the mantle. Oh, look, you made humans. Well, we've kind of screwed things up. So and I read my Bible. And a lot of the Christian folks knocked me. They talk about it's demons. And I said, well, I'm good with Jesus. I'm not worrying about demons. I'm not going to worry about that. I don't think they're demons. Why would they, they don't have to fly around in some craft. It's just to me, it's hard to imagine. But the underwater thing was I was getting briefed by and it was a former Admiral came into my office. In Joe, it was a very friendly conversation. And I'm always a little couched because a little, I hold back a little bit because I think there's a sigh up going on with some of these departments. I was briefed by one of our alphabet agencies not long ago. And the final thing was somebody said, well, well, we got more information. He says, we just don't have the funding for that congressman. And you know, it's a, and I know they're reading the polling data. And they're saying, you know, well, let's take loose the money tree for us. And that's that's part of it too. And I warn people about that. But I guess in a nutshell, that's pretty much it. So when you first got it, how long have you been in government for? Well, eight years in Congress, I was in our state legislature in Tennessee, 16 years. And then I was county mayor for eight years. So was it when you got into Congress that you first started getting inside information about what's going on? Yeah. So that was that eight years ago or like when was that? Probably six years ago. Five or six. Let's see. It was there in Trump's first administration. So it would have been about eight years ago. And do you remember what it was? Do you remember how you were introduced to it? Yeah. We raised, we just raised total hail about it. And then why? Because it's a cover up. Nobody would give us information. Well, what made you think it was a cover up? Why did you think that was just a million? I guess I just don't trust the government. I've been in government most of my life. And I just don't trust it. I don't understand that. But like was there something that led you to want to pursue this particular subject? No, just it kind of pursued me after I did that TMZ interview. People started calling me. And then people would, I would get phone calls from people. But with the TMZ interview was fairly recently, right? No, no, no, no, no. That was that was that was what started at all. Seven or eight years ago. I'm sorry. I don't. Okay. I didn't explain. No, that's very well. So then so, but you had an interest from the time you were child and then getting into government. What was like the first introduction where you had an idea that there's something going on? When I started asking questions and we just get to run around and what kind of questions? Like what is this? Where are you seeing these things? And we would get people. I had an interesting meeting in my office with some people that were nationally known and they came by to see me. And they just wouldn't talk to me about it. And they started telling me things. And then I had a group come to my house. I said, we always come out of the office. And DC and we'll talk. And I said, we don't feel comfortable doing that. And they came by the house and they said, can we hook up to your television? And I said, what's your? And they hooked up the computer to it. And they were showing me objects that were flying it. And granted, I'm not an astrophysicist, but any stretch of imagination. But they were showing me things that were flying it. It speeds that were just that nothing compares. And the angles that they were taking would literally, and I've said this before, it grosses people out. But it would turn you or me into a catch-up package. I mean, you go this way. And then boom, you're going this way. And we have no capability of any of it. And now I've been very so many times from different groups. We scrub missions because these things are out there. And then we tell everybody that's involved to keep your mouth shut. And then if you're a pilot and you come back and say, hey, I've seen this, you immediately pulled off the flight line. I'm not a pilot or military person. But flight line was what I call it. They're not able to fly. And they're given a psych evaluation. And they're given an eight hour, they call it a debriefing. It's I've been told by some of the officers have been involved. It's really just an interrogation. And then you got that hanging on your record. And so it influences them to start. I don't know if I can just keep your mouth shut. I literally had a guy tell me, Joe, that he said his recorder. It was an older style plane. And he said it was close to his right knee. And when he got that on his recorder, he started smashing it with his right knee to just combobulate it so that it wasn't even because he didn't want anything. He did not need it. He saw it. He didn't need it in his record. Even if he saw it and it was on a dad gum tape, they drag you in. And so myself, Luna and Matt Gates went down to Florida to be a brief. Matt was told that some pilots had seen some things. And they had some photographs. And so we go down there. And again, we go in. I told Matt, I said, they don't give up this stuff easy. We're going to go down there. And I have a bad feeling they're going to turn us out. Well, we went down there. And Joe, they briefed us on some very, very serious issues that they were dealing with with the Chinese and Communist infiltration and things going on around Florida and the ocean. And but they didn't ever have the, they wouldn't bring the pilots in. And Matt said, hey, I understand all this, but this is not why we came down here. And Matt said, you can see what you want to about Matt and Gates. But he's a great orator. And he's a great attorney. And he just started filleting on them. And he told him, he said, here's what's going to happen. You're going to jerk me around. And I said, I'm going to subpoena you all. We're going to call you all back to Washington. And I remember looking over in the corner at the suits. And I and I said, and I called them spooks, because they were obviously some sort of military intelligence or CI. And I think nobody might not. The spooks are getting nervous, brother, because they were kind of shipped in around. And they shut us down. I said, no, we're not going to do it. And Matt said, I'm calling whoever big Air Force was, hate Matt. It was on one of the military committees. And he called. And our later, they stuck us up in this room and had microphones under the desk. I remember Luna reached under and unplugged them. And they had a nice fruit tray that you paid for at taxpayers. Thank you very much. So we didn't do it like a jackass eating solubrires. I was just eating. I didn't care. And so finally, it came back in an hour in the gases. I don't know who you all call, but you're going to get your brain thing to bring in the pilots in. And literally, they brought these pilots in, and they were in their flight gear. And they had just come out of the planes. And they were the ones. And they described things. And it's been reported down. It's been imported in public. But it was these craft that were hovering for extended periods of times and could shoot straight up at incredible speeds that we don't have capabilities of doing. And those are the kind of thing. And this was military people. These were top people. These are like the equivalent, not just some of our top people. And I know folks are going to say, well, it's probably the Russians. Well, there's the Russians that gamut. They wouldn't be tied up down in Ukraine for how many years. And Putin, such an eagle maniac, he blasts off to Pennsylvania Avenue, get out and probably wrestle Trump in the front yard or something. Fair chested right at unicorn or something. I don't know. I have his China, they don't. It's even more than they already do. And then people say, well, it's our part. It's just ours that they don't want to raise it. Well, think about this. President Trump, and he should have. And I give him great credit for that pilot that got knocked down over in Iran. We spent untold millions of dollars to bring that cat home. And we should have. Because it sends a message to our enemies. And it sends a message to our fighting men and women that we're not going to lead you behind as many presidents have done many times. There's no way on God's green earth that they would risk a half a billion dollar aircraft with something flying around it. And risk those guys' life and all that training to put these guys in harm's way. And that's exactly what they're doing. These things are buzz and cockpits. It's not an everyday occurrence. It's in certain areas. And that's where the deep water thing comes in, the deep water basis. I was sort of misquoted. I was just telling what I was told. But it makes a lot of sense that these deep water areas are where we see a lot of sightings. And we see a lot of, we've seen craft underwater. It do something over 200 miles an hour that on the sonar pickup are as big as the dad come football field. The best we have, we don't have anything big as a football field. It might be in length, but not in underwater anyway. The best we can do is maybe up to 30 mile an hour, maybe something like that. I don't know. But 200 miles an hour, that's just out of the question. And these things don't have a heat signature. And I hope, I hope though, that they release some of the footage that we've seen and some that we haven't, that we've been rumored that's out there. What I'm afraid though, it's going to get so sanitized. And it's going to get cleaned up. I mean, even Obama, he said, yeah, there are aliens out there. And then in a recent interview, I saw just last week or so. He's backed up on that. I was just kidding. I was just kidding. And I saw a Trump when he was getting interviewed, he said, Obama should have said that because it's classified. He goes, but I might release it. I might make it unclassified. And I hope he does. And I told him that. I talked to the president about it. And I said, Mr. President, it's like layers of an onion. You just keep peeling it back. And I hope he does because. He'd be the only one that would ever do. Only one with enough guts. Only one because he's not beholden to that bunch. All they've done is try to bury him. Right. So when these men came to you and they hooked up the computer to your television and showed you, do they tell you why they wanted you to see this stuff? They just thought I should know about it because I was asking the right questions. And then shortly after that, I was. And you go ahead. I'm sorry. Will you told that you were not supposed to tell people about this? Well, you know, but it's interesting. I had that deep throat moment. You know, not the porn version. Right. The Richard Nixon moment, you know, where I was walking in the tunnel one day and a person came up to me. It's always a friend. It's always a friend that does this and said, it was just a strangest conversation. I'll never forget it because he said, Bertch, he said, you know, you're really pushing on this UFO thing. And I could, yeah. Yeah. I am. He said, do you really think we need to do this? And I just kept listening. When I was a young man, I'd have run my mouth and said, I'll shut up. But I listened to what he said. He said, he said, I mean, you know, this could upset the religious community and all this other. I mean, some of this stuff just left unknown. You know, and I said, no, it's not. And the government has no right to decide what I can and cannot understand or handle or see. And to me, and every time Joe, let me tell you what they're going to do. I had a two page bill for disclosure. And Chuck Schumer had one that was 60 pages, I believe. And he modeled his after the Kennedy assassination committee release, which were over 60 years into that. And we still don't. They haven't released everything that on President Kennedy getting shot. And that's what they wanted to model this dad gum thing after mine was two pages long. Of course, mine didn't get anywhere. I was told by a member of leadership. They come and sit with me. I call it centers row. I sit on the back row, second from the back, from the aisle, everybody gets in trouble. They come sit with me sometimes. And I was told by a member of leadership that the intelligence community was unhappy with what I was doing. And then I got a phone call from a former member of President Trump's staff who told me that I needed to, I forget, is exact terminology. He said, oh, he said, you need to get some bodies around you. And so I don't know what that means. I mean, I'm the 435th most profitable member of Congress Joe. So they bump me off. And it's going to be like, they'll be one tears shed on the house floor. That'd be because the house somebody $10. I didn't pay them back. And then they'll move on to the next guy. So well, I'm sure you're aware of this narrative about the missing scientists and scientists that have turned up dead and been killed. 100% went out. That's real. I think I have a theory on that. I know it's a little dangerous to throw these things out. But and I was on maybe Fox one time. And I just came up with this. I say, say your family's mobbed up. OK. And y'all on a nice Italian restaurant in its world renowned and you're your busting at the seams. You know, and you're franchise and then putting out cookbooks and everything. You got this one chef who's the kingpin of all of it. But you're afraid he's talking to your competitors. Now you don't bump him off. What you do is you rough up a few of the bus boys. And that sends a quick dad gum message that you need to shut your mouth. And that timing is everything. And nothing happens by accident in Washington, D.C. To me, I think it's the timing is uncanny. You got a president. You know, he had these hearings in Washington. You have a president that says he's going to release stuff. And all in that same time frame, before and after that, you're having some of these high ranking officials disappear. And to me, that's nobody disappears in this country. And let's say they want to disappear. There's cameras everywhere. And it just to me, it's just it reeks of a deep state sewer. UFC 328 is here. And Draft King Sportsbook makes every fight night mean more. When a fighter steps into the octagon, everything they've built comes down to this moment. Stars explode, stars finish. And with Draft Kings, you're ready to move when they do. Bet fighter props, Bet live. From the opening bell to the final one, every strike, every takedown, every finish attempt matters. And Draft King Sportsbook keeps you connected as the action unfolds. New Draft Kings customers bet $5. And you'll get $100 in bonus bets instantly. Download the Draft King Sportsbook app and use the code, Rogen, so you're ready for the moment. That's code-rogan for new Draft Kings customers to turn $5 into $100 in bonus bets instantly. In partnership with Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1-800-GAMBLER, or 1-800-MIRY, set New York called 8-7-7-8-HOPE-N-YER, text Hope & Y, Connecticut called 8-8-8-7-8-9-7-7-7-7-7 or visit ccpg.org. On behalf of Boothoek, as seen when Kansas, Wager Tax Passthrough, may apply in Illinois, 21 and over in most states, void and Ontario, restrictions apply. Bonus bets expire seven days after issuance. For additional terms of responsible gaming resources, csportsbook.draftkings.com slash promos, limited time offer. Yeah, I thought one of the things that I thought of is one of the subjects that these people were all, they're all working on different things, but they're working on alternative energy sources. Yeah, that's the, that's the, that's the, I'm sorry to mean to cut you out to it. But that's what ties them together. Yeah. And to their, one of them spouse said, oh my husband or wife or whatever, never did anything with UFOs. Well, they don't talk about it. It's actually, it's a pretty close knit group. And I always remember this, I'm knock on doors. That's how I got elected. Nobody really did. There's not a lot of people like me that are, come from a family of public educators and get elected to Congress. All right. Most of my contributions are $25 and some are reps of Bible first around it and, and tells me they're praying for me. The big boys, they're always for me the day after the election. All right, they always, hey, well, come and get you a check. And we were with y'all alone. I always say, yeah, I felt it right there towards the end, you know, but, but I'm knocking on this guy's door down in Fairget and, and he's putting his flag out. He's an older gentleman. And I said, I said, hey, brother, did you serve? And he said, no, you know, I mean, it's easy to see, you know, and he kind of held his head to the nod it. And I didn't. And I said, you said that I worked at Oak Ridge. And I said, brother, I said, my daddy was on Oak Nala when they dropped the bomb. They were getting ready to invade mainland Japan. I said, if my mom and daddy were alive today, they would hug you because that's, they put it together. And he told me he said to him, before I left, he said a funny thing. He said, my wife worked there too. And you know, I did, she worked on a, I think he said he was a fuse or something. And she was that I worked on a timer on the atomic bomb. He said, and I didn't know what she did the entire time that we were working there. That's called compartmentalization. And that's what you have here. And if I can elaborate just a little bit more, the, you're familiar with FOIA, I mean, you're a member of media freedom of information act. It means I can request from a federal agency. They have to be, they probably wouldn't give it to me. But any information, but I can't go after like Ford Motor Company, okay? So what they've done is they've given this information, these, whatever, if it's craft, it's material, if it's bodies, I don't know. I have my suspicions, but they've given them to, there's four or five major contractors, as you see that are always the ones that are, they're putting it out there. They're missile defense systems. They're, they're coming up with this new metallurgy, these new propulsion systems. And I think that whatever they had, they gave to them early on, and they're, they're the ones, but they're so far disconnected from the government that I can't touch it. And the people that are working on it, there's nobody alive and it will round, those around Roswell or any of that stuff that was in and around those years, that's still alive or still working. So all those people are gone. I mean, that's the best, that's the best secret you can keep if you tell somebody and they die. And that's, that's exactly what they've done. And, you know, we've been given places, addresses and things. And everybody says, oh man, go to, you need to get out to area 51, burchit and see what's out there. All right, nothing at breaking area 51. So those of us who announced where we're going, the U-Haul van, so it would have already been there in the left, you know. And, and so what it's going to take is, it's going to take a scientist or somebody that's going to have to walk out of one of those deadgum labs before they're allowed to commit suicide, but she didn't themselves in the back of the head, 10 times with a shotgun or something. And so. Do you know the Bob Lazar story? I do. I do. I've never met Bob. I know a buddy of mine, I guess, friend of mine, I think sort of broke that story. Tour snap? Yeah, now, I'm sorry. I haven't slept much in the last 48 hours, but yeah, George, I met him through all this and then it's a big honor because I grew up watching George and I have, he's a cool dad. He's awesome. I love him. He comes to my office and we hang out and I mean, yeah, people get, you know, they get kind of story out when they see somebody like yourself or kid rock or somebody, but for me it was George's nap. Because, you know, cause I asked him, I'd ask him stuff and he goes, yeah, that was a report I did one. And cause I'm, you know, he's very careful about what he says to, he's not a guy who says anything that he can't. And he stops, he's like, yeah, you ever seen his files? I mean, it's just, it's a myriad of files. He's very even keeled and fair in the way he assesses things. He's not hyperbolic, the way he describes things is like as clean and as accurate as possible. He's not trying to sell T-shirts really. I mean, he's a true journalist. I mean, I wish other people would look at a guy like that and say, that's the way we need to go with journalism. A real journalist who didn't start off with this whole UFO thing, he didn't wanna do, I mean, he's an actual just regular journalist until Bob Lazar contacted him. And that story, we've had Bob on a couple of times. In fact, this is how popular this idea is in the American Zeitgeist. The Bob Lazar episode of this podcast is the most viewed episode that I've ever had on YouTube. Is that right? Yeah, it's got 65, 66, 66 million views right now. Yeah, I mean, a guy who's just talking about how he used to work at S4, Area 51, Site 4, where he was back engineering UFOs. Right. And there's a new documentary that he just did called S4, where they use CGI and they made models of the craft and they made him, like they brought him, they used this technology that makes it look like he's a lot younger. Yeah. And they showed like what his experience was. They completely recreated it and it down to a tee. And Jamie and I got a chance to watch it with him, with Bob and Luigi, the guy who made the film. And it wasn't me watching how emotional he gets when he's in the rooms, like this is it. This is, this is like, his freaks me out. It like brings me back. Because we're talking about 1988, 1989, when all this was going on. And he really, you know, last report I saw, it was somebody interviewed him at his house. I mean, he had like a med 80s Corvette or something, you know, he's not, he hasn't cashed in on it. Like everybody else seems to do. No, he hasn't made any money off of it. And he's still just a legitimate scientist. He runs United Nuclear Labs. He's, you know, that's what he does. And he's a brilliant guy and doesn't want the attention. Like I, it was very difficult to get him to come back in a second time, you know, and he wanted to wait until this documentary was out and come in and talk again. But he got freaked out. He drank a lot of whiskey. You know, he was like, get's weird at out by it all. It's all like to him. The whole experience was very surreal and strange. And we got, you got to figure, he's the one that escaped from all of it and is still alive. And somehow he got out and was able to do it before they could silence him. They tried to discredit him so he didn't work there. And then he asked. Or he was going to reduce check stubs even. Well, not just dad. They tried to pretend that he never worked at Los Alamos Labs, but he was on the employee roster. There was a lot of stuff going on where they tried to discredit him. But he went public because he was afraid they were going to kill him. You know, because the initial one they gave a fake name and he was a silhouette and he told the story. But then he's, his home got broken into his car was getting broken into he got shot out on the highway. It got real weird. And so he said, look, I've got to go public. I think it might be the only way to protect myself. And he told the whole story. And he hasn't deviated from that story. And that's, that's what's really kind of crazy. Because it's been, you know, what, 40 something years or close to? These guys, they asked those questions, you know, they always, oh, yeah, well. And then they say, was it red? No, it's green. And then they were adamant that it was red 10 years ago. Right. Everything about him has been that he, and I've seen there was a documentary on him and they asked somebody to analyze him. You know, was he telling the truth or not? And he said, I think he's telling truth. Yeah. It was seem like he's lying. But I mean, of course, I'm in the business. I'm in Congress. So yeah, he's an amateur. We're professionals out there. But you only think you can tell a lot. You know, they're not very good at it. The people in Congress that are liars, the problem with liars is they don't really have a good understanding of the truth. Because if you're lying all the time and you're forging this fake narrative, people see that. And so that when you try to say it as the truth, it doesn't come off like the truth. There's a feeling that people get when they talk to. Now there's some real crazy people that could just lie, like really insane. But generally they lie about a bunch of stuff. They don't just have one lie from 1989. The term pathological comes to mind. I'm, yes. You know, that, that bass was this big. You know, well his story, though, one of the interesting things is he was talking about the ways in which the craft moved. And then decades later, we have footage that shows these crafts rotating in the direction that they want to travel and zooming off. And then of course there was the Commander David Freaver Incident off the coast of San Diego in 2004. And if that was our technology, the thing that puzzles me is if we had something in 2004 that could go from 50,000 feet above sea level, to sea level in under a second, I can't imagine the 22 years later. for that can go from 50,000 feet above sea level to sea level in under a second. I can't imagine that 22 years later there would be no advances that it would have leak through into mainstream technology. Well the energy. Yes, the energy. It's, you know, we'd heat our homes in the winter and cool them in the summer. But then again, I always throw out the war pimps. I'm not my daddy fought for this country and I'm not, you know, that's their businesses very good. They, they will quickly, you know, stand up and, and, and trash a guy like favor. He was, he testified before our committee and I was, I was taken by what he said. I know he was pretty well now. But we, you know, we had the committee which was crazy. We, me and Lona and a bunch of others got together and said, my way to go to this committee. This is, we need to do this. And so I went to the chairman and he said, sure. And then they sort of blew it off. And then they want, and I go see the staff of these committees. And that's, that's the, that's the real problem in Washington Reagan said it best. Don't, don't term limit politicians, term limit staff. And I go in there and I'm told, yeah, well, I think we want to just talk about this Chinese hot air balloon. So we want to really talk about that now. Well, no, that's not excuse my language. I'm like, no, we want to, we want to talk about, now, get them UFOs. What people are calling us about constantly. I mean, it was just getting so much air play. And then I was told by some old timers, which was kind of cool. They said that, you know, Tim, I've been here some, I've been here 10, 15 years and said that was the most attended committee that they could remember. They had to open up another room so people could be there. I walked out. I was on Fox that morning and I was going out. I left my office at 4 30 in the morning and I was outside and I remember it was hot because it was summertime and there was people already outside lining up that had come from all over the country on their own dime. I mean, these weren't like wealthy people. And then one guy said, this is our vacation this year. We're coming to the Steadcom committee meeting. And Joe, they were lined up around the hall, around everywhere. And that's where I met Sean Ryan and a bunch of people. And it was just, it was amazing to me. And that's when Congress started paying attention to it because they realized the voters are paying attention to them. Yeah, I mean, that might be the only way to put pressure on them. The thing about the alternative energy sources, one of the things that I was thinking is that if you were involved in whatever petroleum, like whatever your business is and there's some technical... Put them at a business. Yeah. Then and the Pentagon. That was my point on the Pentagon. Yeah. But then out of business, put the old companies out of business because they say what he was showing a deadgum heat signature. Right. If a black bird flies across my farm, it's going to put out a deadgum heat signature. Right. And through the, all the technology we had, and that's the call them the tick-tack. T tick-tacks. Yeah. They look like the little little man and that's what they were. That's what Commander David Frevers saw. Yeah. And not only saw, but there's video footage of it, there's radar footage of it. Exhibiting travel that's just beyond comprehension for modern technology, for current state technology. 100%. But if these people were working on some sort of new energy source or some sort of new propulsion system, and you've got to imagine there's a very small amount of people that are on the cutting edge of whatever this stuff is. If this is like groundbreaking technology that's not known by mainstream physicists or whoever's working on it, and you only have a small group of people, if you whack one of them, you put a big stop to any progress, especially if you get the main people, the lead scientist, and that guy winds up getting assassinated or winds up in some pairs. Yeah. Disappeared. The one lady was the weird one. So she's walking with her. She hiking or something. Yeah. And with her friend, her friend turns around a talk store and then walks a little further, turns around to say something again, and she's gone. Just gone. And they bring in dogs. They have cadaver dogs. They can't find her. There's no trace, no one's seen her sense. And this lady was apparently, wasn't she? Jamie, wasn't she involved in some sort of alter alternative technology alternative? Yeah, I think she's not. She, she met metallurgy was her day also. Yeah. Right. Whatever these craft or whatever have to be something. And I said this earlier on one time and it made a lot of sense. I was surprised that something I said dead, but it sort of stuck. You know, it's like, well, why don't they just bring it all out now if they've got it? I don't think we've got the technology to figure out what the heck it is. Like I ride motorcycles. I got an old 47 Indian chief. If I were to take that thing back to the, when they came over in the Mayflower, you know, they would see it and think that's kind of unusual. They might worship his as a God. I know I sometimes do when I go out to the garage. But, but, but you know, they're going to, they're not going to be able to adjust the valves. They're not going to know what the heck spark plug is. They probably wouldn't be able to figure out how to make a fuel with a high enough octane for the thing to kick over. And, and I think that, and they might polish it. They might get it started. And I think that's sort of where we're at with this stuff, Joe. I think it's a, I think a lot of them have something and they just don't know what to heck to do with it. Well, that's Bob Lazar's take on it. And that was his take on it when he was working there in 1989. He said they understood how to turn it on. They didn't exactly understand how it worked or what it did and they wanted him to try to figure it out. Those guys that came to my house, they, they talked about that and how these, something could travel with these light years. One of them was an astrophysicist and I don't really understand astrophysics, but it took me six years to get out of UT and I didn't drink her smoke pot. So I'm just going to elaborate a little bit about that. You brother, have a green shop, technological and dull education. I can fix your lawn mower, I can burn your house down if you need it wired, but I'll always have a job. So you got something vibrating over here and then instantly it's over here. And that sort of way they explained it, put it on my level to understand it. And to me it proves that there's a God, I mean because it's an instantaneous travel that we don't quite comprehend. Now is there friction involved? And that's where they, when they see these blobs out there that are floating around, they that are lit up. I've had several people tell me about that, how these, there was one incident where they surrounded a group of our aircraft and it was there and a lot of them deal with nuclear weapons. It seems that when we're around some nukes we've had, I always remember I went in and it's been a long time since you had a man bun, so I'm not going to knock on this. I had this bureaucrat with a dead gun man bun telling me I asked him about a certain incident and he said, we don't have data points on that Congressman and I said, well what about this deal? And he said, I don't know what you're talking about. I said, well Google it, everybody in the world knows about we had a nuclear power plant that had these things fly over and the dead gun thing shut down. I mean it's been documented, it has been documented unequivocally and you know and that's and then you have members of the Congress go, well they said it didn't exist so we're out, you know I'm good and I'm like, no, no I'm sitting there reading these officers better, obviously, very, I read people, God gives us all a gift, my gift is reading somebody and I was reading these military officers and you know they had the full, they had all of it, you know they'd been serving for a while and some of them had done some things and I could just sit there reading and they're thinking this little twerp right here beside me, I choke him out if I could. You know I mean they were just like they were angry, no not at me at him, yeah, him because they wanted to tell something and this was a bad enough point to you and you know it just and that's a lot of the times we were, I was in one situation I'll just call it where they sent somebody in basically just a disrupt and you know to throw at a witness and that witness just it was like a, he was like a pro ball player hitting T-ball man, he was just knocking him out of the dead gun park every quase and what about any gave a date and he said oh you're talking about this incident well let me tell you what happened there and he would go through everything and it was, it was beautiful, it was beautiful and then he got disgusted and ended up leaving the meeting and you know and that's, they send people in to disrupt, they're just not going to turn, and I don't know if the fact that and the corruption in Washington DC is not like it used to be, you know it's not like oh I got a picture of you sleeping with some hooker over an Istanbul, you know, oh my copies I want to take it to my buddies, I mean that's about the, that's about what you'd get now but what it is now is I think is that some members have a family member or a wife and or girlfriend that could work for one of these groups and they're told hey you want to keep your dad gum job or you want these pictures to come out or whatever I would, you want you want to need a little help here and then they go disrupt and come into the committee meetings and ask ridiculous questions to try to get up a partisan fight going and maybe some of them do it unbeknownst to them what they're being told to do but they do it because they're, they're just lap dogs. So there's a strategy where they have a bunch of people that they sort of compromise as disruptors and they are compromised exactly that's the word I was on them and I'm going to say another one, I was on the bany show early when he was early on and I was talking to Johnson. Yeah. Yeah. So he's been very kind to me and so he asked me about how do they do it and I see what they used to do is say and called the honey pot you know they you'd go to some you go on I never go on trips the only trip I've ever been on a codel was to the border down here down in Texas and I went down for one day, flew down here saw the border, saw the people coming over the border, got an airplane flew home I was about 18 hour trip it wasn't any luxury a stayed in a room that my buddies at the frat house would have probably asked for our money back in it was pretty rough you know got some good barbecue though but anyway so these guys go on these trips and say you're sitting out the bar I mean you're a good looking guy some girl comes up to your some guy whatever your interest whatever your perclivities are and laughing at your jokes and you know next thing you know you're up in the bedroom, neck it with them and then you think man I pulled off the the gray I pulled this off I was with this smoke show and my wife and kids don't know about it and I'm just gonna you know me I'm just just me just between me and the Lord and then you know you're getting ready to make a key boat and one in a staffer comes up or a lobbyist or something you're in the hall and says hey Congressman said yeah man how's it going? So he got this big boat yeah but I'm not for you all in this one okay we understand he said hey were you in a motel room and in Istanbul with a pretty redhead one time and they say man I don't want that out of the wreck my mom we don't want it out we don't need your help and that's how they sink their claws into you they used to and they might do that now but I was on the benny's show and I was talking about that oh man I caught it from I mean his leadership and members man everybody thinks we're sleeping I'm saying I didn't say everybody I just said some of y'all are I said you know don't and every day you can there's a new one getting in trouble so this is not any big secret 435 of us so you get 435 people you're gonna have a few freaks in there how? 435 group of any human being any you go to especially you know if you can compromise a man with beautiful women it's not that hard to do if they're gay and they don't want it out in their public or whatever so I said this to benny and I caught it and then about a week later a week later and I said it's probably the Chinese the Russians or something I busted a Chinese prostitution ring and what did they list is their clientele lobbyist government employees and politicians and then what happened the next week at story went away and benny does this thing he showed me walking out and he like I thought well matching that and whatever behind me just bursting the flames and I'm walking out you know it's really cool and he also did a song of me singing dad gum which is my cuss I don't cuss I say dad gum and he did that but anyway but that was my point is that they use this stuff and they know what we want they you know these guys these countries they know they own the internet so they know what's porn you look at it you're in the privacy of your home that you think you're you know you got this private name on your freaking computer and they know you know and so that's what they're going to hit you with so anyway that's a long story but it's I think mostly it's just jobs now mostly jobs and influence and figure out well you think about you get a dart bag you're going to get into sleep with some hooker you know that that's going to happen you know eventually too but I just don't I don't know it's that prevalent and I had a lobbyist tell me one time he was his name was Tom Hansley was the Golden Goose he was a liquor lobbyist in national Tennessee and he was a care couture by the lobbyist he is he three-piece suit big old cowboy boots smoking a cigar and we are at the crown plows I mean he like me because I never would vote for his liquor bills but I never would vote for a tax on him either so he he he he he we were there and the guy from the governor's office came and just chewed both of us out you know just treated me I'm a legislator and he was treating like a dog and I and he goes to sit back here and he had that fancy Jack Daniels black label or whatever it is that the fancy version of it is because he represented Jack Daniels made in Tennessee and he pulls that big five dollars cigar out and he goes Birch it he goes governors come and go but the old goose will be sitting right here and he said I said well what are you going to do is he going to shut you down man all these you're going to tell these people the stuff he goes Birch it I just need one chairman I don't need the whole in one body of the house you know in the house of the Senate I just need one chairman that'll listen to me and he wasn't saying he never did anything quick in front of me and he never offered me any bribes or anything but that was a good lesson to learn as a young man when I was in the state legislature well if you just think about how much money Congress people wind up leaving office with just that alone is incentive to play ball I mean you don't mean you don't think we're making 16,000 percent on our own knowledge I got my daughter called me while back and said that and she's super smart she's doing anything with veterinary doctor on brain surgeon she's crazy smart I married my wife and adopted her my wife was a widow so genetically she's not mine but when she gets into trouble my wife says that's all you Tim Bergen but she's a exceptional little girl and she said dad I think I just like to cut hair and I was like right on girl you go undo it and and that's what she does I mean she's she's going to school to do that so I cashed out my $11,000 portfolio which was a mutual fund because I think and I don't own any individual stocks but I think that members of Congress ought to do that that was my bill you don't know and more people have you know more people have played professional baseball than have ever been in Congress you know it's a very it's a very tight it's a very and I tell people if you don't get off that deadgum plane and look at that capital and get chill bumps you get your butt back on that plane and go home because we don't need you there and everybody knocks on Pelosi and I know that but out of the top 10 you know where she is in the in the amount of trades where she up number 11 she's not even in the top 10 days well she should get a better PR person I know it's crazy everybody uses hers an example I know but she don't care I mean if you were making 16,000 percent would you care oh I would be a little concerned that someone would come from me she's all right well it's just bizarre that it's legal that's the most bizarre it's it's it's not right right it's not right but it's it's legal and I just said look you cash out everything you put it in a mutual fund and I know they got this bill and everybody's all fired up for it and I'm not I'm proud I don't know what I'm going to do about it I'm which bill and they got a new bill they don't like my bill mine and loona's bill that says that you you can't own individual stocks just don't a mutual fund they're going to let you keep your portfolio so somebody's cats got a $20 million dollar dad gum portfolio they made a hundred seventy thousand dollars a year which is amazing yeah I mentioned the average person out there making a hundred seventy thousand dollars and all of a sudden they make a hundred million and the stock market and we're we're involved just and I not all of them are crooked some of them are they are geniuses I've been in Congress with some real geniuses but you know if you see I'll give you a case in point all right and I said this many times and nobody's come after me and said you know they told me to quit saying it but I don't care I got a bad gum first amendment I don't care they can't come to knock he used to see and try to beat me but but they um if I forgot what I'm saying now I'm gonna boss my mind I guess I've part you have to cut out oh no it's we're talking about insider trading we're talking about the amount of money that people generate that's what we're at we're talking about this one's a genius really good at it yeah I'm trying to kind of forgot it I've got so many one liners in my head Joe I should have wrote in all these days right now these down anyway um they they all not not all of them are crooked some of them are are really are that good I'm sure but oh I know what it was it was it was um uh when Russia and invited Ukraine I haven't voted for a dime for that's not our dad gum war I don't I keep keep keep my dollars here we need to defend our own dad gum borders well Joe Biden for better for worse gave you crane basically our missile defense system so immediately we had to replenish our missile defense system now who do you think owns stock in that and those missile defense systems members of Congress yeah members of Congress and apparently some of them I bought it it it barely close to those time periods and so I don't know are they doing something crooked I don't I mean that you can't prove it well it's not crooked they know things that would help them and I just know things remove all reproach yeah if you if you got a $20 million portfolio or whatever some probably had more than that you know good and dad gum will you're gonna vote it's in the back of your mind you're gonna vote to make my my investment worth a little more yeah so the possibility of financial win fall would probably make people play ball which makes sense which makes sense I mean you need to make sure you got you got guys a pair that are that you know they've got they got expenses at home got a couple kids in school got payments on a house you know and 170 thousand dollars doesn't go as far as it used to I guess and they just human nature you want more people want more they they want you know whatever it is a lot of times it's not them investing it's their you know their why for their spouse and yeah in cases of that where you know a 16 year old kid is doing pretty well right and it's a child of someone who has some inside information there's something that just came out yesterday about Rokana this guy Kevin base on Twitter posted this big long this examination of his stock trades and how much money he's made and how he's made it and what he's done there's I mean it's just all over Congress it's you have inside information that's what it is that's this and I know Rok but you know I don't know if it's true yeah I don't mean yeah but you could pull it up if you want Jamie it Kevin base BASS it's Baster base I'm not pronouncing the last name but he made this very detailed post about it but I mean that's just one example of one person who's profited I'm sure it's a probably minor in comparison to the other eleven that are ahead of Nancy Pelosi I sleep on my couch in my office and I shower in the gym I don't have a place I can't afford it it's too expensive up there I was so I got elected with a guy one time and he said when we got elected he said hey broch it I just paid 1.2 million dollars this place what do you think and I know he was just bragging to me you know because I wouldn't know I could do something like that and he said and I said well probably in a couple years they're gonna say I can't believe you only paid 1.2 million dollars for it because I've got the price of that real estate up there is just crazy it is crazy and it's a rich man's it is really a rich man's game and the problem with being a round rich man is even if you're rich you don't feel like you're rich if you're in comparison to them and so if you're worth a couple million and this guy over here is worth 50 you're like damn I got a up my game I got up my game and you're in this sort of culture this culture of a bunch of people that are investing a bunch of money and making a bunch of returns and I'll tell you when it was a public meeting I remember it was in transportation it would help with some technology in an airport and it was pretty cool and I just asked the question I said is that as your stock publicly traded you know I looked I was watching people see what they did and they'd all looked up you know and I thought note to self call my broker when I walk out of here you know it's just very odd that that has been legal for so long that's what's very odd it's disgusting and all we're here's what we're gonna do we'll pass some bill in the Senate will pass another bit or phone just won't take it up which is we're seeing a lot of now you don't take anything up and it'll die and we'll all go back back to our people and say oh look I tried to do this I voted for this bill but you know I didn't get a I didn't get a dead gum break you know and look how tough we are and and it or you know and they're all be up at Kenny bunkport sipping expensive wine and toasting each other on their great financial choices that's where bushes from right I don't know yeah yeah yeah well they're from Kenny bunkport main yeah I just do that when I tell him put I could think a Myrtle Beach South Carolina for somebody like me would be pretty cool so one of the things about this disclosure thing the documentary Age of Disclosure yeah and you're in that it's really great if you haven't seen it folks and you're interested in the UFO phenomenon one of the fascinating aspects about age disclosure is you got all these insider people that are all talking about all these different experiences that people have had and all the stuff that people know and one subject came up that made a lot of sense and it was that if there have been back engineering programs and they've had access to all this technology and they've had crashed vehicles and biological entities and they've been all these programs studying this for so long they had have funding so if they they had funding that means they had a lot of Congress so they had a lot of Congress there's misappropriation of funds so you're talking about massive penalties so if they don't have some sort of amnesty and this is one of the things it's pushed throughout this entire documentary is that we need some kind of mass amnesty I'm a very skeptical person I see something like that I'm like okay I see what you're doing you are talking about UFOs so you can get some sort of amnesty for misappropriation of funds and that might just be straight up fraud there might be fraud and theft and you might have moved money into offshore accounts and there's must might might make a bunch of shady shit and you could say oh but we'll tell you some very obscure information about UAPs I don't like that term because it was always UFOs UFOs that's a that's a misdirection I hate that term I mean you need a new name we already have that name forever it's called UFOs is fun UAPs makes me feels sanitized but if they can give you some fucking you know semi shady information now you've got amnesty yeah now you've got amnesty and you've got amnesty for decades of misappropriation of funds so maybe some of it is real maybe a lot of it is real maybe a lot of it is really back engineering programs maybe they really have been doing these things and maybe they can give us slowly trickle down some insight as to what's going on it or probably take forever if you ever get anything out of it but in the meantime all these people that have made who knows how much money in shady ways with all this misappropriation of funds and now they're not in trouble anymore yeah represent Eric Burleson has a bill to do just that and it was but it's it's whistleblower protection is the way you need to go about that and and he can't he's try to get it attached to bills and we did they just won't allow it they won't allow it or they put it on and kill it in the Senate you know it's the same old game go yeah so then the other problem that's brought up in age of disclosure is say if you do have a retrieved craft from wherever another planet another dimension whatever it is from the ocean whatever it is and you need to study this thing what where are you bringing it to most likely you're going to bring it to a weapons manufacturing company 100% and so if you do that well what about the other companies they don't have access to that well then they can sue they can why didn't I get access to that sort of technology why does this person you've damaged my business or you know what have you you and also people have probably lied under oath about whether or not those things exist or what where they got certain technologies I mean there's a bunch of different reasons why you could see why logical reasons why you could see why they would try to try to put the brakes on disclosure and try to put some blockades up and try to obfuscate and make things much more difficult to get through I agree all right it 100% and that's why I think these folks disappearing and dying on unexpectedly or yeah I'll live in some of those messages yeah it's and members of Congress will several of the people that have been involved that are really heavily into it now they were real skeptics we kind of brought them in I needed some skeptics it couldn't just all be a bunch of folks that thought like I did and and they're now not skeptical can you give me some examples we'll let you how that happened yeah well we had a committee meeting and um my buddy Eric Burleson for instance he was he was a skeptic and um and and I mean I'm a skeptic of a lot of it myself but I just have been studying for said that come along and he um you know he he was in the committee and and he's asking very poignant sharp questions which is what you're supposed to do in a hearing and um he you know he's he's one of the biggest advocates now for total release of of everything you might have he's he's always had to pour front of riding legislation when we're doing something we're always me him and Luna um Jared Mosquitz and the and on the Democrat side is involved in it a lot and uh you know and and other members will come in and say hey can I want to be right into this committee or what it means they can come on when we do the UFO stuff but nothing really had the impact is that first committee meeting and I told people at the end of it I was recognizing at the end I said the one thing about and Nancy Mais of course she's involved with as well and one thing um at the end I said you know fine I just want y'all to know that people do believe you this is not some crazy far out thing and you all are have a right to be skeptical and and ask questions to your government and get these answers because we're not going to give it to you with without without y'all without y'all being there and raising these questions well there's too many stories from too many credible people too many people like Ryan Graves too many people like Commander David Freaver there's too many people that you just go I don't know why this person would lie about this one thing can I tell you one that I got on um I was in the state legislature with a guy and and he was watching um unknown aliens or something and they they failed me at one time and then they you should put like three years of ancient aliens I'm sorry that's so great I love that show I love those guys they're all great I love it I love it shout out to George Joe yeah George Joe Sue Cluell yeah crazy hair I love that guy he's I think he's great I need to get him to an oxal for for the Greek festival but anyway he'd be a rock star there but so um uh again we're you know I'm losing my my train of thought here Joe I don't even smoke weed and I'm losing my train of thought what were we talking about here hope we edit some of this because I'm not any shit we're talking about disclosure oh yeah things that people see yeah yeah I just tell you about some people I'm I pick up the phone and buddy and mine says Timbo and I recognize the voice and I said hey brother what are you up to we're in the state house together People see, you know, I've said to you about how people... Tom, I pick up the phone and buddy of mine says, Timbo, and I recognize the voice, and I said, hey, brother, what are you up to? We were in the state house together. He said, I just saw you on ancient aliens. And I said, okay, and I thought, here it comes, you know. You've been probed lately, you know, you get that stuff from something else, gals and congress. And he said, can I tell you a story? And I said, sure, buddy. And his voice kind of got quiet. And I remember, he hollered at his wife. He said, hey, I said her name. And he said, when... What year was that? Is when he was in the Navy. And she said it was... And she gave the day. It was, I think, in the 50s. And he was out on boat, and I don't know, you know, battleship from an aircraft carrier. But anyway, he was out on a boat. And they were arming a sub with nooks. It was in the early part of that where the subs could launch nuclear weapons. And they were all out on the deck. And all of a sudden, it got... There's a cloud over him. He said he looked up. And he saw this humongous saucer in the air. And he said, he said, Timbo, he said, if that thing wasn't too blocked. If that thing wasn't too blocked, long, I'll kiss your butt. And I said, and he described it to me. He said, he gave the color. And it was the classic saucer. He said, there were lights coming out of portals around it. And he said, it made no noise whatsoever. And it just sit there and hovered. And they just looked up at it. And then it just went straight up. No noise, no nothing, no anything. And I was just like, what the heck was that? And so when they get back to port, the guys in the suits come on, the so-called men in black, I just, they're just spooks, CIA or something. And told them, they said, this is a national security. If you talk about this, you'll be in 11 worth the rest of your dad got my lives, busting rocks. And back then, you know, the cell phone wasn't invented. Al Gore had invented the internet. What year was this? It would have been in the 50s, light 50s, light 50s. I believe in early 60s. So, and then, but he gave me some descriptions. And after this came out, I mean, my phone go every day when this started breaking. I would get somebody would call me and send me pictures of something. You know, that's like a reflection or something. And you know, and it'll come out to my house. And I'm afraid I was going to open a freezer in North Carolina or something, you know. Me somebody's dinner. And I was like, I don't want to go out there to look at it. Just send me a picture of it. And every day, but then I got a call for my guy who was Air Force. And I, I, I go called him, he's legit. And he told me about a, um, a siding he had, he was out, um, he, they were out fishing, um, in Florida. And, and it was near where one of the military bases was. And this thing, and he described exactly what my buddy had seen. this, he saw this in the, um, I think the early 80s and, uh, or late 70s. And he described this craft that was just hovering. And it was just going along. And these, then, you know, it was just going on a pretty good click and said these jets were trying to keep up with it. He could tell by the, you know, because he's an Air Force guy. And he was an officer. And, um, it was a legitimate. And I've since read the story that he told, but, um, but it was, it was, strangely identical in the, the color, the, you know, the tech color was it was an off gray, I believe. And, um, and, but it didn't really matter, but it was just the same one that they said could have been charcutis for all I know. But they, um, but the, the, the size and the, uh, circumference and the, um, the, the dome on top and the port holes and just everything was just very, similar to what this guy had told me about just a few weeks prior. And when you see identical things that people that have no contact with each other, to me that, that says something. And with these pilots, they, they're risking their careers to come forward. And those engineers in Asia Discovery that come forward, they're, their, their reputations and everything are on the line. But these aren't rich people. They can't just retire. No, and they're good folks hung out with them when, came, when they had the world premiere, which was something else me standing on the red, red carpet. A little out of place in that. And, and, and a film festival. Yeah. No, I'm sure I avoid those things. They're weird. But this, uh, the subject, when you talk about them, uh, appearing over bases, appearing over air, calf carriers, appearing over submarines that have nuclear capability, it kind of makes sense that if you were from another planet or you were from another dimension or wherever it is, and you're monitoring what seems to be the most intelligent species and the most capable species on the planet, right. That when they would get access to something like that, like all the UFO sightings ramped up considerably after World War II. After we dropped the bombs, we got the bomb. Yeah, there was a considerable amount of activity. You know, that's when Kenneth Arnold first saw those things and talked about them as flying saws, that was a Washington state. Yeah. It looked like, say it looked like stones skipping across the way that like the sawsters. Yeah. So that's where the term first got introduced into the modern world. And then you see so many of them and then you hear these stories about them going flying over nuclear bases and hovering over and shutting down the equipment. And just the fact that they would hover over that submarine and then take off, just to let you know. Like, probably we can do. Yeah, it's probably a smart move. If you, if you don't want a completely intervene and like, kidnap people and shut down the government and land on the White House lawn and freak everybody out, what better way than to take something that's completely isolated like a submarine in the ocean where you know, everybody's going to lock everything down top secret and just show yourself. And just like, hey, bitch, like we're here. We're here and we are watching everything. So don't do anything fucking stupid. You know, you talked about that issue or episode. I remember when they first I've never been invited back of course, but the Intelligence Committee when they did the UFO thing and there was they had these all these seats and they was an open to the, open to the everybody Congress and the press and everybody and they had all these seats behind these this white, this white guy, this black guy who were appointed to oversee the AAP issue, which and I remember it. I thought I'm going to get there early and get to see down front. And I sat right behind those guys and nobody else showed up. I was the only member of Congress outside of the members in the, in the, in the, in on the committee in Joe, those guys couldn't spell UFO. I mean, they were intelligent. They were, they were, I'm sure they're patriots. They had no clue about anything. There's questions asked about certain incidents and we don't know anything about that. You know, and I thought to myself, that's when the compartmentalization came to, in my mind, how they compartmentalize it. So because to them, they could take a lie detector test and say, I don't know anything about it because they are kept away from it. It's like they're looking down the barrel, but 22 rifle man, it's just a little bitty area and they don't get outside that area. And they don't ask questions and they don't, unless they're told. And if you want to keep your career, that's how you have to operate and your pension and everything. Yeah, absolutely. It makes sense. That, that aspect of it makes sense. What doesn't totally make sense is why now disclosure, other than, I mean, just being cynical, though the Iran war is not going very well. American public's very upset. A lot of people don't think we should have ever been involved in that in the first place and we need some good news. I think we, um, some, I, we need some. something to distract us. We need something to take our focus off of. If I was going to do it, now would be the time I'd do it. Yeah. But yeah, I don't think Trump really even cares. I think he just wants to get it out there. Well, I think he does too. You know, he's talked about it. Like, and he's also. I mean, I mean, I don't think he cares about, um, trying to get a, uh, everybody off, off target, you know, by, by disclosing your folks. I think he cares about all of it, but I don't think he cares that if you're talking about it or not, I just think he, he genuinely sees that America needs to be a little bit forced to know this stuff. Well, he also realizes America wants to know it and he's an outsider. I mean, I mean, though, he's the president. He is going to put a lot of ways he's an outsider. And I mean, this is last term, right? So it's like if you're going to, if someone's going to do it, do it. You want to leave a legacy, be the guy who releases all these files. I tried to kill him three times. Yeah. So, you know, it's not, and that didn't know. Did you see that judge that apologized to the guy that, did you see the story? No. The guy who was at the White House correspondence dinner that shot one of the Secret Service agents and the guy got arrested. Yeah. The judge who's dealing with the case apologized to him for his treatment in jail. Do you have that, Jamie? See, we can find that. He should have gotten some quality stick time. This is another guy, this judge will also released another man who was arrested for threatening to kill Trump. Well, Trump derangement syndrome. Well, it's ridiculous. I pray this guy addressed this man. It's almost as if he was condoning it. Like it says, the indictment comes day of the judge overseeing the case against Allen Express grave concerns about how he's being treated in jail and apologized to him in court. He's talking about a guy who showed up with a rifle or a shotgun shot, shot a Secret Service agent. Obviously in the vest, the guy's okay. But whatever you've been through, I apologize for the prior week. Magistrate judge Zia Farukui. I don't know if I'm saying that right. Said during hearing in Washington DC on Monday, according to the court documents filed over the weekend, Allen had been in solitary confinement. Oh, poor boo boo. At the DC jail after being placed on suicide watch after his arrest in April 25th, his lawyers said that he was housed in a permanently illuminated safe cell with no access to personal items or jail visits, despite repeated assessments showing he did not exhibit any suicide factors. In an order issued on Sunday, Farukui wrote that he had grave concerns about the conditions Allen was being kept in, which he said were seemingly unprompted by the facts of the case. It could drive a person crazy to be in that situation, Farukui said during Monday's hearing. That is really crazy. That is really a crazy thing to apologize for someone who was trying to at least assume, you're assuming you're trying to kill the president. You guys have been programmed to do this. He immediately turns from one way to the other overnight almost. And we're seeing this more and more, I think. What do you mean, you guys have been programmed? I think these people are, you'll mean like MK Ultra type program? A hundred percent. Really? It's a different, you know, you're the expert on it. I'm not really. Well, don't say that. No. I don't want to get your bumped off. Let somebody else go start your car when you walk out there and wait 30 minutes. But yeah, but you know, the CIA, they were grabbing these people up and giving them, I guess, a acid or L.S. whatever and then programming them. And then they said they weren't doing it. And they got sued and they said, oh, we lied. We were doing it, but we're not doing it anymore. No, which time are they not? There's some, here's my thought on this. I think you've got a bunch of people today because of this. It's just open up your head and pour it in and they can put these things out to people just enough to where they know that there's going to be a reaction. There's some people, you and I are going to read this stuff and they're like, huh, you know, and there's some people are just going to stay awake at night and just, excuse my, I know people that read stuff and they'll call me and text me and say, can you believe this? And I'm like, dude, man, I live this stuff. Cool out. We're good. Okay. And I think that these folks, they know who they are and they can, they can target them. You know, how many of these people are going to be, are we going to find that have no internet access, have no history of being on the internet? Right. Like Thomas Crooks. Yeah. That's just, I want total B.S. Total B.S. Total B.S. Oh, we couldn't, we'd let him on the roof and yeah. And then also they couldn't get snipers on that roof because the slope was too steep. Yeah. We had members of Congress that are older than I think Darrell Isa was there. I know a couple other guys were there too. I mean, he's an older guy. He's older than me. I think he was walking around up on it. You know, and that's bogus. That's totally bogus. They put Trump at a bad position and you know, that's the thing you'll never know. You'll never know. Another thing we should have. There's a lot of people running around out there saying that that first Trump assassination was a set up and then it was a hoax and that Trump did it to try to get people to be more sympathetic to him. Anybody who says that doesn't know anything about guns. Because the shot was from how far was it? Was it 140 yards? Somebody was jamming? There is not a person on earth that could nick your ear at 140 yards reliably. Not only that, but miss other shots first. Kill someone behind you. That's another person as well and just nick his ear and just by the grace of God, by his ear, luck, he turns his head at the right time and it catches his ear. Okay, 120 to 140 meters or 135 to 150 yards away during the rally. He was positioned on top of an AGR International building which provided a clear line of sight to the stage. Just that alone is a tremendous failure of security. The fact that they didn't search and look at these buildings that you don't have drones above scanning the area where you have a potential line of sight. A easy shot with someone with a scope. My buddy, Eli Crane, he's a sniper and he said, I could have made that shot because he's a seal cypher in my brother's name. Brad Brown law cliff was a marine sniper and he said I could have probably done it with a steel cypher. Tim. Did the man have steel sights or did he have steel sights? He didn't have a scope. The thing to me is that he got up there and people were pointing at him. It was just a complete. Is it a breakdown? You think is it a breakdown? It's a breakdown. If Tim Burgess sneaks into the back of a Leonard Skinner concert and gets close to the stage, that's a breakdown. That to me is a complete capitulation. They put Trump out there and there's people that don't like him. Say what you want to about programming and things. I just think it's out there. I think it is a reality and I think we better wake up because they're, why shouldn't DC is not a, everybody wants to call it a swamp? Okay. So it does have a scope. It does have a scope. It does have a scope or something. That's a good dot. Okay. I mean, I don't know if it's magnified. It says optics attached to rail, A-E-M-S optics. No, I don't know. I don't have to talk to some of my guys out front, but like what kind of a, what kind of a site that is? What kind of optics that is? I don't know if it's magnified or if it's like pistol optics, but either way, even if it's just, if he's prone and he's got a rifle and it says, yeah, check it out Jamie. I think that's just the setup though. I don't think that's actually the, I think, A-M-S optics. The optics. Right about model, modify with the collapsible stock. I am red dot site. Yeah. So it's a red dot. I don't know if that's magnified. I don't think that's magnified. I think that's just like what you get on a pistol. It just makes it a little bit more accurate. I'd say in pictures of him just walking across an area and you could tell he was carrying something that was fairly long. Well, not only that. He was walking around this site with a rangefinder. Yeah. Are you playing golf? He'd earlier put it in her own up, I think. Yeah. You're not playing golf and you have a rangefinder. You're trying to shoot something. That's it. There's the only two reasons to use a rangefinder. You're playing golf, do an archery or you're trying to shoot something with a rifle. You know, no other thing. But these guys just keep doing this and I think we're going to have a hearing on that, not on that particular case, but just on what the CIA is doing and how they could do that today. They most certainly can do that today if they could do that in the 1960s. Yeah. There's a fantastic book called Chaos by Tom O'Neill. That's all about the Manson family. Have you ever read it? I've seen it and haven't read it. It's phenomenal and it's mind-blowing. You read it and it all documents jolly West and the MK Ultra program and what they did with Jack Ruby and they visited Jack Ruby after he shot Lee Harvey Oswald and Jack Ruby went insane and had a complete psychotic breakdown and said they're lighting Jews on fire and he was like, going nuts. Yeah. And was insane before Ruby visited them. This guy was known to be using LSD on people, unknowing people. They ran Operation Mid-Dike Climax, which were the CIA actually ran brothels. They had two amiers and they had these supposed prostitutes give these John's alcohol that had LSD in it and then they monitor them. They were doing that with people. Unsuspecting people, dosing them up, trying to figure out how and what techniques they could use to manipulate people and to get people to do things they wanted them to do. That's what the whole Manson family was all about. And with the Manson family, that what those killings did, the Tate Labiankum murders, what they did was they turned people against hippies. Like people had this idea of hippies being peace and love and like, oh, it's a new world and everyone's just going to do acid and hug each other and drop out of society. Then it was all a sudden it became no. They're psychotic killers and they're demonic and this is what we have to think about. We need to ban all these drugs and that's what they did. It's kind of fascinating that they were able to do that and do that for so long and it wasn't for the Freedom of Information Act request and if it wasn't for finding those documents that they found that we're just in storage that detailed all this, we wouldn't have any knowledge of this stuff. I'm sure there's a bunch of stuff that we have. I think this is just the tip of the iceberg. There's probably a ton of those things that have gone on that they successfully hid and they got sloppy with this and Johnny West seems like it was a completely insane person. And how could you not be if you were running around dosing people with acid running fake whorehouses? I mean, it's nuts. The whole story is nuts. But the idea that they go, hey, we shouldn't do that anymore. Even though it was successful, that doesn't track. It doesn't track with how anything works. It doesn't track with human nature, it doesn't track with how the government works. The idea that they don't have people right now and also how many people are voluntarily on psychiatric medication that alters them. And then without any sort of formal program like MK Ultra just using bots, just using people's algorithm to turn them radicalize them in certain ways. Like, of course they're going to do that. Of course they're going to try to figure out what they can do, how they can shift narratives in one direction or another. I mean, what's what they do? And Trump's a threat to their machine. Of course. I don't ever think we'll ever find the answer to it. I don't think we're ever somebody's going to come forward and maybe in our lifetime lifetime, they might, but by the end of everybody gone again. Where's the toxicology examination on Thomas Crooks? Let me find out what he was on. Why were they? Yeah, they created him really quickly. Not only that, like, why was his place professionally scrubbed? He didn't even have silverware in his house. No computers. He had no social internet across that. No internet footprint at all. And then they found stuff that led him to believe that maybe he had international accounts. He didn't have it. He just constant constant. It just happens over every course, every time. Not only that, but they documented metadata that track specific phones from the Virginia area out near where the FBI area is to his home multiple times. Why? He's a kid. He's just a young, weirdo kid. And someone's visiting him. His parents were allegedly counselors, I think. that makes the whole thing even that much more mysterious. It's all weird. And we don't have any answers and no one's asking questions. It's like, bye bye. Go away. Yes, the question is you're still not going to get the answers. Right. I mean, that will be one of those things that 30, 40 years from now, people are going to be reading books about it. What the hell was going on? It's like the Kennedy assassination. You know, the Kennedy assassination, we had a committee meeting on that. And I asked a question from this doctor who was in the emergency room. We brought Kennedy in. He clearly, he brought a poster in to show that clearly that the bullets had come from two different directions. And that was, it said had to be two bullets. It could have been a very quick ricochet. Yeah. Obviously. And the whole thing, you know, and no press, nobody covered it. Nothing. They made that was blockbuster news. I thought that would have been. But again, the big boys didn't see fit to put that out. And there we are. Well, just the magic bullet theory alone. That bullet theory. Well, that gun is called a man-laker carbing. It was a got one actually. It's I think I was 7.62 Italian. It's called the only gun that never won a war. You could go into a western auto and bought an M1 with scopes on it and made a bunch better shot than that thing. I mean, the whole thing just stinks in the gun. They show a holding up in the gun that they had later. You know, the whole thing is just screwy. And because we didn't ask questions back then. Yeah. So what questions could you even ask? And there's a great book on it called Best Evidence by David Lifton. And he was an accountant that was hired to go over the Warren Commission report. And he started finding all these inconsistencies and contradictions in the Warren Commission report. So then he wrote this book on all the different things that are wrong with the Kennedy assassination and all the different things that we've been told that couldn't possibly be true. And it's very disturbing, including how many people that were witnesses that died. And it is at the scene in Dallas that died from weird circumstances and the odds of those people dying car accidents suicide murder robbery. It's just too strange. And people they can't find anymore that were in those pictures. You know, yeah, that is square. They cleaned up a lot of the loose ends. Quick. Yeah. But back then, you know, again, you couldn't ask the questions. She didn't have any internet and accounts. But I think, but nobody's even talking about it. You can't get anybody to bring up anything on Trump getting shot or other than they put out its fake, you know, it's his ear, hailed at sale and all this stuff. You know, listen, his ear was clearly bleeding. He got shot in the air. You can see the blood come out right away. It's dripping down the side of his face. And the idea that that's a setup, you cannot be that accurate. It definitely can't be that accurate with a red dot at 140 yards. You can hit him. You could definitely hit him center mass. No problem. Maybe you hit him in the head if you're really good and you're prone. But the making is the year like that on purpose and to be there and say, hey, I just want you to nake my hair just a little piece. Like that's there's not a tough. There's not a chance that that's a fake. And the guy behind him's dead. So what are you saying? Do you think that's fake? That's a setup. The fire monster's life. Yeah, that's crazy. The whole thing's crazy. But it's just this thing where people hate him so much and the narrative and the media, it's Trump derangement narrative that you see in the media is so strong and people are so programmed by it. And for the average person that has a very involved job, you're working all day and then you have a family and you have a life and you have a bit, you don't have time to really go in a depth about what's real and what's not real. And you got that rush of collusion stuff shoved down your throat by mainstream media for years and you believe all of it. 100% And so you really believed that he's a terrible person, rush and agent. All these things. So you want someone to kill him. Yeah, there's a group of folks, young folks that are starting to ask some questions. Yes. You know, my wife's son Tyler, he lives on the farm there with us and he's been asking me inquisitive questions because he doesn't buy it. And a lot of those kids in that generation, I'm like, I don't know if it's the Charlie Kirk effect. I don't know what that is. That's a definitely effect on it because a lot of people don't buy that story either. But it's also the internet. The internet has there's enough independent reporters out there that are untied, independent journalists that are untied to any organization that has a narrative they're supposed to push and they're uncovering real information that's screwing. Right. It doesn't make any sense. Well, and also when they do, though, they get, they get trounced upon by the so-called mainstream media. Of course. But they're numbers. I mean, my gosh, I read somewhere that the amount of media or the amount of information people get from the mainstream media is just diminishing. Well, COVID sunk them. The way they handled COVID and the way they carried water for the pharmaceutical drug industry and the voucher and the, yeah, phoachi and now he's going to walk. Is he going to walk because there's some talk about him possibly being set up for perjury, but there's only a week to go. Yeah, that's a week to go. I just don't. He'll get a stern letter from somebody in Washington. Oh, that drives me crazy, man. I saw, you know, the big boys, you go down to the big hardware chain and they were allowing people to go in, but they closed down a little local and then they closed the churches and the seven dogs and everybody down. And then we just all got in line. They just rang the bell. We're like Pavlov's dog and we just all got in line. I remember at my hospital in Knoxville, one of them. I came out there, you know, to get tested. I got tested. I can't tell many times I got tested and I never tested positive. I've never took the vaccine or any of that, but I can remember coming out there and they had these morgues they were setting up just an anticipation of what, and I just thought, man, this is, if this doesn't work out, this is the ultimate setup because people are going to get rich off this crazy thing. And they did. You know, we greatest transfer of wealth. I don't believe. Unbelievably. Yeah. And Congress just did it. We just did it and then ask any questions. Well, it seems like there's a real pandemic right now on this cruise ship. You know about that Hentavirus? Yeah, that seems really crazy. And ticks. Watch that thing. The tick thing is nuts. Yeah. Especially. Yeah, because of meat, because of gates. Uh huh. But boxes, people are finding, I don't know if this is true because I've seen many reports on it, but I'm just going to say what I saw that farmers and ranchers are finding boxes of ticks on their property. Now, I don't know if that's fake. I don't know if someone's setting that up to pretend they found these boxes of ticks. But there's videos of these people finding boxes of ticks. Now, what they'll say is, they'll probably say they're sterile ticks and that we're planning them out there so we can diminish the population. That's what they'll say. But anytime they try to mess with the balance and nature, it never goes right. Is that what there's saying? It's not what you're getting at right here. I don't believe you have a right to go to someone's property. No problem. Sterel ticks. No way in the ale. That's crazy either way. But I have a good friend of mine who got bit by the Lone Star tick and has that alpha gal problem. Yeah, I came out my house yesterday looking at putting gutters up at our house. And I'd come, he said, I know, I said, you did what? He goes, yeah, I can't eat anything, any mate produced by a mammal. Yes. I was like, yeah. So my buddy, he had it and my friend Evan. So he had it for a little while and then he did a bunch of treatments and got off of it and then started eating steak again. And he was fine for about a year and a half and then it came back stronger than ever. And he just can't shake it. He came around like so. Yeah, he can only eat eggs. I mean, he's basically eating eggs and vegetables. That's always eating. Every time he tries to deviate, he has a horrible reaction. It makes for people that don't make sure body allergic to red meat. Right. And who has got genetically made mate now? Yeah, Bill Gates. Bill Gates. Yeah, well, they're doing things with mosquitoes and they're doing, they're messing around with nature in a way that no one's giving you permission to. The general public does not want you doing this. They could vote on it. They'd say no way. You can't. It's like those bagels that they share that phalgae hagger up in bagels. There's a best dogs ever. And my buzz was his cavalier mix, but he was what we think I'm not really sure, but he was a rescue dog. And that board thing had never been on grass. And I see those dogs acting just like poor buzz. He couldn't climb stairs. And he was mistreated. He can't hear very well. And he's the sweetest ad gum dog though. And those freaking bagels. I just ripped some hard up because right now I've talked to scientists in the labs and they've everything we can do now we can do in the lab without pretty much without cruelty. Without cruelty without bringing in bagels and why bagels? And the whole thing just thing just disgusting. It's very evil. I mean, look, I don't even like when they do it with rats. But doing it with puppy. And in bagels and wild bagels and the whole thing just This is very evil. I mean, look, I don't even like when they do it with rats. Yeah, but doing it with puppies is insane. And then euthanizing them after you've forced them to be mystery horrible. Yeah, he did some evil stuff. He's any light, like clearly live. I remember the American people about transmission. Lied to the American people about preventing infection. I can remember when they brought him to Congress. And I brought him into a meeting I was in. And I was in the back. He's a little short guy. And I was like, who the heck is that? And he said, it's fauci. And they brought me in and everybody started cheering. I thought I had a bad buy-bonding then. And then you talked to gay folks. You know, he was involved in that. Mm-hmm. A-Z-T. Yeah. Yeah. They got a bad feeling towards him. Sure. I mean, he's the culprit. He's the villain in the movie, The Dallas Buyers Club. That's about him preventing people from taking alternative medications. That sound familiar? Yeah. Exactly what they did right now. Right now we're doing it. I was in Blunt County yesterday for a police officer's memorial service. And officer came up and said, you know, my child is suffers from a rare disease. And we can't get to this treatment. And can you can you put a bug in the president of law? Sure. You know, we'll try. But in Trump's doing that a lot now with an RFK. Yeah. RFK Jr. People, they'll try to trash him. And that's fine. He's a tough guy. But he, a lot of those trials now are going forward, cancer and other things. Yeah. And that's another reason they don't like Trump. And you talk about, I mean, you've got big pharma. You've got big agriculture. And, you know, a couple others. And they run the table. Yeah. They run the table. And they, I told somebody, you know, and of course, big energy oil, you know, we get zero. I know it's a commodity. And I'm going to get lit up that oil's a commodity. And it, you know, the world market. But we get zero oil from Iran. Zero. We export oil right now. And yet the price is going through the roof. It's going through the roof because it can. They can. And I always say, well, how does that gasoline in the pumps go up? That's been in the, they've already been processed. Already been paid for, how does it go up exponentially just overnight? 20 cents a gallon or whatever. And how does that? And if that's, because it's a commodity and virtue, you don't understand, how come that quarter oil that you at the hardware store doesn't go up like that? Wouldn't it? It's processed oil, wouldn't it do the same? And of course, diesel is your first cut, I think, is carosene. Then it's diesel and diesel. And I've got a diesel doodly. I filled it up yesterday is over $100. You know, it is the cheapest, it is the roughest cut. You know, that's why you have these credible filters because it's dirty. And gasoline is the third or fourth cut. And it ought to be the most expensive, but it's not. I just think it's a racket. And every time they out, they'll hold the hearings and they'll come down there and, you know, and the oil company's all in other shape that money tree. I had to do it on both sides of the aisle. It happens all. I remember when Bush was leaving office before Obama took office where gasoline just went through the roof. The price, everybody was freaking out and no one could explain it. And it was just, I was like, look, they can. This is like the last chance they can to just jack up the prices, jack up the profits, hold everybody hostage, you have to get gas, you got to drive to work. Got an old man in the White House. Yeah. And they just jacked it up. It's pay off time. Yeah. I just, it is at eight on an animal capitalist. I'm a heartless capitalist. I make skateboards. Um, and I make skateboards. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's cheaper than psychiatrist. I guess I'm a little bit like Trump. I like catch up on my steak, although I think he gets his well done. I get my medium rare. But you put catch up on your steak. You should go to jail. There's a Baptist church. Got a bus. That's too. They do. And they're terrible. Anyway, no, I make skateboards. So I make this crazy skateboard for, um, for, um, Tulsi Gabbard. She's a buddy of mine. She's, she's, she's kind of a. I love her. I love her too. She is wonderful. And she's from Hawaii. So in Trump's first, there it is. Okay. I made that skateboard. You put it, skateboard. Yeah. I put my sticker on it. It's made out of bamboo oak and banana fibers off the banana plant. Oh, wow. And, um, and she, she outs me during the, um, Trump's first, there's my guys at Pluto sports. They put my wheels and trucks on. It's just a, they're guys I was in high school with. Um, but anyway, yeah. Oh, yeah. But I don't do the fancy stuff. I do tricks and not anymore. I'm 61 dude. I don't feel like I did when I was 51 much less than I was a young man. You're only a few years older than me. Well, you look good. Thank you. Sorry, man. I'm just, you know, people think I'm on steroids, but I'm naturally this huge. So, so you see, it tells us he's his virtue. I said, Hey, Tulsi, she says, she's walking into the state of the union cameras. People are in, where's my dad comes skateboard? My birthday's next month. I'm like, oh, so I make her this skateboard, right? And that picture comes out. And then people all over the world are saying, where can I get a birch at board? Where can I get a birch at board? So I'm Mr, you know, I'm trying to be ethical and, you know, and I, I want, I go down to see the ethics guy in this little attorney tells me he says, well, Congressman, you know, you got a, you can't do that. He can't call it a birch at board. You can't, you know, I said, well, my wife's got own the company. And they think, well, maybe. And then you, but you can't work there and all this other stuff. And you know, everybody down there's got a side hustle. Right. And I've said, dude, so you're telling me I can do the insider stock trading, but I can't sell a dad comes skateboard. And they got said, that's correct. So anyway, I got about 35 skateboards in my barn. I just keep making them. And I call my attorney making myself. Yeah. Yeah. I saw say it's cheaper than psychiatrists. So you make them by hand? Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. You know, I have a, that's pretty cool. I make them, I'm cheap. But so I make them out of a bamboo that I cut, uh, buddy, my Chris pointers got a bunch at his house. But I go to the synagogue, behind the synagogue on Kingston Pike, there's a bunch of manboons. They used to let me cut it now, but when this air is, they probably won't. But, um, and then I get oak pallets and, um, in banana fibers, they grew off the banana plant. So but anyway, I grew up. You're a laminated all? Yeah. Well, I used fiberglass with that. And I'm trying to get away from the carcinogens, you know, the cancer causing. So I use a type one, three glue. It's waterproof and water based. And then, um, and then I just sand them all down. And because, you know, you scuff them up after your ride them around anyway. So anyway, so I might come out of that and I laminate the wood and, um, my local, the steel labors, um, they needed a project one year when I was my Ernox County. And I, and somebody said, hey, they want to, these guys want to make a skateboard press. They said, do you want one? I said, yeah, I'll buy the metal. And I'm thinking, you know, they're going to build me this little thing. No. I mean, it's like three barley union metal workers have to put this thing in the back of my deadgum pickup truck. It is a monster and it, um, and I can press them. But, um, and I've got clamps. I do all of it. But anyway, that's pretty cool. Yeah. But I can't sell them. I got my wife's like, what are you doing out there? And I said, well, come up there and look at my boards. Anyhow, make them skateboards. And I'm saying, and she always there. Yeah, that's one I, that's this one I laminated up. But, um, oh, it's side laminated, but my wife always says, honey, you go to it. She says, I'm sure they laughed at the guy that created the pool noodle. That's her line. Holly's like, you know, probably right. Kelly said, Joe, yeah, yeah, it's just a piece of insulation off some old rental house. And he threw it in the, his kids were swimming with it. And he thought, man, I'm going to take that 12 cent piece of foam, take it to Walmart and sell for $6 a piece. Now he's probably sitting on some islands and we're laughing at it. Right. But no, I make them and I've been trying to anyway, it's very frustrating. I got a meeting with the attorneys and the chairman of the ethics committee who is a really good guy. And I came to Congress together and we're trying to work it out. So it's not even that it's a lot of money in handmade skateboards. Look, the fact that you get of insider trading, you can't sell handmade skateboards is, that's ridiculous. A little ridiculous. It's also, it's like what, what? Because you're famous because you're on television. Well, my name's gonna, yeah, I was gonna sway my vote because they bought a deadgum skateboard from me. I took one to an auction and I think somebody paid $5,200 for one of those decades. Whoa. And then some other guy has to come up and says, Tim, I was at the bar and I missed it. If I give him $5,200, you make me one. So I got a couple and then my friends in Clyburn County, the mountains up there, they chair the committee and they asked me to, so I thought I was making one and then I got out there, I was making three. So I don't know. You people just like them and they put them on their wall. I mean, you know, you're not gonna be in the Olympics with Tony Hawks, not gonna go, hey, Tim, bro, you make me a board, you know, but it's, it's just for cruising down the sidewalk kind of thing. That's awesome. That's awesome. It sucks that they won't let you sell it though. Yeah. You sell yourself, but I can't sell a skateboard. Speaking of selling, you were telling me earlier before we started and I said, save this, because I want to talk about this later. Yeah. Tim gets how many millions of dollars a week? About $40 million a week. At all, happened, I was on a podcast and they were talking about it and Sean Ryan and he had, I love that dude. Yeah, great American. I love him. Good man. He's a good Christian man. He's been through it. You know, he's an incredible guy that they've asked to do horrible things and people like that, I give them a wide path. I let them slide on a lot of things. But he's a good daddy and, you know, he just, and he worries about our country. Reminds me a lot of my dad because dad was, you couldn't wake my dad up to the day, dad over the top of him, always buys big toe because he might wake up on one of those islands. Pinn me against the wall. Right. His marine on Pelleu and Okinawa and daddy's colonel was a guy named Chistipolar, Colonel Puller. He was a marine quartile legend, but in my daddy loved him. But anyway, the, I'm on this podcast with Sean and he says, hey, I want you to introduce Eli Crane. He's a, excuse me, Navy seal in Congress. He said, I want you to go on this podcast with Sean Ryan. I said, I don't know who Sean Ryan is. I don't, I'm not a podcast guy. I don't, my daughter always give me your phone. You know, I don't know how to do it. And obviously I got a cool picture of her on there. I don't even know how she did it. So I'm on there and, and he calls me and says, I want you to meet with this guy. He goes by the name legend. And that's not his real name. But he comes up, he comes into the office and he has to, he can't use his real name. And, and says, look, they're getting $40 million a week. I said, who he is. He said the Taliban. And he's a, he's a, F.G. It fought for us. And so he's dual citizenship. Enter, you know, talks to the pro, last democratically elected president of Afghanistan through him on a, on a call. And, and he's a dear friend. And he comes by all the time and we talk. And so John Stout in my office, who's like, he's the best. I mean, this guy, his mom and daddy were in a very tragic car accident. They prayed through it and, and they both lived. I mean, daddy had to get, you know, he was, he was banged up. His mom was head, got banged up pretty bad. And John's just, he's, he is the quintessential staffer because he's so loyal and he loves this country. And so he said boss, I think I got an idea. I said, all right. So he figured it out this monitoring thing where what they do is they, they send, they send pallets of cash to them through whatever. And they, there's three banks and over there that are owned by the Taliban. And everything goes through them. You know, the Lord takes 10% with tithe and, but the Taliban takes a hell of a lot more. They take it right off the top and on anger, s and egress. If you give them money or take money away, if you spend money or put money in or whatever, you take in or pay out, they get their cut off of it. Every dad come time. And so I'm thinking this can't be right. I got a memo on my desk from the State Department. It's stamped classified. So I can't talk about it. But then it stamped unclassified under it. So I can talk about it. And it basically said under the Biden administration, they think we gave them five billion dollars with a B five billion dollars. Now, and you've got NGOs now, many NGOs you think operate out of over there over a thousand. And then you throw in the United Nations. And the out of Afghanistan. Yeah, it's just a thousand NGOs. It's a freakiness. It's the biggest scam. NGOs, I wrote a letter to the president months ago and they've tapped the brakes on the NGOs. I mean, some of them don't have any money and some of them got a lot. But Elon Musk told me, like I really know him, I mean, I hung out with him a couple of times and we talked, called me Tim, which I thought was pretty cool. He says, Tim, here's how these NGOs work. He said, they start out as a good organization, maybe during Bush Warner Bush two, a lot of those limousine liberals do good or they start these organizations. And they set them up and to feed the starving children or whatever. Well, they don't have any money in them. And some billionaire who we all know, you can just name them, they'll drop a million in one of those. And then this unelected bureaucrat in Washington, D.C. says, hey, they got a million dollars in places legit. And so they give them money. They put the money in there for them. And then they start running federal money through that years and my tax dollars. And he told me things they stole over a trillion dollars. I thought, at the time, I thought that was crazy. But then I start looking at what happened in Minneapolis, Minnesota, 19 billion. So when I went to state legislature, our state budget of Tennessee was at $19 billion years ago. And so it's a lot more than that now. But that's the amount of fraud and waste and abuse that go on. Well, so backtrack to this deal. So I get involved with it. And it's just unbelievable. It took me two. I passed the bill twice. And the second time my buddy John Stout in the office there, he comes up with even stronger for a version. And so we send it to the Senate. And so we find out that there's a Senate staffer that somebody said he's like the unofficial ambassador to Afghanistan. He's literally read where he said it appears to me complimentary things about the Taliban. Those people want to kill us. As I say, they'll hate us for free. We don't need to give them any money. Well, it's like pulling teeth through my committee, the Democrats raised Ruckus. And because obviously they don't want anybody looking at those NGOs. And the NGO money, now get this. It may be a little bit goes to feed some starving kid. But a lot of it gets washed and it goes back to the good old United States of America. Are you familiar with dark money and campaigns? Yes. And I'll folks back home the day before the election. The people for American justice approved this ad. Did you know Tim Burchitt pushed his second grade girlfriend down in a mud puddle and never apologized? That's what happened. And then paid for by the people for American justice. And then what's happening is that money that you're sending over there is coming back in the former dark money. And I think both parties are involved with it at some point. I think the Democrats have had a run of it. And they've got it pretty much closed. They've got a pretty good market going on it in my opinion. And there were probably some Republicans, I think I know of, that have some dark money too. And not necessarily from this, but from other things. And then you start talking about the UN. The UN is got. And everybody, so as you in, Burchitt, we don't have a heck. We don't. And the response of the freaking UN, if it was up to me, I'd pull out of the dad company. And they are nothing. All they do is get Americans killed. They talk ugly about us and they take our dad, come money and we let them do it. Because crooked politicians are in bed washing it is crooked as the dogs like Joe. And this bill makes them report it and follow the money. So we know where it's going. And if it's going to the Taliban, it's out. And you just explained to me how they would justify sending money to the Taliban. And what is the circumstance? Like how they justify it by saying it doesn't happen. I justify it by saying it doesn't happen. But I'm talking to a guy that's got legend who's got people on the ground. And the people over there, the freedom, I say, and please quit sending them money. And when we left over there, we left how many billions of dollars worth of armaments on the ground. And they said, oh, I mean, I heard Democrats saying, well, those people can't fly those high-end choppers. Well, you know who could? The dad gum Chinese who were on the ground before we got out of there. So it's just a crooked game. It's a small portion. I know. But explain. How's the money getting to them? OK. It is sent to them through these NGOs and other organizations. And so we fund the NGOs. Correct. The NGOs send money to the Taliban. Why would they do that? Because they get a cut off of it. They don't care. OK. So the Taliban gets $40 million and then they send that money back. Some of it comes back and some of it doesn't. But as long as they get a piece of it, they don't care how much the Taliban gets. This requires a report on any cash assistant programs in Afghanistan and how the US keeps the Taliban from assessing that. And it requires a report on the Afghan Fund and the Afghanistan Central Bank. These reports, of course, would shed light on the Taliban's influence over the Afghanistan Central Bank. And you can research it. A lot of it is these do-gooder programs. Oh, man, we're taking care of the orphans. We're taking care of this. And you know good and well, they ain't taking care of any dad gum orphans. They're stealing the money to do it. And it just infuriates. And then I hear them say, well, it's not happening. I say, well, it's not happening. Then dad gum it past the bill. What's it hurt? What's it hurt? Worthful legislation every dad gum day. And I can't get a peep. I said to Thon when he came in when King Charles was, which was kind of funny to, had funny conversation King Charles. By the way, no kings. I'm not a king. Yeah. What about that? I was getting a bunch of things. What the heck? I got pictures of those. There's a picture of me. I did a video on my ex account at Tim Burchard. See how I threw that plug in. But Central Bank of Afghanistan said it received another injection of $40 million in cash this week. And this is literally $100 bills in stacks. Is that real? Is that what? Is that a stock photo or is that them showing a photograph of the money they received? Because I can't imagine they're sending bricks of cash. Oh, yeah. Absolutely. It's pallet. It's called a pallet of cash. What? I'm reading through this explanation of it from these reports. It's he's saying exactly what these are all saying. But this is a lot of. And I'm not as, look, explanation in here. I got a mutual fund. I don't understand all the money. When I see her $40 million going overseas. But in cash, too, is crazy. There's no risk of it. Take it and divvy it up. The print it every day. The print it every day. The print it every day. And it's responsible for purchasing, transporting, and transferring at least $2.9 billion in US currency to Afghanistan. And this is from 2024, I think, when this was printed. So that they have to find the cash on, you know, call your senator and say, I want this to add bills on the floor. It's crazy. It's past the committee. And it was like pulling to eighth. It was because apparently I offended somebody, which I'm sure I did now. But I don't understand why anybody wouldn't recognize that giving money to an organization that hates us. A fundamentalist religious organization that not a religion. They're not a religion. They're a culture. Yeah. Whatever you want to call it. Since its first cash shipment, UN has made at least 80 purchases of cash for transport to Afghanistan, 80, 80 purchases of $40 million. The UN reported that it began purchasing and shipping cash because of Afghanistan's banks inability to participate in international wire transfers. And Afghanistan's lack of domestic currency circulating throughout its economy. Oh, so we got to help them out and get $40 million a week. Yeah. And people are getting kids are still starving. And the little orphans aren't being prepared. And they're still throwing gays off of buildings and poking little girls out. They're getting the closet. They're getting the closet. They got to be in the closet. They are in the closet. There's a lot of that. A lot of pedophilia. I have some buddies that served them. Yeah, I guess a horrible story. Skazz wanted to, yeah, I was going to frag after any general or something one time. He told me and he used to work for him. And he had mental issues over it. Oh, it's horrible. Yeah. I've heard horrible, horrible stories. It's my dad wouldn't go back to Okinawa because if I can digress quickly, Daddy went back for the 50th anniversary of invasion of pillow. And he said, I said, you can go back to a 50th because, you know, those Marines, that's not all those guys are left. You know, and they're all gone now. But he said, I ain't go back to Okinawa. And he said, he told me this story. He said, they came over this hill. And of course, they are caught a bunch of Japanese out in this field. He's called, dad called it a lucky strike. They'd love a course. They had thing to do. They died over 400 miles an hour and just lit them up. Caught them out, obliterated them. They run up on them. And they had been raping some of the islanders or Korean girls that they'd collected. And I think that mess with my dad on the hall. The stuff he saw blowing caves and shooting people up close. And that's what he said, I won't go into it because I got a daughter that's going to be watching this thing. But it was, and that's what scarred my daddy. You had a loved him. He was my buddy. Chris Agrady got a accurate for Christmas when it was a bright red acuer. And, you know, Acrid is not made in America at the time. And dad goes, hag? He says, my daddy was a dean at UT, dean of student countries. Where's that thing made? And he goes, I reckon it's made in Japan, CB. And dad goes, I reckon you're going to be parking that thing out in the street. Daddy just went back to the kitchen, and I went out and moved his acke hours of the street. There was nobody messed up my dad. He was, I remember the neighbor one time. He comes over and said, somebody's in my house. And I was like, what? And I'm downstairs. And I run upstairs and dad runs by me with a browning high power. I mean, he's probably 70 years old. And he was clearing that house. He ran in that house and I remember on the phone and he said, don't shoot my husband. He's in a blue powder leisure seat. Oh man, he was something else. He was, yeah, mama was something else too. They were, they were real Christian. So they weren't bumper sticker kind of Christians. I would, to this day, I don't like, I love the Waffle House. You know, it's America's premier steakhouse. And I go in there and I don't, I don't like eating breakfast food any other time than at breakfast because I can always remember as a little boy. Daddy would always pick up some of my own interstate. Some might broke down black folks, white folks, you know, anybody. And we're at some UT student that was having a little rough go and bring him to the house. And there wouldn't be enough hamburgers for me, my brother, sister. And I know the five of us. But mama could make enough breakfast. And I always knew that he brought somebody home and we were going to be, we're going to be breakfast for supper. And that always took me off as a kid, you know, I didn't understand at the time. But now I realize I had pretty cool parents. So that's awesome. Can I show you a cool picture of my mama? Sure. She flew an airplane during the second World War. She was, I was hanging out with kid rock one time and I'm going to use a little language here, Bobby. And I said, I know your thing is you're the American badass. I said, but I was raised by the American badass. It's not pictures that on Pella, and O'Connell, and with his stomp and submachine, and stuff. Here's my mama. So my colorizes, she's just a little country girl. And flying an airplane during the second, her brother Roy, who was 33 years old, got killed in the hedge rows. Wow. She's a beautiful woman. They colorize that. It's crazy. And I'm an independent mama's boy. That's a crazy picture. Yeah. And I'm going to put you in my daughter. We were at the air show, and the guy had a biplane over there. And he wasn't going to. There it is. That's the one. Oh, thank you, Jamie. You're the man. But that's in Nashville. And somebody, it was National Women's Aviators Day, and everybody's showing all these pictures of these women. And I said, well, I'm going to have to one up y'all. And I put that up there. And somebody sent it to me. I didn't know just a supporter, not even in my district. And they colorized it for me. Wow. And that company that I can't read the name off of all the parachute, but I think they're still in business. And they didn't know that was in Nashville. You could see it. They're on dirt. And the crazy thing was when she qualified, I don't know how long you got to fly with an instructor before you solo. Well, they messed up. And they did it. And they did the math wrong on it, which was crazy. Because mama was a math teacher. But she was a country girl. And she was in it for the fight. And she's a lot like my wife. My wife is a fighter too. You don't even get between her and anybody in her family. But mama, she soloed in half the time that she was supposed to. And the wars going on. And I've still got her little log book. And they tried to redo the math on it. And it was wrong. But mama just said, yeah, I bet she cleared out a fence row when she landed. And she was pretty cool. It's got to be in a terrible slap in the face of these people that served in Afghanistan to find out that the Taliban's getting hurt. My buddy, like her, I just look over him. And he's one beautiful human being. I love you, like her. And he is my buddy. And lone survivor, Marcus Lattrell. Yeah, his brother is Morgan. Morgan. Yeah, he's the catcher on our baseball team. And I was out there, Linda. We don't actually practice in the best part of town. And but we've got security everywhere because when they shot Scalise and all those guys years back, we've got a very secure and her just pop pop pop pop pop. And this young officer, they see officer said, capital police were said, it's okay, guys. I think it's fireworks. And Morgan took his hat off and goes, barge it. That was gun fire. And I thought, I'm going with what Morgan says. Yeah, I know what this guy bears. They didn't refer to shot nagger. And I love those guys. They're wonderful people. And I do too. I hurt for my daddy because he would, he talked about China. They went to China after the war and he fought the communist over there for a short while. And then before he left the Marine Corps, but how we just turned him over and that he would talk about that. And he would, he would be visibly upset and walk away because of that. You know, these, we just, we want to get these wars over and we don't, we don't deal with the repercussions. We don't deal with repercussions of we got warriors that we need to heal. And we got to, you know, and, and it's just very frustrating to me. Yeah. Well, you know, kudos to Trump for passing this psychedelics. Oh, good, gosh, I saw you on that. I love that. I talk, cause I didn't know anything about it. And I asked, I asked some of those guys about it before. And they said, oh yeah, barge, it's one of one member confided in me that he, you know, he'd been in some of the mess. And he, and I, and I told him, I said, you know, my daddy was head anger issues and stuff. He never beat mom or may or anybody, but how could you not? No, I know how could you expect. That's the crazy thing. I expect this a people to do horrible things and to see horrible things and to come back and just go to the grocery store. Yeah. Just be normal. Yeah. Just sit and traffic, be normal. I remember one time we were at a UT football game and I was a little boy. I must have been four or five. And dad, we were on the 50 yard line. It was in the 60s and they let you bring these cowbells. And it was the last game they let you bring cowbells to. I don't even probably do it now, but back then they, they, and so this guy was sitting behind us and he was drunk and he, and he took the Lord's name and vain. And my daddy said, hey, he said, we got ladies down here. You know, my sister who was probably seven or eight and, and my mama was there. And the guy said, okay, and then the guy spilled his drink on my dad. And my mama grabbed a sawless kids and just rushed us out. And I remember it. I was like, no, what's daddy doing? You know, and the UT cops, they love my daddy because he was being a student conduct. He always backed them up and they come running down the aisle and literally my dad would beat these guys. I asked all three of them right there on the 50 yard line at Neelon Stadium. And I was just a little boy and I was like, he didn't. And they come running down the aisle and literally my dad would beat these guys I asked all three of them right there on the 50 yard line at Neeland Stadium and I was just a little boy and I was like you didn't give high fives back then but I had I would have given them because he was He was pretty incredible guy Well guys been to war like that man had and come back and And it wasn't any different than thousands of other of his buddies You know they would get together and talk about stuff and and I you know We didn't drink in the house my mom and daddy didn't let me have a beer King collection And daddy's buddy Red Welch came over and Red drank beer at the dinner table and it was in the 80s I was in I was gosh, I was getting ready to go to college and that was still no beer in the house and Red was drinking beer and I said daddy I said what's the deal with a red drinking beer and he said buddy He said you get pinned down on one of them islands and you got you know you're gonna get you're gonna Leave this earth pretty soon. There's one guy that comes running for you He can do pretty much whatever he wants to in your house and that was red I found an old bitch or him and daddy and John of the other day, but yeah daddy had um Had a great life though. He had a great life him and mom are both buried at veteran cemetery there in Knoxville And you know to this day I'm 61 years old and if I go up there I think about them in their sacrifice and I cry like a baby because I go to that capital Joe and I see people just That are just gonna throw it all away throw it all away and to me that's just that's that's his unforgivable unforgivable well, I'm very happy that some of these people that have experienced these horrible things have At least a pathway to relief now. Yeah, and that is and thank you for getting involved brother That is that was huge. Well, I couldn't see that Eric do what thank Rick Perry Yeah, yeah, Brian Hubbard because if it wasn't for them explaining to me what they've been through and how it's Help people and all the other people that I know like Marcus Lattro's a friend They didn't want to happen I talked to everybody and they said it wouldn't happen if it wasn't been for you you use that microphone for for good And I appreciate it because a lot of people aren't but I'd never asked them for anything Up until that moment and also like if there's a thing that I could do that might make the world a little bit of a better place and The fact that those things were made illegal in the first place is just ridiculous It should have never happened. They should have been studied and we could understand how they could help people especially when you consider how many people are on antidepressants in this country Tim Walsh's daughter The guy who was running for vice president his daughter just made a post on social media where she was talking about She's been on him for 15 years and she's realizing that they're a real problem and she every time she's tried to get off It's been devastating. Yep, and I know people that have also been on them that they try to get off them like my friend Three of on and the roof falls off and like Every time he starts talking about something that drives him crazy I just got to kind of rain him in and just like calm down like You know if you've had friends take their lives and I've had a few I've had quite a few It's it's a horrible feeling when you think about it and you go what could I have done? What could I have said how could I have and so much so we don't know My oldest friend in the world got named Scott Davis He and our little red schoolhouse together his his brother took his life and he was Separate from depression and this was in the 80s and we didn't understand it, you know I was with a guy yesterday one of his best friends have been testament he was telling me You know I talked to him. You know we came home He was he was a professional tennis player and he came home and was talking to Jeff and he said you know He said I just feel like I'm in a hole and nobody gets that and and people will say to him I hear people all the time say say hey Just get over it man, you know go for a job And there's some freaking chemical imbalance that we don't know something has happened That's jarred them that we don't understand and that is if if there's one avenue it gets it You know and but big farmer again big ag big farmer. It's right ham. Yeah, why the hell are we not going him? Right, it just drives me crazy It drives me crazy as well. It doesn't make any sense Especially when you find out all the stuff that is legal. It's like yeah Have some consistency. It doesn't make any sense how many people do we lose every year and a lot of my friends are in the alcohol business But it's a personal responsibility issue with me You know if you do it, it's your business, but if you break the law. Yes, you know you're going to the hooch cow Yeah, and listen, I'm not a big drinker But I think you should be allowed to drink I think I don't think there's anything wrong with being allowed to smoke cigarettes So that's what you want to do you should be able to do it I believe in freedom But I don't I think we should be consistent and the fact that there's these things that could help people that are suffering from depression that are suffering from opioid addiction that are suffering from all sorts of PTSD and CTE and that we have this thing that we've known about for decades and the only person that had the courage To try to push an executive order as Trump and if I again help that again He is he is enemy number one with a lot of those people well I mean thank God He's got the kind of courage that he has to push stuff like that through because it's good It's gonna change a lot of human lives a lot of veterans lives a lot of first responders a lot of police officers a lot of people that have experienced violent crime It's just it's gonna change a lot of people women that have been abused. Yes, and They're not like gonna be walking around like some kind of crazy zombies thing It's a it's a very controlled thing and especially I've again I've again is not recreational in any shape or form no one's taken it recreationally I've never done it But I've heard it's a terrible experience, but you come out on the under end of it and Rick Perry was also talking about how he's experienced natural brain atrophy being a man in his 70s Yeah, he went and got an examination after he did it and his brain atrophy had dropped by 25 percent He went back in six months later was all gone just that alone Wow think about all the elderly people out there that are suffering for memory loss and all these different issues that people have That that could fix them and that it's literally just one experience that you have that takes 12 hours and when it's over You're better. That's crazy and then we've kept this from people. There's no chance of people being addicted the money Time we've got to be human. Oh, I've always money people have to realize you're only have a certain amount of time on This planet and you have an opportunity to make the world a better place and we got to say no to people that just want personal money they just want personal Funds that're going to go to their money that's going to go to their bank accounts going to go to their company their corporation Personal benefit and at the expense of who knows how many people including literal heroes When's enough enough for those guys? Yeah, when is enough enough? I mean this is the same feeling that I have about this disclosure stuff Like I don't care what it's gonna affect. I don't care like if there is real things out there That we don't know about you as a human being have no right to keep that from the rest of humanity There's I don't care what your title is. I don't care what three-letter organization you work for You're a human being and you have an obligation to the other human beings to alert us In fact, there's people that have if this is real and there's people that have gone to their grave with this information that would literally change the course of human history That's a crime. It's a real crime. Could you imagine The poor countries the people itself you know the deserts and things like that if you could you could cool their Huts or whatever right and we get out of these worthless wars which are overall all the time right and it just it would end it all and just Stroke of the panel host. What do you think it is like when I? I've I go back and forth I know it's a little crazy and this will probably cost me election because they've tried to use it against me in the past people only help you at this point Well, I think I think we need to look at these deep water areas I have a hard time believing that something can travel light years and some suspended it after being some kind of suspended state So I have a trouble with that Those five gentlemen that came to my house four or five that came to my house that time They were talking about a moon It was around Saturn or Jupiter that they've done some testing with that they that they think would be capable of something In the moon was larger than earth of course, but There's a moon is larger than our earth. Yeah around Jupiter or Saturn. That doesn't make any sense. I don't think that's correct Maybe I'm wrong check it out. No, no, no, there's no moons that are larger than a planet No, it's not only things so our planet. Well, I don't believe that's true circles around it. I don't know anyway Is that accurate? Do I not know about this? Yeah, but I don't believe there's a moon out there that's larger than our planet These guys seem to think that something could travel from there and it was the quantum physics I've you know after talking to that admiral You know it makes me wonder if there is something in these deep ocean areas. They'll cliche We know more about the surface of the moon then we do the surface of the ocean floor and some areas I think it's true because well, we're not down there logically This is that's the one place where we don't go and it covers 75% of the earth at least right If you wanted to hide that would be yeah, but it's I mean if you were monitoring humans let's say that humans are on this path of technological evolution and then they recognize that humans have split the atom We've developed atomic weapons and we've used them and they want to make sure that we don't blow up the entire planet before We achieve some sort of enlightenment before we bypass whatever territorial prime-ate Monkey brain stuff that we have that's causing us to have all these wars and do all these things that we shouldn't be doing Stupid stuff We're on our way. We're getting better. We're clearly better than we were a thousand years ago and better than we were three thousand years ago We're on our way to being a more advanced civilization But it's possible that we could screw it all up at any point in time and blow ourselves to smithereens I would imagine they would want to monitor us one maniac in our end Yeah, if they hadn't had stop that they're nuclear I'm convinced that they're I mean they were out for armageddon They'd launch something they had to keep buildings go all the way to England. I mean if they put one close to Israel It'd be over and you know people like North Korea who have terrible technology on missiles the biggest threat there was if they put one up in the air that the nuclear cloud could blow over China And so there's that could have had some incredible bad repercussions Well the fact that there's so many different countries that have nuclear weapons and we're just relying on these people to keep their shit together It's nuts. It's nuts. Yeah, and they're and they're mining acts Yeah, well, it's it makes sense that if you were a super advanced lifeform from wherever that if you wanted to have base Some sort of a base where you'd monitor us it would be in the ocean Well right there you could get out of it real quick and go to wherever you wanted to go Orbs was the thing I was thinking of earlier or worse. That's that's the new word that you hear a lot of It's getting away from saucers and well there's a lot of weird stuff with orbs of people say that they could summon them. Yeah I'm not on that there's someone a friend of mine wants me to go and do it with her She's my friend's wife is like experienced it. She's like you got to try it. I'm like, oh Now that to me. I'll say who it is when she comes on the podcast next I don't know. I don't know. I don't have permission to talk about it or she wants me to talk about it, but I'm like, okay What we got to do be careful about the sex cult angle well, she's not that's not more well I know you're good looking God. Yeah. No, no, no, she's not be digging you. No, no, no This ain't that this is not that she's been my friend for 20 years. It's not She's married to my friend. She's not saying the angle, but they use this lady's not there. She's a comedian. Okay. This is not that Is but there are a lot of cookie people that do have sex cults That the sex cult with every cult turns into a sex cult, right? Power you know I almost bought a building in Austin that was owned by a cult. No, really the original comedy mothership was the original location was a place called the one-world theater the one-world theater was owned by this cult and I'd kind of knew about it because Ron White told me about it because they had this theater that they built to So that their leader can perform in front of them and then the cult got disbanded the cult there's a documentary about the cult called Holy Hell and Yeah, it's crazy. It's crazy. It's correct But it's a sex cult. It was a guy who is a get this He started out in California and he was a gay porn star in a hip to test Which is a wonderful combination if you like he like you do yeah, and also a yoga teacher So he starts out teaching these people yoga and I don't have ever taken yoga before I Take it a bunch of yoga classes would bunch of different instructors and most of them have been amazing But a few of them were very Culty very culty and there's just one guy that I took classes from way back in the day like more than 20 years ago And he was in California and he was sleeping one of the bunch of the ladies that were there and he was kind of he was kind of like a cult guy Yeah, he was like her following him. Yeah, he was dragging to singing singing stupids songs But it was like very full of himself. It was gross. He was gross and you know everything line up falling apart for that guy But any ran for Congress and yeah But there's a lot of these people that for whatever reason that's where it all boils down to they want to have sex with Everybody's wife and they want to run into everything and they want you know run in the middle and type you know It's very strange But that's where the demonic stuff comes in with Christians when you call these things down They yeah, why do you think that that has to do with sex cult? Why would the aliens have to do with that? Whatever they say aliens I think it's I just think some people are abusing the people's They think that They're using their belief in UFOs to draw them in and to some sort of thing and have you knowledge of this kind of stuff Yeah, I get all of it. I hear about all of it. I mean name names can you talk about like not on the air? Okay, I don't want to get sued Okay So the underwater bases or the underwater listen This is when an admiral told me of this so did he say locations that are these things are coming from or is there an actual physical base that they've observed? he said that they They don't have the capabilities get down that deep actually But they did say that that the sightings were happening in about and and I think four of the five deep water areas around our world and So and he didn't have any other you know, and then I was on talking about it and somebody said Tim burch it says that they're underwater bases You know and and then You know and they had Gates was on the other day and he said he was he was briefed I just told what I was briefed on and he was briefed by a guy that said it was in uniform That said that they were breeding They were capturing people and breeding them with with these aliens and you know he just talked what so yeah He was on you can pull it up. I mean Matt gates he talked about it. He didn't say believed it But you know we talk about we get briefed on that's what I'm talking about the sigh up They here's part of the problem too They bring you information and you go forward with this and this is oh, this is the truth You know these underwater bases whatever and then They prove it doesn't exist and then they just discredit you and they discredit the whole movement So that's why I'm very cautious anytime anybody brings me any information or pictures or Testimony or you know third cousins recollection. Yeah, that is the disinformation thing is a problem They'll tell you some truth and mix it in with some really cookie stuff And then you say the cookie stuff along with it and the cookie stuff just discredits everything that's true. Yeah, yeah And Lazar talked about that too. He said they would Tell people certain things that weren't true and they would tell different people different things that weren't true So if the story got leaked out they would know who leaked it. It was like a hook So that anchor would be like oh that was Mike Mike told the story. That's what now Always warn our other members when we go into the skiff and talk about stuff that You know this First time I've ever heard that one or or that's that's sort of what we heard the last time and then I'd say everybody just be real careful with it because if it if it gets out Then they'll come after you or If they want it to get out so they can discredit you and make you look like a fool So they talked to you about deep water areas We're sightings occur and so it's just a presumption that somewhere in that deep water they're emanating from that they're well He also he described It is Gatt dates claims whistleblower told him of alien human hybrid program The alleged program evolved captured extraterrestrials mating with abducted humans from war zones and migrant Caravans to create hybrids for intergalactic communication He claimed the whistleblower identified between six and twelve such facilities in the US and sought coordinated congressional visits to prevent Relocation of the activities though gates did not verify any of the information. How could you? You're gonna talk to the hybrids I just want to go the t-shirt Yeah, the pastors thing that I sent you Jamie's. Yeah, that's bonkers. I don't think so. I don't buy that. I don't So this is a guy. It says his name is Alan Dido and It's weird capital D lowercase i capital D lowercase i Oh Dio After sitting in a private meeting with pastors and those connected to these investigations the message was clear UFO and UAP disclosure is coming pastures must prepare their people now Silence is not an option. Well, what does that mean? Like what are they preparing the people for? Like what why would they bring in pastors? I've never heard of you know These I think I think it is. I think if he had a broad anybody any Franklin Graham in is This gentleman a pastor himself click on his uh, yeah, you run well I mean he also has a show which is Of course he does. Oh, so his show is about disclosure revival nation church or something. No No, no that this is just what these clips are coming around. Can you click on his bio, please like what it clicks what it says a Quipping end time believers for the next great awakening. Oh boy I Want more than people that think we're in the end times the Bible is pretty clear about that It says that they don't even angels in heaven or even know when the end times are ends coming So yeah, well, that's I've always very suspicious of people that say the end times are coming I remember when we're I was living in LA there was a billboard Do you remember those billboards Jamie where there was like I was like saying a very specific date where the end was coming the rapture was gonna And then it didn't happen as I got got some bad information. It's coming soon. Yeah I did my math wrong. I remember I see those all the time. I just shake my head. So what happened Yeah, that's the guy made 21st 2011 cry mightily unto God judgment day. Oh boy And it's looking I look at the gold stamp the Bible guarantees it by the way I read the Bible. I've never read anything where there's guarantee of this day. Yeah made 21st 2011 Yeah, so when they tell you things is there anything that they tell you that you could tell us Like how much of what they told you is like completely top secret that you not allowed to say until they disclose it a lot of it a lot of it Yeah, there's anything that really disturbs you. Yeah, we had one meeting and it got into some Stuff that they were talking about and the treatment of people and The capabilities and this was the treatment of people by these supposed extra now by our own government But but that we're trying to come forward with this stuff, but also yeah, they told me some pretty creepy stuff So I would Again, yeah, I bring this out and then they're busted my ass for it But the what do you think is going on like be so I think it's a cover up. I think there's something else out there I do not think we're the best that God can do and I really just don't know Joe. There's so many options. It could be One of these groups that met with me. They they just grabbed several different Types of beings and they go through all of them. I'm you know how many different types of beings I don't know three four five. I don't know. I just change this. I don't I don't get caught up in that You know and I tell our guys I say look here's the argument just say I Just want to know what we're spending tens of millions of dollars on. That's all I don't care if it at it I don't it's not about little green man. It's not about fine sausages. What do we spend in this money on if they say they don't exist? That should be the answer a question and then in the answer will come from that. Okay, so if they do exist When you say you think it's a cover up. What do you think? I think I think I think well, I think they really do exist And I don't think that there's such a it's such a finite group of people that actually know it And and you got a lot of charlots and out there that say they know it and out there or selling membership of course, but I think there's Something to it. I'm always very suspicious of anybody who speaks definitively about something like that where you can't possibly know and Then they don't offer up any proof of this and they say well I've seen the pictures well bring in the dad gum pictures. Yeah, but I have seen some pictures And I've have seen video and I have what's the most convincing thing that you've seen? Those guys came out the house. I was pretty convincing. Yeah, that was before the Before the hearings that we had how clear was the video? Clears the screen. I mean, it was pretty clear Yeah, and that was pre AI I was such a new thing and then it fit in with what the tiktik videos were and the The heat signatures would always what I always thought was unusual because it had to have a heat signature, but it didn't Zero point energy whatever that is right and The just the quantum physics angle of it is mind blowing to me and you have no Knowledge of what's supposed to be released because it we're today's Wednesday. I'm gonna know tomorrow at three tomorrow at 3 p.m I'm the world knows now. I think they're gonna ask me just give me a little bit of it But I got a feeling they're not gonna tell me much. I don't feel they're not gonna tell America not much When is it supposed to be disclosed this week? Whatever the gun on I don't know. I don't know. I don't know But if they're gonna disclose it to us then it'll be out right as soon as they hang up the phone with some guys Do you feel an obligation if they don't release it to try to tell people what you know? I do I do I do I think it's Because I don't like it if they're lying to us and I Again, I don't think Trump knows I mean these people who kept this stuff secret. Oh, here's another thing I was in at one meeting and I guess it I said what about the president on this and he said the president's on the need to know basis Now that's a federal employee saying that he or she has Information that the president is not allowed to see and I Just was a gas man. I said, you know, you that's the kind of crap you see on some the sci-fi network or so, but that That'd be a title in my book. I mean that that that ought to tell you right there that that this thing is a cover up and I don't and It's kind of like MK Ultra. I don't think we're gonna get to they're not gonna tell us everything. I Really don't I don't think they're gonna give us Half of what we should get but you think we're gonna get something. I think we're gonna get something. Do you know how put off? You know how put off Do you know how put off? No, I know who is I'm just gonna I've actually got how put off you are No, no, I don't put off. I put off was in the documentary as well He was in the age of disclosure and he was a guest on the podcast and one of things that he told me is that during the Bush Administration they brought in him and a bunch of other scientists and thought leaders and What was explained to him was that they are considering disclosure and that there have been visits of These super intelligent beings from somewhere else that we have retrieved crashed Vehicles and that we have Biological remains and we are talking about disclosing we would like you To make a list of all the ways that it'll negatively affect society and all the ways that it'll positively affect society and attach a numerical value to these things and they all did it and every one of them said the negatives far outweigh the positives in terms of The impact on government the impact on the economy religion all the all these different factors and how that how would disrupt society and In the end they decided not to disclose. Yeah, I've heard that many times. I just don't buy me don't buy I don't buy I mean I don't doubt what he's saying. I know all those guys now She mentioned I was moving a course and I met them all afterwards But I don't I just don't buy that I think we should know Let us know let us decide. No, I believe that too But I I wonder what that meeting was like and whether or not They were being truthful to these people or whether was a thought experiment allegedly when they told Jimmy Carter he cried That's what I heard too. I was yeah, it was I Don't go in all that but I was in a meeting. What would make him cry? I don't know. I know he's very sensitive guy But I understand, but I mean he was also I probably want to saw old yellow. Yeah, I didn't too Still cry, but they he had seen a UFO, you know, he was on a Navy sub nuclear sub and I don't know if he saw that when he was on the sub or not. I can't remember But you know, here's a I've got me spreading United States and he they told them something and supposedly he cried and I was in the meeting and That was brought up and the guy that they were trying to trip up gave the date of that meeting and he said you can go to the Carter library and Pull up that date and you'll know there's one person they omitted their name Which who knows who that was but they list the the meeting and where he was when he got that that briefing Wow, so I don't know. I don't know. I don't know either. I don't know if that's true or not You know they also say Nixon pulled up one night to Jackie Gleason's and I know that story. Yeah Well, you know Jackie Gleason built that crazy house in upstate New York Do you know about that do not oh you don't it was for sale a while back? Jackie Gleason essentially built a UFO house it built a house that looked like a flying saucer. No, yeah Yeah, it was for sale fairly recently within last few years. That's the house. Oh crap That's a house Jackie Gleason built after supposedly Richard Nixon took him so supposedly the story was they were golfing out drinking and Richard Nixon's like hey You won't see some shit They took him to see this UFO Somewhere on some base. You know the story is very big It's hard to tell what what actually happened, but Apparently people that knew Jackie Gleason set up profoundly affected him and Jackie Gleason became obsessed with UFOs afterwards and he had this house built The shape of a UFO which is I mean not evidence, but weird. That's very weird weird. Yeah Nixon Nixon was a very serious guy that would have been a had a bit an interesting Yeah, scenario Indeed, but I I just wish they Show us everything. Yeah me too Well, we'll see we'll see what what comes out this week, but thank you very much for being here I really appreciate it was great to talk to you. I wish I could get you to move to East Tennessee Why? Well, we saved Texas a science man. You know, they'd be crocodile. Yeah, I mean crocodile in the day Yeah, he said he was in Congress and got bait. He was a state legislator and he got they got bait in Congress He said as for us. He's quote was that he's for me. He says for you are you can all go to hell as for me I'm going to Texas He goes to Alan on this kill, but he parlayed that into a Disney special so he kind of evened out Sort of sort of sort of I'm very partial Texas. Yeah. All right. We're low tax date. I know Texas I just love it here. I love a lot of things about tech. I love the people It's a fun place to be. Yeah, my buddy Chipper Roy. He's leaving. He's from down here a bunch of guys in Congress Are down here that are leaving and they go on to Tennessee? No, they're coming down here Oh, there's coming AJ down here, but no, they're all coming home. They're tired of Washington. Yeah Well, let's let your L told me I said why you leaving Congress day and he says once been time with my family my kids are growing up And I was like keen argue with that brother. Yeah, and the pressure of Congress the pressure of Washington DC is just so Odd I've only been there a couple times, but every time on there when I leave him like look it's like when I used to Yeah, he's to manage to do a guy in prison and when you leave Brush him out in state prison you know, I call it that institutional smell whatever they used to clean You know, he's managed to a guy in prison and when you leave brushing Mountain State Prison, you know, I call it that institutional smell. Whatever they use to clean that place, you just smell like it for you could smell it in your nose for days later and that's Washington DC. It's more of a filthy smell. Yeah, it's a weird place. I guess it's necessary, supposedly. But it's odd to visit. But I appreciate people with you. Thank you, brother. Thank you, and I appreciate you doing it right. Especially for our veterans and on disclosure and all the other hot button issues. And you got heckle fish right there. I do. Heckle fish. He said my wife on his show one time. Yeah, I love that show. He said my name one time. He said it wrong, but he's a Yankees, I guess it's okay. Yeah, it's like a bird's shat or something. Yeah. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Bye, everybody.