Go to the show, Rogan, experience. Train my day, Joe Rogan podcast, by night! All day! All right, bro. It's real, right? Nice to meet you, man. Yeah, good to meet you. Happy birthday. Thank you. How old are you? I'm 35. Wow, do you feel 35? I feel like after late 20s, I just kind of like, well, I got to check in every year to be like, we have all the money again. Yeah. So I'm not really, I guess. It's a strange time. 35. Why? Because you're kind of middle-aged. Yes. But you're young. Well, I was successful pretty early in my life, so I was always like the kid. I dropped out of college at 19. And so I worked in Hollywood. And so I was always like the youngest person in the room by far. And so that's not been part of my identity, but I felt it. What'd you do in Hollywood? Well, I dropped out of college. I worked at a desk in a talent agency. And then I started signing new media clients. And then very quickly it didn't work out. But you want to know. I'd so sure. So I was working for one of the reasons it didn't work out. I didn't work out because it was horrible life. And I don't know why anyone would want to have it. But I was working at this desk. I was insistent. And I was also a research assistant for Robert Green, 40-odds power guy. Sure. By the way, I brought you the new one from him. Oh, great. He signed it for you. Oh, that's awesome. Yeah. Robert's great guy. He's my favorite human being in the whole world. All right. Yeah, I want to be your favorite. Let's see. Well, no, so I was working for Robert. And I had the 40-odds of power on my desk because I was working on it. And one of the partners became convinced that I was up to shit. What? Yeah, yeah. He got in his head that I was not a threat, but I was someone to be suspicious of. And because he had the laws of power on your desk, yeah. It was the weirdness. It was ambitious. Like, well, yes. Yeah, it was wow. And I remember one time, the partner I worked for, he was always gone. And he never liked to be on call. So he had me on some call for him. And I was supposed to be feeding him info. You know, like when you're on the conference call, I was supposed to type him stuff. And you know, like you log into the call. And it's like, you're the seventh caller, but there's only supposed to be like six people on the call. And so the partner's like, someone else is on the call. Like who is on the call? And I was like, am I supposed to say something? Because like, I'm not supposed to be on the call. And I kind of froze. It's only like 20. And I froze. And who is on the call? Who's on the call? And I was like too late to say anything. Right. That's fine. I'm like feeling it like the nervousness. The nervousness. Really? Well, no, because it was so stressful. This is like, you know, this is like an already gold type. Right. And then all of a sudden I hear like foot steps down the hall. And it's like, he's assistant. And the assistant is like looking through the door and see, I'm like, oh shit, I hang up the phone. And then you know, it makes the noise. And then I hear like stomping down the hall. And he like bursts into the into the things. Like what the fuck are you doing? I knew you were up to something. Like I saw you reading that book, you know, and it's like this whole, he's just like screaming at me. And then like he could tell that I was like not scared enough. And so he, I'll never forget he grabbed the door and he slammed it and then opened it again and then slammed it. And then opened it again like just pure like physical intimidation. Like a champ banging sticks. Yes, exactly. And so I just got up and left and then I never went back. Oh my God. It was crazy. I dated a girl when I was like 27 and she was an assistant for an agent. And she would wake up in the middle of the night, terrified that she fucked something up. She would just have these like fearful moments. She worked 16, 17 hours a day for nothing. I mean, she, she got paid garbage money. And the whole idea was that like you're kind of interning slash working there and you were eventually going to get a career as an agent. So she worked for this guy who was just a complete asshole. Just fucking asshole to everybody who worked under him. It's the dumbest system in the entire world because like the person who is good at being an assistant and I was so bad at it and would put up with it for like five or six years is not the person that anyone would then want to be there. It's like filtering out for like pencil pushers and like nerds. Yeah. And like, you know, it's the craziest system. And that's why most agents are horrible is because they most people would get up and quit or just not be interested in it at all. It encourages abuse too because then you abuse if you ever get to that position where you're an agent and you get an assistant, you're just going to abuse them because you were abused when you were an assistant. That's just, it's a hazing ritual. Yes. And people who were hazed are very un you'd think you'd be sympathetic to people who were vulnerable, but it actually hardens you because you're like, well, I went through it. You have to go through it. How weird. It's awful. Well, it's a, it's a weird abusive system period from top down, from producers and directors to Tarantinos on the podcast. He was telling me about this famous producer who kept a bedroom in his office where he would take the starlets and he would, he would bang all the starlets. That power corrupts. Yeah. But I think back then it was unchecked. You know, now it's like it's the same guys are like terrified now. Yes. Like all those stories are resurfacing. Like that was that was the way women got roles. Like you had to sleep your way to the top. Like you literally had to do that. It doesn't seem that hard to not be a piece of shit though. But does it in a world where everyone's a piece of shit, like depending upon what, like there's different cultures of different, you know, businesses. And when you have a business like that where, you know, there's, one of the weirdest things about Hollywood is that there's literally people that just decide to pick you. And if they pick you, your life becomes your wildest dreams. You're in the cover of Vogue magazine. You're starring in a naction movie right next to the fucking, the biggest A-list celebrities in the world. You're fucking made it. You're at the Oscars accepting the award and thanking that person who points at you in the front row. and if they chose, if they choose you, if they don't choose you, your fuck, they is not a meritocracy. It's just not. You could see by like someone like Amber Hurge, it's not a good actress. But if you get into the right spot and you do the right thing and you fucking make the right noises, you can become famous and successful. I think any industry that has gatekeepers is inherently susceptible to being corrupted because those people have a certain unearned power. And they probably deep down know that they don't really do anything and that they're just like guessing, you know. And it's probably something in that too where you're aware of the inherent bankruptcy. We don't make anything. We don't do anything. And it probably goes to your head. You need distractions and stuff. Well, I think that's this is an interesting jump off point to talk about your work and your fascination with stoicism because what you're talking about there is like a truth. Like you're talking about like there's a reality to that job is that these people who are the gatekeepers like there's a lot of people that work in Hollywood that work as executives that are really not talented people and I've known them forever and I've seen them fail upwards. Like I've known them since I've been there so like 20, 30 years ago and they're still around and they were retarded then and they're stupid now. It's like they're the same person. It's like there's a reality to that. And one of the things that I think you're really that you highlight very well is the importance of reality, of dealing with things and of finding positives in any sort of, you know, the title of your book, the obstacles, the way. It's a great title because obstacles are very important and although they don't seem like they are when you know you're there, they don't seem like they're beneficial. They seem like it's just like at the end of the world and this is going to be horrible but there's some great benefit in difficult times and difficult things. Well yeah even when I was in Hollywood right so I have to walk out on this job I'm like fuck this is what I dropped out of college to do. Like this is not good. My entire life would have been different had that not happened to me. What did you want to do? I wanted to be a writer but I got this really good advice from a writer and he said writers live interesting lives so you have to like go do stuff, you have to be around people or you have to go get, you have to go earn having a point of view. You can't just get good at the craft of doing the thing. Obviously that's super important and that's why I learned from Robert as a research assistant like here's how books come together, here's the art of doing the thing but like if you don't have anything to say, right, you know. I was like okay I had this thing to chance to do this and then I went from there I worked it, I was the director of marketing in American apparel so I did like weird shit and I was around crazy people but all of that ultimately informed what I talk about but I knew I knew I didn't want to be a person who's just like taking a percentage of what other people do. I wanted to make stuff like I wanted to actually produce and create things so I knew I wanted to be a writer and when I first read the Stoics I was just like shit this is it like when I read meditations for the first time I was 19 I was sitting in my college apartment and I was just like not only if I never read anything like this I've never even heard of anything like this because you have the most powerful man in the world writing notes to himself that he never thinks are going to be published like pretty much every other book ever written was like a writer writing to an audience and meditations was never intended to be published, he'd probably be mortified that we even have it and so it was just a kind of philosophy and a way of thinking that I hadn't heard in any school, you know, in any class, from any adult in my life and I was like I want to tell people about this. Marcus Aurelius, one of the more interesting things about this stuff that he writes is how relevant it is today. Like when you read it you wouldn't imagine this is being written by a man like how many years ago was that? 1800, 2000 years ago he's writing in like the mid 150s 160s AD. It's very relevant. The way he writes, the language is incredibly familiar, it's the same. You know, one of the things about, you know, we would always make fun of the way people talked a long time ago, you know, where far out there is a way of talking that we don't communicate like today but when Marcus Aurelius writes and you read meditations, it seems very current. What does depend on the translation, right? Because like if you are reading and people do this, it'll recommend Marcus Aurelius and they'll just get what's free on the internet or whatever. If you're reading a translation from the 1850s or the 1600s, it's going to be in Shakespearean English because... Wow, interesting. Because they're translating it into their... Particular. Yeah. So the right translation is key. Do you remember which one you read? I don't. I like that there's a Gregory Hayes translation for the modern library which I think is the most like lyrical and beautiful of all of them. That's the one that I randomly bought on Amazon and had no idea that it was going to be the one that would hit me. So were the original ones in Latin? So this is what's crazy about Marcus. So Marcus lives in Rome, the Roman speak Latin but the philosophical language at that time was Greek. So Marcus was writing to himself in Greek. So when you read those passages or you listen to them and you're just like, that is one of the most beautiful things I've ever heard. There's one passage where he talks about a stock of grain bending low under its own weight, the way all of falls to the ground. He talks about the way that when you put bread in the oven, it breaks open on top and we don't know why that happens. It's just this beautiful inadvertent act of nature. He's just like writing like a poet, like a great writer. And again, he's writing in his non-native tongue to himself, never expecting anyone would see it. How fucking town, it'd be like finding out that's like a comedian is like funny in their diary. You're just like, wow, you're just naturally that. You're not turning it on or off. It's just like intuitively part of you. Yeah. But I think your point about how it feels timeless, that actually does feel like a thing I've heard comedians say, which is that like the specific is universal. I don't think he was trying to talk to the audience. I think he was so unflinchingly honest with himself that he was touching something universally human. And that's why. Because like we should not be able to relate to his experience at all. Right. There is literally a cult of the emperor that worshiped the emperor and their spouse as living deities. And he controlled the largest army in the world. He had unlimited wealth. He could kill or murder or torture or exile anyone he wanted. People cheered him as he walked in the streets. There's no way we should be able to be like this passage. We're talking about struggling to get out of bed in the morning. And you want to huddle under the warm covers. Like how? Because I guess people are people no matter where you get in life. People are people and not everyone gives in to the temptations of being in that position. And in his case, I think it made him more apt to reflect upon his thoughts and find the source of why he believed what he believed and why he thought what he thought. Yeah, he says in meditation, he says be careful not to be scesarified. Don't be dyed purple because the emperor wore a purple cloak and purple. Now we're just like the color purple. To get purple, it was this complicated process of different merchants. Actually the founder of Stosis and was a merchant in Tyrion purple. But like they slaves would smash up sea snails, drive them on rocks. And this dust would eventually become like the source of purple. So he's like don't be stained purple. So he was acted like when he becomes emperor, he's like this will change you if you're not careful and you have to actively work to make sure that doesn't happen. So he was aware of that. That was the character and gladiator, right? He wasn't that Marcus Aurelius, was it based on him roughly loosely? Well, it's I think one of the great movies of all time, but great movie. Peter O'Toole. Yes, he's the one that Joaquin Phoenix's character kills. I'm right. And then a lot of the sort of things that Maximus says or sort of very stoic inspired. The irony of that movie is that Joaquin Phoenix probably underplays how bad Marcus Aurelius' son was in real life. He really did get killed by a gladiator. He was a psychopath, uh, immediately destroys all of Marcus's work. It's one of the tragedies of Marcus that he has a like a POS son. I've always wondered like how that that seemed like it's Joffrey from Game of Thrones. Like that is a very common thing. Yeah. Why is that like it's an archetype? It is. There's another great Eastern Emperor Cyrus the Great, and he has a shitty son too. You know, it doesn't look like Queen Elizabeth's kids for that great. But I think what's interesting about Marcus is like it's weird that he's such this great man and then most people know nothing about him. But like Marcus's father was not emperor. So there's what they're called the five good emperors. So there's basically all of Roman history. There's like five good emperors and they happen in a row. And they happen in a row because each one does not have a male heir. So they don't have sons. So in the Roman tradition, it was much more common to if you didn't have a son, you would adopt a son. And so the emperor Hadrian is old, probably gay, does not have any children. And he adopts, he sees something in Marcus that they're very Marcus's young, but he sort of starts mentoring this boy. They actually go hunting together. He sees something special in this kid. Marcus's nickname was for Rismus or the truthful one. But he's like just a kid. And Hadrian realizes it's too young to name him emperor. So he selects a man named Antoninus Pius who's the great politician of the time and makes him emperor. I'm conditioned that he adopt Marcus Aurelius. So Marcus and then the thinking was Antoninus Pius would live for like five years and then Marcus would be king. And in fact, he lives for like 19 years. So Marcus has like a 20 year apprenticeship in being the emperor under a man who like could have killed him, who could have been corrupted by power. But is this incredible example. And that's why at the beginning of meditations, Marcus has like a two page thank you letter to Antoninus, his adopted stepfather. Oh, wow. It's fucking crazy. And his son, what was the deal with the wife? Marcus's wife? Yes. Marcus's wife, Faustina, is I guess it would be. Faustina is Antoninus' daughter. So they're not related, but that's the mayor of the family together. Marcus loves her. They're married a very long time. There are rumors that she's unfaithful, but as far as we know, Marcus pays no attention to this does not believe them. But the tragedy of their marriage is Marcus loses like seven children before they reach adulthood. Can you imagine that? That was very common back then, though, isn't it? Seven's a lot though. It is a lot, but isn't that that's one of the reasons why the general age that people live to was so low back then. People think that people died, that your age of expected death, it wasn't that. It's just like you died in childbirth. You died when you were young. You died from infection. It wasn't that people didn't live as long. There's lots of old people in Rome. It's just getting to death. If you made it to 40, maybe you can make it to 80, but chances are you weren't going to make it to 20. That makes sense. But you're all sword fighting, that's all. I mean, just imagine you could cut your hand and dive in infection. Then obviously they're shitting in the streets and just fucking horrible, rich people don't have toilets. They know nothing. That's one of the rationalization. But how does it go so wrong that this great man leaves the empire to his son? He does have a male heir. That's a problem unlike all his predecessors. It's that every one of the sons that he wanted to succeed him died. There's some speculation that Marcus is playing. This is the other crazy thing about Marcus. If I'm nerding out, you can... No, please go. Marcus has a stepbrother. Through this crazy adoption process, he has a stepbrother. He inherits through a hate dream. It's a complicated thing. He has a stepbrother. We know what kings do to their rivals. You have to kill them. The first emperor of Rome, Octavian, Julius Caesar's nephew, Julius Caesar has a half-son with Cleopatra. He has a half-brother. He has a son with Cleopatra, a son out of wedlock. Octavian has two stoke teachers who instruct him to murder his rival, which he promptly does or have murdered. The precedent was like you can't have too many Caesar's. You can't have more than one viable heir. Marcus, when he's Antoninus' favorite, Antoninus, preps him, he ascends to the throne. The first thing Marcus does is he names his brother, Lucius Ferris, co-emperor, which is not only never happened, basically before Orson's. It is a nod to how the Republic was. The Republic of Rome before it becomes a monarchy is led by two consuls, like two elected presidents who serve together as a Czech against power. Marcus, by naming, he can't put it back to a Republic, which is the plot of Gladiator. He can name himself a co-emperor. The thinking is that's what he was planning to do with his sons, but they all died. In the movie, Joaquin Phoenix kind of kills the dad. It kills the dad because Marcus does not in the movie, not in real life. Marcus really knows his son cannot be king. But in real life, he passes it to him. How did Marcus really die of the plague? That's the other crazy thing. Again, Marcus was writing in what we now call the Antonine Plague, what they named it after him. But it's like a global pandemic. It starts in the east, over Wilms Rome. Five, ten million people die. They have no way of stopping it. Marcus leads through all of that. The suspicion is that he catches it at the end, realizes he has to send his son away, so he doesn't give it to his son. Sets in motion like a series of advisors who should lead his son and then his son promptly gets rid of all of them and goes bad. How does a man like that, who's so introspective and so thoughtful, particularly for the times, how does a man like that have a son at such a piece of shit? I don't know. I don't know. I mean, one argument is he's a psychopath and there's sort of nothing you can do. Like, no blame whatsoever. The other argument, the more likely one is like most great men, and talking about history, so it's mostly great men, but again, Queen Elizabeth has crappy kids. Most great men are shitty fathers. Gandhi was a bad father. Winston Churchill was not a good father. Why is that? I think they're busy. I think it's a power thing. I think growing up with that amount of wealth and that amount of power, that your mind develops in this privileged position where you never have to struggle, you never have to develop character and you always feel entitled to everything. If you're like, imagine being a prince, imagine being the son of an emperor, you have the most ultimate power. You could have people killed. He probably did. He probably killed people. If he got an argument with a boy, you know what they're playing, he would probably stab him. You could get away with that. And if you did that many, many, many times, you would develop this ultimate sense that you're superior to all mortals. Like you would think of yourself as a god king. You would think of yourself as someone who's not a normal human being. And I don't think you could ever get that out of a person. If you grew up, like childhood stars are the most broken people that we have on exhibit. If you want to really examine human beings in terms, if you want to do like a psychological study, like what is the average architect like? What is the average singer like? What is the average child star like? Well, they're almost all drug addicts. They're almost all completely wrecked. Their personalities never fully develop. They develop under this weird position where everyone loves them from the time they're little and they get exorbitant amounts of attention that are completely unearned. Then they never have to develop character under adversity. They never have to prove themselves. You cannot prove yourself, in fact. You never have the opportunity. And so what do they do? They get their faces tattooed. They get hooked on drugs. They're fucked up. Man, they're just falling apart. It's almost universal. Yes. Well, there's the exceptions, but the exceptions prove the rule. The exceptions are so rare. And even the exceptions usually are fucked up. I heard this quote. It was actually about Marx's realius. No, no, it was about a different place. It was in a book about Marx's. Anyways, the guy said, the worst thing that a son, or it's again, no. But the worst thing a kid can say to their parents is like, I was never a boy, or I was never a girl. You never had a childhood. So I imagine that's part of it too, is like from the same with child stars, but also like the person who grows up knowing you're never a normal regular kid. You're getting your ass kicked, where you're confused, where you're struggling to both fit in and earn your place. Or just like, you know from the moment you're born, you're special. And that's maybe why there's five good emperors in a row, is that each one of those emperors did not grow up thinking that. That makes sense. Yeah. I don't know if it's possible for someone to, I mean, I think it's the same as being famous, right? I mean, essentially he's the son of the emperor. He is famous. I think it's the same thing. I've met dozens of people that were child stars. And I've met some of them that were very nice. Like Demi Lovato's very nice, my only Cyrus, very nice. I've met a bunch of them, but they're all fucked. They're all fucked. In one way or another, they're all like, I'm sober now, or I'm going to do this now. I'm going to do this. There's never like this sense of calm and discipline and being centered. There's always like this state of change and improvement. They're always like in this weird place where they don't feel fully centered or they're always like falling over to the left or falling over to the right. The structure's not there. Yes. Yeah. I mean, do you think about that? Like how do you, I tried to make decisions in my life. Like one of the reasons I live where I live is that like I wanted my kids to be normal. Like I want, you're doing to me. Obviously, my life is never going to be super normal because I don't have a job that I go to every day. And I don't have to think about certain things that I'm quote unquote normal person would, but like there are definitely cities or neighborhoods or lifestyles you could live that are inherently less normal for your kids. And I was like, I would like to have normal kids. Yeah. Normal is an interesting term, right? Because I've met people that grew up in LA and their parents were in show business and their normal. Yeah. Yeah. It's possible. They probably had to create kind of a bubble. I don't know. I mean, I think it's all about what kind of activities you get your child involved in. I get my kids involved, my kids are involved in a lot of athletics because I think people have this faulty position on athletics that don't participate in them. And they think of athletics being something that is for the body. It's not a smart pursuit. It's a Position on athletics that don't participate in them and they think of athletics being something that is for the body It's not a smart pursuit. It's a dumb pursuit. It's like a physical thing. It's not a mental thing But they're not right. They're incorrect There's a giant amount of success in athletics that are about not just mental states but about discipline which is also a It's that discipline is a part of the mind right we all agree to that But so is the ability to perform into pressure so is the ability to deal with a loss and sort of Reestablish yourself and Come back feeling better the feeling that you get of the shame of loss It's very valuable and that's a mental thing and there's mental sort of challenges that you acquire from sports that I don't think are available in any other way. I don't think I think you get different mental challenges And there's there's different lessons that can be learned from academic pursuits but there's mental Challenges that you only get from athletic pursuits you only get when you have to force your body to keep going even though your mind is Exhausted your body's exhausted and your will is leaving you and There's parts of you that are telling you to quit and you have to learn how to manage that and that is a mental thing But it's a mental thing in a different way than calculus is it's a mental thing in a different way than learning languages But it's equally as difficult I Think what one of the things I think a lot about and that I dislike like what if you I was like describe a philosopher He'd be like University professor Turtle neck like you need you know Jacket with pads on and or whatever Like you'd think of a weakling and in the ancient world like philosophers were people who did shit right like the rewarders They were warriors. They were king like Mark Surya as hunts There's an early stoke who's a distance runner one who's a boxer like and what I love when you really read the stoke Texas like that Their metaphors are all sport. It's wrestling and fighting and running and hunting because they did those things those things are difficult Yes, and difficult things are good for you and they're good for your mind. That's what people don't understand. I don't pursue them There's in America unfortunately there's this sort of intellectual leadism there's this This mindset that some very smart people have Because they're very good at certain intellectual pursuits and they look down upon pursuits that are physical in nature Because because of this sort of prejudice they have this idea and it's I think it's also like a fear of Encountering something that you're not good at or something that's gonna humiliate you and something's gonna make you feel bad It's like it maybe came from gym class Maybe came from you know being forced to participate in sports when they were younger and they didn't enjoy it So they have this thing in their head that there's no value there Yeah Seneca says we treat the body rigorously so that it will not be disobedient to the mind. Oh I like that that's good You're good like like uh When I when I crank the nod to cold in the shower or I push myself when I'm running or with your weights or swimming or whatever I I feel like part of what that is is an assertion about who's in charge. Yes Doesn't my friend John Joseph says John Joseph is a lead singer the Crowe Max But he's also done like a shit ton of Ironman's he has got this great saying about doing an Ironman It goes he goes that's when your mind has to tell your body who the fucks in charge It's like and you hear with his heavy New York accent. It's beautiful But that's what it is. It's like you're You have to be able to endure you have to be able to tell your body that this is what we do and the more you do it the easier it is Man, I made a video about it today when I was doing the cold plunge Because it's like it's a it's so much easier than it used to be but it's still hard But it's just easy because I must come accustomed to the grind of it because I do it every day So just get in there or almost every day, but it's like There's there's something to that that's so valuable that doesn't get emphasized enough in our modern day Conversations and it doesn't get emphasized in media. It doesn't get talked about It's like you have to search for that you have to search for this idea that struggle is difficult or You know like the title of your book the obstacle is the way like getting through things is How you you build a stronger foundation? It's how you develop characters how the mind Understands how to manage difficult situations When I think it's a transferable skill so like yes You're doing it in the cold plunge or running or fighting or whatever and then when you're like when I'm working on a book and books are hard You know and like halfway through I'm like this isn't coming together this sucks. Should I stop? I'm like I know this feeling very well And I know that you don't listen to this feeling so like fuck off. Yeah right like you have to build that for me because because you're gonna go through hard things in life and You want to have cultivated a sense of like not quitting. Yeah, thanks are hard Yes I have a very good friend this name's Cameron Haynes and he's a hunter right from yeah He's also ultra marathon runner does a lot and one of the reasons why he's such a good bow hunter I believe is because of all the exercise he does Because I think there's I used to think that it was just him building endurance for the mountains I think there is some of that too, but I think more than that it's his ability to maintain Calmness because he's always torturing himself So he's always running like 15 miles in the morning before he goes to work. He's always torturing himself Yeah, so he has this ability to just stay in this like steady state so when he's at the top of a mountain and there's a giant bugling bowl that's like 50 yards away He can center his pin right on that bowl's vitals and release a perfect arrow every time because he's so Good at managing uncomfortable states He can stay relaxed under fire. The stoic word for that is stillness Adoraxia is the Greek word, but it's sort of like freedom from disturbances like even if it's Crazy outside or even if you're going through something internally like how do you how do you slow things down? I'm actually really talks about he says be like the rock or the cliff that the waves crash over and eventually fall still around I think you cold you you've been when you've been in crazy stuff or you've exposed yourself or you've endured things You're you you just realize that I got to slow this down I got to center myself and that being excited is not is not a positive Contributor to this situation, right? Yeah, there's there's a thing that happens when you do a difficult thing is that you develop more of an ability to do difficult things and One I mean and it's also like it's a daily thing. It's not as simple as like oh I used to do difficult things so now I can do this difficult things like I don't think so I think you you are better off than someone who is never encountered something difficult But I think there's a reason why fighters take warm-up fights and fighters when they're active when they fight all the time They fight better when I was competing. I would be at my best if I just fought like a week ago Hmm like if I fought a week ago It's like I know this experience. I know this feeling I've been here before I was just there. Yeah, but if I was like like I got injured once and I couldn't compete for like four or five months Is weird coming back was weird. It was a totally foreign experience. It felt very nerve-wracking and I think There's something to like forcing the brain forcing the mind into these difficult positions into these difficult situations And so that the mind gets accustomed to that feeling and then you can maintain calm and then you could keep yourself in the midst of all the chaos you can keep who you are. Yeah. Well, I try to design my life around Like cultivating slash protecting that feeling so like I like I know people They're like they get up and then the first thing they do in the morning is they're just like sucked into social media or the foam Right and then like they're already riled up from like before they they're feet have even touched the floor They're like, can you believe so and so said this or like I heard this or like I was talking to a friend of mine And he was like actually I started a Peter Antilla and he was saying the problem is He scans his email in the morning to check for fires Like not literal fires, but like stuff going on and I'm like so you're you're starting the day looking for Things that are disturbing for like you're looking for his defense He is a physician. Yeah, of course He's a man who has a bunch of clients and if a client emails him Hey Matt foot's numb And I can't see it on my left eye. There's this fucking he's got to put out that fire Yeah, yeah, that's different than you and I. Yes definitely and there are obviously professions where you have to be more on call But you can and what we were talking about and he was like he's happiest though when he like gives himself 30 Minutes to an hour in the morning, which means waking up early Right that like you're not sucked into that. Yeah, and so I try that's what my rule is like I know he's a phone for an hour in the morning I broke my phone once on a trip and why yeah, I was bow hunting in l'anai and I dropped my phone. Yeah, and I dropped my phone and It started just randomly calling people It would just it was wild like I would hold it up and it would call people and I'd hang up and it would just call some nails I showed my wife I could look at this Where watch this and it just doing this wild thing we just kept calm. I shut it off turn it back on It was doing the same thing so I'm like, okay, I gotta get a new phone But there's no Apple store in l'anai there's only three thousand people. Yeah, yeah on l'anai. Yeah So I have all by one person. Yeah Larry Elson the Oracle guy ballin Paulin out of control son. Yeah, he owns a fucking island So it's a beautiful place to and so anyway I had to order a new phone Well, it took like three days to get there and in those three days I didn't have any phone and I felt wonderful. It was weird man like I had a weird Relaxation come over me like like an alleviation of stress and concern And it wasn't even that anything was going on in my life where like people were mad at me I was in trouble anything like that It was simply that I wasn't checking in on the opinions of so many people and I was allowing myself to just think about life Clearly also I'm in paradise So that helps a lot and I'm just with my family So there's no concern about other people. I'm with my family Right the most important people and I'm with two of my very best friends and we're having a great time together with no phone But there was a feeling that I had where I was like wow I feel lighter I feel like there's an alleviation But then as soon as I got that phone I went right back into it as soon as I got that phone I'm a check on my Instagram mom. Oh my god. Look at all these messages. I'm checking my email. Oh god I got to answer all this and I fell right back into this bizarre Steady feeling of like a buzz of subtle anxiety everywhere It can't be good for you terrible for you. Yeah terrible, but is it? Like all this other stuff we're talking about like hard working out like doing difficult things like endurance work and sauna work and all that stuff Is it also a resilience? Does it build up your ability to tolerate massive amounts of information coming your way? Because would you be worse at it if you hadn't experienced it because me personally like I Have something like 15 million Instagram followers and nine million Twitter fiber fuck It's a lot of people and if I absorb all their opinions, it's unmanageable. Yeah But I'm so accustomed to people talking shit about me I'm so accustomed to that I can read someone being really mean about me and I just go Like it doesn't get me anymore, but it could it used to get me like one like maybe like if you go back To like the beginning of social media if someone would say something mean to me. I'd be like what is this? This is awful because I thought it was a real person as opposed to something on the screen Well, it's you thought it was a real person, but it's also you cannot respond you're there's no one there So you feel helpless. It's like you're swinging at ghosts It's like if someone would say to your face unless they were a really dangerous person a lot of things that people say on Twitter They would mean if someone to say that to your face They're trying to instigate a literal physical violent encounter Most people would never do that But they can say something and just throw it out there and it reaches you and it's like causes emotional pain to people And they know it does, but they feel disconnected from it and so it takes a long time for someone to understand what that is and how this is A negative thing that you really probably shouldn't have in your life So don't go looking for it don't go reading that stuff because it's just not good for you But if you aren't accustomed to it When it does get through and slip into you it can fucking really bother you and I know some people that never learn this skill and I will see something happen to them and then I'll see them two three days later and that looks like they haven't slept because they're just fucked from people being mad at them and I think that there's a certain amount of resilience you can build From social media. It's just like snake venom. Yeah, take a little bit of it. You develop a tolerance But if you get too much of it, it's gonna fucking kill you Yeah, it's like if this is the way of the world and this is how things are to totally Step back from it pretend it doesn't exist live in a fantasy world There's kind of a fragility to that Would you have to keep it's like you're you haven't been exposed to germs So your immune system is now like more vulnerable. Yes, like I found like I used to love New York I live there when I wrote obstacle actually and then when I moved to Texas Uh, and then when I moved to the country in Texas Like now when I go to New York, I hate New York like it physically hurts me. It's too loud Like I can feel the noise like my heart is just like yeah, because I'm not the noise pollution is so Radically different than my life, right? It's it's it's not healthy Like I think what it tells me the day-to-day life of New Yorkers actually like much worse than they wanted to admit They're just they're just built up a tolerance to it. Yeah, but like my Withdrawal from that makes me vulnerable to it when I'm in it and I like I just can't handle it too much Yeah, I think that's exactly right. I think I think you're exactly right my friends that love New York that I'm Close with they're the most unhealthy people. I know It's and one of them who I love dearly. He's always saying it's the energy of the city I love the energy of the city. I'm like don't you have your own fucking energy I got don't need to hear people yelling at each other and honking horns We were there at three o'clock in the morning getting falafels and I heard gunshots. I was like This is great. This is great bang bang bang like what the fuck are we doing man? Let's get out of here. I hear plenty of gunshots where I live Someone decided to play with their AR at like six in the morning, but or kill a pig. Yes Yes, the one that I dislike the most is like when the like a dump truck or something goes through an intersection in New York and the Back kind of lifts up and then it. Oh Yeah, I can feel that like in my chest. Oh, I scan Yeah, it's just I don't think human beings are designed to be stacked up on top of each other either there's this weird Like There's a lack of appreciation for other human beings because they're a burden instead of being a benefit like a community like a small village Everybody has a role and everybody's welcome and you need everybody in New York City. There's too many people so The value of people diminishes to the point where people become a liability instead of being an asset Like turn it turns down your ability to empathize. Yes, because if you did empathize You'd be paralyzed you'd have to think about how horrible it is to be like a Korean bike to live food delivery guy or To almost person or yeah, or to commute three hours from some burrow to make $11 and that like it would be horrible and yeah, but you the city wouldn't function if you thought about it and so You have to turn off that part of your brain I think that's also a problem with social media You know, I've discussed this many times that I just don't think we're supposed to absorb the problems of seven point Whatever billion people it's too much and if you just set out Every day looking for all the problems in the world You will have a very distorted idea of what life is Because that is not your life that is all the lives and we cannot manage all the lives It's just not possible It's not remotely possible for you to take in all of the violent and sad moments that happen All throughout the day in the whole planet earth It's just too much Well, you think like we as a normal person probably get more information Than like a president got like even just a couple decades ago Oh, yeah Even Marcus Rose is the emperor of a empire 50 million people He knew nothing about them. He didn't know what they look like. Maybe he read someone wrote a letter and then you know They would have been essentially non-existent to him Yeah, but we're flooded with more information than a human than even the most connected humans On the planet just not that long ago. It's can't possibly be healthy. No It's not and I think it's changing the way Our brain is mapped. I really do. I think it's it's this is a very recent thing Right social media is only existed for the last 13 or 14 years as we know it and I think we're going to get to a point Where the mind has to adapt to deal with the the volume of information that comes in and the way we receive it and I think Along the way there's going to be some sort of a technological intervention And it's probably going to be something like neural link and we're going to accept it because it makes the management of all this data more easy Yeah, I don't know anything about that Neuralink is an idea that Elon has that is initially going to be used for people that have spinal cord injuries and it's going to Change the way your brain communicates with all your muscle tissue So you're going to be able to move your body even with spinal cord issues So people that have it's going to be fantastic for people that have been paralyzed They'll have they'll regain use of their body because instead of The spine the spinal cord being the conduit for all the information and all the signals that you're sending There's going to be an electronic interface and this electronic interface will I think it will initially initially mimic What the mind does with the the spinal column and then Ultimately be far superior and then One of his things that he said the door he freaks me out. He said we're going to be able to talk with our words Oh, I think there's going to be an information a transfer of information hopefully that Surpasses language Meaning that there'll be some way of universally Expressing information where you don't have to like, you know, you don't have to write it in Greek You don't have to write it in Latin. It'll it'll come out as intent Interesting Yeah, I wonder I know having moved here one of the really beneficial things was that like I don't know I know but I don't see that regularly people who do what I do So it turns off kind of like a competitive part of my brain Where like I just get to be me and do what I want to do and focus on like what I think is cool and what I want to create There's not that like keeping up with the Joneses part of that can be a powerful driver of your career But also a source of unhappiness. Did you feel that in New York? I felt it in New York I felt it when I lived in LA What did you like how did you feel it in like what way did you compare yourself to like other people? Yeah? Just like why are they doing better than me? Do you see that person's house? You know that that sort of Yeah comparison is the thief of joy is that yes I didn't know that quote when I lived in LA When I first got there, but I was on this sitcom we were on a sitcom, right? Incredible. Yeah. Oh my god. I'm on television. This is amazing and the people that I was with who are great people They were they were all reading the Hollywood reporter and they would read this and they'd get upset Oh, why is she getting this? Oh? Why is this happening? Why are they on Thursday night at eight o'clock? Why and I go? That's the devil's rag. I go what are you reading? That's what I would call the devil's rag That's the guy. I go guys last time I checked. I'm on fucking TV. Yeah, okay. I'm on television You're on TV. We're on a TV show and you're complaining that other people are on better TV shows or on TV shows that have Better ratings. This is crazy. Yeah, like you're looking for reasons why your life sucks when you're in one of the best Positions that a person could ever be in in your line of work You're literally on a successful television show. It's so crazy and they're reading Variety to find all the people that are doing better than them. Oh look at this. Oh, they're in a movie now I want to be in film and it was wild to watch Yeah, that's one of the things the stokes say is like you would be gel if you if you didn't have what you have And someone else did you would be jealous of that person. Oh, yeah, but all you're doing is comparing what you have to What someone else has instead of the gratitude of holy shit? Look how lucky I am on to present that is sucking your happiness But I think it's also if if good work comes from being present It's preventing your ability from like actually being great on the television show that you're on because you're You're spending energy out in the world on stuff that doesn't matter instead of being like I'm gonna be the best that I can be in the thing that I am 100% 100% if you are constantly dwelling on other people's opinions if you're constantly dwelling on other people's success It will 100% to finish your capability of doing good work. Yeah There's no just no if ends or butts about it because the mind has a certain amount of bandwidth and the way I always Just express this when I talk to people about it I go look at it like a number if you had a hundred bandwidth Like if your bandwidth was 100 and then someone says something mean to you on Twitter And you read that and responded and you're going back and forth now how much do you have a bit? You got about 30 is gone 30% is just dedicated to this thing. It might be 40 you might have for and now what happens now now Whatever work you are actually trying to do is greatly diminished because you don't have the focus Well think of the arrogance to of being like I'm so good I can be on this show or in my like I can I can deliver this book in Environment where so many people would kill like to be able to do what I'm doing So many people are doing it and we're competing for a finite, you know, mouse whatever I can do it with only 60% of my capacity. Yeah, it's it's horrendously arrogant and stupid like I don't think it's arrogant though Because I think it's ignorant. I don't think people are really aware when they're doing this. I think they're just so Instinctive. It's so instinctual. It's such a normal thing to do to you know read some mean quote that someone said about you or read an article that someone wrote that pisses you off or You know, I know friends. I have friends I'm not close with but I'm close enough to them that I pay attention to them and they The career is a disaster But when I go on to the Twitter page, they're so deeply involved in politics like Massively where they're quoting spending bills that I don't even know and they're talking about what the problem these bills I'm like if you spent a fraction of your life paying attention to your own career and Doing what you actually love doing instead of focusing on this you're focusing on this because you feel like this is something that You can get involved with mentally where the burden of performance is not on you. Yeah Well, there's a Zen there's a Zen story like a Zen master was told he was criticized by another Zen master And he said oh how lucky for him to have arrived at perfection and to have the time to do such a thing He's like me. I'm not there yet and so when I'm saying it's arrogant. I just I don't I think always The humble way is like dude. I can spare zero. Yeah, I'm so Holding I'm so on the razor's edge of this. I cannot possibly afford to waste even one energy point on This thing that's not up to me Which is what the stokes say they said epic Jesus is the chief task in life is separating things that are in your control from what's outside your control and all that stuff is Outside of your control Yeah, and you're spending the energy points that could be on what is in your control on The stuff that's outside your control so it makes you doubly worse. It does but unfortunately this is not taught I mean you're teaching it. There's Marcus Aurelio's books There's there's there's many books that are available if you want to go seek it But this is not something that's being beaten into the head of people in a daily basis and it should be it should be something that television shows that You know that are supposed to be these intellectual Exercise is an examining the world around us One of the most important things is how are you looking at the world around us? Yeah How are you thinking about things and through what lens and have you done the work on your own self because if you have not You're going to look for these struggles in other places because You're uncomfortable dealing with your own personal struggles and you're avoiding those so you'll find them in other places You'll start fires because you haven't dealt with your own bullshit Yeah, and this is also what they teach in like 12 step-groups, right? It's like The acceptance of a higher powers to say like you're not the center of the universe right? This is why they do the serenity prayer. It's You're realizing it's like the source of your unhappiness and self-destructive life is your focus on Things you don't control is your you know your hand in over that power to this thing that you're hooked on and so 12 steps are really like a way to teach someone how to be a person again From from rock bottom and we don't you're right. We don't do that. We just assume Well, the problem is even people who studied philosophy they they think about Interesting, but abstract questions, right? Yeah, how do we know we're not living in a computer simulation? Right, which is fascinating, but like First we should probably focus on like what is in our control and what is not in our control What's you've mastered that think about all the big questions you want right and how does the mind handle adversity? How does the mind handle difficult situations and The knowledge that if you force Difficult situations into your life that you can control like rigorous exercise like meditation like sauna and cold plunge And there's many different things you can do like writing like sitting down and forcing yourself to do work that will It will free your mind in so many ways and allow you to have a Philosophy or at least a philosophical perspective That's based on how you actually think not based on overcompensating for deficits not based on trying to you know Piled dirt on the problems that you've created Yeah, it forces you to wrestle with yourself and your shit. Yeah first and foremost first and foremost Which is I mean social media is designed to like focus on other people shit. Yeah What are you thinking about this? What's your opinion about this as if the thing cares? You know, I'm going I'm in the middle of another book I think it's called amused death. Oh by Neopostman. Yes, and yeah, I was listening to that was it Neil Brennan recommended it. Yes, he did and that's amusing ourselves to death It's great credible and what's fascinating about it Neil Brennan recommends it. I think when he was on my podcast, right? Yeah, one of the things that's fascinating about it is that it's from the 1980s and they talk about Television the same way we talk about social media today and he compares It's from the 1980s. And they talk about television, the same way we talk about social media today. And he compares television to the way they talked about the printing press. When the printing press was first made available, a lot of people thought it was a disaster, and that really the written word on a piece of paper in a book, like a written book, was the way to go. And this printing press was some cheap, easy cop out that was going to make people stupid. Isn't that fascinating? Well, I love amusing Marcel Sadef. There's another book called The Image by Daniel Borsden, which is written in the 60s. And he was talking about this thing called pseudo-events. Like a press conference is a pseudo-event. And he was like, it exists for no other reason, but to get media attention. That's why they do a way in and a fight, right? Like, so cameras will be there. Maybe something will happen, and then it will get more attention, right? Like, how, so he's talking about how much of what we respond to. Even then, was not real, but things that were made for the media to suck our attention away. And then you go back to even further. There's another book called The Brass Check, which is written in, I don't know, 1910, 1912. And then, anyways, Upton Sinclair, who wrote The Jungle, you know, The Jungle. The Exposave, The Meatpacking Industry. He wrote an Exposave of the media industry in, like, the 1910s about how almost all the same things that were happening then, or how, like, this has always been a problem. It's just different mediums. Like, what Postman is saying is that when television is the dominant medium, the world conforms around that medium. And before that, it was radio. And then before that, it was newspapers. And now, it's social media and, you know, video and these other things. And so, like, our world conforms around what the medium wants, right? Like, what the medium is good at. Well, if we make it too easy, then people get soft and lazy. And I think that's what he's talking about in comes to television. And then he's comparing it to the way Lincoln's debates were. I have like seven hours people went home for lunch. Yeah, they told people to go home for dinner. They come back for four more hours. And so, they would make these agreements like this man would speak for an hour and a half. And then he would have a rebuttal for a half an hour and then he had his own speech for an hour and then the other guy would rebut. And it's like, they had these attention spans that it was based possibly on that there was no TikTok. There was no distractions, no real, like the kind of media that we have available, the touch of our fingertips just did not exist back then. It was not a thing. So, you had to get all of your entertainment from literature. That was the only, if you saw a live performance, that was it or literature. And that's it. There was no recordings. So, you, and even you can go before that, before written word, everything was oral. It was all oral traditions. So you had to learn these oral traditions. They were passed on from generation to generation. And you had to learn them. They were a very important part of your upbringing. So you had to have a grasp of language in a sense that you had to be able to communicate things in an eloquent and sophisticated way because it was part of being a fully formed grown adult. Well, the things we don't always think of things as technology. Because when you think of technology, you think of tech, right? We don't think like a book is a piece of technology. It's a great piece of technology, right? And the incentives in it are pretty good. Like an author has to work on a book for a number of years. Then it's edited multiple times. Lots of people look at it. It takes a while to publish. So it has to be somewhat timeless. Then the reader is paying for it, right? You can trust that with like a blog post. The blog post could take an hour to do. It's designed to only be relevant today. It's designed to be shared a lot by other people. So it's focused on the valence of emotion that it provokes from the person when they see it. It's not supposed to challenge them. It's not supposed to be complicated, right? So it's good medium versus bad medium. And the only like recent medium that I think is somewhat positive. It's not totally bad. But podcasting is a medium that I think generally extends out, right? Like it's not short. Right. It's a conversation. Pieces of it don't really spread. It's like a whole thing. You consume in a block. It's usually two people talking or whatever. Like podcasting, I think is better than most of the other sort of online tech focused mediums. But I think what Postman's point is is you have to think about the incentives or the language that a medium is built around. And then you have to ask yourself, does that make people smarter or dumber? And a lot of these mediums inherently make this dumber or at least they make it harder to get to truth. It's interesting with podcasting how one of the things that happens is that you take social media, which is inherently a short attention span platform. And then people will take out of context clips of podcast and then insert them into their world of outrage farming. And they'll instead of like looking at a conversation in terms of the entire three plus hour conversation. They'll find a sentence from someone may have misspoken or a disagreement that someone might have had and they'll force it into their world and then attack it with also short attention span, non sequiters, short little 140, 280 word sentences or letter sentences. I think Twitter broke a lot of people's brains. You think about like what a journalist was like 20 years ago. They were someone who thought long form, so a couple thousand words. They thought like not the days news cycle usually, but they might be working on an investigation or a piece over a somewhat long period of time. It would be edited. It would be fact checked, et cetera. It was supposed to be objectives. We had to consider multiple perspectives. Now you can trash that with Twitter, which is like driven primarily by journalists, right? And they're like, throw all that out and think about the world in 240 characters. The world is fucking complicated. 240 characters is nothing. You can have like Twitter threads where you can have one thing and then you have a second comment on a third and fourth and people do that and they do get coherent points out. But nothing is the most viral is a singular tweet, right? And you're not like, hey, it's pretty complicated. There's a little bit of this and a little bit of that. There's like screw this person or this is evil or this is the worst thing I've ever seen, right? Yeah. It inherently, I've got a postman, I've been talks about this really, it's inherently driven by the demands of that medium. Yes. Yeah, it is in many, many ways. It's also so alien to the way we are designed to communicate. We're designed to communicate, looking at each other, eye to eye. And I think that's one of the great benefits of podcasting is that podcasting is at its core, its communication in its purest form. It's like that's how people are designed to communicate. What we're having right now- And communicating for all of- Other than the microphones. Yes. What this is is one of the most basic human things that there are. And ironically enough, the microphones enhance it because what's going on is you were headphones, eye wear headphones. Eye wear your voice in my ear at the same level I hear my own voice. So everything is together. So any overtalk is painful and clunky. Sure. Yeah. And that's why like if you ever heard a podcast where there's like five guys sitting around drinking and there's no headphones, I've done those before. They're fucking disasters. Because if you don't have headphones on, everyone's just talking over everybody. And I have friends who do podcasts that way and I'm telling them like, well, you can't do this. This shit's unlistenable. But one on one with headphones is actually better. You don't hear the rest of the world. That's right. It enhances sensory deprivation. Yes. Yes. Yes. Well, I wrote about this in my first book. I wrote this book about medium manipulation in 2012, which I was like, if we don't get this out right now, it's going to be late. And it was like, you were 25. I was 25. You're a little baby. And you wrote a book. I know. People were not pleased with that book. They were very angry about it. Because I was talking about medium manipulation and I was saying the primary manipulators of media are not just bad people, like dictators or marketers or whatever. Journalists themselves are inherently manipulative. Right? Like, think about it this way. You would never want a reporter to write a story about a company they own stock in. Right? Because that would be a conflict of interest potential. Right. And then shorting the stock, that would make them right negatively if they were long the stock and right positive. But what happens when the journalist is compensated or at least evaluated based on the number of views that that piece gets? That is also a conflict of interest. Yes. It's like they're working on commission. And you wouldn't want a shoe salesman to be working on commission because they would pressure you into doing something that maybe you wouldn't actually want. And you couldn't trust their judgment. And that is the dry, and that was a metric of journalism that was invented by Gawker like in 2008, like not a long time ago, like all journalism forever was not monetized in that fashion until like our lifetime. Well, the convenience of digital news was so much more efficient than getting an actual newspaper and unfolding it and reading it. And so people stopped buying newspapers. I would like to see, let's see if we can find this. The difference, I don't know how you'd Google this. The difference between the circulation of printed newspapers, pre-social media to now. I mean, it has to be a fucking massive hemorrhaging. Yeah. Of course. And not just the subscriber base, but like there were thousands of daily newspapers in New York City at one point, like in the 20s or 30s had like 50 daily news here for one city. Wow. And so all that goes away. All that goes away. And then you're incentivized with clickbait journalism. So people have deceptive headlines. They have salacious stories that they cover, even though it's not even interesting, not real. It's just bullshit. But that bullshit is going to get people to click on it. Total estimated circulation of US daily newspapers. There is a fucking giant drop off right at the invention of social media. And what if you if you had somehow charted population growth along that right, you see how many that would be crazy. Look at that number. Like look where 2007 is, go to 2007. It's right there. So it was dropping off before. I guess it was probably the internet that made it drop off even before social media because too, I mean, generally, wasn't 2007. Is that the question Twitter? I was in Austin at South by when they launched it. And I was like, that is the dumbest thing I've ever heard that won't be a thing. And I could not have been more incorrect. I feel that way about NFTs. I might be wrong. So it seems like the drop off started happening around like 94 go to 94. A peak here is like 91. 91. Which one of the people that's weird people don't talk about Craigslist just guts the newspaper industry. Classified, subsidized their, you know, Baghdad bureau and like all that stuff. Oh, that's right. That's right. I didn't even think about that. Which is also a tech invention that destroys, you know, a thing. Yeah. And then there's also people advertised online. They started advertising for things online. So they didn't need to take ads out in the newspaper, which was always a thing. Yeah. Like ads and newspaper was a big thing. Yeah. And so that was where we got our objective information. If you go back and you read a New York Times story from like 1983, it's a different world. I mean, the way they wrote was different, the way they covered critical issues was very different. Well, the reason that fundamentally was, and Upton's a clarinet was talking about this in the 1910s, whenever that was, he was saying that, okay, when the news boys are selling the paper like at the street corner, it's a similar competition. Right. So when we think of yellow journalism, it was, you know, extra extra read all about it. So you had, let's say there's 50 newspapers in New York City and you get off a train at Grand Central and there's news boys for all of them. They have to have the most salacious headline or breaking story that day to get you to buy it. And as the 20s, as we got in the 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, the newspaper stopped being sold one off at news stands for the most part. And most people subscribed, you know what I'd say, I take the New York Times, right? Take the Washington Post. Yeah. You would subscribe to a newspaper. And so like when you look at the breaking of the Pentagon papers, it's, the headline is beyond boring. It's like a long ass headline because the New York Times didn't need to sell you the paper. The New York Times knew we are delivering this story to 20 million, 30 million homes today. That's the, so there's, and I think what a podcast does, like when you, you're not thinking with, I want to have this guest on to grow the show, to get attention. You're thinking, how many subscribers do I have of the show? am I honoring or disappointing them, right? You're thinking, I know you don't really think about the audience too much, but your point is you have a fan base that you are making stuff for as opposed to a thing you are trying to sell and shout over everyone else to like dominate the news cycle that day. That's an interesting point because that was one of the things that actually came up when I first came over to Spotify the first week of Spotify shows that like who's the guest going to be? Like who are you going to be like, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, I'm not doing that. I'm like, that's not what I do. I put on people that I think are interesting. I'm going to continue to do it only that way. And when I'm not doing it that way anymore, it won't be the same show and I'm going to quit. It's not going to be the same. Like I have to just have people on that I think are interesting. That's the only criteria I have. I look at all of the requests that come in. I look at all the different people that I'm interested in either I reach out to people I'm interested in like you, like I reached out to you. I can't believe you do it yourself. I do it myself. Yeah. Well, I have a guy too. I have my friend Matt. I have him contact people. But I so all scheduled on my phone. Everything's on my phone. So I just say like I go through the requests like I get emails and there's like hundreds of them. So I'm like, no, no, no, where did he go? What? What? Like Charlie Walker who was on the other day. Like what? Four years. He bicycled through fucking Asia and Africa. Holy shit. Get that guy. He just got out of Russian jail. Holy fuck. He wound up in Russia because he was in the Arctic in Siberia during the time where Russia invaded Ukraine just coins identically. And then they thought he was a spy. So they arrested him and he's in jail in Russia for a month. Like crazy. I'm like, let me talk to that guy. So it's that kind of a deal. That's the or you know, Snoop Dogg wants to come on. Yeah, I want to talk to Snoop. It's that kind of a deal. It's like it's not like this is going to be huge. Like I don't think that way at all. And that's the only reason why I think it works. I think if I stop thinking that way, I don't think it would work. I think if there was a if there was a fucking hint of disingenuous behavior, if there was a hint of bullshit, I think people wouldn't trust me anymore. If there was if they thought that I was only doing this to get attention, I mean, I'm sure some people that don't know me think that that's what I'm doing. But that's not. I don't need I don't have to. It works. And I did it from the beginning where I didn't think it was ever going to make any money doing it. So I only did it for fun. And then once I started making money and said, well, I'm doing it this way anyway. And this is how I want to do it. So I'll just keep doing it this way. I never would have thought you could become the number one podcast in the world by just talking to people you want to talk to. I thought you'd probably have to promote it everywhere. You'd have to like go way out of your way and take ads out and pump a bunch of I've done none of that. I've literally I know I don't even talk about it. I just do it. And through word of mouth, it's become what it is. It's really like the most organic thing I've ever done. Well, that's what I like. I like substacks that way of the idea that you're writing for an audience and doing that audience is paying you. So you're not like doing this sort of virally thing. I think the only downside, the only risk can be it. Do you get in a place where I'm not saying you are, but some people are where you're like, if I tell these people what they don't want to hear, that costs me money. I think the big risk today is someone like substacks decides to disempower you and to take away your platform. And that's a real issue. Yeah. I mean, I know people that have been banned from PayPal. I know people that have they can't use PayPal anymore. I know people that have been kicked off of YouTube. I know a lot of people that were things have happened or someone has decided that they're going to censor this person's positions on things. Yeah. But they call this audience capture though, like where you're because these people are paying you because that's your audience. You're not necessarily thinking about what's true. You're thinking about what they want to hear. Right. Yes. I've seen that too. That's dangerous. You see comedians, they find an audience like maybe they get a certain amount of tension from attacking people. That's a big one. And then they really lean into it. And that becomes their thing. They just go after people because that's where they find success. And you find like they lose who they are. They lose who they are and they become captive. Yeah. Like a caricature of your sense. Yeah. You also see that with people that switch political affiliations. They get lured into the other side and they get a lot of attention from this transition. And so they make this transition and everybody loves them. And so then they go all in. Generally speaking, I see it from people that used to be left-wing and become right-wing. And they go all in and it becomes an identity. Yeah. You want to be a free agent. Yeah. That's what you want to be. Like this is what I think about this. And I don't really think about what other people think. Like sometimes I'll write something that's political and people will get upset. And I go like, I didn't build an audience to not say what I think. Like, right. I want to own the audience, not the audience own me. Yeah. I mean, you don't even own the audience, you own yourself. Right. And you're going to have an audience because your ideas are interesting. But if you decide that you're only going to speak from a right-wing perspective, there's a lot of people that do that. There's a lot of people that do that already. And they do that because there's a business in that. Yeah. It's very valuable. Like you can talk from a pure left-wing progressive perspective and attack everyone as being far right or notsies. And you can get a lot of money that way. It's a good business model. Yeah. But it's not smart. It's not good for you either. It's not good for you intellectually because you're not going to be examining things from a purely objective perspective. You're not going to look at your own flaws in your own thinking in the way you formulate ideas and go, why do I think like that? You're not going to do that if you're captured by the progressives or captured by the Republicans. The people that get locked into that, it's like, man. And when they transition, like if someone transitions, it's very similar. The word transition has been captured right by transgender today. Yeah. But it's kind of similar because if you go mailed a female, you're most likely not going back. Sure. Right? And so if you go left-wing to right-wing, you're not going to come back to the progressives. You're not going to go, you know what? I just decided the right-wing is a racist and they're evil and they support white supremacy and fucking the military industrial complex. I'm going back to the left. Like no one's going to take you. They're not going to take you back. And isn't that kind of what happens? It's always like one issue. They talk about one issue. And then that issue gets so much attention. And it's like, like magic. They suddenly also have the same right-wing opinion on all the other issues. And you're like, yeah, because you're not going to be the one guy who has one out of step opinion and then stay in this group. You stepped out in the middle into no man's land. And now these people don't want you anymore. So you're like, I might as well go over here. Well, it's, but it's only if you choose to align yourself with a very specific ideology. If you don't do that, you can have opinions. Like, I mean, I have a lot of opinions that are on both sides. And I think most people do. I think most people have conservative as well as like, I'm very socially liberal. Like about a socially liberal as you get. But more and more as I get older, I start looking at things from a perspective of being a pragmatist. And I start looking at things and instead of looking at what do I hope people will do, if you give them free money. And if you give them free education, if you give them free this and free that and take care of them, I start going, well, what does that do to the psyche? And does that force laziness? Like, if everyone in this country, let's imagine a world where everyone in this country gets $50,000 a year. Yeah. Everyone. How much less productive would it be? It would probably be horrific. Now, I want to live in a world where this universal basic income. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I want to live in a world where no one has to worry about how to feed themselves, no one has to worry about how to put a roof over the head. All you have to worry about is what do you want to do? What would best serve your interests and also how could you provide a service or whether it's art or something that other people going to enjoy and appreciate. And that could elevate you past the middle class, past making $50,000 a year into becoming, you know, affluent. Wouldn't that be nice if you didn't have to struggle and spend your resources thinking about how am I going to feed myself? And instead, let me write the best book I can write. Instead, let me create the best film. Can I get paid on top of the $50,000 in this? Yes. Yeah. That's the idea. But I don't think it would work. I think we would lose a lot of great people because I think there's a lot of people that are motivated by desperation. They're motivated by this kick in the ass where you have. Like, I have friends that had children and once they had children, they became fucking hyper ambitious because they realize, oh my God, I have to pay for this little baby. And then they realize like, it does turn you into an adult. Yes. Because you're like, these people are, I'm responsible for these. Yes. It's a completely different kind of feeling. But I wonder, but I look, I don't want people to live in poverty. Poverty sucks. It's a terrible place to be. To be desperate and that's caused a lot of crime. It causes a lot of violence. There's a lot, it's attached to poverty that's horrific. However, it is an incredible motivator to get people to get moving and to do something. And desperation, much like loss and humiliation are great motivators to make you work harder to be better at whatever thing you are attempting to do that failed. There's something about being poor that forces people into this feeling, this hunger that causes greatness in so many human beings. So many artists, so many great musicians, so many great comedians and so many great people that have accomplished amazing things came out of nothing. And there's this inherent hunger and this desire to be someone, to be something that creates greatness that gets recognized by so many people and enriches so many people's lives. If you think about how many hip hop artists who are so poor became so rich and inspired so many people with their music, how many comedians did the same? How many people who wrote books have come out of utter poverty and through the struggle and pain of their existence, it gave life to their words in a way that you're just not going to get sleeping on silk sheets. Yeah, but are you sleeping on silk sheets making 50 grand a year? No. So there's no, you're not a number, right? Yeah, there's like a subsistence number. But you don't, but that again, it's like how much encourages people to just exist. Like that subsistence number, how many people would just get that kickstart? I'm from poverty and leads them in to success. And this is just, this is not encouraging poverty. I don't think poverty's good at fucking, I was poor when I was a kid, I hated it. It's horrible feeling, but that feeling, it is a motivator that is unlike anything else. That the pain and the discomfort of poverty and of feeling like a failure or feeling like nothing is an insane vehicle for your human potential. It can push you if you get on it and ride it. But it can also destroy your life. I mean, it causes so many people to become drug addicts and so many people to become criminals because they're desperate and they're poor. And they feel like the world is abandoning them. You know that quote like, if you aren't liberal when you're young, you have no heart. And then if you're not a conservative when you're older, you have no brain. Yeah. I'm really a truth to that, but I also really hate that expression because it sort of means like you're supposed to care less about people or think less with your heart as you get older. Which strikes me as kind of one of the problems in the world. Yeah. Yeah, I agree with you. I mean, I don't think it's real. I think people give in to that because it's so nuanced and complex. The reality of human life and civilization is so nuanced and so complex. You know, I was watching this horrible video the other day. It was really bad. It was these two guys in Brooklyn. They robbed this kid. They walked up to him and sucker punched him and he fell back and hit his head off the street. And he died five days later and they stole $20 from him. I mean, that's all I had on him. They punched this guy in the head and took $20 out of his pocket. Now he's dead. And I was thinking so many different things. First of all, I was thinking like imagine being that kid's parents and finding out that that's how your child died. And then I was thinking imagine being those kids that did that to that guy. And your life has gone so far off the rails that you're essentially a parasite on society. You can't find a better way to make $20. Your development is so fucked. Like your morals, your ethics. Someone's failed you. Society's failed you. And that's what I really feel like. One of the things that conservative thinking leaves out is that not everybody starts at the same position. You don't start at the same starting line. It's different. And if you don't accept that, if you don't look at that, then pull yourself up very bootstraps. They don't have boots, man. There's people out there that don't have anything. And I don't even think most of these people saying that. Like you just got to put your nose to the grindstone and get to work. You don't even understand where these people are starting from. And if you're these kids living in Brooklyn, walk around sucker punching people in the street and stealing money from them. Like your morality is so fucked. It would take so many mushrooms and so many psychedelic trips and so much therapy. And so just to try to realign you with good and love. So this is like the liberal part of me. The liberal part of me feels terrible for the guy who got killed, but also feels terrible for these boys that sucker punched this guy. Because in my mind, I think if I live their life, I would be them. If I was in that... terrible for these boys that sucker punch this guy because in my mind, I think like if I live their life, I would be them. If I was in that situation of dire poverty and probably a lot of emotional and physical abuse, but if you're accustomed to just walking up to someone and punching them, you've probably been punched. You've probably been abused. You've probably seen it all and you probably have like deep anger towards society and civilization. And you've probably been conditioned to think that you deserve this and that you got to go get what's yours. It's a horrible failure on all of our parts. So even though like, I might have some conservative ideas, most of my ideas are very liberal. And in that regard, like my feeling is we need to pump insane amounts of money and time and effort into inner cities. We need to fix the imbalance. There's obviously an income inequality problem in this country, right? But there's also an effort inequality problem in this country. Both things are true. And poverty, like extreme poverty has a gravity that is so difficult to escape. You're like a 500 pound man is trying to do box jumps. Like it is so goddamn hard. And we got a T-step 500 pound man had to lose some weight. And that's how I look at the general state of the horrific poverty that exists in these inner cities. Its gravity is inescapable. So many people have been trapped in it for so long. And there's been decades upon decades of these places. There's multiple ones in this country that have been completely ignored by this country that supposedly wants everything to work out better. Well, if you want something to work out better, you got to look at the people that are in the very worst starting position that's available in the United States. States of America and change that. Elevate that. Have you, did you watch the movie No Mad Land? No. Or if there's a really good book. And I read it not that long ago. And it's basically about people who like because of the financial crisis and other stuff. It's like old people who have lost their houses. And so now they live in vans or campers and they just drive around the country. Working at different like theme parks or Amazon seasonal warehouses. Like these companies recruit those, those people because they're like old people work hard. They don't have anywhere to go. They pay them like next to nothing. They get like a couple hundred bucks a month in social security. These people like live and write on the edge. They live in a van. And I was reading it. There's this voice inside me that was trying to think like, how bad do you have to screw it? Like what choices do you make in your life where you end up this way? Like my first thought was like basically like how is it this person's fault? Right? And I realized that I was doing that because if it was their fault, then it wouldn't have to make me sad. And I wouldn't have to do anything or change any of my habits or viewpoints. Do you know what I mean? Yeah. And then you're like, no, the system failed these people. Like these these these these people have worked their whole lives. Maybe they messed up once they got addicted to alcohol or they went through it. divorce or you know, they got fired from one at this the system failed them in some way. Because you shouldn't if you work your whole life, you shouldn't end up in a van down by the river. Right? Like these aren't these aren't like people addicted to crack on the side of the street. These are like these are people who if you saw on the street, you wouldn't know that they live in a camper. Right? And it was I think the idea that the system has failed huge amounts of people. And that you can't individually hold someone responsible for something that is a collective failing. They're a symptom of a huge problem. And many of these people have not had access to anybody who thinks outside of the box. They're the they're the access that they have to other people are the people that live in their small community that are also troubled by the same problems that they are. Yeah. And you know, in many of these places in the country today, it's pills. I mean, there's a great documentary that was put out by Marianne of Van Zeller. Like it was we had her on talking about this. I want to say it was like eight or nine years ago. And it was called the OxyContin Express. Did you ever watch that? But it's all about the horrible situation that used to be in Florida, where they had these pain management centers. Yeah. Yeah. And you go to the pain management centers really just a pill fill, a pill mill route, rather. And so you would go into this place. They would have a doctor on one side that would say, what's wrong, Ryan? Oh, my back hurts. Oh, well, you need a toxic cotton. And then you go here right next door and they would give you the pills. And there was no database. So you could go to Jamie and Jamie could prescribe you the pills and then you can come to my office. And I would prescribe the pills. And people would do that and they would go to 10, 15 different doctors. And they had it set up that way, specifically to make the maximum amount of profit. Yeah. So they knew that they were doing this. And then these people would take these pills, they'd have a trunk full of them, and they drive them up through Kentucky. And that's the OxyContin Express. Yeah. And then we're like that person lives in a camper park because they were a drug addict. As if they weren't exploited and basically like there's humanity extracted out of them, but these doctors and these multi-billion dollar conglomerates that they're doing fine. Well, you know, the people that are running it to say, what's a side effect? These fucking people, if they weren't hooked on drugs, they'd be hooked on something else. If it wasn't that, it would be gambling. And if it wasn't that, it would be cocaine. If it wasn't that, it would be, you know, whatever, cigarettes, they're going to find a way to ruin their lives because they're idiots. And these people can justify things like that. And you don't realize like some of these people are four. Okay. And if you're four and you're living in that trail and your mom's on OxyContin, like you're fucked. Yeah. But if that's same four-year-old grew up with like a really healthy person who lives in an upper middle class suburb and spends time going over the homework with the kids and takes into practice and gets them involved in sports and, you know, maybe exposes them to some activity that will eventually be their career, that person could be a functioning thriving member of society and be a benefit to everybody. It's really in where you fucking start from. And this is why the whole, if you are a young and you're not a liberal, then you have no soul. But if you're old and you're not a conservative, you have no mind. Doesn't work with me because I'm forced to look at the reality of the situation. I didn't have the best childhood, but I had food. I had parents who cared about me. I had stuff. I didn't have a bad childhood. I went to high school in a pretty nice area. It was not bad. Like there's bad, it was enough bad to make me motivated, but it ain't shit compared to what someone who lives in Appalachia, who lives in a fucking trailer park, whose whole family is a bunch of drug addicts and criminals. There's, there's people in this, this world that are fucked. They're starting block is miles from yours. And it's all uphill to get to you. I think about that, even with the student loan thing, which I'm a dropout. So I don't have any student debt. I don't have super strong opinions on whether it should be forgiven or not. But you think about how exploitative and extractive that system is where colleges were like, oh, you're 18. You can't even legally drink, but sign this contract to pay $70,000 a year for your, you know, insert obscure degree that has no viable job prospects. Oh, you can't afford that. Just take out a loan. We won't, you don't just don't even look at it. By the way, this is the only unforgivable debt in the entire world. Yes. And, uh, you know, when you graduate, you'll be $400,000 in the whole and you'll figure it out. And so when I look at my friends and they're like, you know, in their, their my age and they're just starting to get it together. The reason they didn't buy a house like I did when I was in my mid 20s is because they have a house that they're carrying around on a, on a bank balance. Yeah. And it's getting bigger every year, every year. And then we wonder why they don't become like it totally changes the jobs. They take like, why do they go get a job in Wall Street or whatever? It's because they have to pay back this obscene debt. Meanwhile, the college is just hiring more and more bureaucrats and administrators, administrators and putting in a fucking lazy river. And you know, all this nonsense. And this is coming off the backs of a generation of people who were misled or outright conned into a thing that, you know, is totally unjustifiable, totally unjustifiable. And the way you know it is in the fact that what you said, it is the only debt that's not forgivable. Yeah. Doesn't matter what happens. I read a story about the, the, the prevalence of people who are getting their social security checks docked because they owe student loans. Oh, can you imagine carrying that your whole life? And you have, you have a piece of paper to show for it. And you're at the end of your life. And this is your subsistence income. Your subsistence income is reduced because of a debt that you can never get rid of that didn't serve you obviously. Yeah. Cause you don't have any money. If someone sells you a house that, you know, you pay too much for it. The whole termites or whatever, you're going to get a bad deal on a house. You can just walk away. You'll take a bath on it. But you'll, you can just walk away. Yeah. If you got con into some for profit school or some, you know, they over promised that, Hey, this is what you'll make. If you become a physical therapist, you get your masters in this or whatever, you can't, you have no recourse. No. And those people in their middle class houses or, or bigger, the, the people that, that profited from that money. Like I think so people sometimes say this about me, they're like, Oh, you're profiting from philosophy. Cause I sell my books and you know, stuff that I'm profiting from it. And I go, you think this college professor who has job security for life paid for by the US government, you know, subsidized by the US government. Meanwhile, it's charging students $50, $60,000 a year for the, for the courses for this piece of paper. Like he's not here. She is an also, uh, profiting from, I can sleep at night. I know I charged $17 for a book that took me two years to write. You made someone take out unforgivable debt to attend your university class, and obscene amounts of, you know what I mean? That's true. But you know, there's no need to have a what about with that, what about that guy? What about this guy? Just you're not getting paid for philosophy. You're getting paid for your work. You're getting paid for work. And if you put together a good book, that is your effort. Sure. And you will profit from that because people enjoy it. It is a meritocracy. The selling books is a meritocracy because if people don't enjoy your books, you don't get money. It's really very simple. So anybody says, Oh, you're getting paid for philosophy. I don't know. Getting paid for work in philosophy. That's like getting paid for serving food. You know, are you getting paid for serving? You're getting paid for work. Sure. It's work. Yeah. No, I don't feel bad about it. It's this value. I'm just saying we don't, we don't think of the college professors or the university president. We think of them as good people. And I'm sure they mean well. Some of them. But the system is inherently exploitative and extractive against people at their absolute, and not their most vulnerable, but vulnerable people who don't understand that they're signing away, their financial freedom or the choices they can make as far as their careers goes for their entire life because you'll never be able to get out of this. Yeah. And the thing is too, that information is available. It's like that scene in Goodwill Hunting, where he talks about going to the library, you know, you could learn all this from a library. You don't have to spend all this money on education. That that didn't really used to be true, but it's true now. You can get a full blown 100% education without ever stepping into a classroom. You can have a varied nuanced education about a myriad of subjects. And you can get that all from books. You can get it from online. There's online courses you could take for free. I mean, you can become incredibly well educated. Now, would you be able to do an internship with like, you know, some scientist that's working on genetic engineering? No, you probably would have to have some sort of a degree to qualify you for something like that. But for just general education in terms of elevating your intelligence or elevating the information that you possess, that's readily available. When you think about probably what Harvard cost when that movie came out, versus what it is now, I bet it's like double or triple. Like I remember when my son was born, someone told us that there's a thing in Texas where if you want to send them to UT, you can pre-pay for their education now. So like you can be like so in eight, but the bet there is that let's say it's two on a grant that 200 grand compounded in the stock market for 18 years will be less. Oh, yeah. Well, yes. We'll be less than just the natural increase in tuition over 18 years. Whoo, which is obscene. But they are inherently, they are, they are implying that they plan to beat the stock market compounded every year with their tuition increases for a state run institution. Well, I think it depends on who is playing the stock market because of its Nancy Pelosi, I'll give her the 200 grand and I'm betting on Nancy. Because I think she knows shit. Harvard College tuition fees room and board 2017 tuition was 43,000 service fees 1000 plus student service fees 2000 plus room 9000 board six. So the total is $63,000. But that's 2017. So five years later, it's probably quite a bit higher. Yeah. It's pretty wild. But if you go back to Goodwill Hunting, which was what was that like 96? Yeah. So it was only 27,000. So it was half. Less than half. You talked to people and they're like, oh, yeah, I went to, I went to Berkeley and it was $46 a semester. And then, and then they judge people who are my age and they're like, these kids, you know, it's like, are you fucking kidding me? But then there's a thought of education was free. You would take it for granted and you wouldn't work harder. It's like the same perspective about hard work and poverty. You know, like if you're, if you're poor, it motivates you to work hard. And I mean, there's, there's a lot of examples of that. It's like fighters almost all the best fighters come from poverty. Almost all of them. It's very rare that a rich kid becomes a super successful fighter. Isn't that like the history of boxing is like whatever the most marginalized group was in that generation. That's in the boxers where. Yep, used to be Jews. Used to be like slap seed, maxi, rose and bloom. It was like a lot of Jewish boxers. And then it was Italians. It was Italians for a long time. It was African Americans. It's still African Americans predominantly, but it's a lot of Russian immigrants. Irish for a while. A lot of Irish, a lot of Irish. It's like whoever the poor immigrants are that are scratching, clowing. Yeah, those are the people that have the most hunger and the most anger. And unfortunately, they've probably experienced the most physical abuse, which is a significant factor in your ability to dish out punishment. Yeah, because like if you if they're your kids and you could choose, you want them to play like lacrosse or something where they're, you know, not where they have the most upside, but the least downside. Yeah. My my I would way more like my kids to fight than to play football. Football to me is the scariest one because I, you know, I don't follow football, but I watch it occasionally. And when I watched those giant super athletes just running full clip and slamming into each other, that is just car accident after car accident. And then you got to take into account all the ones that happen in high school, all the ones that happen in college. And then they all the by the time they get to the NFL, they probably are already like severely mentally compromised. They probably like, there's a number of see if you can find this. Um, they, they did a study on chronic traumatic encephalopathy. That's the CTE. And they did it from, they measured from children playing pop Warner football, all the way up into the NFL. And they found a astounding number of people at every step of the way exhibited symptoms of CTE. It's a, it's a sport with you. I know fighters that don't have like visible CTE and they're really good fighters. A journal of American Medical Association found CTE in 99% of brains obtained from the national football league players as well as 91% of college football players and 21% of high school football players. That is fucking crazy. The data suggests that there is very likely a relationship between exposure to football and the risk of developing disease, uh, duh, 99%. What the fuck man? And it's a degenerative brain disease. And it comes from a repeated head trauma. It's a, is a terrifying disease. And I, you know, look, in many ways, um, I'm kind of morally compromised because I am a commentator for professional mixed martial arts. It's a big part of what I do. I'm a giant fan of the sport. Um, you know, I've been a martial artist my whole life. I used to compete. It's a, it's a big part of who I am. And I know it's bad for you. And it's not just bad for you. It's bad for you in one of the worst ways possible. And then it compromises your ability to think. Yeah. Which one of the reasons why stopped and I stopped when I was young, when I was like my early 20s, because I knew that I was compromising my ability to think. I knew that what was coming. I saw it in other people. And I'm like, I gotta get out of this. And when I see it now in friends and I see it in people that I care about, and I've seen all that they've gone through and I know what's ahead of them, I get terrified for them. And I try to sound the alarms. And when anybody is thinking like, man, I don't know how much longer I want to be able to do this. Get out now. Like get out now. Pretend you can't do it. Think of your next fight as a death sentence. Get out. Just get out. If you're thinking you don't want to do this anymore, don't do it. Because somewhere out there, there's a guy's not thinking about that at all. And he's just trying to be a destroyer. That's Mike Tyson when he was 21. And he wants to separate you from your consciousness. And you got to get away from that guy. Don't do that anymore. Stop doing it. Because you don't get those brain cells back. You don't get them back. You don't see to eat doesn't reverse itself. I mean, there might be some therapies that come along in the future. But right now from what I'm aware of, I don't know of anything that makes me comfortable saying like, you're going to be fine. It's going to heal up. You're going to be fine. So how do you separate those feelings from your enjoyment of the thing? Because I love football and it's been cool. My books have made their way through the NFL. I love it. I was watching it. We're talking to players. But yeah, how do you square that? I look at it the same way. I look at life period. Life is finite. You have a finite lifespan. You're not going to live forever. You only have so much time. If you choose to spend a good portion of your life living the wildest, most dangerous and extreme way outside of war and law enforcement, firefighting and being an EMT or something like that, like being a professional fighter is one of the craziest fucking things you could do with your brain and your body. You're literally playing a game of I'm trying to steal your health. Like you're trying to steal health. You kick someone in the liver. You're stealing their health. You're shutting their body down. And you can only do that so many times to a person before their body deteriorates. And it's a choice. If as long as you're aware of what that choice is and the exhilaration of victory is worth it to you and you can go through the pain and the horrible feelings of loss and the punishment of training. If you're willing to do that and that is exciting to you because ultimately you know that the end product is so entertaining. If you watch an incredible, incredible fight is so entertaining that the joy that you bring to people when those guys like if Michael Chandler sitting on top of the octagon cage with his arms up in the air and the whole arena is like, yeah. And then millions of people around the world are watching that and they're feeling the same like, wow, you're providing a drug. You're literally providing an endorphin rush to millions of people. And you're doing so at the cost of your own health. You're doing so where you're compromising your lifestyle to dedicate yourself to the Spartan existence where all you're doing is training and eating clean and resting right and going through all of the recovery modalities. You could choose to do that. And I am all about people choosing. I'm all about people. If you want to fucking flip dirt bikes over the Grand Canyon, I'm not going to stop you. I don't want my kids to do it. I wouldn't want anybody to love to do it. But the argument about the argument, the structural argument or the, the point about like universal basic income is like, did they actually have a choice? Like it was, it was between that and what for a fighter? Yeah. Well, it depends. You know, like we, I use the example of Michael Chandler. I don't really know about Michael's background in terms of like how he grew up, but I knew he was a very high level wrestler in college. And generally that means he's got an education and they, he chose he's a competitor. So he chose to fight. Sure. Um, a lot of people just come from like Conor McGregor, Conor McGregor, who's a great fighter came from poverty. Um, you know, there's, there's other guys that have come from, you know, various levels of struggle. But ultimately we're compelled by the challenge of this insanely difficult pursuit and the glory of victory. And so in that sense, yeah, they have a choice. Like a lot of these guys went to college. No, no, there's definitely ones that have a choice, but I'm just saying when you look at some of these athletes or fighters or whatever, where they were, like, the alternative was like jail drugs. Yeah. Nobody. So they, they chose it, but they didn't have a lot of choices to choose from. And so is there something inherently exploitative then in like being like, well, they, it's horrible, but they chose it, but they didn't really choose it because nobody actually gave them any life, like life did not give them options. I don't buy that. I don't buy that for most mixed martial arts fighters. And that's most I do buy that for some boxers. There's, there's some boxers that didn't go to college and grew up in the abject poverty and that was the only way out boxing or more of a little and an early in my groomed into it. And my choice in, right. It doesn't seek out even Muhammad Ali is like someone's like, you're going to be a boxer. There's something to that. Sure. But at a certain point in time, Mike Tyson could have retired. Yeah. The amount of money that he generated by the time he was 20 years old, he could have probably lived off if he lived well for the rest of his life. If he decided to, it's just the glory of it and the excitement of it and the thrill of victory. You know, it's the old sports, the sports thing, ABC, why was sports, the thrill of victory, the agony of defeat. Remember that? Yeah. That's, that's what it is. You know, you, you certainly can make an argument that is exploitative because you exploit people's desire for victory and the desire to conquer and the desire for wealth beyond what they can imagine. You know, if you're the average fighter that becomes a world champion, you're going to make millions of dollars. The average person doesn't make millions of dollars. Like you're, you have a path that is an incredibly lucrative path if you can get to the tippy top. But how many people get there? How many people become a Kamaro Usman? You know, how many people become a Charles O'Levera? How many people does not that many people? It's really hard to become a champion. And those are the ones that make the money. The, the regular folks, you know, it's just a hard, scrabble existence. Well, I've heard similar arguments for like women who become prostitutes or women who interporn. It's like these are consenting adults, but it's like it's more complicated than that. Yeah. Because there's other factors, you know, weighing on this person. Yeah. And you can't just be like, you chose this. Sorry. I think competitive athleticism, it's, there's a, there's a, there's a, a difference. See the thing about porn and in many, in, in, prostitution is like there's probably sexual abuse involved there. That's a, there's not always, but there's a large percentage that have been abused by relatives or by, you know, it's horrific shit. And then there's a lot of like fighters that were beaten up when they were young. They were bullied or they're abused by someone close to them and they, they got good at lashing out and they got good at dishing out punishment on other people because they know how horrible it feels when it's dished out on them. What the positive argument and they also make this about porn is that this is an empowering way to recover from that trauma, to take this thing where you were small and little and vulnerable and turn it into a strength of yours, that you can channel that energy and that rage into something positive, you know, that you're really good at. Like clearly I think when I think about like, why did I become a writer? Clearly there was some desire to be seen or heard that went fundamentally unfulfilled as a kid because why would you develop the skill to sit at your computer and just, you know, if I just get it perfect, they'll understand me. And it'll be, it'll match. You know, there's a, well maybe in a nonfiction context, but in a fiction contest, don't context, don't you think there's a lot of people that just have ideas and it's kind of very satisfying to write out those ideas and have other people enjoy them. Like, ooh, this is a good story. But it could be the same thing. Maybe their circumstances were dire and awful and unpleasant and it drove them to pursue a world that they could control and make, you know, an explore and have agency over. And, you know what I mean? Like the match and the fantasy author being drawn to fantasy for a reason. Yes. Well, you know the story of Robert E. Howard. No. Robert E. Howard's guy wrote Conan the Barbarian. And what does that guy, Vincent Denofrio, played him in a film a few years back. I never watched, which is really odd because I'm a giant Robert E. Howard fan. Okay. One of those. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. What do you want to do? Neuroments for the win. Dude, I actually really like that. I love them. Yeah, I love the gum more than anything. But Robert E. Howard was like a really fucked up depressed guy who lived with his mom, you know, and his life is kind of a disaster. And he wrote the greatest fantasy novels the world has ever known. I mean, his character to this day is like, I'm going to have many millions of copies of the Conan books. I read them all when I was a kid. And they're fucking good man. And it's about this character that is the opposite of who Robert E. Howard was. Robert E. Howard wound up taking his own life. I think it was like 30 something years old, he shot himself. But before he did that, he wrote about this unstoppable, unconquerable man who was a giant amongst men who slayed everyone before him and fought demons and dragons. And he carried you through this these incredible adventures that Conan would go through with like, it was so impassioned. It was so the words were so vibrant and exciting. I mean, while this guy's life was dog shit, it was terrible. But he wrote about someone who he wishes he would be. I think also like if your life sucks or you're struggling with something or you don't feel good, you don't feel your parents are proud of you or whatever, there's something inherently satisfying and rewarding about just mastering something. Because you have power over it. It operates the way that you want. So whether you're mastering writing fantasy or archery or fighting or any of the or trading stocks, there's something about like I go into this place. And in that place, it doesn't feel quite like real life feels like you're a superhero or you know what I mean? There's something inherently human and wonderful though about mastery and mastering something. I think it's. Like you're a superhero or you know what I mean? There's something inherently human and wonderful though about mastery and mastering something. Well, I think it's we have a Desire that is probably genetic. It's probably the result of thousands and thousands of years of evolution Where figuring things out is very rewarding Figuring out how to flint map and make stone tools, figuring out how to play the wind and sneak up on a deer when you need food for your family Like all of those things, they're incredibly rewarding for us Because that's how you survived and figuring out how to conquer your enemies, figuring out how to Convince this woman to mate with you. All those different things, the puzzles of life. The puzzles of life, they're and they transfer to chess Right and the feeling of winning at chess. Like I'm a big fan of pool. I play a lot of pool It's a stupid game. Who gives a fuck of that ball goes in the hole It means nothing, but it's hard to make that ball go in the hole And you have to concentrate and in that concentration of getting that ball to go in and getting position on the next ball And I was saying to reward when you knock that final ball in is like wow you get this This exciting feeling and when you miss you like oh It's the same feeling is like missing an animal. You're your family's not gonna eat or not figuring out how to make a Tool that's vital for your survival or not figuring out a way to start fire if you're a person in the village And you were the guy who knew how to start fire go to Ryan He doesn't start a fire and Ryan can teach you like there's a there's a value in Figuring these things out and I think that is inside of our minds And we activate those human reward systems and we activate them whether it's through creating literature Or whether it's through music or whether it's through getting better at things There's like this pathway that's ingrained into us. That's incredibly human that We get rewarded for getting better at things. Yeah, you go back to the first cave paintings like what's motivating a person to do that And then you look at like where they were and where we are now and this sort of un broken Passing of torches from like these rudimentary buffalo or horses or whatever Yeah, like the cysteine chapel. You're like. Yes. Wow. Yeah, that is that is a chain of masters Yes, yeah, that's a perfect example too. That is a great analogy like the difference between the cave paintings and Like uh same Peter's Basilica. Yeah, which when I went to when I was in Rome a few years back I couldn't believe how big it was. Yeah, like when you look at that and you're like How long did this take because you see it in a photograph? And it's it's pretty beautiful and it's gorgeous But when you're there in person and you're walking around you're just like holy fuck This is insane the amount of effort is so undeniable. Yeah, or like some of these like Cathedral's where it's like they don't even know the person who did it because it wasn't one person it took 200 years Yeah, and they're just like Collectively that is such a human thing. We're just like we're coming together to build this burial mound We're coming together to build this. Yeah This cathedral and it's just a process and we all just plug into the process. There's something that this though It's kind of believe that we're all this like giant organism that's working together and there is just something crazy about That that just half that's what humans do like in the way you look at like ants. They just do stuff. Yeah We or beavers. They just that's what I'm a beaver is what I do That's what humans do that the homo favor is one of the names for the human species like man the maker We make stuff we do stuff Yeah, I've always said that if you were something from another planet and you came to observe us you'd be like what's going on here? Oh, there's this one creature that can manipulate and its environment in a very sophisticated way and all it does is make better and better stuff Yeah, and that's what we do. We just do it collectively You might think you're just working on your poetry and you but you're basically plugging into this human need to improve upon things You might think that you just practicing the saxophone, but by do do do do do do you're practicing getting better at it Yeah, that's what you're doing because everybody gets a reward at a getting better at things But ultimately the collective reward is better and better technology. Well, and then maybe randomly you are Saxophone player who moves the ball forward. Yeah, right? So it's like and and it's funny though The marks really talks about this it's kind of weird like only recently like could you get up and look down on human beings Right like you can maybe climb a mountain But like you couldn't get in a hot air balloon you couldn't get in an airplane We only saw the earth from space in 1970 something right like you know the blue marble photo famous photo like that was just 50 years ago. Yeah, but like That's what bees do that's what beavers do. That's what ants do there are other things that do We just think we're special because we're us but like empires are that and whole civilizations and whole eras like we're just all part of this giant collective thing Which is going on and we all think we're so important We're so integral But we're really just one part of a process that randomly Produces progress for the most part sometimes produces the opposite of products But randomly produces these sort of evolutionary improvements and then that's how you go from there to here But it's this timeless enormous thing that you're just an minuscule part of and there's certain instincts that we have that we think are detrimental like the instincts and inclination towards materialism Well, why does that exist was that well that ensures that you keep buying the latest and greatest stuff? Which ensures that we keep making the latest and greatest stuff so innovation keeps pushing forward if everybody was wise and You know and didn't need anything. It was pragmatic and was relaxed and wanted to just live in a log cabin We would stay static and nothing would improve but there's these design and then when something comes along like some Horrible situation like where things go badly like war like the Nazis like Hitler Well, what happens? Well the reaction to that is so intense That it forces people into action and it forces them to go out and stop that and then you look at the innovation That happens after World War II and it changes cultural around the world Like this horrible event takes place and through this horrible event We realize oh my god. This can happen this and now we got through that and there's V-Day where they're kissing in the street Everybody's celebrating and and then civilization moves forward in this beautiful way for a while Well, there's a beautiful kind of symmetry to it. It's like horrible thing reaction to the horrible thing and and like so You know if you look at world events up close right? You're like Russia invades Ukraine It's this horrendous violent awful thing. It's also though you zoom out. You look at it on a hundred year timeline a 200 year timeline it's humanity staggering towards some sort of global balance of power then it gets out of balance and it has to rebalance And so we take these things personally when in fact They're just they just are what they are and it's always been happening just like waves have always been crashing on the beach and trees have been growing and falling down This is what it is and it's always been that way it always will be that way until eventually It's not that way. Yeah, but it just and that's what I think so fascinating about meditation is like Marcus is the most powerful man in the world and he's like Who remembers the Emperor six emperors ago? You know he's like he'll go like the name Vespasian You know like how odd that feels now and that was like just a couple before him And he's like think about all the people that worked in Vespasian's court They were so power where are they now? Yeah, and and he's like the same things gonna be happening to you and That this is this thing that just happens and there's a beauty and a horror to it But you got to choose the view you're gonna take I think it's interesting because the Elite minds of the day for lack of a better term like Marcus Aurelius like there's no other form of There's no other form of Discourse there's no other form of entertainment there's no form of distraction You have life and you have writing you have literature You have reading other people's writing and you have making your own writing and then you have this Comprehension and understanding of the world around you where you're trying to express it in in his case to himself and The valuable lessons that he learned like one of the things that was really fascinating was the value that he placed on for forgiveness. Yeah Well, so he famously is betrayed by his best friend Who declare he thinks Marcus is sick and you're death and so this kind of a vidius Cassius goes like I'm the emperor now The Marcus wasn't dead and so puts him in this horrible position of like obviously you can't allow this But he doesn't want to fight a war over and he basically says this is the final chapter in the obstacles The idea that like even this is an opportunity and he says like I'm gonna show History how civil strife can be dealt with and so he's he tries to give Cassius a chance to come to his senses Eventually has to take the Roman army on battle You deal with it and then he weeps when someone kills Cassius because it deprives him of the opportunity of forgiving him of like giving him clemency Wow and And he orders the Senate. He says do not execute a single person for this He says do not let my name be stained and blood which is maybe impractical maybe too philosophical But there is a beauty to that that You know he talks about forgiveness and meditations But then he has to like actually apply it in his life. Yeah at the highest level Well that happens in history, right? When there's true sis and people have to sort of They have to deal with whatever just happened. Yeah, like that was a real issue with the civil war in the United States For a long time there was a lot of murder That happened where people were punishing people for their participation in one side or the other and they would go back and forth and kill people They think this would look a long history well went on for decades and decades of people murdering people who Responsible for killing their relatives in the civil war Yeah, I mean the horrible part of the civil war that the genius of Lincoln is he said both Lincoln and Grant are like just let him go home Right just let him go home He says turn their swords into plowshares Going the Bible and they think it's gonna work and it is gene if there's a genius element to it a sort of Almost a Christ-likeness to it But then the horror is that the South doesn't Like they're not like immediately like yeah, this slavery is bad. Why did we fight this war over? They go home and they're like we still hate black people We still don't want them here and now that we can't own them now There are a problem for us and some of the worst massacres in American history are Basically Confederate sort of paramilitary soldiers is what the Klan is originally is this terrorist organization That just goes around in murders black people Caught sometimes hundreds at a time. There's other sort of almost battles of the Civil War and The U.S. really struggles with how do you pacify? After a war like that the argument is we kind of learn this lesson in the Second World War We go and there's a process of denotsification in Germany Which we which we don't manage to do after the U.S. of war? Cuz Lincoln is assassinated which you could argue is why he was assassinated But we never fully sort of get rid not get rid of but but Change the hearts and minds of the people who went to war for like the worst possible cause you can think of for going to war for next to the Nazis And so like there's a Confederate statue in the little town that I'm in and like why is that there? That's there as a giant middle finger to the federal government Do many of them were actually put up during the civil rights era night this one is here's a crazy thing this one went up in 1910 right and so that's 50 60 years after the Civil War I met a guy and when I lived in East Austin Down the street this guy his name is Richard Overton and when he died He was the oldest man in the world. He died at 112 He was born before the statue went up So you and he's black he lived in the segregated part of what is now in East Austin But you like we think these things are so old But they were put up for very specific reasons to send a very specific message. It's not that long ago That's what's really terrifying about it and when I was a child when I was 11 years old My family moved from San Francisco to Florida. Yeah, and that was the first time I'd heard the expression Yankee I got called a Yankee and I mean this was this doesn't happen in Florida anymore This is what's interesting. It's like what happened from the Civil War 2022 is like it takes generations to escape the hatred of the past But when I was a kid so this was like this was the 1970s because I was I was 14 in high school which was 81. It was my first year of high school so this is before that so it was like 79-ish somewhere now and They were calling people Yankees. Yeah, like it was a thing like you're a fucking Yankee I was like what am I yeah, I'm a what yeah like what are you in a cartoon? I'm a Yankee like this is real like this So he had to have heard that from his family. He probably heard it from his parents or his grandparents So they had an attitude about people from the north like they didn't think of us as all being one population I Don't think people experience maybe in some pockets of the world to experience some pockets of the country rather they experience that today But I think for the most part people think of America is America Yeah, they think of red and blue like the red states and the blue states and we're separated in that regard conveniently line up with the same states as How it broke in the civil like the base in Dixon line is there is that? For red and blue though isn't aren't there a lot of red states that are northern states that there are of course But I'm just saying all the red all the red states Were Confederate states or all the can sorry all the Confederate states are now red states Almost I see we say yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, so the states that used to be Confederate are now red But there's also some red states that we're not Confederate. I see we're saying yeah, that's true It takes generations where we're fucking dumb and slow to learn It takes it takes a long time for people to figure that out and I think What we were talking about before and this is something I talked discuss at nausea I'm this the lack of attention to the worst spots in this country Like I've always said that if you want to make the world a better place make less losers How do you make less losers give people a better starting position give people more support? Don't I don't think you should hand things to people necessarily but I think there's a real value in making community safer and more conducive to people advancing and getting ahead and showing people more examples of it Then you have a better more robust civilization Because you got you have more competition You have it filled with more people that are doing exciting things and doing things that are fulfilling and I think you probably have less finger pointing because you'd have a better Perspective of what our society actually is our society is a society that lifts people up our America America is a great place because we treat people not just equally But we look at people who don't have an equal shot and we want to give them a head start and give them a hand up and I think some people have criticisms of that in terms of like aspects of it like some people have criticisms of Affirmative action because they think that affirmative action Rewards people that are less qualified simply because they came from another place I think there's a way to do that where we don't feel like that where get them young and Train them better and educate them better and also protect them give them environments give them community centers Give them give them places where they feel like they're a part of a great group of other human beings that are also Striving so the environment that they're around is an environment of information Education they're learning how to think and behave and rewarded for progress rewarded for improvement rewarded for succeeding and over-con print and overcoming bad situations and also rewarding themselves for discipline and and then Also learning that loss and learning that failure and humiliation of valuable teachers and You don't have to be defined by your worst moments those worst moments can actually enable you to produce a better result in the future and Show other people that have done that and help them lead the way. This is all possible man This all can be done. They would have a radical effect on the way this country behaves But I think a lot of people want to pretend this is all a really long time ago, right? Like right now like no, no, but I mean like Ruby Bridges You know from the famous like photo she integrates that school She's the little girl that all the parents are yelling horrible things at her, right? She's like 63 Wow, you know you you want to think she's like 90 or 190 yeah, but no, it's not that long ago not that long ago and like think about the effect that Think about what her parents went through and the effect that that had on her and think about like the age of her children now Like they're they're like maybe my age right Yeah, cuz she's like she I remember yeah, she's like a year older than my mother-in-law and you're just like Wow, okay, so this could like my grandmother went to Arkansas Little Rock High School the famous one that was integrated like two years before it was integrated and So you think about the environment that she grew up in in the privilege You know the privilege of the fact that like a Good chunk of the population was not allowed to go to school with her. Yeah And then what what those people with the school they had to go to and like It's not any part of like my family's history that we benefited from this You know we think it's a long time ago like but it obviously shaped my dad it shaped the The the life that we live like there's a legacy of that and you have to figure out how to address it But we not the reason we haven't figured out to address it is I think the good chunk of us Just don't want to think that it's true. I think there's that it's inconvenient for people to concentrate on things that have happened in the past when they can say well Hey, I had nothing to do with that. I'm just living my life I'm doing it best that I can But I also think that it's like you were talking about before with the negative things that happen and then through those There's just kind of yin and yang effect, right? I think one of the things that we're going through today is just that it's just like we're in the middle of it So we can't recognize that progress is being done. It's just There's so much work to do and it's one of the reasons why greedy politicians are so disgusting When we find out that politicians are making hundreds of millions of dollars off illegal insider stock Well, I guess it is legal insider stock trades and that's really what they're concentrated on They're not really concentrated on their constituents. They don't give a fuck of people get ahead That's nonsense. It's all lip service when you hear the White House press secretary who talk about You know the economies in a better place than it's ever been before Like you know that's horseshit and it makes everyone angry and that anger is there To encourage people to act. It's encouraged people to take steps to do better to To force politicians to be more upfront to force honesty and also to get people that are maybe Qualified to be better leaders, but are reluctant to get involved in that it may motivate them to get to get going I even think like I'm very critical of like woke ideology because I think it's essentially a religion But I think the overwhelming Thing about work woke ideology that gives me comfort is that all of it is encouraging people to be more inclusive Kinder more accepting even if it's wrong like even if you're like even if you're In doing so enforcing this ideology You're really victimizing other people which is possibly the case in some some ways the overwhelming Direction that things are going is to make it so that everything's okay. Yeah, sometimes they make everything okay They make people that are not guilty guilty and they make they make victims out of people that were innocent but the Direction that it's going is supposedly in kindness and they're being vicious and mean and enforcing their kindness But this is sort of a natural aspect of human ideology Anyway like when people have an ideology that's rigid they enforce it and they enforce it the same way they enforce a religion Now that's a good way to think about at least virtue signaling is pointed towards virtue Yeah, as opposed to like open cynicism or nihilism Right or evil. Yeah. Yeah. I mean if you were you know growing up in Nazi Germany and you know you were openly a Nazi Like it's that that's an ideology that's an ideology that you you signal to all the other Nazis that you are on board And you're cruelty to Jews and you're Decision to enforce genocide You're you're signaling to your tribe that you're doing so that that's humanity in a terrible direction This is humanity in a good direction But it's been hijacked by terrible people and generally by people that are failures that don't have good character or will And don't have the ability to objectively assess their own thoughts and their own actions and try to figure out why they're motivated to do what they do Instead they just do what gets them attention because this is part of what people do They try and strive to rise to the top they try and strive the economics of the internet are pulling them in that direction Yes, yes, which is why you know Twitter is essentially a Mental health compromised market Have you seen the we are the bad or are we the baddies sketch? Yes, that's like my favorite like wait the people we have the schools and You know like yeah, are we the bad guys? Who made that I don't know some UK thing? Yeah, because I mean we don't say baddies right right? It's definitely UK thing Yeah, we should find that we should find that because I haven't seen that in a while that Mitchell on the web Can you put it up? Yeah? How long is it three minutes? Yeah, let's play it Think this is the whole thing give them some props You got it. Yeah, here we go. They're coming now. We'll see how these Russians deal with a crack SS division Hands Have courage my friend so these guys are wearing Nazi costumes folks. They're just listening hands. I've just noticed something These communists are all cowards You've looked at our caps recently Our caps the badges on our caps have you looked at them? What no a bit? They've got skulls on them Have you noticed that our caps have actually got little pictures of skulls on them? I don't so hands are we the baddies? You should be able to hold them at this point here at least for a few hours Why skulls What a skulls well, maybe that a skull's more enemies Maybe but is that how it comes across? He doesn't say next to the skull, you know, yeah, we killed him, but trust us this guy was horrid No, I mean, what does skulls make you think of death? cannibals the heading Pirates pirates are fun. I didn't say we weren't fun, but far more not pirates are still the baddies I just can't think of anything good about a skull. What about pure area and skull shape? Even that is more usually depicted with the skin still on Where is the airline? Oh, you haven't been listening to our live propaganda Of course they're gonna say we're the bad guys, but they didn't get to design our uniforms And their symbols are all you know quite nice stars stripes lion sickles. What's so good about a sickle? Well nothing obviously if there's one thing we've learned in the last thousand miles of retreat Is that Russian agriculture is in dire need of mechanization I'm gonna say it's better than a skull. I mean I really can't think of anything worse as a symbol than a skull Rats anus And if we were fighting an army marching under the banner of a rat anus, I thought we'd go less worried It's just called ashtray We can have a skull club. It's getting a skull Okay, so That's funny very funny It's a great sketch Yeah, nobody ever has that realization though. They just they're in the middle of it and they just keep doing what they're doing And I think it's also The culture that they're involved people imitate their atmosphere, right? I think if going back to politicians one of things that Got revealed when this whole Nancy Pelosi thing Happen when they started looking at the insane amount of money that she's made from insider trading they started looking at all of Congress and It's across the board. Yeah, I mean Republican Democrat. They are all dipping their toes into those waters I'm sold socks. I write before the pandemic. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. They know they knew a lot of what was going on like in terms of like The adoption of electric vehicles by the entire United States You know the the government they were adopting EVs and so before that bill gets into play They dump a shitload of money into Tesla stock and then we Look how much money we made like they knew these bills are gonna be passed There's a lot of that going on But that's the culture that these people are involved in that's are we the baddies? Well, or to go back to the Hollywood thing It's like it's not that hard to not be a piece of shit But if everyone's doing it you're like Why not? Yeah, there's people that I knew there were agents that thought they had to act like that They thought they had to be like get my fucking cup of coffee. Let's go here They wanted to be our e-gold like Ari gold is a that's a real human I mean, there really are people like that. Yeah. Yeah. There's a there's this great book called What Makes Sammy Run It's about this like a Jewish agent like Hollywood agent in like the 20s or 30s like endlessly ambitious and we're talking about boxers like because he's from the disenfranchised group then he comes from the slums becomes the most powerful man in Hollywood Sort of a cautionary tale, but the irony is as the book As society evolved like all the things that it doesn't age that well Because you read it now and you're like yeah, that's what you do to get successful You stab people in the back right like Ari gold is the hero of entourage right not a garbage horrible boss Right right. Yeah, well, he's also like what people aspire to be That's the baller. That's the guy with the expensive watch. It drives the Mercedes. He's killing it Yeah, he's out there killing it. You know you got a crack eggs to make an omelet Yeah, it's um, I mean that obviously We have to look to that when we look at horrific moments in history like like World War II or like Genghis Khan or like like any of these horrific moments where things are so hard to imagine years later like when we're looking back on the Inquisition and looking back on the horrific methods of torture that they used on people that were infidels like Who the fuck are these people and how could they have done this? Like I was someone sent me this I'm gonna send you this Jamie because this is Really fascinating. This is from I forget what year this is but um I'll send you this Jamie um This was a He was a judge that took a bribe in court um his name is uh Sisomeness. Oh, I saw this on reddit. Yeah. Look at this It was from reddit. Yeah reddit today. I learned He was a judge that took a bribe in court and passed an unfair sentence He was skinned alive and his leather was used to make a chair that is at it today I learned. He was a judge that took a bribe in court and passed an unfair sentence. He was skinned alive and his leather was used to make a chair that his son had to sit in as his son was appointed the next judge. There was a later painting made depicting him being skinned alive and then there's the painting that shows they're just stripping his skin off while he's a lot. Look how stoic he looks. He just loaded on it on. They just cut me open. We don't give ourselves enough credit for the progress that we've made collectively as a society away from cruelty. Right. Like at the founding obviously the founders were horrible hypocrites, you know owning slaves, but the idea that like cruel and unusual punishment should not be a thing. Yeah. That that was an advancement like not that long ago. Not that long ago. And even the ones they said were not cruel. We're still super cruel that we've made a lot of like I mean they in World War II they still executed shoulders by firing squad and just like how horrendous or heinous that you would just make a bunch of your troops just murder another one of your members of for doing something wrong. Do you know what I mean? And that the progress away from cruelty is a huge improvement. And so when we watch something like George Floyd or the video of Armad Aubrey and you're just that's the worst thing I've ever seen. That does say something about the progress we've made as a society because not that long ago people would have seen that many many times. Yeah. And even though horrific things still do exist it doesn't minimize them by recognizing that the trend is towards people being kinder and better to each other. If you like what you pigeon it like Stephen Pinker is a great example. Like his work has been like roundly criticized by woke people because they're saying you're spending too much time concentrating on how much better things are instead of how much better we need to get. Yeah. That's our system. But he's like that's I'm a I studied trends. I'm studying the progress of the human race and over time things have gotten far safer and you know people are far kinder and they're far more educated than ever before. Well the problem is if you just look at the trend you're like this is just happening. You're missing the point. Yeah. Like you know there's that quote like the arc of history is long but it bends towards justice. That's because people are pulling it that way. Yeah. Like Martin Luther King pulls it that way Frederick Douglas pulls it that way. Yeah. The very hemlicon pulls it that way. The Harvey Milk right like the activists that were by the way widely hated in their own time criticized opted assassinated etc. Like they they were pulling it that way. It could have just kept going in the horrible direction that it was. Things also can get worse. But you have to accept that you as the individual are we collectively at a moment in time have the ability to change the direction. Yeah. Yeah. And we collectively have an ability to communicate these ideas that is unprecedented. There's never been a a time in history where we could communicate these ideas better and you're just going to get a lot of fog and a lot of noise and a lot of background noise and a lot of people trying to take advantage of this opportunity because of the fact that there's unprecedented models of communication but overall the ability to change things for the better has never been it's we've never had a situation that is this positive that we have some I mean yeah the economy sucks yeah gasses to high yeah there's potential for a nuclear war with Russia but just our understanding of the inequalities of life our understanding of what could be possible understanding of the positive aspects of being a good person they've never been more highlighted. Well yeah and it's kind of weird work we so focus on misinformation like all this bad information is spreading out in the world and and it's true like there is misinformation but it's also equally true that these same tools the tools are neutral yeah all right let's say they have biases but the the tools are are the tools. We know what a good example that is the early books. The early books were mostly about witchcraft and how to spot witches. I didn't know that until like a few years ago or not even a few months ago I should say somebody was explained to me that the early books that were first printed the vast majority and it wasn't like you know how to learn French it was like how to spot a witch. The first self-help book was published in the 1870s really like just think about how many so it's like the printing presses the 1400s right 14 1500 so let's say 500 years ish or wait now 400 years and someone is like what if we use this book to help people get better as a person and it doesn't have to be because God sets up like what how many shout-ins that were out there back then how many fake help guys well thanks self-help guys Napoleon Hill who wrote that book thinking Grourich he was a literal con man really yeah it's crazy no kids there's a huge daily B-startical that it's nuts wow it's really like well I have a friend of mine who's a jiu-jitsu black belt who reads that shit before he does anything it's a lot of people's favorite book but they just started I mean and I'm not saying the book doesn't have value if if it made you better as a person by all means but there's a dark story there so who wrote the article about him being a comment I think it's the daily B-start might have been it was a different site what was his deal you pull it up I don't have it memorized but it's like when you read it you're just like like whenever someone's like that's my favorite book I'm like read this piece but maybe people would say that about me I mean my first book was about medium manipulation but you know people change well right him out but you're a young man you know it's the self-help genre is a very troubled genre you know because there's a lot of people engaged in self-help that really haven't done shit that's true and also it's like do you want to tell people what they need to hear or what they want to hear they want to hear you just have to manifest it into reality just think about it right they think and grow rich right like that that's what I think that's his genius as he was like yeah I'll just tell people just just matter of your thinking yeah I've had to explain that to many people that want to talk about the secret we want to talk about the law of attraction like hey hey you're only hearing from the people that are successful like there's a lot involved if you want to talk to a successful person how'd you make it while I visualized it and I kept working okay yes they they but the second part is the most important they kept working but it's also the visualization is an aspect of 60 you can't just succeed and make it to the point where you're running some gigantic business without some sort of a vision yeah but it doesn't mean the vision created it there's so many people out there that try to manifest something and it never takes place yeah well I know you quoted this one but Marcus really says thing about how your life is died by the color of your thoughts it's true if you think it's impossible it's impossible for you yes right if you think you're not capable of it if you think it's unfair that that is a self-fulfilling prophecy in that sense but it doesn't mean that if you think it's possible it's gonna happen like if you visualize yourself beating my Tyson he's still gonna fuck you up yeah but yes but if you visualize that you're capable of making a better life for yourself and then you fucking work at it every day chances are barring some insane unforeseen unfair circumstances you will likely get there you will likely get there and it is a thing that other people have done and you can model yourself based on what they've accomplished and if you put in the kind of effort that they've done and the kind of thinking that they've put in you can accomplish great things it is possible for almost everyone to achieve something beyond your imagination you can get there in incremental steps and each incremental step will open and broaden your possibilities well and it also if you allow a long enough timeline if you comes in your certainty right so like when the obstacles away came out it did okay I didn't hit any bestseller list the publisher was sort you know and they'd offered me like half what I got for my first book and because I didn't think an obscure school of ancient philosophy like that's not gonna work but you know six years later in number one you know now it's sold like you know almost a million a half copies like now but that's because you know that's like a hundred thousand copies a year a little more you know what I mean like over time steadily it works you know it works because it's effective yeah like if you read the book the what's interesting to me about the book because it's clearly you have absorbed yourself into the writing of the Stoics and you relay it in a manner that's very absorbable and applicable and that's why it's so effective and when I put it up on Instagram my god I got so many messages from friends let's say I fucking love that book that books and credit bills helped me so much so you know through this fascination that you have with this philosophy I mean you've generated a lot of really positive thoughts for people and you've really got people moving and generally a good direction because you give them these quotes in this book you know all these the different philosophers that you quote in all the different scenarios and where you apply these these thoughts those things they stay with you and they're like little sparks that you have in your head that you can blow on those embers and start a fire with yeah yeah that's a good way to think about it the funny thing so I got offered to write a book about Stoics Philosophy because I'd written an article about it that was popular online in like 2008 2009 and I went to Robert and I was like this is my dream this is what I want to do should I do it and he was like I don't think you're ready yet and that was like the hardest thing in the world to hear but he was totally right I turned it down and I waited like almost five more years and then I think I what I mean I if I wrote it today I'd be more ready but like there's always a point of over preparation whatever Robert want you to do what was this uh I think he was like look you're getting better every day as a writer so you're going to only write this book one time so you should every day that you wait you'll be more prepared you'll be better for it and he's like also like he was like the difference between like 21 and 27 is a transformative amount of life experience it's still pretty young to have written that book but like I went through some shit in that period right and so that the book is more relatable because of my experience it you know what I mean like if I just was I would have just been speculating about the ideas if I wrote it when I was 21 I think well luckily we're talking about stoicism and you literally are preaching the philosophy in your books that any sort of negative happenstance or any you know anything that sets you back will probably ultimately be to your benefit yeah so you had a practice what you preach totally totally and then you know when it came out and it's so that enough copies to hit the list and it wasn't there you're like oh is it something I control or not like am I proud of the book or not do I think it's going to work or not and then you should not mean it was there what do you mean oh it happens all the time like you you can sell enough copies objectively to qualify for like the New York Times list and then you just not there they it's an editorial list it's a hell yeah of course and there's a so but wait a minute so when they say New York Times bestseller so that's not necessarily the bestsellers that they can they can eliminate you from the list like if they don't like what you're we're talking about for sure and one one to eliminate outright fraud like what if a billionaire just bought 100,000 copies of their own book like no one would think that should be included I actually know a guy did that it's there's a company that helps you do it but like if you look at the fine print in the New York Times list and I know this now that I because I have a bookstore and so we report to the list right you have to send a report each week and you have to flag like whether there's bulk copies or other things but like the list every week would be like in advice how to miscellaneous the best selling book every every week right so they or Harry Potter would be the top of the fiction like they they decide they decide to filter stuff out they even explicitly I wrote a book about the school year so but they explicitly filter out what they call perennial sellers which are books that sell every year a shit ton of copies because like schools buy them you know so so there's a certain amount of filtering but the big one for the bestseller list is like you know how many copies are sold on Amazon how many are copies were sold independent bookstores was it all in New York and LA and San Francisco or did you sell a lot of books in Cincinnati right like they they're trying to it's not that they're putting their thumb on the scale but they are trying well they are putting their thumb on the scale there's certain books that don't appear for suspicious reasons people edge but like they are trying to create a more robust definition of what bestseller is not just objectively who sold the most because that could be unfair well it's it's okay because of those reasonable examples that you use but not because of the ones where they just decide that your subject matter is problematic so do you think that they decided that stoicism is problematic now I just think like I think it was like maybe borderline or they just weren't even thinking about it they weren't tracking it or you know because my first book was about media and the corruption of media I imagine there was some reticence to recognize me did it ever make it onto the list I don't know if it's ever made in your time to hit number one on Wall Street Journal which is a which is a difference at a criteria the first time I did 10 books before I hit the New York Times list and it was at number one so that's unlikely that I never qualified for any other spot for any of my books and just suddenly in 2019 which book uh still misses the key so that one hit number one that one debuted at number one they decided yeah fuck it I think I think it was an overwhelm like it the the number of copies was overwhelming that it would have been like egregious to not be included interesting that's interesting yeah how gross well and the decision of what list you're on so are you advice how to miscellaneous or are you nonfiction general nonfiction like the general nonfiction list like maybe the 10 spot is like 5,000 books but the 10 spot on the advice how to miscellaneous because you're competing against the Guinness Book of World Records and blah blah blah blah is uh you know could be 15,000 copies like Malcolm Gladwell because he's sort of part who I love uh it's a super awesome guy and I think one of the greatest in the world that what he does his books are considered nonfiction but that's I think because he's a New Yorker writer right and he's part of that establishment yes and so that's an incredible gift to him in the sense that he's ranked in a category that is less competitive the good example that is Cameron Haines yeah he didn't book and door should have been in nonfiction it would have been number one but instead they put it in how to and it was highly ranked but it wasn't number one yeah they basically anything that isn't sort of a fancy like New York-y style thing is going to be relegated to advice how to miscellaneous which is the crazy thing is the for advice how to like that's not what he's doing he's telling his life story it's not how to at all it is a nonfiction book about his life story yeah I mean I did a book lives of the stokes which is like a set of biographies of all of the main Stoics it's there's not any how to or advice in it and it was put on that list instead of the nonfiction list god that's so weird but you can't it's like all the games are rigged do you know what I mean the Nobel prize is fucking bullshit like all of these like all of these organizations these gate keeping organizations are inherently about keeping people some people out and keeping some people in and so Marcus says uh immeditations that ambition is tying your well-being to what other people say or do insanity is tying it to your own actions you have to get to a place where you're like I'm good in any of the recognition or respect for ranking is extra yeah I think that has to be the case when it comes to selling books right because the most important thing you have achieved is that your books resonate with the people who read them and they enrich people's lives and that's what you've met set out to do you didn't set out to I don't know how many people are involved in curating the New York Times bestseller list but you didn't set out to please those people you know you know who those fucks are but some people that is all they care about but well that's on them no no it's it's just it's the wrong thing to do it's the wrong thing it's the wrong game to play yeah yeah for sure but you like seeking recognition is always the wrong thing yeah it's just and especially when it comes to awards you know like that those are you know this podcast is one of gang of awards and I just leave them places like my kid found the iHeart Radio award and she's like you fucking won this she didn't say fucking choose 10 and I go yeah yeah just put that over there like I don't I don't mean anything to me it's just what means to think things to me is did it did the podcast provide enjoyment to the people that listen to it that's all I'm trying to do right and if people a award doesn't mean anything it's just that's a small group of people there's this it can people people that decide it's the worst podcast it's ever existed the does that mean it is no it just means some people don't like it there's people that don't like things I like I don't I can't take into consideration what other people like I can take into consideration did I do my best and put something out there that resonated with a certain amount of people that's all I'm trying to do there's a story about Jimmy Carter who was not the best president obviously but he was being interviewed by Admiral Rick over who was the head of America's nuclear Navy and Jimmy Carter like people don't see in this way because maybe we think about him as this old man but he was like he went to the naval academy he was ambitious successful like he was driven to be like great from a very early age and so he's being interviewed he just graduated from the Naval Academy it's like 48 49 and he wants to get on a nuclear sub that's but that way to do it is you this guy Admiral Rick over to sides who's one of the unsung heroes of American history that very few people know about um immigrant went through Ellis Island Jewish guy's family flees persecution helps us win the Second World War and then the Cold War but anyways he's interviewing Jimmy Carter it's like a three hour interview like this they were kind of these big long discussions and you know Jimmy Carter's like going on and on about all his accomplishments you know like here's what I did I got this grade this grade and then Rick over goes like how did you finish in their class at the Naval Academy and he was like I was 56 out of it 800 and Carter thought he'd be like oh wow that's great like he's been beaming with pride about it and Rick over just looks at him and goes did you always do your best and then Jimmy Carter was gonna be like of course you know that's what you say and then he thought about it and he's like you know I kind of posted through this class like I didn't always study this like you know it just and he was like I'm gonna be honest he's like no I didn't always do my best and then Rick over looked at him and he said why not and then it got up and left the room and that quite like what you control is whether you did your best you don't control how you rank in the class you don't control whether you won this award or the scholarship or that's so you don't control any of that you don't even really control people like what you do right you only control if you did your best and if you were proud of it that's a great metric yeah did you leave anything on the table yeah hold anything back right yeah yeah that's the thing that haunts athletes right when they examine their legacy because that's the one thing unless you're involved in organized practice like certain sports where you're you're in even then there's offseason yeah what are you doing during the offseason yeah yeah you know certain athletes are notorious for working incredibly hard during the offseason and coming back better than ever where's other guys get fat and you know people think it's funny that they're laying around waiting come back isn't that life though like you like for sports like you have let's say 10 years in your professional prime but like we think we're so different like because we have a longer amount of time yeah but you don't like and it's only in the light of the cancer scare or you know the COVID diagram only the thing that shakes you out of that entitlement do you go like oh no it could end any moment and to take it for granted or to waste it or leave something on the table is the rejection of a credible gift and an opportunity yeah absolutely that's great within this all right I've read some books but fantastic thank you very much these are all yours uh no no no these are books different I know because I know you love um empire the summer moon yes so I tried to pick some books that I think I've went through my story this morning I was like these are books I don't think I haven't heard you talked about that I think you will fucking okay all right gang is kind of the making of the modern world I know you don't like him very much but I think it's a different like him no I I think you will see him in a different way okay uh the tiger this book will rip your fucking face off what's this book this book is about a guy in Siberia sent to hunt down a man eating tiger oh and it's literally I know it's one of the best nonfiction books ever in because I've heard from so many people about it cool and then have you read shadow divers no it's about these guys diving and he's like Christmas this is this is my life man they're diving a sunk German U-boat off the coast of New Jersey that they discover oh wow and it's like all about the thrill of like diving and discovering something and the mastery of this thing that could kill you at any moment if you read the black count no okay this is you know the you know the count of Monte Cristo yes the famous story okay Alexander Dumas his father was one of Napoleon's generals but he's black and his real life story is fucking incredible it's one of the Pulitzer Prize speaking of prizes it definitely deserved you it's amazing wow all right river of doubt you read this no I can't believe how many books you brought I figured you're gonna get them all on audio but I'll give them to you okay so after Theodore Roosevelt's president he goes to Africa kills bunch of animals the greatest hunting trip of all time but this book is about he explores like a 500 mile river in the Amazon the first time a human being has ever done this and he almost dies he takes his son his son with him he almost dies actually if you look up if you look up Theodore Roosevelt Epictetus he brings a copy of Epictetus with him on this journey and did you ever go to his birthplace in New York City no next time you go you can go to the house that he grew up in you can see the maintain it yeah it's still there how big is it it's just like a townhouse in New York City oh wow and you can see the gym where he worked out his asthma and became like the dude that he became but if you if you look up you can see he took a copy of Epictetus with him that he wrote as he was near death he's one of the main reasons why we have a public land in this country yeah we have our wildlife preservation system that we have in place he also saves professional football he gets them to wear helmets people would die playing football at Harvard and he loved sports and he comes together forms the NCAA and institutes safety wow this is a book about yeah so if you click on see what's signed this is like the engraved copy that he takes with him oh what but that book's amazing what happened there Jimmy zoos zoos is automatic wicked river the Mississippi when it last ran wild this is fucking crazy I have more I have even more can I keep going okay all right I know your daughters are into sports so this is a book I give to every college coach that I talk to you it's about this she's one of the great cross-country runners of her generation she commits suicide she runs off a parking garage and so it's about mental health and pressure and the I think it's any person who has a kid who is good at sports and wants to make something of it and Kate Fagan's an incredible writer should read that book it's like a cautionary sort of warning and about what social media does to kids actually I did this book with Chris Bosch he lives here you might like that and then this is the best history of Texas it's fucking the epic the best history of Texas you have if you if you look as is right I would listen to it you can listen to that one but seriously it is also incredible okay and then all right last one this is my favorite translation of meditations I don't know if this is the one you read but I would read this and then I know you like uh Stephen Pressfield this is the first edition she's the worst that he signed wow all right that I read that book every time I start a project it's a great book dude it's one of the great the resistance it's it it's so perfectly outlined like that's what that's what it is that's what you're at war with in everything thank you very much Ryan for saying great to meet you really appreciate your work appreciate everything and I really enjoyed this conversation thank you all right bye everybody