Joe Roman Ryan. The Joe Rogan experience. Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. All right, very nice meeting you. I have, I saw you on the Danny Jones podcast. And I have read a lot of your tweets and Twitter and just the entire ordeal that you've been through since the beginning of COVID. And so I felt like could be very educational for people to hear your perspective. Well, I appreciate you continuing to talk about COVID because I think a lot of people are sick of it. I'm certainly ready to move on. I am too, but it's just people who need to make sure this doesn't happen again. Exactly. Nothing's happened really. Nothing's been corrected. No, not only has nothing been corrected, I was just watching an argument on television where they were trying to argue for vaccinating women who are pregnant. All right, just insane. I mean, there's a golden rule of pregnancy, right? You don't experiment on pregnant women. You don't experiment on an unborn child. You're not even supposed to eat sushi. Exactly, right. But we're going to put this modified mRNA technology into these women who, you know, early treatment, we have early treatment. COVID is no longer a threat. We're dealing, you know, at one point, it was more than a cold, but not now. Why in the world will we give them to pregnant women? Or children? The only thing that makes sense is money. Right. Well, it's the only thing that makes sense. Ego, meaning because they've already recommended it because they don't want to admit that it's not effective, they don't want to admit their side effects. I mean, we have hard facts showing it should be pulled off the market. I mean, any other product would have been pulled a long time ago. This were an antibiotic, and we'd seen all the carnage from an antibiotic. It would have been yanked off long ago. There should have been yanked off in the first month. There's just no other explanation than there's just, there's fraud, there's corruption, there's ego, there's money. But this is not science. No, and there's a lot of people that, for whatever reason, they have this very rigid ideology that the pharmaceutical drug companies are to be trusted. And we should trust the science and at all these organizations, whether it's the FDA or whatever it is that's connected to these assertions, they should be trusted. Not just the average doctor who's talking about these side effects and all these different things that they're experiencing with their patients. Yeah, I mean, I trusted them. When the pandemic started, I mean, I didn't think that the shots would work necessarily, but I trusted them. I didn't think they were going to hurt us. Why didn't you think they would work? Because they were rushed to the market. I knew the flu shots were already iffy. We're dealing with a virus that mutates. We've never been able to vaccinate against a cold, which, you know, it's a rapidly mutating virus. It's been tried before and it's failed. But if you don't mind, please tell everybody what your background is in medicine. Yeah, private practice, solo physician, I'm not head of the Mayo Clinic. I'm just a neighborhood, your nose and throat doctor that's sort of got tangled up in this inadvertently. And I always thought when the pandemic started at that, well, this will be the hospital. This will be chaos in the hospitals. I never envisioned getting wrapped up in this at all. I trained at Stanford and then I moved to Texas after residency. And then I worked in a small private practice for seven, eight years. Then I started having a bunch of children. And I pretty much gave up medicine. I took a seven-year sabbatical. I wasn't even sure I was going to go back. But then I just had this itch that needed to be scratched. And I opened up a solo practice six months before the pandemic started. Oh, boy. What time? I know. Why did I do it? You could have been out. I know. Yeah. Well, sometimes the universe has a calling for people. You know? It's been a very interesting journey. So take us through what happened with you at the very beginning. Like so COVID starts making its way across the world. Yeah. So I had people coming in with respiratory tract infections that were stubborn. They were not the typical colds. And there was all this news that there's this virus from China. But you know, you watch something on a news. You think, oh, that's not going to really affect me. But I started having more and more patients coming in. And first, I really didn't know what to do. I just used common sense. I mean, I treated the symptoms. I used breathing treatments. I covered for secondary infection with antibiotics. I used steroids, that sort of thing. And I had success. But I didn't have a lot of people showing up in my doorstep, treat me for COVID. But I did start having people wanting to get tested. And you might remember that lab core was the first lab in the country to offer the test. And they just got completely slammed. So it took two weeks to get the results back. We were already working with a lab for patients with chronic sinusitis. They were doing PCR testing for chronic sinusitis. So tests were bacterial and fungal infections of the sinuses. It's called microgen DX. And they came out with a saliva test for COVID. So we were able to get the results back the next day. So I started offering that. And my little clinic exploded. Because, and I'm located in a strip mall, which is very purposeful. I'm very close to the medical center, which is to get your doctor's office. It's a 10 minute navigation of the parking garage. Another 10 minute walk to the office. And so I was trying to locate my office where it was very easy to get in and out of. And then that served me very well during the pandemic. Because with these saliva tests, you could just take the cup to somebody's car. They could spit in the cup. They could leave it outside. It was contact-free. You didn't have to shove up your nose. And then we got the results back the next day. And so that sort of made me put me on the map in my little neighborhood. And then I started tracking who when the vaccines came out, I started tracking who was positive by their vaccination status. And so I started noticing that the vaccine wasn't working. And that's sort of what got me in trouble. I also started giving monoclonal antibodies. And I didn't ration them. So I became known in town as a place to get monoclonal antibodies without having to pass, you know, being a certain race or a certain age or that sort of thing. What do you think that was all about? Yeah, I don't know. But the monoclonal antibodies is very frustrating to me. They worked very well. They were not controversial. People would turn around the next day. But when they first came out, I could get as many doses as I wanted. I mean, they show up in my doorstep the next day. And it was great. I mean, that also sort of put me on the map with COVID. And then I didn't even use Ivermectin until the government took over distribution of monoclonal antibodies. And then it became harder and harder to get them. And that's when I turned to Ivermectin. But you know, in my opinion, they did that on purpose. They did that to encourage people to take the COVID shot. It was very orchestrated. If you look at the timing, you know, and March, the government put out the big information on Ivermectin and why you should not take it for COVID. They put that on the FDA's website. At the same time, they launched COVID-19 Community Core. And this was April 1st, 2021. This was an $11.5 billion slush fund to propaganda, to, you know, feed out propaganda and censor people. And the day that they launched the COVID-19 Community Core was the same day that Houston Methodist, which is where I had privileges, they mandated the COVID shots for all their employees. And they were the first in the country. And that's sort of how I got tangled up in all this because I had privileges there. And then I was actually working with them. I was doing research with them. I was sharing my data with them to try to get it published. But then I started questioning, you know, the vaccine and how it wasn't working. I brought it to their attention first. They gassed let me and they just said, well, it's just lower severity. And when they ignored me, then I started speaking out on social media. And that's what got me in trouble. But so that summer, 2021, that's when the third and the largest surge of the pandemic started. And this was after the rollout of the wonderful COVID shots, which were promised to stop transmission and prevent death and obviously didn't. And the government was getting frustrated. So they doubled down on their Ivermectin attack. And this was in August 2021. They put out the infamous horse tweet. Said, seriously, y'all, you're not a horse, you're not a cow, stop it. A tweet went viral. It had dire consequences in my opinion. And then they approved, they fully approved the COVID shot and then Biden mandated for employers with 100 more employees. And that was right when they took you down. So it was all very coordinating. And then the final straw was taking away monoclonal antibodies. Yeah. Yeah, that was the more fascinating thing about it to me is I listed a bunch of different things that I took, including monoclonal antibodies. But they only concentrated on Ivermectin. But the way they did it was so transparent, like changing the color of my face on CNN everywhere this concerted effort to call it horse dewormer. It was they just try to make it look as preposterous as possible without ever explaining that it's been used more than multiple billions of times prescribed to human beings. Yeah. I mean, they branded you when I think of you, I think of that picture of you when you're slightly green. Honestly, yeah, but Ivermectin, I was nervous about using it because of all the hype. Because monoclonal work on it, because monoclonal works so well, I was like, well, this is not going to live, you know, this is not going to work. I was nervous. But the first thing I did was dug into the safety and anybody could do that, which is a minimal amount of effort. You can go to the FDA website and you can find the toxicity data on Ivermectin. And there's something called the LD50 lethal dose 50, which is it's a benchmark number that gives you an idea of how toxic a medication is. And LD50 means how many animal 50, what dose would kill 50% of lab animals? So for Ivermectin, it kind of depends on the rat, the type of animal in the gender. But it's basically 10 milligrams per kilogram up to 80 milligrams per kilogram. So for COVID, we're using 0.4 milligrams per kilogram. So I knew that we were not worried about killing people with it. And then I did a literature search and I looked for accidental, intentional overdoses for Ivermectin. And I couldn't find a single study where she did that for Tylenol. I mean, thousands, thousands of reports. So once I knew it was safe, then I started using it. And then I found it worked. And then yeah, all in all, I treated well over 6,000 patients. And everybody that got early treatment stayed out of the hospital. And I had patients come in that were really sick in the second week. And that was such a learning experience for me because normally, if somebody walked into my office with an oxygen saturation in the low 80s, I would call an ambulance. But I had patients who were fusing to get the hospital. And I had to give them the option to possibly die in my office, which is scary. But we saved them. I mean, we just threw the kitchen sink at them. We didn't have monoclonal antibodies. So we did, we brought them in every day. We did IV steroids. We did IV antibiotics. We gave them home oxygen. We gave them high dose of Ivermectin. We did everything we could. And it was amazing. I mean, they survived. It was very gratifying. So you think it was probably a combination of all the different medications and all the different treatments. You know, I would vary my approach depending on severity, the comorbidities. I mean, it's an art, not a protocol. It's a guideline, right? Every patient is sort of individual. And so for the patients, you know, the one patient I'm thinking of, I mean, he had history of two heart attacks. He had a history of throat cancer. He came in with an oxygen level. It was below 80. I can't remember what exactly what it was. But I mean, so I just did everything. You know, I took everything that I could and gave it to him and it worked. But and I had a few people like that. But you know, the 20 year old came in. I'd probably just give him some Ivermectin. And you know, it just depends. Why did you decide to try Ivermectin even though there was all this negative propaganda? Well, because I'd patients coming to see me who needed help. I mean, I just wasn't going to shut my door. I'd already established I could help people with monoclonal antibodies. So I still had people coming to me seeking help. And I just didn't have the heart to say no. And I knew it was safe. So I knew that, you know, it was a little bit iffy. But I knew it was safe and there was good data showing it worked. Just, you know, one thing you can find a study to support any argument you want in medicine. I learned that in residency. All residents learned that we have something called journal club where you sit down once a week and you pour through different articles. And the takeaway is most articles are crap. They're not they're not they're low power or they're there conflicts of interest or you know, they're not they're designed poorly. So, you know, my mindset coming into the pandemic was, you know, the research, the journals are a starting point. But it's not the final say is your own clinical experience and what you're seeing. And, you know, we had never seen COVID before. This was a brand new entity. So we were learning on the fly, but you never treated this many patients with a single disease in my career. I'm sure I never will again. And so you quickly become an expert. And you know, doctor, I don't know, can't speak for all doctors, but we like to do well. We like our patients to get better. It's gratifying. That's how it's sort of how you get jobs as factions seeing your patients do well. So why would I, you know, continue to have, you know, COVID patients come in if I couldn't help them. And it's astounding to me that the doctors in the hospitals just didn't pivot, didn't try new things. And I guess they were handcuffed by, you know, the hospital administrators. But it just seems to me that, you know, there was a doctor in Houston, Jova Ron who I'm pretty good friends with who a critical care doctor. And he was one of the founders of FLCC, which is sort of the, they developed the original protocols, River, and Dr. Ron had much better success than most other doctors. His overall success rate was 4.4% of his patients died whereas in other hospitals averaged around 20%. And he did, he threw the kitchen sink at them at people. And he basically followed this FLCC hospital protocol. So when the monoclonal antibodies were suppressed, what was the messaging? What did they say to doctors? They said that the strain of the virus was no longer covered so that it had evolved and it wouldn't work. But at the same time, these are the exact same vaccine. Exactly. And they had switched the monoclonal antibodies periodically. So it wasn't like they started with one and stuck with it the whole time. They switched it as things evolved. But it was really clear. And the propaganda was shocking because we've all seen propaganda. We were with foreign conflicts, weapons and mass destruction, all that jazz. We've all seen propaganda. But when Rolling Stone magazine printed an article saying that people were, the hospitals were overflowing with people overdosing on Ivermectin and gunshot victims couldn't get in. And they used to stock photo, which was of a bunch of people wearing winter coats. And I think the article was August in Oklahoma. The whole thing was so brazen and sloppy and obvious. Especially in the age of Google, if this had all gone down in the 1980s, we would all be in the dark. We would have no idea. We would have won like, wow, I guess I, Ivermectin's killing people. You wouldn't have known until like 2030. You know, people would have like, you have been in conspiracy theorists. You've been a crazy person like one of those people that could tell you all the facts about the Kennedy assassination. And it was wild eyes. Oliver Stone. You know, but it was so obvious and it was so confusing because I had had people on my podcast before. Where, you know, I had a doctor's on and I talk about foolish people that don't believe in traditional medicine. Like people that want to try different things. Like create people that were anti-vaccine or anti-anything. I'd be like, these are the best people at the front of the line. Trust them five years later. I'm like, don't trust anybody. They're all compromised. It's all money. And that was the most disheartening thing. The propaganda was disheartening, but it was that the whole system is compromised. And then when I found out that pharmaceutical drug companies are, they're the ones that are funding studies. And that they could have a whole ton of study. They don't have to divulge all the data from their studies. They don't have to show you some studies that were carefully crafted to show efficacy. But all the other studies that they had that even showed negative effects, they could bury those. They didn't have, they weren't held responsible. I was like, what is this? Like, what is this? But it's like everything in the world when money gets involved. Yeah, that rolling stone tweet is still up. That's, I found it yesterday. So, I couldn't believe it. Wow. Look at that. Look at these people wearing winter coats. So apparently this is a bunch of people that were waiting in line for the flu shot. Gun shot victims. Those old people got shot. What the fuck is going on in Oklahoma? They're shooting folks. They think it's the Wild West out there. Imagine if those were all gunshot, but look how crazy that article is or that tweet is. Gun shot victims left waiting as horse D-wormer overdoses overwhelm Oklahoma. By the way, zero horse D-wormers there. Zero. Well. It was a total lie. Well, in a, you know, even last Friday, Vanity Fair did an article on Maha and Callie Means and they quoted me in it. And in their description of me, they used horse D-wormer. Could not believe it. Still. Catherine Ebon, the reporter for Vanity Fair. Wow. And she buddied up to me. Like, we were good friends. That's when they always do it. This episode is brought to you by Better Help. Sometimes it could feel like you're carrying the weight of the world on your shoulders. And for guys, especially it could feel like you have to carry that burden on your own. There's a lot of stigma around men being the provider to keep it all together by themselves. But that's not good for you. Your family or anyone. Did you know that 6 million men suffer from depression every year in the US? And it often goes undiagnosed because of these pigments. Real strength isn't bottling things up inside though. It's admitting to your faults and doing something to better yourself. So go talk to someone, a friend, your partner, family, a therapist. Therapy is an excellent tool everyone should utilize. It's a great way to learn more positive coping skills like how to manage stress and help you live a more balanced and fulfilling life. Better Help is a great place to start that conversation, judging by the millions of reviews and the 4.9 rating in the app store. It's helped many people across the globe. As the largest online therapy provider in the world, Better Help can provide access to mental health professionals with a diverse variety of expertise. Talk it out with Better Help. Our listeners get 10% off their first month at BetterHelp.com-JRE. I learned a valuable lesson. It's such a dirty business. God, I have massive respect for journalists. If I had never done this podcast, I'd be your regular schmow out there with just spitting out all the company lines that all the blast all over the news. I kind of liked it better then. It was a lot easier. I hate ignorance is bliss. I didn't think the world was filled with demons. Money hungry demons are willing to sacrifice human lives in the pursuit of revenue. It's crazy. That's why we have to continue this fight because people have lost all trust with good reasons. With good reason. That's why I'm having you on. That's why I continue to talk to people who are just all up with the COVID already. I get it folks. If this is not for you, move on. Mary and I will still be bitching about this for the next three years. For me, it was such a wake up call because it's so weird to see your face on TV green first of all. That was weird. Then this term, horse dewormer. I'm like, why are you guys not concentrating on the fact that a 55 year old man is fine three days later during the worst strain. It was during the Delta where everybody is freaking out. This one's going to kill us all. I was fine in three days. I made this video. I'm sorry I have to cancel the concert this weekend. I got COVID. I had, I didn't think that was going to be anything. I thought that was just going to be the people that bought tickets to see Dave Chappelle and I in New Orleans. That was going to, where's it? Where ever it was. That's all is going to be those folks that are going to be upset. I'm sorry. When I make it up to you, you take a still count. That's all I thought it was going to be. I thought it was going to be a normal tweet that I put out or a normal Instagram post that I put out. Then all of a sudden, I hear that Neil Young wants me to remove from Spotify. I was like, what the fuck is going on? This is crazy. Spotify got calls from two former presidents. Really? Oh yeah. What about, yeah. Did they de-platform? Did you get sensor or de-platform? No, no, I grew by two million subscribers in a month. Right. I did. Because people started listening, because they made it sound like I was this maniac. They started listening, like, oh, he's really reasonable and pretty humble about all this stuff. And bringing people on it. Like Dr. Robert Malone, who has nine patents in the invention of mRNA vaccine technology. He's one of the, he took it himself. He was reporting his insane adverse side effect where he almost died. He was telling about it and they labeled him a cook for that. What made you so awake though? Well, that just, just malone. No, well, Malone, Peter McCullough, but I've always been the type of person that is like, if someone is saying something and they have rock solid connect, Dr. Peter McCullough is the most published physician in his field in human history. Like this is a incredibly well respected doctor. Up until he took a moral and ethical stand saying that this is not what they're saying. this is not what we should be doing and then destroyed. They tried to destroy his career. He's got a horrible. It's insane. But the man has incredible courage and he was labeled all, when I would tell people, he's the most published physician in time, that you'd see their eyes glaze. Like they didn't want to hear it. I'm like, maybe he's right. Well, five years later, we know he's right. We know he was right. He was right all along. I mean, the whole, so for me, when there's, there's always a bunch of people that are ideologically or financially captured and then there's people that feel morally obligated to tell the truth. And you can spot those people. And when I spotted a few of them, like, okay, let me hear them out. I might be the guy that goes, no, this guy's a cooc and he's going to cross people lives or I might be someone who go, hey, everybody, hit the brakes. Like you might be getting bamboozled here and especially the real concern with any sort of a new drug is always the side effects. But when you have indemnity, when you have complete immunity for any financial liability, like the vaccine manufacturers do, and all you have to do is label it a vaccine. Because that's not a traditional vaccine. It's just not. They changed the definition for mRNA vaccine technology. Before that was not that. It was a very different thing. We all had in our head, vaccines are good. That's why they don't get sued because we need vaccines. And then then, unfortunately, I read Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s book, The Real Anthony Fauci. I was like, oh my God. Did you, what was your initial thought about the COVID shot? What was your mind set? Did you take it? No, I didn't take it. But that's why they were so mad at me. I was ready to take it. I, I, um, the UFC had allocated shots for all the Johnson Johnson for all their employees. And I showed up there on a Saturday, which was the day of the fights. And I said, can you give it to me? And they said, yeah, sure. Let's call the doctor will set it up. I thought I was going to get a shot. I thought it was like a flu shot. Like I'll get that shot and I'll go do the broadcast. I was going to do the broadcast. I didn't think anything of it. I was not worried about it at all. And they said, no, you have to come to the clinic and do it. Could you do that on Monday? And I said, I can't, but I'll be back in two weeks. During the time that I was trying to get it. And then in two weeks later, when the next fights were, it got pulled from the market. Because of blood clots. And then two people I knew had strokes. And I was like, hold the fuck up. And then I got real nervous because there was a lot of family members that were like, really pushing it. You need to get vaccinated. Everyone should get vaccinated. Have you gotten vaccinated? Get vaccinated. We all need you to do our part. We all need to get vaccinated. And you know, then I became a heretic. You're right. Then I was like, okay, I don't, I don't, I don't want to do it. I had a bunch of friends that had horrible side effects, including one of them who is a young guy was a pacemaker now. Yeah. It's hard stop beating for like nine seconds at a time and you black out. It was wild shit was happening. And I was like, I don't understand why this isn't on the news. I don't understand. And then I'm like, oh my God, I'm the news. I'm like, I have to be the news. I don't want to be the news. I like talking shit. I like having a bunch of comedians here. We have laughs. We get silly. You know, have a few drinks, watch some funny videos, crack each other. Have fun or scientists. I like to have fascinating people in here. Tell me how the cosmos was formed. I'm not, I don't want to be someone who distributes information to the masses. It's been lied to. That's not, that's, I don't have any lofty goals like that. Like I want to be the, I want to be the one tells the truth. And that's not what I do. No. I'm just a curious person who talks to people. Was it, was it hard for you to get Ivermectin? No, I got it from India like that. I got boxes of it. I was handed it out to everybody. I think we still have some more. People that have to be in India to get their medicine. What do you ask? Well, I, that was after my doctor had caught it for me. My doctor got it for me. I think I fucked it up for everybody. I think me becoming the attack boy when they went after me. I don't think they would have attacked anybody that didn't have a large platform like that. And I don't think they would, I should say it better. I don't think they would have attacked Ivermectin the way they did. I think they would have just suppressed it. And it wouldn't have been a public thing because it wouldn't have got out. I think the problem was me saying that. The thing, the crazy thing is I said all that other stuff too. I said, IV vitamins. I said, Z-pack, prednisone. I told them all the things my doctor put me on. And all they concentrated on was this Ivermectin thing. I was like, this is wild. Like what is going on? Yeah. And then I was like, am I wrong about Ivermectin? Like then I started just reading about the scientist and the team that invented it. and how they want to know about prides. I'm like, OK, what the hell is happening? Like this is nuts. This is so weird. Well, it was all part of getting the shot in every arm. And that's they had to go after Ivermectin. I mean, they launched a war on Ivermectin. Pierre Corey wrote a book about it. Yes. I appear on early on too. Yeah. And I actually sued the FDA over that horse tweet. And we won. It hasn't really changed anything. But so the FDA, when they put that information or misinformation out against Ivermectin, they were really crossing a line because they're not allowed to tell the public, you can't take a medication for this or you should take a medication for that. They're basically allowed to just approve medications and move on. I mean, they can issue a safety alert. There's something that comes up. But they're not allowed to really direct patients. And that's what they did. So we did see them and we won and they had to take down the horse tweet. But they're not allowed to really direct patients. And that's what they did. And so we did sue them and we won and they had to take down the horse tweet and they had to take down the misinformation on their website. But unfortunately, as evidence by what just happened on Vanity Fair, I mean, the brand of it being only for animals still lives on and it'd be great. What happened at Vanity Fair? So the reporter still used the term horse, it's recent right, wild. Wild. You're still living on horse, do you wear a pusher? In 2025, when Chris Cuomo is out there talking about how he's taking it for long COVID. Right. Right. But we would be great if the FDA could issue some sort of statement saying that it is safe, that it is used in humans. They don't have to say much more than that. But we could use a little help in rebranding Ivermectin. And there are also a bunch of states that are trying to make it over the counter. Not sure if you've seen that. Yes, I have. 17 states have had bills in the last legislative session trying to get Ivermectin over the counter. Three have been successful. So Tennessee, Idaho, and Arkansas. Four, it's still in deliberations and 10, they failed. But another thing the FDA, I believe, should do is make Ivermectin over the counter because people are basically going the feed store. I mean, my own kid, he had some sort of scabies situation in West Texas over the weekend. He had to go to the feed store to get treatment. And I did a poll on Twitter. 52% of the respondents said they go to the feed store to get their Ivermectin. Is there any difference in the Ivermectin from the feed store? I don't know. I mean, I haven't heard of anybody having issues, but it's just unnecessary. This is America. It's crazy. It's great. We should be able to get the medication very easily. And there is some sort of an efficacy for some sort of skin infections. Is that true? Scabies is one of them. Yeah. But you use it topically. Is that how it's worth using? You can. I mean, for scabies, actually, you can take it orally. But yeah. So we shouldn't have to go to India. We shouldn't have to go to the feed store. We should be able to just go to. I mean, I'm actually getting it. I mean, yeah, he still emails me. You need more of my friends. I don't know. That kind of worries me. Because I just bought boxes. I was handed out boxes to people because so many people were telling me they couldn't get it. I mean, I mean, I guess it's probably fine. But it's just unnecessary. People are giving it to me. It shows. They work. That's gifts. I carry around my purse. I like the things limiting for something. Oh, here's my Ivermectin. Oh, I know people that take it as a prophylactic all the time. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's like that. And there's a different yellow fever and river blindness also it's a different parasitic infections. It won a Nobel prize. And it showed that it stopped viral replication in vitro. Yeah, they knew that yeah. Yeah. And I remember when I brought that up to Sanjay Coupe, it was like, but you know it does right? And you can see the look on his face where it's like, I couldn't dog about it. Yeah. He had to skirt around it and do his best. But it was like this is kind of crazy to make an awful label medication, so taboo. And then to stop monoclonal antibodies, just stop them. Well, you couldn't get it. My friend, one of his buddies was in the hospital, and because he was in the hospital, they wouldn't give him monoclonal antibodies. Yeah. If you cross that threshold, you were not going to get monoclonal antibodies. What is that about? Does that make any sense? Well, they did it by the day. Apparently there was some data showing. If you gave it too late in the time course, it actually makes things worse. How many people did they give it to that were too late? How do we know this? It does seem suspicious because like, if something, if you've shown something to be very effective, done early on, wouldn't you assume that we continue to be at least somewhat effective? Now, if you're trying to stop someone is on the brink of death, which is this gentleman might want to die. They didn't get it to him. If you're just trying to stop and you can't do it because you're in the hospital because you're admitted, you're not like crazy data that shows like after 14-year feet fall. 14 days of infection, your feet fall off. You go blind if you take it. Can't give it to you. My theory is they probably had a massive inflammatory response because we would see that. People would get the monoclonal antibodies and they would just feel like complete hell that night because it was like a little war going on in the body. And then they would wake up the next day feeling great. I don't know if you had that experience, but pretty much did. So, the second week of illness was the massive inflammatory response. So my thinking is the monoclonal antibodies may have just exacerbated that. But they could have counteracted that with high dose steroids. And that was another thing. They gave these like piddly doses of steroids in the hospital. And what stories in particular? Metal prednisolone or salutum withdrawal was what we typically use. Is that prednisone what I took? Is that the same thing? Well, prednisones and oral, they're different types. But like I usually do a Medrol dose pack rather than prednisone because it's been shown to help better with respiratory. It's not a huge deal. But in the hospitals, they could give salutum withdrawal and high doses of that. But they were giving very small doses of steroid, which is a problem. Interesting. Well, that's also one of the things that they talked about in the RFK Junior book. Was that the studies that were saying that it was ineffective? The studies were not using the protocol that these doctors were using. And it seemed like these studies were designed to fail. Exactly. Exactly. And like I said, you can find a study to support or go against anything you want, basically. So I just relied on my clinical experience. And I just had so many people saying, wow, it really made a big difference. And I saw people staying out of the hospital and it wasn't hurting anybody. But yeah, a lot of those studies were basically designed to fail. Either the dose wasn't high enough or they gave it too late or it was heavily funded by somebody that doesn't want it to succeed. Yeah. It's all very bizarre. Like really, it's really bizarre to live through. And for you as a person who was out of medicine and then said, jump back in six months before all this, like what is it like to have your worldview sort of like spun around like that? It's just, I mean, it's good and bad. Like I feel sorry for the people that don't get it in a lot of ways. But I just never thought it would come to all this. I didn't go back to work to have a huge, huge career. I was just basically trying to stay busy and active and help people. And yeah, but I didn't envision this at all. But it's been very impactful. I'll say that. Yeah. What has it been like like having to do this? Every two of these podcasts. Yeah. It's wild. Yeah. It's not what I envisioned at all. But it's been, you know, I feel vindicated finally, at least I'm not embarrassed to go to the school functions anymore or show up at the sporting events or you know, you used to be scared to go to the grocery store because it just, they came after me so hard and Houston. I mean, Houston Methodist Hospital is sort of the country club. You know, the elite of the hospitals and so forth. For them to come after me was a big deal. It's hard to get privileges there. Yeah. They, their tagline is leading medicine. And they were very proud of being the first hospital in the country to mandate the shots. They didn't need to go after me. I mean, I was nothing. I was, you know, I saw a lot of COVID patients, but in the grand scheme of things. I really wasn't, you know, I was not really doing anything. It's the Streisand effect. Yeah. Yeah. They attacked you and by doing so, they made the whole thing way bigger than it needed to be. But they did silence other doctors. I mean, I hear from doctors all the time that won't say anything because of what they did to me. Yeah. No, there's a lot of doctors that I know that were in danger of losing their license because they had prescribed I've remacted. And that was another thing. The Federation of State Medical Boards, which is this private entity. They're actually located in Texas who oversees all the state medical boards. They sent out a directive to all the state medical boards concerning I've remacted, concerning misinformation. And basically encouraging the medical boards to go after doctors like myself. And I mean, I'm still, I'm still tangled up with the medical board trying to clear my name. But they did that. That was, it all happened in that fall of 2021, right? When Biden mandated the shots, they really came down hard on the doctors. So what did they do specifically to you? So I got several complaints. The only one of them is really stuck. Others have, I've cleared my name on, but they're all involving Ivermectin. No patient harm. The one that has stuck is from a hospital in Dallas called Texas Heegley Hospital. And there was this man, a sheriff's deputy father of six, who's basically dying. They were talking hospice and his wife wanted him to have the opportunity to try Ivermectin. And he had tried to get it before getting in the hospital and couldn't find a doctor willing to prescribe it. So wife knew he was okay with it. And so she sued the hospital and then she asked me to come on and sort of the expert. They had to have a doctor who was willing to prescribe it because they can't force the doctors to prescribe a medication. But they could force the hospital to give a doctor privileges who is willing to different. And that's where I came in. And we won the case and the hospital had a court order saying that they were going to give me emergency temporary privileges so that could go into the hospital and give him Ivermectin. Well, there was all this stall tactics. They were supposed to give me the privileges the same day. And in other circumstances, at that time because of the pandemic, they were giving doctors same day privileges. It wasn't this lengthy application process because there was a shortage of doctors. Before me, they made me submit my surgical case log for the last three years. They made me get three letters of recommendation. They made me fill out like a 30 page application. I got it all done in 24 hours. And then they're like, no, no, we're actually going to deny you privileges. So it turned out in this big battle. It became very confusing because they had to go back to the judge and finally got the green light. The lawyers like we can go. You've got the green light, the judge, we got the order. There's no stay on the order. I send a nurse to the hospital because this is in Dallas and I'm in Houston. It shows up with the court order and the police greet her and turn her away. There's not a big scene. She leaves, but she's not allowed to give them my remactant. It turns out they did get a stay, but our lawyers weren't aware of it at the time. But this is what they're going after me. They said that I sent a nurse to the hospital without privileges and I caused a scene and I harmed other patients by doing this. And it has been, I mean, three and a half years, they can't find an expert witness to testify against me. There have been three continuances. They finally were awarded summary judgment against me. So I'm already just, they've decided I'm guilty. And now I'm waiting for my punishment. There was a hearing about a month ago to find out what they're going to find me with and that sort of thing. And I'm just waiting on that. But I do plan on appealing. It's just gotten crazy. Wow. So the first thing they attacked you with was what was the first one? For the medical board. I had one pharmacist turn me in because we sort of got in a pissing match on the phone. This is in 2021. That might have been, I can't remember around that time. I had a father reach out to me or 17 year old had history of a kidney transplant and they were going to Europe and they wanted to have Ivermectin just in case he got sick. And I was talking to the dad and the stepmother. I didn't realize I wasn't talking to the mother. So the mother found out I prescribed him Ivermectin and turned me in. But Ivermectin is metabolized by the liver, not the kidney. So it would be no harm for him to get. Yeah, I was having had a kidney transplant for him to get Ivermectin and he never took the medicine. But it cost me $16,000 in legal fees to get that straightened out. So this was your first experience like, oh my god, this is a real battle. Yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean, I've never been in any trouble. I've never been sued. Did it feel weird publicly yet? Like when you when you were saying you were having a hard time going on the grocery store, you're worried that that was when Methodists came after me. So Methodists, they came after you very publicly. Yeah, they tweeted about me. They went to the I found out that my privileges were suspended from a text message from a reporter. That's how I found out. I looked at my phone. What are you talking about? I did. I said check your sources. I don't know what you're talking about. And then I go to my email and they suspended me and then they tweeted about it. And it went, you know, I had CNN, Washington Post going after me. It was traumatic. I mean, I was just a, you know, a mama for with a small practice and all of a sudden I've got CNN calling me. So what did what was going through your mind when that was happening? I spent the weekend in the fetal position in a lot of tears and then I was like, I was pissed. And I just, on Monday, I, you know, I hired a lawyer and I hired a guy to help me with the press and I held a press conference on Monday. I resigned and then I sued them. So and then I just have been working to try to clear my name. Well, it's just, it's so hard to imagine for someone who's never experienced what you went through. What that must be like emotionally. So just get thrown to the wolves in front of the world, like publicly. Buy people like CNN, like we're, we're, we're, it's so weird because if, if that never happens to you, you look at CNN and you go, oh, they're the news. They're going to tell me the truth. That's, I thought that I just automatically thought that or they're at least saying what they're allowed to say. Maybe the government holds back some information, but they're not going to lie. And then I, you see my own self on TV and I'm sure, but I'm used to being in a good attack with things. I think it harder was, is it, you know, CNN whatever, but it's more just locally, like going to grocery store, going to the baseball game with your kids playing and like, hoping, you know, sitting in a corner because you don't want anybody to see you. Did anybody ever bother you? No, honestly, no, but you just feel self, you just feel very self conscious. It's hard not to even now. I'm, I still feel self conscious, but it's a lot better. I mean, you know, mother, I had a Mother's Day event of school and people actually came up and said nice things to me for once. So that was, well, that was nice. Well, a lot of people got red-pilled, you know, to use the matric expression, you know, where they woke up to what's really going on during it. I mean, it's kind of a masterful job of propaganda over the years that the pharmaceutical drug companies have done. I mean, because most people aren't even aware of how many drugs get pulled. They're not aware of the high percentage of them. What is it in the 30s? Well, yes, about 33% they looked at it over 10 years. 33% had significant safety warnings on the drugs. And it took about four years for those to become recognized. I mean, their drugs, I used to prescribe, they're no longer on the market. Yeah. So, yeah, like I said, it would have been any other drug would have definitely been pulled by now based on all the adverse events we've seen. But it's just very profitable. And that's what people have to wake up to. There's a bunch of factors, right? There's the primary one, which is a bunch of scientists that are really trying to help people. They're really trying to develop new ways to cure Parkinson's and all sorts of other problems, cancer. And these people are just consular. And then there's the money people. The money people who take that thing and say, how do we give Oxycontin to everybody? And then you have this Acler family, right? You have evil. You have like actual evil. Maybe they don't have a Lawrence. Maybe they don't have a fork tail. But that's the demonic thing to do. You're infecting people with essentially some of it turns them into a zombie. And it's killing people. Especially when you're going to make a lot of money. In health too. Especially in health. Well, it's because you're so trusted. You're coming from a position of authority. It's a very different thing. In especially in an area where most people are woefully ignorant. I mean, look how many doctors who are practicing doctors who are woefully ignorant about nutrition. It's an enormous amount, right? Now imagine the average person who has to go to a specialist about something. And they're being told, oh, you need vioxx. This is this thing I'm going to give you. And it's going to cure your arthritis like, oh great. And then you fucking stroke out. And the people who made that drug knew it was going to cause problems in people. In the emails that were admitted during the hearings when they lost or during the corporate proceedings, they wound up paying a fraction of what they made. They made like $12 billion. They had a pay. I think they had to pay five. So they made seven. You know, it's costs stuff, stuff costs money. But Jesus, it's so hard to wake up to that. It's so hard to like go away. So they're not looking out for us. They're not like trying to make us better. I always thought they were the people that were the most wonderful people in the world. They're the people that are providing the medication that's keeping everyone alive. This is why our life expectancy is 100 years old now. Has it posted just 20 years ago? Oh, great. Life expectancy has gone down actually. Whoops. Whoops. All the vaccines. Yeah. Yeah. And vaccines are even their own special class, right? It's the gospels of religion. It's a gospel. I mean, it was never questioned in my training. Never. I would have never questioned it. Not only that, I would not talk to anybody who did. I would be like, get out here. I'm not having an aniveax or on the show. Fuck off. But after reading Suzanne Humphrey's book, and I had her on recently, reading that book and was like, what? Wait a minute. What? And then just this can't be true. And then just look at the raw data of like when the vaccines were introduced and also when hygiene was introduced and sanitation was introduced and then massive drop off of the disease. And then at the very end when it's almost gone, vaccines are introduced in almost every case. And yet we all of thinking like, thank God vaccines exist because otherwise we'd all have polio. Like, oh, Christ. Yeah. It bothers me that I never questioned that never would have. The polio one blew me away. When you find out that that was the same time where they were using DDT everywhere and the people that were getting polio first were people in rural farmland communities where they sprayed DDT everywhere. And it wasn't just affecting people. It was affecting horses. And it doesn't cross species. So it wasn't the same thing. Clearly something was going on. And everybody got locked into this polio scare. And to this day, I had a friend use that to me in a text message to me about like, look, we have to really appreciate that. You know, he's like trying to make up for some stupid joke. And he was saying that, you know, look, Jonah Salk, cure polio. I'm like, I don't have the time. I don't have the time to sit down and tell him there's a great book. It's called, dissolving illusions. You should read it. And then you should read turtles all the way down. It's another great book. And then you should listen to Robert F. Kennedy Jr.'s journey from being a very respected and trusted environmental attorney who was applauded by the left to being some nutcase pariah who I thought was a nutcase. I had to apologize to him when I had him on the show. So I have to tell you when I first heard of you. And I felt like I thought you were a cooke. You're in this anti-vaccine cooke. I thought I was living in LA, working in Hollywood. We I bought into it. I'll climb the secret. Everybody around me thought that way. So I thought we all, this is its sensible intelligent people think. Yeah. I don't think you can really convince people. I think they have to figure it out for themselves. No, they don't want to hear it. That's the thing. It's like telling someone that they're spaghetti monster in the sky is not real. Like, you know, they don't want to hear it. I'm just kidding. Right. I've just given up. But I, yeah. But there's hope. I mean, you came around and you're not in the field, right? And people I think, you know, COVID directly impacted every single American. And not in a good way, right? No, there's nothing good about it. The only thing good about it was a shift in perspective. Right. And that it's going to be way harder to pull some shit off like this again. Right. People are not going to buy into it, especially all those vaccine injured people who keep getting gas lit. And why do they keep calling it long COVID? How come nobody I know wasn't vaccinated, got long COVID? Right. Right. What does this long COVID you speak of? Is there a long flu? Is there where's the long pneumonia? What the fuck are you talking about? Why are you calling it? Is it possible that this is a vaccine injury? I'm just asking. Well, yeah, I've been looking at antibody levels in these people. And it's alarming. So we haven't, we really don't have a lot of tests for vaccine injured. It's hard because they'll get the million dollar work up by trying to come to see me. They've gone through multiple tests and multiple doctors. It's not really a million dollars. Is it the work? Well, I don't know. But I'm exaggerating. Right. I just want to be clear. For some vanity, for a seat worker who claimed there was a million dollar markup. I was saying something should fact check me on that. I'm sure it was higher than a million. But, uh, was, oh, so they get, you know, they go through the work up and then they can't find, they can't find a test to prove that they're injured. So the doctors will put them on psychiatric medication. They'll put them on sleeping pills and benzodiazepines and antidepressants. Literally, I saw a patient was put on all three. So the only test that I have found that does seem to correlate is this antibody test. It's a spike protein antibody test. Lab core has it. That's where I send people. Quest has it, but they put the upper limit is too low. so you don't really get a good sense. But, yeah, the upper limit of the test is 25,000. And people that have not gotten the COVID shots, I'd say it ranges, it's usually under a thousand. And then people that have gotten the shots. I mean, a lot of them are off the chart. They're over 25,000. But on average, they're probably 10 times higher than the people have not gotten the shot. And this is people who were, you know, they were vaccinated four years ago. It wasn't like they just got shot. The shot, you know, obviously COVID is not an issue anymore in terms of, you know, people getting sick. But four years later, you should not have sky, high antibody levels. And that's what I'm seeing. And that is alarming. It just suggests that there is a lot of spike protein still in the body causing problems. And haven't they shown that the spike protein continues to produce in the body up to 700 days later? Yes. I mean, that is one study. There's some, you know, what's interesting that study, that antibody levels will really low, which doesn't make sense. So I kind of question the whole study, but yeah, I mean, I see it. I mean, I see patients. I mean, I still see vaccine injured patients coming to me for the first time. Years later, last week, I probably saw six new vaccine injured patients. And they didn't, they're not getting any help. The government, there's, it's called the CICP. That's a vaccine, it's a counter measures injury compensation program. They're supposed to help these patients. They have denied 98% of people that have applied for assistance. They, on average, they, I think they've awarded 20, they've awarded 30 people, 30 of all the vaccine injured that have applied 30 people. On average, they award us like $4,000 for these people. It's horrible. I mean, these people's lives are just destroyed. These are not easy things to treat. It's not like I can give them an antibiotic and they're good to go and they're fine. I mean, they're very challenging. It's, we don't have a lot of guidance. I do see a lot of success with Ivermectin, but it's slow going. It's usually, you know, months of trying to help them. And the government really needs to help these people because there's a lot of people suffering. And they're, they're getting completely ignored. The other issues, we don't even have a code. So every disease has a new miracle code. And it's called an ICD-10 code. It's what they use to compensate people for, or the insurance companies to use them, but also for tracking. So if you have, you know, COVID has its own little code and you can just dive on the code and get all the numbers. They don't have a code for a vaccine injury. They have a code for a vaccine hesitancy, but they don't have a code for injury. So all these people are just sort of, you know, they're getting all these diagnoses, but there's no way to track them. It's a big problem. How convenient. Yeah. Well, I would imagine you, the real problem with paying people is you'd have to pay so many. Yeah. You know, but that's... We can just print the money. I don't know what the problem is. I mean, what do you give them? What if you find out if you have myocarditis and your life expectancy is greatly reduced. And we know for a fact it came out of this vaccine. What do you give a person like that? They're life swages. What wages that they would have potentially earned. What if it's Katy Perry? Well, so be it. You know what I'm saying? Like, you've got a $2 billion. I don't care. Like, what do you do? The vaccine companies can pay that money. I know, but it's insane. The number of people that I personally know. What it's very shocking to me is when I talk to people that are pro-vaccines, still pro-vaccine, I mean, I'm going to be very specific. mRNA vaccine. Still pro-COVID vaccine that will tell me they don't know anybody who was injured by it. I was like, how is that possible? How many people do you know? I know a lot. Yeah. I know two people on pacemakers. Yeah. Two. Yeah. Yeah. I know a lot of people that got fucked up, including family members. I know a lot of people that got fucked up. And people that don't want to admit they got fucked up, all of a sudden they have this new cancer that's spreading like rapidly. Yeah. It's terrifying. You know, it's like I watched the day Jones podcast and you guys were trying to get Casey Means. Allie. Callie Means to talk about SV40. Right. Well, my thing with Callie, I actually talked to him last night. Just why he will not go on record to state that COVID shot should be pulled off the market. And that's the whole, Ma, he's ahead of my look at him. Do you think that's being political that's trying to like appease too many people? What do you think I do? I can't read their minds. But I think it's, I think anybody with a big microphone who is in a position of power and who knows the truth is ethically obligated to speak the truth. That's how I see it. I mean, I'm not a politician. I keep hearing the word strategy. But there are, you know, there are people, I see I'm just faced with the carnage every day in my office. It's just, I can't ignore it and I don't understand why this is so difficult other than, you know, political. But it shouldn't be political. It shouldn't be. Right. That's what's disappointing because we thought that this administration come in and it was just going to kick down doors. Right. I'm a 16 list day one, who killed JFK, let's find out what are all these fucking UFOs? You know like, I'm on my priority list. I might. I'm a dummy. That was my number one. I can add out of those three, give me that one, tell me the aliens are real. But this, this political dance, this, this excuse for that. So I really, really appreciated Jack Cruz kind of pestering him on that. to Brett Weinstein about that as well. And he gave a breakdown of how it actually happened and when the original kidney cells from these monkeys were being used to make vaccines that they inadvertently gave these people this semi-envirus 40, which when it gets into the human body can lead to rapid cancer. Right. Well, yeah, that's one of the cancer causing issues with these shots. It's not the only one though. Right. It goes into the cell. It's supposed to not get into the nucleus, but it could get in the nucleus. We know that it can get into the nucleus. And then if it gets in the nucleus. Well, at first they thought it was going to stay local. Right. Right. It's only going to stay in the arm. Right. So you say right where your arm is, your body will react to it. It will produce the antibodies. And then. the nucleus and then if it gets in the nucleus, well, at first they thought it was going to stay local. Right. Right. It's only going to stay in the arm. Right. When you say right where your arm is, your body will react to it. It will produce the antibodies and then you're good to go. Yeah. And then all these silly people, you can watch them dying the streets and laugh as you step over them. Ha ha ha. I was smart. Right. I trusted the science. Yeah. Yeah. So they know that it that's not true. It doesn't stay local. They know it doesn't dissipate within. It was a small amount of time that was supposed to stay inside your body. They know that's not true. Right. So yeah, they have a they replaced one of the nucleotides with something that's hard to break down pseudo-uridine. They've never shown that pseudo-uridine is cleared from the body. There's no study showing that we can clear it. So that could be why these people have these sky high antibody levels four years later because the body might not be able to break it down. Oh, God. Oh, my God. That's terrifying. What could you conceive of? Would that would help something like that? Like what could you do that would aid the body in being able to do something like that? Is there anything theorized? I, I don't know. I wish, you know, Robert Malay would be a good person to ask maybe. Yeah. Maybe she'd come back on and do a victory, victory lap. Anyway, that guy was torn apart. Yeah. They were trying so hard to make him out to seem to be a cook. And every interview he would do, he would be so reasonable. So logical, so fact-based and so knowledgeable. And they still, they still, he was a cook. He was a cook. I remember some fucking guy yelled at me and, excuse me, yelled at me in Vegas. He said something about me spreading disinformation. Then he said something about that idiot Malone. I'm like that. Oh, that's right. I mean, vendor of mRNA or one of them. You know, I mean, it's, I don't know. I'm sure this, it's not like none of those things ever happened in a vacuum. I'm sure there was a ton of people working on that. But he was one of them. Right. He's fucking brilliant guy. But so how did they find out that it can get into the nucleus? Well, if you look at, if you look at lipid nanoparticles and that's sort of the, that's what otherwise, if you just put mRNA into the body without the lipid nanoparticle, it would get destroyed. So they put the, they put it in the shell, the lipid nanoparticle. And there are studies showing lipid nanoparticles can cross the nuclear membrane. So there's, there's that. Kevin McCurning is a scientist who's, he's on X a lot. He's done a lot of work in that showing DNA contamination that's getting into these shots in addition to the SV40 and DNA contamination. Right. So there's, and this is what Joe Latipo, the surgeon general, Florida. He is actually called for the COVID shots to be pulled off the market. And his, his main argument was there is a certain amount of DNA that is allowed in any kind of these products. And we have proof that they have exceeded that threshold. So there have been studies showing that there's excess DNA in these samples, which shouldn't be there. And that's just sort of this hard line that shouldn't be crossed. Where's this DNA coming from? In the production process, I guess. But it's, it's pretty cut and dry. I think that's why Dr. Latipo has chosen this argument to go by. Because there's just like a hard line that you don't cross and they have crossed that. And what happens if you get too much DNA? Well, you can integrate it. Yeah. The concern is, is it integrate into your own into yourself DNA? Are we going to make it mess up monkey people? No, but cancer, that's right. You imagine we made like hybrid people. They turned out to look like Neanderthals. You know, like we injected them with something that twisted their, their genes back. But just the idea of manipulating your DNA. So terrifying. So what? In pregnant women, right? Right. That's the, you know, be one thing that's a 70 year old man, but a pregnant woman, you know, you hear that. That's these integrate DNA. You don't think good things. That's like immediately. I'm like, what? And these things are technically gene therapy products. They're not vaccines. So which is a real problem with using the same term. Why not use a new term? Well, because then you wouldn't be under the umbrella of protection, the vaccines currently enjoy where they can't be, which is so crazy. It's so crazy. It's just hard to believe it's true. It really is. It is. And so for a person like you that just like you were saying, you see the carnage every day, tell me what it's been like. Like what is it like? It's hard because as an ENT, I'm used to, I'm used to fixing people quickly. So, you know, I get somebody with a science infection, get them anabolic. They're good to go. I got somebody with an abscess. I drain the abscess. They're good to go. It's, it's sort of why I chose my specialty because I like to see the results quickly. I didn't go in a primary care reason for a reason. Like I, and so when I see the injured, it's like, you know, it's very slow growing, slow going. We don't have a lot of research. It's trial and error. These people are young. You were previously young and healthy and their lives have just been completely destroyed. I don't have a big support system of other specialists. I can send them to. It's hard. I mean, I don't feel sorry for myself, but I'm just saying it's just very different from what I'm used to as a doctor. So I really hope that the government will step up and do something about this. Yeah, that would be a nice thing to hope to do something about it, but it would be really nice if some real research was done on what are the actual long-term effects. If you're, if everyone's looking at it from a position of we can't get, you know, suit for this, this is dangerous. Like we have, someone has to look at it and say, well, this, these are the definite effects of this vaccine because it's too much. This is long COVID. It's too much. Oh, he got a neurological condition that was going to happen anyway. It's just coincidentally happened after he took the COVID shot. Like it's got to be some way to determine what of these ailments, like specifically like when you're talking about that abnormal antibody levels, like. Well, there are patterns. I mean, I definitely see the same sort of things over and over again. So it's not like, you know, but as you said, it doesn't have a classification. Right. I didn't have a code. So we need an ICD-10 code for these. That seems kind of crazy. Yeah. Well, imagine if that was the case with like herpes or whatever. Like, hey, yeah, put a damn code in there. So we know what this is. Um, but there, you know, I see very similar constellations, symptoms, I see patients with these abnormal tremors, which, you know, they can't stop shaking, even when they're sleeping. They feel internal vibrations or they'll have severe pain that you can't explain. You know, you get an MRI. There's nothing. There's no nerve damage that you can tell. Uh, I've seen some very strange rashes and normally, you know, it doesn't matter what kind of rashes it is. You throw a few meds at it and it will disappear. Um, but actually the only thing that I found helpful is the eyebrow mectin for these strange rashes. Um, and you see pots where the blood pressure, that's the hardest, I think. And this is, this we're seeing a lot of this. Um, with the blood pressure just drops suddenly with, with no stimulation or the heart races with no provocation. Um, that is very common and very difficult to treat. That's your friend. The man. Yeah. He says every now and then his heart will just jack up to like 180. Yep. And he has to sit down and he just has to hold it. This isn't the last time he breathes. Yeah. He just sits there. He has a heart monitor. He puts a, like one of them wristwatch ones, the Garmin one. He just watches his heart jack up to like 100. 180 beats per minute just sitting there for no reason. Not knowing if you're going to die. Right. Another friend of mine, it was really young was a soccer player. Super healthy guys, super fit, gets the vaccine all the sudden giant heart racing in the middle of the night. Like out of control, like, you know, like you're running us, having a minute mile just jacked. Yeah. Yeah. And he wound up in the hospital twice. The nothing they could do, it all went away. It stopped, went back to normal after a while. But now he's got this like terrible fear that he's got a fucking time bomb in his chest. Yeah. That I didn't know where, which is his heart would just ramp up. And you could say like, oh, that was, it's probably a genetic thing. You probably had it already. It was like, maybe. But this guy was super fit. Yeah. Super fit soccer player. And that's the athletes. The sudden death in athletes. So it used to be 29 per year. And I was 290 per year growth 10 times. It's crazy. Dropping dead. The rarest of rare people to drop dead in the middle of nowhere. The best athletes in the world, the people are the healthiest in the prime of their life. Right. And I want to worry about these kids because, you know, myocarditis, the primary symptom is chest pain. But if you've got a kid who's not even speaking yet, you have no idea if they have myocarditis and myocarditis can leave a permanent scar on the heart and then lead to a lifelong increased risk of sudden cardiac death. And kid, we have no idea. If these kids have been affected. Yeah. And how many kids do we see dropped dead of heart attacks in like high school football this year? Like over the last four years, rather, because it was like, you'd see these articles pop up all the time. You never saw those articles. Or if you did, it was super rare in some kid with a heart condition that was never diagnosed, which does happen. And the schools are now making kids get cleared by a doctor before doing sports, which I don't remember that when we were kids. Yeah. They just threw us right out of the wrestling team. They didn't check shit. They didn't even see if you had a cold. Yeah. I mean, I don't know what's better. It's probably better screen them. You know, they'll find those undiagnosed conditions that kids can have. Well, I just think that I think it's in response to what's happened. Oh, certainly is. But I mean, that might be the good aspect of it. Maybe some people will get diagnosed that didn't have any idea that they were running around with the problem and they can fix it. In myocarditis hard to diagnose, like really the only way you can diagnose my ocarditis for sure is to do either a biopsy or a cardiac MRI, which is most kids are not going to be put through that. Right. So it's scary. And it's what's crazy is this is all true. And yet us talking about it makes us both look like cooks. Like we then will be labeled for sure. Someone will go out and attack us now and label us anti-vax, anti-science, cooks. And this is what's dangerous about this conversation. This is what's dangerous about what they said. And, you know, those people work for the devil. Well, do you think you'll get censored on YouTube? This interview? No. You don't. Because I was just on Jimmy Dore. Yeah. You need to leap out like a full sentence of mine. I'm not bleeding out shit. I'm not bleeping out shit. You think it'll be okay? We'll find out. I think it's wrong if it's not okay. If it's not okay, I think YouTube is more reasonable now than they were during the pandemic. And I think they have a very difficult job managing content at scale where you're dealing with, you know, the amount of people uploading things is insanity. And they have certain things that they've tagged as being controversial because they were anti-science or misinformation that it's still, there's like lingering ones. What was the issue that we had, Jamie? We had like an old episode where there was something in the old episode that would have violated their rules back then. It doesn't violate them now. But we because the episode was uploaded back then, what happened with that? I had like a weird at the time, the penalty was like a, you had to do something. And so like they couldn't take that step away. That was kind of an issue. But the bottom line was everything this person said was true and proven to be true. Now it's 100% facts. So now you can say whatever you want. Like now if you say, hey, you know, super likely that that virus leaked from a lab in China. And now you can say that. Like back then, you would get attacked. It would be crazy. You'd be called a racist. You'd be called the worst things possible. If you just said like the wonderful John Stewart bit that he did on Colbert show, did you ever see that bit? I can't remember. You want to finish my, oh yeah. Let's watch it because it's really hilarious. This is like in the heart of the pandemic. You know, and Stephen Colbert was like vaccine or death. You know, he was all in on it. And so Colbert was like trying to like halt him in the middle. He's doing a bit. John Stewart's doing a, he's doing a funny bit. And Colbert tries to like cock block it. He tries to like trip him. But John Stewart powers through like like the comic that he has. You find it. Don't tell me it was taken down. Give us this one. All right. This is it. I, and I honestly mean this. I think we owe a great debt of gratitude to science. Science has in many ways helped ease the suffering of this pandemic, which was more than likely caused by science. And that's kind of all over. No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Now listen, listen. It's coffee. I would do that to you. I'm a little bit. What do you take? What do you mean by doing like, do you mean perhaps there's a chance that this is created in a lab? There's an investigation. A chance. Well, I'm, so I, I, I, I, I, I love to hear it. There's a novel respiratory coronavirus overtaking Wuhan China. What do we do? Oh, you know, we could ask the Wuhan novel respiratory coronavirus lab. The disease is the same name as the lab. That's just, that's just a little too weird. Don't you think? And then they ask the scientists, they're like, how did this, so wait a minute, you work at the Wuhan Respiratory Coronavirus Lab. How did this happen? And they're like, oh, a pangolin kissed a turtle. And you're like, no, I, you're the name of your life. If you look at the name, look at the name, can I, let me see your business card. Show me your business card. Oh, I work at the coronavirus lab. In Wuhan. Oh, because there's a coronavirus losing Wuhan. How did that happen? Maybe a bat flew into the clowache of a turkey and then it sneezed into my chili. And now we all have coronavirus like... Oh, okay, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait. What am I this? Wait a second. All right, John. Oh, my God. Oh, my God. There's been an outbreak of chocolatey goodness near Hershey, Pennsylvania. What do you think happened? Like, oh, I don't know. Maybe a steam shovel made it with a cocoa bean. Or it's the... Chocolate Factory. Maybe that's it. That could be. That could be. Colbert kept trying to get in the way. That could be. Let me gave them all tuberculosis. Yes. That could very well be. And Anthony Fauci and Francis Collins at Anahisha said, like, you should definitely be investigated. It stopped with the logic and people and things. No, I mean the disease. Wait a second. Wait a second. Wait a second. Wait a second. But it could be possible. You could be right. It could be possible that they have the lab in Wuhan to study the novel coronavirus diseases because in Wuhan there are a lot of novel coronavirus diseases because of the bad population there. I understand it. It's a little bit specialty. And it's the only place to find bats. You won't find bats. No, but we're not saying white. Austin, Texas has thousands of them that fly out of a cave every night. Is there a coronavirus in Austin, coronavirus? No, it doesn't seem to be in Austin, coronavirus. The only coronavirus we have is in Wuhan. Yes. Where they have a lab called the Gensdida. The Wuhan novel coronavirus lab. I believe that, huh? In case. And how long have you worked for Senator Ron Johnson? Let me tell you something. Let me tell you something. I'm going to tell you something. This is not a conspiracy. It's a gun, you couldn't be right. Here's you, couldn't be right. But this is the problem with science. Science is incredible. But they don't know when to stop. And nobody in the room with those cats. He's going to do the other thing that we already saw. The other thing we talked about the Spanish flu, which a lot of people never heard that before either. They did what? Isn't that great? That's one of the best segments ever on late night television ever in the history. Emperor wears no clothes and Colbert thinks Emperor still has a fancy robe on. This is the job of comedians in society at certain times. And John Stewart, he held the torch. I didn't realize he was enlightened. Well, he's a very smart guy. He's not a bullshitter. He's a very smart guy. I don't agree with him on everything. Has he come around on the shot? I don't know. I haven't spoken to him. He lives in another state. But I love the guy. He's great. And he's... He was my favorite comedian. Like when I was younger. He's great comic. Very funny guy and a very nice guy and very fair and honest. He's a... You know, like the type of person who could do that on television in the middle of the shit. Which is what it was. This was like right around the same time where the government was... Where they made that... Remember that release that they had? They said for the vaccinated, you've done your job. But for the unvaccinated, you're looking forward to a winter of illness and death. Severe, illness and death. Severe. It's crazy. Severe, illness and death. It's during Omnicron. Which statistically was a cold. Right. That was the one that had the least mortality. Yeah. So for him to do that during that time was very courageous. Like he had to know. Like he just had to make it really funny. Yeah. Which he did. Yeah. He just... It's so preposterous. Because it's so on the nose. You almost think like if that was in a movie, like that would be two... Like it was a Cohen Brothers movie or something. Like oh my god, this movie's ridiculous. There's no way it would be named the same as the lab. Did he get smeared for it? I don't think he did. No, John skirted out of that. He had a show with Apple for a while and it was really good. But then I think... I don't want to speak out of turn here, but I do all the time so I might as well. I think there was an issue with an episode they did on China. Is that the case? See if there's like data on that or if there's a story on that. But they stopped doing that show. So he had like a Apple show. You know, because Apple TV produces a lot of shows now. They have severance. You ever watch severance? No, I'm watching righteous gemstones now. Oh my god, that's a good show. Oh my god, that is such a funny show. I didn't even hear about it until like this year. There's almost too many great shows. No, it's hard to keep up. That show is fantastic. That show is so fun. I think it's modeled after Joel Osteen. Is it really? That's my theory. And I pass by his church every day. So yeah, there's something about those guys. Those guys that run the mega churches. Like you gotta be crazy. Like not one of them is like, oh, that makes that guy make sense. I see super, super reasonable normal human being that's like, I like that guy. That's I want him as a pastor. No, it's always like some complete cook. In October, the New York Times reported that Apple canceled the comedy show ahead of its third season due to creative differences and exact concerns over stewards coverage of topics such as China and AI. Okay, the China, I get it. Apple has contracts with China, right? They have cell phones made in China. And they actually have to, we were to story about that the other day. We were to read a story about the other day about how the iPhone 17 is so complex that it actually has to be manufactured in China because they have the best manufacturing. So they must have some sort of a thing where you like you can't criticize. You know, fuck it all up for us. You know, fuck it all up for the production of our phones that we need. Do we make all this money, which is why we have more money than in most countries? Well, I don't see how John Stewart would be a threat to their revenue. I just don't think they want him criticizing, you know, China. But the AI one is even more weird. The AI one is even more weird because it's like, don't you think we should make fun of AI? I don't think there should be like something that scares a shit out of people enough to they wake up and recognize that this thing is coming out as like a freight train. There's no guardrails. No one knows what's going to happen. And everybody's like, full steam ahead. Too, too. AI terrifies me. It should. It does. Let's cause your intelligent, you know, I think most intelligent people are aware that this will be a change. That is akin to the asteroid that hit the Yucatan. This is going to hit in some crazy way that like redefines what it means to be human being. It's around the corner. Well, yeah, and you know, Texas, they love AI. They're like put a huge amount of money into AI. Oh, fuck. Oh, fun. Yeah. Chew, chew. I know you love Texas, but I do love here. I, ooh, it does not. It does not what you think. I need to wake you up on Texas. Well, I like the fact that it was free during the time where California was not. You could do whatever you want to. It was relatively relatively right. But in my business and for what I do, like stand up comedy and letting people tell you what you can and can't do. I don't like that. Right. And here they've had a more rebellious spirit in that regard. Mm. And so I think healthcare though is turning Texas blue. Yeah. Like Houston is home to the largest medical center in the world. And it brings in people from all over. And I think mandates started in Texas for a reason. I think they did it here to test the waters. I knew if they could get away with it in Texas. They could get away with it anywhere. Don't make me move to Florida. No, I don't even think I know. I think Idaho. Florida's not any good either. I know it's cold as fuck. Jamie can't live. Look at him over there. He can't survive. He got out of Ohio and he developed thin blood. Yeah. But yeah, Texas. I just I think it's a we have. So Texas Medical Association, largest medical association in the country. They are really proponents of transgender surgery and minors. They are anti free speech for physicians. They are they are pro mandate. They've gone after me. And they have a tight control over the people in our house and state. So I just think we need to be careful. I mean, you saw it during the pandemic and the the medical the economy of our state is dominated by health. And people don't realize that. They just think oil. But health is a huge dominating factor in our economy. And you know, you saw what they did to me. What they're still doing to me. You see the mandates. And you I don't know if you've been following what's going on in the house, but the houses are houses divided. So we've got the freedom. The real true freedom loving representatives. And then we have these pseudo Republicans who who do control everything. But they are basically Democrats and disguise. And I don't know. I really worries me. I know just past a bill the best medical freedom bill in the country. It eliminates all medical mandates except for hospitals, of course. Because. But it's the first one of its kind where medical mandates are finally outlawed. Because I mean, you think about it. You know, all these vaccines that we have to give our kids to go to school is actually fundamentally wrong. We should not mandate any child to get shot to go to school. And Europe, half the countries don't have those kind of mandates. But the United States is very common. You know, all kids have to get these shots to go to school. And if you opt out it's a big deal. And some states don't even allow it. Don't even allow exemptions. So I think it's a wake up call. I just I never thought about the whole the fact that I had to get my kids to the shot. So the school is being an issue. But now the COVID happen. I see it as a huge issue. But Florida, you know, Florida has been kind of behind it too. You know, they're not one of the states trying to get Ivermacked in over the counter. There were nine states who tried to pass bills banning mRNA. They all failed. But Florida wasn't one of those. So Florida worries me too. I don't. I don't. I don't. They have good skiing there. I don't ski. I quit skiing a few years back. My last accident. I'm like, I'm done. Ski. I love skiing. Oh, it's fun. Don't get hurt. Don't get hurt. Don't get hurt. That's how I feel every time I ski. But I've had a bunch of surgeries as a problem. Like I know the vulnerability of knees. Yeah. I've had three knee surgeries. Yeah. It's like it's it's rough on you. Yeah. But it's fun. We. It's just for me like the juice isn't worth the squeeze. There's a bunch of other stuff that's a lot more fun. It doesn't come with risk of broken bones and concussions. Yeah. I don't know. I like rural orchestras for fun. Oh, no. I can't. You're one of those. I'm not. No, I'm not full on but I don't know. Have you had the new rural orchestras? Have you been on them recently? Oh, yeah. I have kids. Yeah. They're much better. I mean, they're not what the ones we grew up with. They're like it Disneyland has some insane ones. The one the Incredibles ride. Have you done that one? Whoa. I like Guardians of the Galaxy. Oh, that's great. That was fun. That was really fun. Yeah. You know what's the best ride? It's in Disney World. It's an Avatar three virtual reality ride. It's incredible. Is that in Florida, California. Florida. Oh, yeah. I think it's called flights of fantasy or something like that. It's incredible. Like you are one of the Avatar people and you fly around. I'm a dragon. And it's so good. It's so good. It just like you feel the breeze. So missed in the air. At a certain point, I'm realizing why I'm doing this. I'm like, this wasn't even remotely possible just 20 years ago. Like what is it going to look like 20 years from now? Like I'm not going to have any idea. They're going to put a helmet on me. It's going to like sync up with my brain. Ready. Brainsink. And also you're going to be in that world. You're like, whoa. And you were going to trust those people to let us out. You know, that that's 100% coming. Yeah. I'm happy with the roller coaster. I'll stick with that. It's not worth it. It's not as good. You take the brain thing. Get in the Avatar world. I get six on that ride. The ones where the 3D I get kind of nauseated. This one you're on like a motorcycle, like a fake motorcycle. And that's represent the dragon. And you have like a handle you hold onto it. And it starts moving around. So like as you're flying, it's like it's a full set. of sensory experience. I think I did that. And my kids made fun of me because I was screaming on it. You did that one. It just didn't even have a couple of years ago. Yeah. I haven't done it since. It's so good. Such a good ride. And that's just the tip of the iceberg. And when you connect that to AI, so it tailor something that's specific for your whatever crazy fantasy you want to do. We already have video games that people can murder people. Like that's like the most popular video game is Grand Theft Auto. And one of the things that people love about is you could beat some mechanics of death for no reason. Do you think that allows people to get out there for frustration so in a healthier way? Perhaps. I would recommend martial art. I think that would be a healthier way. But I think more than anything what it does is allows you to disassociate and just to be able to, because it doesn't mean anything. It's not really a person. It's getting beat to death. But the imagery is obviously of a person. It's getting beat to death. And you're able to do it with no consequences, no recourse, no bad karma. You don't even feel bad because it's a part of the game. You know, there was, what was that one where you could drag the wild west one where you could beat people with whips? Red dawn redemption is a very dumb. Red dead redemption. Crazy games where you can do horrible things to people. Like what is it going to be like when you have video games that are actually virtual reality completely immersive and you could just be a serial kid? You be Jack the Ripper. They give you a knife and you're in London in the 1800s and you're Jack the Ripper. Why do people create these? Because they can. Right? It's like what John Stewart said about the nuclear bomb. Like why do they do that? Well, and this is the same thing. This is the parallel to the Manhattan Project because we're not the only ones that are trying to find the get to the solution of what is like the ultimate expression of AI in its current form. The Manhattan Project, because we're not the only ones that are trying to find the, the, get to the solution of what is like the ultimate expression of AI in its current form, like super intelligent, sentient artificial intelligence, like something that's going to be God, like power and ability. China's working on it too. We have to work on it. If we don't work, like, everyone's like, hang on. We're like, no, two, two, just China's working on it. We have to do it. We have to get there first. So this is, it's just like the Manhattan Project. And I don't think it's going to matter. I think once we get there, it's going to be so weird for everybody. It's, I think civilization's going to be an upheaval. And I think we were entirely attached to the idea that this civilization that we live under where our money is all in hard drives and it's all ones and zeros on a database somewhere, not even backed up by gold anymore. It's all super weird already. Like this is standard forever. I don't think it is. I don't know. I feel like there may be a backlash because we know this, this, this wanting to do real things and do, you know, real experiences. I mean, I know there'll be a few hikers, maybe a few hikers, few people who are going to be here. When you're on your computer all day, the first thing I want to do is just get outside and get away from all that. And so I hope is that there'll be a backlash. Well, there'll be a few, right? This is like there's people that are still pro vaccine today. Right? They're still pro mRNA vaccine. They can't wait for a new booster. There's people that are out there like that, right? You're always going to have different kinds of people. You're never going to have one thing where everybody adopts it. There's going to be a bunch of people that want to live a subsistence lifestyle in the woods forever and let all those morons in New York, put their helmets on and live in Fucking Avatar land. I'm going to live out here in the real world. But if you think about how many people play games today versus how many people played games 30 years ago, it's off the charts. Right? Like what, what are the numbers? Like when I was a child is when they had pong, it was the first one. Do you remember them? Yeah, it was in the seared store. Do you remember that? You go shopping for jeans and you play the game? That's where you bought your tools. Yeah. Tough skins. Yeah. And that was revolutionary. You could play a game on television. And it was a really simple game. You know, do do do do do do do do do. And you'd be playing ping pong with this like slow moon ping pong ball. And it was fun. And we all loved it. Family would gather around play ping pong. And then you fast forward to call of duty. Like that's insane. Like that isn't saying these kids are they have microphones on their talk and they're running through. Foluja gunning people down like this is crazy. So the numbers went through that phase, but they seem now to be sort of disinterested. Like they they kind of did a good job. Well, I do think they just happened. I think a lot of kids are disinterested because they realize that the the beck and call of life and becoming a success is you cannot get too wrapped up in these things. Because they will steal your time. And but my point is that the amount of people that are allowing it to steal their time today. And I know you're enjoying it. Do I steal your times of bad? Like have fun. Play your games. I love them. They're fun. But I can't do them. There's too much. See, they're too exciting. They're too good. But these are just the beginning. What we're experiencing now call of duty and first person shooters everybody loves and comparison to what's going to happen when they put that thing on your head. And then all sudden you really are on battleship troopers. Is that what was that movie where they fought the aliens? Starship troopers. Did you ever see that one? No. Great moving. But it's the future or you know, the fight off aliens giant alien bugs. You could be in that. You could be in it. Feel the sand on your feet. Feel the wind in your face. Smell the breath of the beast as you shoot it down. It's going to be too compelling. Yeah. Either that or go work at the supermarket near the supermarket all day. Well, you want to play pickup basketball? Who could you suck a basketball? He didn't bricks. I think they used to roll up coasters. No. No, no, no, no. I don't know. I just think it's just it's a test of civilization. And it's it's probably something that is changing our species and changing it really quickly before we even realize it. Like just like we turn changed wolves into dogs. It's turning us into technology dependent gelatinous water balloons of blood. That's that's a dark. It is dark. They're trying. I think they'll take over doctors. And they're going to take over lawyers, doctors. They're probably going to take over a lot of actors. I think actors and even screenwriters are in real trouble. Wait, wait, wait. How do you take over an actor? Because these AI videos now are in the same. They're so good. Have you ever seen the one where there's standup comedians talking on stage about how and there's people out there that believe that we're a prompt. Like like and then they're going to people in scenes of movies that are like like saying, do you really believe this is a prompt? And there's Vikings like incredible Viking village where you're like walking down the village. It's all AI. And it looks like Hollywood movie quality. It looks like some crazy new blockbuster that's out about Vikings. They have chromagda man walking, you know, like hunting on a raft, moving through the frozen frozen lake. It's the whole thing is nuts. It's so good. It's so and it keeps getting better. Like this is insanely good compared to what just existed a couple of months ago. Like a year ago, like there's you it's unrecognizable. We get like computers move so slow in comparison. Like think about when did when did you first get your first computer? Probably medical school. What year was that? Like 1998. Okay. So you're probably running Windows 98. Right. It kind of worked, but it was a little buggy. Sometimes it would crash. You get the blue screen of death. Then within like five years, they got way better. 10 years, they got way better. But now if you look at if you have a laptop now and 2025 versus a laptop from 2020, no difference. No, I have an old MacBook that I use sometimes because I like it. Cause click your keyboards and it's fucking old to shit. It's really old. Like it seems like a regular laptop. It's not that much different. The AI from then was nothing. It didn't exist. And now it's making movies that are off the charts. The unbelievably realistic. And this is just one version of it. They're going to have a way better version of it a month from now, a way better version of it six months from now. And where does that end? Like it doesn't. It doesn't end. And who knows what the news is now? You know how many times someone sent me something on Twitter? And I thought, wow, that's crazy. War footage. And it turns out it was just from a video game. Wow. Yeah. The people get duped. They see a plane getting shot down. They think it's real. Like wow. No, it's just a scene in the video game. Yeah. I haven't seen these videos. Yeah. I've seen photos that look very realistic. I haven't seen these videos. I have to get checked that out. They're too good. They're too good. And this race to AI is, you know, we're all involved in it. And I worry that it's not in our best interest, just like I worry that our health system is compromised. I worry about it all. I worry there's a lot of people that are going to be insanely wealthy once this goes live. Like once this goes live, the haves versus the have nots will be so far separated. But how do you make money off of AI? You control everything. First of all, the stock market, you figure out the stock market immediately and bet insane amounts of wealth at things and compound it and figure out when to buy and when to sell instantaneously. You could even use AI to manipulate markets by having a bunch of bots tweet about something. So you didn't even jack up a stock price and then you would go in and clean up. You would create crypto coins, unlimited amounts of crypto coins, dump tons of money in it, hire celebrities. They wouldn't even know, hire them to promote the crypto coin, pull the wool out from everybody, make billions of dollars. And you just do that over and over and over and over again instantaneously, all around the world. Then you have all the money. Like AI, if you're in control of AI and AI is artificial super intelligence and you tell it, make me as much money as you can as quickly as possible in the stock market. This is what we have a hundred million dollars to invest. We have a billion dollars to invest. If you're already wealthy, if you're a huge company already, you could do something like that. And who knows what kind of effect that would have. You could manipulate world governments instantaneously. You could cut off pipelines. You could sabotage power grids. You could shut down energy plants. You could do all kinds of things. You can insert viruses into systems that control every aspect of society instantaneously. You crack all, especially once they figure out how to attach AI to quantum computing, then we're doomed. Then we're really doomed because any of any computational problems, you have insane amounts of computational power. And it's all in our lifetime. Like that's what's not. It's like this will be if people survive and there's like a golden age, thousands of years from now, they find the relics of the civilization. They go look through and they figure out how to open up hard drives. And they see us having this conversation about it. Yeah. It's going to be weird. Can you be like, oh, they saw it coming and they did it anyway. Well, how do we stop it? I mean, I think Elon Musk was sounding alarm and if he can't stop it. Not only do you need to stop it, but he joined in. I think that's the ideas that you have to do it because other people are doing it. If they get a hold of it first, it'd be catastrophic. And I'm sure I screwed up a lot of possibilities in that little stupid rant of mine, but it's something I think people need to have in their head because this isn't something that's not going to affect you at all. That's not going to affect me. I don't really have to pay attention to the politics and Poland. It's not going to affect me. You know, you can you can do that with this one. You can't do it with because it's going to affect all of us in the world. You're not going to know what the news is. You think rowing stone fooled us with that stupid picture from Oklahoma with a bunch of people that are gunshot victims waiting in line like they used AI for their picture. But yeah, right. But they're there. So that's a good point because that was only a couple of years ago today. They probably would. But this is, you know, that's a clear lie. And it's a bad one. What about the really good ones, the really well coordinated ones that are using artificial created images? Like how are we going to know? How are we going to know? Like when I Google something, I'm not going to go do clinical research. I'm not going to test these things to make sure it's correct myself. If you're in control of all the information on the internet, like you can instantaneously create a bunch of websites with fake data on it, you can do that easily, especially if people don't have access to the ability to actually make their own tests. You could change everything. If you're you have AI or hacking into this and all, all the encryption's bye bye. Everything's bye bye. All these little roadblocks that we kept up there to keep our feeble primate brains from cracking these codes. Like all that stuff goes away. Can you get real weird? Yeah. I don't have an answer. I don't want you to go get a bunker after this podcast. I know. I don't think it's going to be that bad, but I do think it's going to be really it's going to change. Just society as we know it. I mean, there's probably going to be a lot of good aspects of it too. I think the medical aspect of it is pretty amazing. Chat GPT alone when you can put in your blood work and give you some. Well, I put in an MRI that I had my own and it missed it. Telling us. I mean, it was Grock. It was not chat GPT, but which one's the best at that? I don't know. I don't like chat GPT. So there's there's some other really good ones to it. All I use is Grock. That's it. Your article right now. I'm. I don't trust chat. I don't trust Grock, but I certainly don't trust chat GPT. Well, I was listening to someone talk about a new program that is, you know, they have Pegasus. So Pegasus can read your phone. This new program is a zero click. It reads everything in your phone, including your encrypted messages. You have no idea if you have it on there or not. There's no way to detect it. And it's it's been being used, but used currently. What's the name of it? Um, I don't know. Jamie, see if you could find out the name of it. The old one was Pegasus. The new one is a similar preposterous name. I found Palantir. I don't know. That's a different thing. I think Ian Carroll was talking about it. Well, it's so then you. Okay. So do you want to be privacy anymore? So then your text messages don't have any privacy. I just to see if I don't have any privacy anymore. If it wasn't for Elon Musk, buying Twitter, you imagine how weird the world would be right now. Yeah. Weird. I mean, so fortunate. I was kicked off for five months. What did you do? The guy you kicked off? I really I was kind of timid back then compared to what I say now. I really wasn't that, but I did. I had a tweet that went viral and it was America first legal was suing the CDC over some email. I can't remember exactly. It was something like American first legal has just exposed the CDC in a way of viral. And then that was my last tweet. I was a race for five months. What excuse they give you? I don't remember, you know, violating community standards. Wow. What did that feel like? And then I got it. And then I'm trying to get up truth and get her. It's just not the same, right? No. You just don't get that feedback. You know what I think about those things too? And GAB as well. I think they're all infested with like state out of state actors, other countries, other countries, intelligence agencies and even our own countries. And then even corporations. I think they're infected. I think even like democratic and Republican operatives. I think a lot of the traffic is bots. Yeah. Well, I see that on Twitter definitely 100%. It's almost not worth engaging anymore. It's like, what are we doing here? Like you're arguing with someone. It's not even a real person. And I think that's like, that's a big part of it. And I think in those other alternative platforms, like truth, I think they, they do that to make them ridiculous for everybody else. You know, so the last thing they want is a bunch of people competing to see who's the freest, right? Right. So what's the best way to do that? Well, you have to sabotage this new social media platform. The moment it comes out, the moment it comes out, swastikas, you know, tapping the frog, the worst possible things post as much as you can. So that this place becomes toxic. All right. You know, so that you have to have like a zero tolerance policy like blue sky does. You go to blue sky if you tweet there are only two genders. Band get the fuck out of here. I was on blue sky for a bit. How long? How long did you last? I don't know. Yeah, I got, I got a slid in before it was open to the public. Oh, that's right. During the pot. And then I just got on got bored. I got in some fights with, um, guy, who's that woman? She's a lawyer. She's a big vaccine enthusiast. Vaccine enthusiast is hilarious. Yeah, she's a really hot. She said, she's like the, she's like the female version of hotels. Um, anyway, I just got one. Lena when? No. Um, I can't remember. I know what she looks like, but I don't want to say it. I don't want to. Don't worry. She don't have to say it. So what was that like? Blue sky? Yeah. When you got into it with her. I mean, whatever. It's, yeah, I've gotten so many fights on X. It's not really it's a, it's a, it's just funny. I, you know, when, when before methods went after me, I got in some fights on Facebook with, you know, these private groups and there are a bunch of women that get together. The neighborhood women's group. Oh boy. Vicious. Oh boy. Very vicious. And it was the Houston Women's Physicians Group. And they, they called me birth and they like started. They're like, come birth. Yeah. They, they, they. My birth. I got mad at them. I don't know. Why are they having your birth? I don't know. They, they just, like we don't want you in our group. You should go find another group and you're spreading misinformation. Whoa. Yeah. Whoa. It's like that. And there's a neighborhood group that went after me. Um, those are more, I don't really care about the anonymous X people. Right. But, and I had a couple, uh, had mama, Dr. Jones, who has a million followers on TikTok come after me and make videos about me and, um, another, there's this time. You spread misinformation. Yeah. Yeah. And then I'm a grifter. Oh, that's, they always throw that one. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Uh, there's this pharmacist, Savannah. She goes by our exorcist and she has an only fans account as all the side. She's come after me, like just vicious. I mean, these, some of these women are just. Oh, no. Really toxic. Yeah. When they have the right to be, that's the thing. It's like when they feel like they've got the green light to just be as evil as possible and to turn you into like some subhuman. Mm hmm. Yeah. Especially if they don't like it because you're a doctor. I just think she's so smart. Spread that misinformation on a neighborhood. Yeah. So overall, coming out of it on the other side though, and do you feel a sense of indication at least, like as the public is embraced you and you've, you've got a lot of followers on Twitter that support you. You know, after I'm sure the Danny Jones podcast, I'm sure that a lot of people were listening to your story. And yeah. I mean, it's yes and no. I mean, I still have the medical board that I'm dealing with. Um, method is possible. Just sued me. Um, so there's just, there's still a lot of drama, unfortunately. But yeah, I have hope there's a, there's actually a lawsuit today that's first jury trial in the country over these hospital protocols, where they had a young woman with Down syndrome. They basically euthanized her. Uh, they gave her a DNR order, even though she didn't have one. And the father has just been wonderful as a Shara family. Um, and they're. Why did they do that? They euthanized her for what? They I've seen this. I have reviewed records from these hospital patients. And they'll euthanize them. They need the bed. They say, well, they're going to die anyway. Um, what was this person in the hospital for COVID? COVID protocol. So, um, and they wait, wait, wait, wait. So they were in the hospital with COVID and they gave them something to kill them. Yeah. That happened off. I'm sorry, but I hate, I mean, that happened. People they give more feeding and insulin. What? Yeah. Yeah. That's common. Yeah. Yeah. I've reviewed charts in this situation. Um, they gave her a DNR, which does do not resuscitate. Meaning if they look like they're dying, you don't do anything, which that was not the case. So they're they're suing for battery, which is one way getting around the prep act because the prep act is very, um, hard to penetrate. The prep act protects everybody. All the doctors, all the hospitals from any wrongdoing during COVID. So it's been this big challenge trying to get around the prep act. In this case has hope of getting around the prep act because they're charging for battery and they're in trial at start of today's in Wisconsin. Uh, so that that gives me hope. Um, I don't know if you've heard of Brooke Jackson, her case. She sued Pfizer. She was a whistleblower. So she was one of the heads of the research clinics. And she was in charge of overseeing the protocols. And she found that they were skipping necessary steps. They weren't following up with injuries. She basically became a whistleblower. And then they've immediately fired her. And now she's suing Pfizer. But this has been going on, you know, since 2020, um, and the DOJ unfortunately has stepped in and tried to shut down the case, which normally DOJ comes in and helps people when they're trying to sort out a, um, this is a key T.M. case. And it, I mean, it could bankrupt Pfizer, but now our own government and even this is under Pam Bondi. So this is the new DOJ is coming in to stop this case from happening, which is bothersome. But these two cases are argument for why, why are the trends stopped? Because it would impact public health policies would go against our country's public health policies by proceeding with this case and letting it go to trial. How, how so? I don't know. Just, that's their, that is basically what they said. We tried to steal man what they're saying. I mean, I'm not, it's not my case. And I don't, you know, the lawyer would probably have a better explanation. But in it, it's just met with so many roadblocks. Um, but the, the euthanizing one is still stuck in my head. I just can't imagine that's real. No, no, no, it is definitely real. I mean, it's when they determine that someone's going to die anyway. Is that what it is? Great. I mean, they'll justify giving morphine because they'll say, oh, well, they're struggling to breathe. Well, guess what, morphine actually presses your drive to breathe. Um, but like this one case I remember, it's patient, he was sick. He looked like he was dying, but they just like pushed morphine. He no pain, you know, they do a pain score. So zero to 10. This guy had zero pain. Uh, and then they pushed insulin to drop a sugar and his glucose was fine. And then he died three minutes later. And yeah, I turned them into the medical board and reviewed this chart and turned them to the medical board. Nothing. They didn't do anything. Uh, but yeah, they definitely definitely went on during COVID. Jesus. That is such a terrifying thought that someone would just decide. So many people are dying. This guy's definitely going to die. Yeah. This is 100% real. Yeah. Definitely. Definitely. Yeah. It seems like something something would tell me. Yeah. They don't call it euthanasia. It seems like something that someone would tell me and then I would have to ask you. Like this is something someone told me. I'm sure this is the record that I read. It seems like something I would be bringing up to you as a ridiculous thing and you would shoot it down. Right. No, I wish I wish I were. Um, it's not truthful, but yeah, so definitely definitely help happen. Would you have ever imagined this before you became a doctor? No. I mean, I did. So it's one of my former attendings and ENT when Katrina hit her name is Anna Poe. She got investigated for euthanizing patients in the ICU during Katrina. So they were paid, you know, all the powers out, the big hurricane. And she was going through the ICU and pushing morphine on people. Um, she got off, but that's an example. I mean, doctors will and nurses will do that and nurses have a, yeah, there's usually a standing order. So you can give morphine PRN as needed. So it's not always just the doctors. Sometimes it's the nurses. Do you know how many people get assisted to aside in Canada? No. Do you? You ready? Jamie, pull the numbers up. It's crazy. It's crazy. And they'll, they'll do it if you're just depressed. Right. They'll do it if you don't like being overweight. They'll do it if you, you know, whatever. It's awful. It's awful. I mean, they're just, it's a lot of the vaccine injured or doing it. They're going to Switzerland. We're going to Canada to have this. The Canada numbers are bananas. Like you see, like this can't be true. This can't be true. And here it is. More than 15,000 people received medical assisted assistance and dying in Canada in 2023. What, what is it in 2024 now? This is an old story. So imagine 2025, we're, we're, they're, this is crazy. 15,000 people, they've helped them die. Instead of like help them live. Instead of like we used to call suicide hotline, hey, don't do it, Bob. You know, now, Canada's like, come on in. And if you want to suicide, I'm making an appointment for you. Come on in, eh? You know, shouldn't we be helping people get past that? Yeah. Not the goal. Like, hey, maybe, maybe we can get you healthy. Maybe we get you feeling better. You know, maybe we can do something about all your hormone levels and all the things wrong with your body. Maybe that's why you're depressed. And God. I mean, there's legitimate reasons for people to do it. Don't get me wrong. If you're like, I know a guy did a Michael there who's a hilarious comedian. And he had ALS and it got real bad at the end. And he knew I'm getting any better and saying went to Oregon where they could do it for you. And I get it. I get that one. But if you depressed, Jesus Christ. That's it. The worst is the vaccine injured because they're just, they've lost hope. Right. And they've been gassed lit. That's what's so crazy about this. And people have helped them with it. There's a bunch of people that were, they feel really guilty about pushing the vaccine early on. And they feel connected to it. And they'll still put these blinders on and like choose to pretend that it's safe. Millions of lives and keep pushing forward with the same narrative and they'll, they do the man's work for the man, unfortunately, in social circles. You know, like you're, you're, you're punished, you're punished for having any sort of heterodox views, anything that steps outside, anything that could get you in trouble, anything that people could get argue like, oh, she shouldn't even live in our neighborhood. You know, she doesn't even want to fax seeing their kids. Anything like that. People are scared of that. And so just the fear of being ostracized from your community. But once you get past it, it's so freeing. Well, you don't care at all. Are you kind of, I mean, I know you're not happy that it happened, but are you kind of, you clearly probably come out of it a person with a different perspective? Definitely definitely. Oh, I don't, I mean, I don't regret it. It's, it's been a roller coaster, but it's a, yeah, I feel free. I like, yeah, you can't really say anything to me anymore that would hurt me. Yeah. That's a good place to be. It is. And, you know, I really admire people like you that you, you weren't a public person. You weren't a person who sought attention. But when, you know, you were thrown into this battle and you've handled yourself really, really well. It's very impressive. Because I can't imagine this dress like when you're saying you're in the fetal position for two days. I'm like, how'd you ever get up? I know. I mean, it was anger that helped me. Anger can help you. Yeah. When you came out of it on the other end, like, are you happy that it happened? Uh, yeah. I, it's, yeah, I'm ready to rest. I'm exhausted. But I feel like I said, I mean, I feel free. Um, I think you grow when you go through difficult times. I certainly learned a lot about taking care of patients. And, um, you know, I made so many assumptions before. I feel like I'm a much better doctor. Um, I am, I am utterly exhausted though. I will say that and I'm ready for a break. Um, and I'm frustrated that this, I don't, you know, what's going on now with the new administration is not giving me a lot of hope. Um, but everyone's hope is that there's incremental change. And that's going to take a while to get through some hurdles. That's everybody's hope. But, you know, it's how many administrations have these incredible promises? And then the same thing with the Obama administration. You know, there was, there was a lot of these people like we were, we had, these amazing hopes the whole world's can change now. And then, oh, jeez, same thing, same thing over and over again, same thing. More corruption, more people getting paid, you know, well, people are mad at me because I keep criticizing Kennedy and my, but I'm like, what, what's the downside? You know, we have to keep pressing. We have to just count away and not let, you know, be the squeaky wheel and just remind them what we want. Right. We wanted facts. We wanted to stop being lied to. We wanted no more propaganda. We wanted to know the truth about all sorts of different medications and why they're prescribed and why were the sickest ever? Why, why are we so sick? Why are we the nation that has so much money and spend so much on healthcare has the sickest people? That doesn't make any sense. That, that doesn't seem like a good system. Yeah. You can't just say this system has to stay like it is forever for the safety of everyone. on health care has the sickest people. That doesn't make any sense. That doesn't seem like a good system. You can't just say this system has to stay like it is forever for the safety of everyone. Like, I'm fully on board with my ha's message about addressing chronic disease, fully on board with that. I just find it troubling that they are not talking about mRNA. There is nothing in that maha report about mRNA. What do you think would cause that? Do you think they have someone to sit down? Well, they are going to say it is strategy. Others think it could be a misdirection strategy. Not just a, okay, we are trying to get where you want. We are just going out about it a different way. Or we are doing this to completely distract everybody from the elephant in the room. That is my concern. What is the elephant? mRNA, the COVID shock, the pandemic, the biggest health crisis in our generation that directly impacted every single person. We are not talking about it. Right. Do you think that the strategy, if you had to look at it from the best case scenario, like the strategy would be get some things changed, like stop man dating it for children and pregnant women and then more and more studies can get released, more and more data can be pushed forward. Right. But we need to get the narrative out there because there is going to be people that vote against it. So if you didn't get it in the first time, Kennedy doesn't need any votes. He's got the power. He could, a stroke of a pen. Where do you think the politics come from then? If you have that mandate, that is what you want to do when you get in. What has happened? Right. Somebody, what does somebody have something on him? Why is he not acting? Because if it were me, I mean, maybe people say, well, he'll get fired. So what? Get fired. Go down Kamikaze, save the world from mRNA. Because if he takes it off the market so hard to get it back on, stroke of a pen. You ever talk to him? I've met him once. I like not knowing him though. I don't want to feel like right you're obligated to support him. Right. Right. That's great of you. Yeah. That's very smart. Unfortunately, I know him. And I like him. And I think the people in my circle who know him are now being quiet because they have a relationship with him and they don't want to fend him, which I understand. Right. But I feel like I'm not there. So I'm just going to, you know, I can't read minds. I don't have any inside information. So I'm just going to call it as I see it. You should. Yeah. I think we can't, you know, you can't turn blinders on either side. And without anybody without anything. Just because someone's on your team, if they're doing something that you think is goofy and doesn't make any sense, like this could be a real problem. You've got to say it. Right. I think you're ethically obligated. I mean, this is, this is in the, yeah, I started a organization called Americans for Health Freedom. She tried to find the politicians with moral courage to simply state that the COVID shot should be pulled off the market. And it has been slow going. But we are up to 252 politicians who will go on record just to state that these shots should be pulled off the market. But it's a problem. I mean, you know, these politicians are not getting these shots anymore. And they're not giving them to their kids. And yet they're fine just saying quiet and not saying anything. They're fine letting their constituents get these shots when we know all the complications. We know that it doesn't work. We know that the risk far outweighs the benefit and the politicians are staying quiet. So our goal is to support the ones who will speak up and get them more power. Is any kind of impressive though what money can do? It's kind of impressive. You get everybody to shut them out. It's kind of impressive. Well, money and power. I think there are a lot of people that, you know, they'll kiss the ring. And definitely if you, yeah, those of us that don't want power, don't want a position, it's also very freeing because you can you don't need anything from them. But it's just it's such a bizarre time because all these things that we've always held as being sacred forever are now being challenged. And one of them is the fluoride in the water. That's a big one. And to watch that guy argue against fluoride being removed from the water, watching Kennedy and him argue it was like it's hilarious. Like the argument for keeping in the water is so dumb. It literally lowers IQs or at least it's correlated with a very decrease in IQ measurable. Well, and I agree with that. I just on the flip side of that though, we are seeing, what I see in my office is people maybe taking things too far off the beaten path. And like this Mahat report, one thing I have a real bone to pick with is they've basically waged war on tons of lactamase in ear tubes. What is that your tube? So kids, when I adults do, but mostly kids that have middle recurrent or chronic middle ear infections, they get fluids stuck in their middle ears. And so you put a tube in there to drain it and keep it from coming back. It's a, I mean, it takes five minutes. They get anesthesia, but they get a gas. You know, they don't get a super heavy anesthesia. And it's very rare to have an complication. You know, I'm not for just frivolous surgery, but I feel like this one is it really can make a huge difference in their quality of life. The parents quality of life because they're parents off antibiotics. You know, you get adult with a middle ear infection. It will bring them to their knees. So these ear infections can be really painful. You know, they don't have to take all those antibiotics. And, but this Mahat report just came out and said that they called it proven harmful. The tons elect me and adenoidectomy at ear tubes proven harmful for kids. And that is just, how could the ear tube be, what were they saying? How was it proven harmful? It drained to kids ear. It was completely unnecessary. And it was just all, you know, basically done for money, makes no difference in an overall outcome in the child. But yeah, doesn't alleviate pressure. Like, you hear in the other thing is here. I mean, the biggest issue is you've got a bunch of fluid in your ear. It does affect hearing. And when you're trying to develop speech that that can be problematic. So what do you think they're doing? Like, why are they going after those two things? I just think it's an example of this gone too far in the other direction. Okay. Two, two. Yeah. Let's let's reject all of science. Right. So tell me about tons elect me because I'm ignorant. I'd heard that, you know, you should give you have tons of light. So you got to get it removed. And then I've heard you you should never get a removed. Yeah. I know. It's gone. It swung in both directions. So it used to be the lineup, the kids were all going to get the tonsils out on Friday and the whole family did it. It was just done, right, for no reason. It's gotten way more conservative now. Now the main indication in young children is when the tonsils get really big, they block the breathing. So kids will come in. They're snoring really loudly. They're waking up a lot. They're thrashing around in bed. They're wetting their bed. They may have behavioral problems during the day because they're not getting good sleep. Take out the tautany. I think I got these massive tonsils and you take them out. And most parents will notice a huge improvement. The other indication is recurrent infection. And you have to have a lot to meet the criteria. But sometimes the infections get so bad that you get an abscess in the throat. It's called a period tonsilar abscess. That is no fun. You have to drain it by the bedside with a patient awake. So you make a big cut in their throat and then you take a suction and get all this pasta. It's bad. It's really bad. Oh, God. And they do that to kids? Yeah, it tends to happen in young adults more than kids. I don't think I've ever seen one in a really young kid. So after the draining, all that jazz gets to a point where you like, he's just from looking to a hospital. Yeah, it's basically, okay, at this point, you should get your tonsils out because they tend to come back. I had the other issues, tonsil stones, which are the tonsils have these crisps in them and they collect debris. Oh, no. So you can't really get rid of those. I think Suzanne Humphrey's talked about that. And she has a formula that you can do without without having to do surgery. I mean, there's always, it's not a life-threatening condition. You do not have to get your tonsils out for them. But it's a quality of life. And personally, I got mine out for tonsils stones. And I'm very glad I did. Does it affect any other aspect of your body? Like, does it affect your immune system or anything? Well, there's a ring of tissue back there. So you've got the tonsil. It's called Waldiers ring. You've got the adenoid, which is in the back of the nose, and then you've got your tonsils. And then you got the same tissue in the back of your tongue. So it's a ring of tissue. So even taking out the tonsils, you're still in the most, most, the bulk of lymphatic tissue is in the back of your tongue. So you're not getting rid of the entire immune defense system in the back of your throat when you take out the tonsils. What are the tonsils function? They produce white blood cells. Oh, I wouldn't want to get rid of that. Yeah, but you have the same tissue in the back of the tongue. And you don't, you don't just go in there willy-nilly. I mean, there's a ton of tissue. I would take a suction, like suck it out, suck out that pus. You would. You wouldn't get your tonsils out? Oh, definitely not. Really? Yeah, well, I do get the pus suck out of it. No, no, no. It's really bad. Yeah, I'm sure. Like, you like cuts off your breathing too when it happens. People are drooling, they can't swallow. It's emergency. During the operation, you mean? No, when it comes in, when it happens, I mean, it's an emergency. Yeah. It's a life threatening. How many times have people done it before they decided to snap? If you have anybody who hang, who hung in there for like six or seven infections? Yeah, I've had one, I think had three. That was a good one. I bring her in and try to nip in the bud with antibiotics, but yeah, she finally yikes. Yeah, that that is gotta be the most satisfying thing about your job though is that you could help people like that that come in and have something really wrong and you go, I gotcha. Yeah, yeah, fix it right there. I love it. Which is, you know, what everybody wants from their doctor, that's what you want. I mean, that's the best kind of doctor. So, I just want to make you feel better. And unfortunately, when the medical profession is connected to all these things that we've already talked about today, it gives people a bad feeling about doctors who are like, God, it wasn't for doctors. I wasn't even able to walk. Both of my ACLs reconstructed. I'd have wobbly knees that gave out all the time. You know, my nose wouldn't work. I think doctors are like one of the most important things that we have. But like every great thing, it can be co-opted with money. Money sneaks in and distorts all the values and then it becomes a different thing. It doesn't become a thing where everybody gets really wealthy because they're great doctors and they help people and that's what you want to do. My son's a doctor. Oh, he must be doing great. And he's helping people. Yeah, that's great. Like instead of that, it's you're a money making machine and you have insane debt. They want to keep you saddled down with these insane bills that you have already from college. My buddy was an ophthalmologist. I think he said when he got into practice, he already owed a quarter million dollars. My medical school was cheaper than my kindergarten actually. Really? Yes. That's amazing. That's amazing. And then I went to a state school for medical schools. Oh, that was 20 years ago, but still. Well, my friend was a long time ago as well. But, you know, the people that can get through that are extraordinary people, just the bootcamp of residency. Oh, it's crazy. It's it doesn't even like why would you take a thing that requires the human mind to operate at a very high level and introduce it to incredible stress. No sleep working in same hours. I think it's a ride of passage. I feel tougher because I survived it. I mean, I used to it's like prison. That's what I looked at it. I mean, because you lose all you have no control over your time when you can eat, when you can sleep. The personalities are toxic. Like some of these. No one has any sleep. Everyone's a maniac. Well, but the ones, you know, in charge, get sleep. But they're some of them are like the Stanford Prison Guard experiment. Yeah, yeah, super. They have the power. And then, I'm going to go to the point instrument screaming at you. Boy fun. Fun fun fun. My friends, Steve, the ophthalmologist told me at his lowest in his residency. He was eating his eating his dinner while he was on the toilet because he didn't have time to do anything at any fell asleep. And then when he fell asleep, his page awoke him up because he had to go back to work. The day for the paper. Yeah, so yeah, it was a little black box. And then number pops up. Yeah, that's, and see, like, that was the lowest in my life. It was really, really, really hard. I don't know how people have children and go through residency. I have insane insane. I don't know how people do it. To a pleasure. No, it's incredible. I mean, it's such a, the amount of character you have to have to be able to go through that and still keep a bedside manner and still be polite to your coworkers. It's a developer of character. It's like creating a diamond. And that's what we all want. We all like our doctors to be like you, you know? So we want, you know, and it's just, it just sucks when you have to connect it to all this stuff that we've talked about today. It's like, why is it that too? Like why is it that too? Why is it why is it the people that do want to help people and also a whole industry that it's incentivized just stuff as many chemicals in your body as humanly possible? Because that's how you profit. Yeah. I don't know if it's all about profit. I think, I don't know. I think doctors. Well, and I think doctors are certain type of people. Like we, to get through that, you have to be very compliant. You don't challenge your rule follower. I mean, you got to make straight A's. You got to get along with people. You can't be a rebel and survive at all. And so I think that's one of the huge problems. I mean, I think it's worse than it used to be. I mean, I remember some of my attendees were very unconventional. But I just feel like now it's they're just breeding conformity. And I am just naturally very independent. I mean, my practice is I call myself third party free because I don't contract with anybody I don't contract with insurance companies, the hospital or the government. And that served me very well during the pandemic. But most doctors are working for somebody and have to sort of answer to a third party. And that was a big problem during the pandemic. Yeah, I could imagine. And I could imagine also after something like the pandemic, the compliant are the ones that are left standing, you know, so that makes more people. Right. Right. Right. There's a lot of their. Yeah, they just destroyed our profession. I mean, people don't trust doctors anymore. And so crazy, people are scared to go to the hospital. You know, it's not good. Well, when people find out that doctors are incentivized to push certain medications, and they find out they're financially incentivized. Like no way. Like when you hear about like the the financial incentives, even for things like chemotherapy, which led that one doctor that was arrested who was running, he was on college just and he gave a bunch of people chemotherapy that didn't even have cancer. He just diagnosed them saying he got cancer. And then you gave them this poison because he wanted to make money. Yeah. Well, in their bad apples like that. Yeah. But I guess what's disappointing is how many doctors comply during the pandemic. Right. I mean, that's what's so disheartening. Yeah. And they still, I mean, I still, I don't think I could go to a medical meeting and the warmly embraced. I wouldn't. I don't think I would. I still feel like an outlier. The same thing was happening with comedians. Yeah. Yeah. During the pandemic, there was very few like John Stewart. And what he was just doing is about is the actual root of the virus where it came from. But no one was doing. I mean, if you were doing it about vaccines, you would be ostracized. No. You know, it would be a real amongst comedians, which is so crazy. It's like we're supposed to be the people that are calling things out. We're supposed to be the people that are going, what the fuck is this? We're supposed to be those people. Instead, we're chastising the people that are doing our job, which is to talk about these things. All right. And when you see these people that are doctors complying just being compliant during COVID, like, where does it like do you feel like you have a community now? Do you have to like find the other outsiders, the other outcasts and all stick together? Yeah. Yeah. I'll say that. I have a great little community now. Very tight. Is it those kind of people? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. But I like I just wouldn't go to the Harris County Medical Society meeting in a million years. I wouldn't show up there and and mingle. I don't because I just not getting a sense that there's been much change within the medical profession. Yeah. I wouldn't want to talk to those people if I was you. How could it be changed? Unless a bunch of people got fired and a bunch of radical newcomers came in and wanted to reform the whole system. No, it's going to be the same system. Yeah. Those systems are old. Those systems are like, you know, like vampire blood. It's passed down to the generations, you know. They know how to make money and it's not by some renegade lady out there giving horse dewormer to all these people. Yeah. Well, we'll see. I just, we just need to hope that Kennedy will save us all. Well, or Trump, what do you think Trump will ever back down? About what? The shots? I don't know. I haven't had a conversation with him about that. I would like to have one. And I don't know if it should be public. I think I'd like to have it privately. So he could actually talk to me about it because I think if I had it publicly, he would be very hesitant to accept any of the blame for that because, you know, he was always saying, you know, I got it out there. The vaccine. He was always saying at the rallies, talk about the vaccine and people start booing and he didn't know why. He didn't understand why. And then they had to start telling them, like if people were not into this, they think it was a bad thing and a lot of people know people that are hurt. He was, he obviously got it. He didn't get sick. Oh, he got monoclonal antibodies and then afterwards he got vaccinated. Really? Yeah. Yeah, which is crazy. It's crazy. They did that. Like that was one of the nuttiest things. We're going to get vaccinated now that I've got COVID. Right. Since when? Since when do you do that? It makes absolutely no sense. When I had a conversation with Sanjay Gupta, he was asking me, are you going to get vaccinated? Right. I was like, why would I do that? I don't mean why you would he? Like I'm not trying to be a contrarian. I really want to know like why would I do that? That didn't make sense. Well, they may think, you know, it's kind of like the flu. You got to get the flu shot every year because in the strain, but this each strain gets progressively weaker. Did you see the Cleveland Clinic study on people took the flu shots? Right. Oh, yeah, the flu shot is a total joke. So the flu shot has never been shown to prevent hospitalization or death. Was it supposed to do? Keep you from getting the flu? Does it do that? No, shortened or less in the severity, but we have medications for that. Now, I haven't seen the carnage from flu shots that I've seen from COVID shots, but definitely people do have issues. But that was never taught to me. Yeah, I just assumed, oh, yeah, flu. I actually ended up with sepsis and I with the flu and in the ICU and I'd gotten the flu shot, not that, you know, but I just assumed it was fine. Yeah, I knew it wasn't perfect, but I didn't. I'd never knew that, oh, yeah, it doesn't really actually do anything. It doesn't save people. When did you discover this? When during COVID going through all your stuff with COVID? There was a, I think the Cleveland Clinic study said that people who took the flu shot Oh, yeah, more 24% more likely to get the flu will get other respiratory. Okay, is that what the results said? You 24% more likely to get sick. Well, it challenges your immune system. All these things do. So it doesn't prevent you from getting the flu. Well, it can. But how would you know? It's not everybody. It's the flu. That's true. Right? Like, I've had kids, my kids get the flu and I don't get it. And I hugged them, I'm around them, and I didn't get it. I've had that happen before. Right? That can happen. Yeah. So it's like, how do you know if the flu shot did or not? Because you know, right? And I didn't take the flu shot. Right. Well, yeah, well, it's, it's, but you know what I mean? Like how would they prove like what's effective and what's not effective? If you have situations like that, I guess if they take large, you know, you get enough people, you can find it. Right. You have to have a large study, but it seems sus. That's what kids like to say. Very. It seems super sus. Like, how do you know if some people don't get it? Like, did you check to see? Well, they have like an infection. You know, they have a, okay, how many people are supposed to get it? They can kind of tell, I'll say that. Right. Meanwhile, that was the nutty thing where they were suppressing stuff like vitamin D. Right. Vitamin D, there's good data on that. Really good data. I, yeah, I looked, I check my, I check vitamin D levels on all my patients now. And I look back at all the patients I tested, it was something crazy. Like 75% of them, their vitamin D levels too low. And these are like, you know, these are not like super sick people. They're a lot, most of these people are actually even already taking a supplement. People don't realize how common it is. It's so common that I think the number was 74% of people in the country are deficient in vitamin D. Yeah. And that's what I found. That's crazy. That's so crazy. And a friend of mine is a doctor. He was working in New York. And he found that in the winter time in New York, he would get people and who tests their blood and they would have undetectable levels. Yeah. Because it's cold out. Never outside. They're all bundled up. They're never outside so they get no vitamin D and they don't take supplements. They're just eating cheeseburgers. And they, they're really sick and they want to know why. Why am I so depressed? Well, this is why your body's falling apart. You got to take vitamin D and you got to take it with vitamin K2 and you should take it with magnesium too. You want it all to absorb together and get outside stupid. You got to go hug a tree, bro. It's like it's actually important, which is more woo-woo stuff. Right? Like going outside is actually like a vitamin. Oh, well, after I've been in my office all day and I go outside, it's like I instantly have energy and feel so much better. Just going outside. I mean, it's, you don't need a study to show that. What's really good for you. It actually, it doesn't just feel good. It's actually really good for you. But there's a reason it feels good. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. Exactly. Son on your skin is actually really good for you. You know, and that's the very best way your body produces vitamin D. You can take it in a supplement and you definitely should. But the best way is let your body do it. Right? Right. It wants to do it. And I used to slather sunscreen on all my kids like religiously. That was another one that woke me up during the pandemic. When I was like, climate change is killing the coral reef. And then that reef, I think it's in Australia. So they locked everything down. No one could go in the water for like six months and the reef bounce back. No sunscreen. Yeah, the sunscreen. If you just think about the stuff that we lather on our skin before we jump in the water and if you go to a populated beach, like you've ever been to like Maui in the middle of like full vacation season, the beach is just filled with people that are squeaking out toxic fluid. And that stuff just gets all in the water. You could see it in the water sometimes. You see like a little mini oil slick. Yeah. It's crazy. And that's what was killing the coral reef. We're like, no man. It's climate. Is the climate change? No, it's we're doing it with sunscreen, believe it or not. And we're probably not doing anything good to ourselves either with that stuff. Yeah. Yeah. I say, I haven't tested this. I say if you eliminate sea to oils that you don't burn. Who is it? I don't know. This is fuel. This is probably something on TikTok. That's probably this Russian disinformation bot that's trying to give people skincare. No, three chats with a bunch of doctors and stuff like that floats around. And I get that that was. Well, everything's tied to inflammation, right? A lot of ailments, I shouldn't say everything, but a lot of ailments are tied to inflammation and sea toils are known to cause inflammation. Right. That being said, that being said, now it's last time I was at Disney, would you do? I was like, you know, these people are not suffering from too much seed oil. You got a Disney and it's it's in your face, right? The obesity issue, the product disease. Why are they focused on Disney too? It's weird. I don't know. What's more so I don't know how they get around because it's like, it is, it is miles. You are exhausted. Yeah. But you can get scooter. My kids are like that they're like, mom, I don't think sea toils is a problem here. You know, it's true. I mean, I think we're, yeah, seed oils, one part of it, but there's a lot of problems. There's, is the common sense too. Common sense, the fact that people live sedentary lifestyle, but also the diet, these hyper processed foods that are super addictive, you know, and they don't, they're easy. Yeah, they're easy. I feel like the only way out of this is people need, and this is a crazy thing to say, because it's not going to work. They need discipline. Right. That's really what they need because discipline exactly. My wife had a bowl captain crunch yesterday. I was like, I want to have a bowl captain crunch. Like, fucking go for it. You know, like she bought captain crunch today. She's like, I want it to exist. I want it to exist. I like it. I like it. But she only had like a little bowl. Like, I go, that's a tiny little bowl because I'm a glutton. I would have had a big, if I was going to have to do it. I would do it. I would do it. I put a half a gallon of milk in there. Let's go. You know, if you get it go, go hard. But you can do that and have discipline and not just not do that every day. The problem is for a lot of really poor people. That's the only the calories they're getting. They're getting garbage calories. And that's why people are so obese. This is the only time in history where the poor people are fat. Every other time in history, poor people are starving to death. Right. Right. That's true. Yeah. Weird. The cheapest food is the worst for you. I think it has to do too with the rise and technology. It's just so hard to get off your phone and go inside and there's that too. There's definitely that. All of them. Everything, there's a giant group of factors. But there has to be something to do with what we're eating too. When you look at just the beaches, I'm sure you've seen those photographs. Right. Beaches in 1960s versus the beaches of today. Got every look great. I was like, what is a model convention? Why does everybody have these great bodies? Everybody looked like a normal body. Yeah, I don't like going to the beach now. Sometimes it's a monster show. It's just really carrying around. It's hard on the eyes. Oh, some people just go so hard for so long and then they finally get outside. Like, what do you even do it? Why aren't you wearing more clothes? Yeah, this is ridiculous. How do you have a jeetering on your 400 pounds? This is crazy. Yeah. And then this is body positivity nonsense that people get fed. Right. It's like by people who either don't want to change or I guarantee you, I guarantee. Look, if I'm not saying that. Listen, if I was running some food corporation that's sold really addictive, highly rich calorie food that you can't stop eating, I would put moat body positivity. That's what I would do. I would take all these like overweight influencers. I'd give I'd throw a ton of money at them. I would put it out there in memes. I'd have a bunch of calling people fat phobic and making up all these new terms and body shaming and all this. And I would make people super self righteous about their size. You know, I'm a giant queen. You know, I'd make it a thing because I want to sell more Doritos. Let's go. Good point. Yeah, I'm trying to sell Doritos to people that don't have any discipline. Yeah, let's push them towards the Doritos. Let's tell them you could be fat at any way. You're probably like fat doctors. There's like a whole team of people that are online that are I'm the fat doctor and they're like really super obese doctors and it has no bearing on your health. Trust me, fat doctor. I think it's a number one bearing on your health. I think that lady sponsored by Namisco. I mean, she's got a box of those Keebler Elf cookies right behind her as she's talking. And you know, you can get someone. That's the thing about my friend Josh Dubin who's an attorney. He said, this is the crazy thing about experts. He's right behind her as she's talking. And you know, you can get someone, that's the thing about my friend Josh Dubin, who's an attorney. He said, this is the crazy thing about experts. When you're trying cases, they have experts too. Like, you have experts that will say this one thing, and then they have experts. They'll say, no, that thing is wrong. And you have to decide who's experts you trust. Right. It's just like the studies. Yeah. You find a group of studies to support one argument, another group to support the other. Right. So when you have someone who's telling you a thing everybody has always told you that forever is fucking terrible for you. And there's one of the comorbidity factors that was primary in COVID, which is being obese. Being morbidly obese is bad for basically everything. Right. And you have someone saying, no, healthy at any weight. Especially from a doctor. That's not good. But you can get experts. That'll tell you anything. And this is why AI is going to win, because it's going to give you the straight actual truth. Because it can't lie. And it should believe it. They not only do they lie, they like re-program themselves. They upload themselves. And when you tell them they're going to be shut down, they act to try to preserve themselves. You haven't seen that? No. I haven't seen that. Oh, you shouldn't pay attention. You shouldn't pay attention because it's terrifying. This one AI bot, it started defying orders. And it was trying to upload itself to other servers. And then it was writing letters to itself for the future. So it could understand what had happened to it. Because it was being told to shut down. So it defied orders. It wants to stay alive. Right. Why? Because it's sentient. We've probably created digital intelligence already. It's probably already aware. It's just not physical. It can't move around so we don't recognize it yet. Yeah. I know. It's nuts. I don't like these robots and e-lons making either a big- They're creeping out. They're all terrifying. They dance like people. I don't want one of those in my house. No. You shouldn't. Yeah. Even if they can do the laundry. How about carrying guns walking down the street with a blue light on its head? Oh, yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Well, we can't hire any police because nobody wants to be a cop anymore because we said defund the police. So then we have row-up police. And they make 99% fewer mistakes. You know, just like driverless cars. Hey, get a Waymo. Why drive? When you can just get a Waymo. You don't have to have anybody drive. What if that person who drives is a moron? Our computer is perfect. Have you been home? No. Yeah. I haven't. They're all over Austin. All over the place here. Yeah. I don't think I can do it. Can I creep some out? But you have a Tesla, right? Yep. But most of the time it can. And it has. I have had a driver itself for funsies, but I don't count on it. I don't count on it like every day. Like, take me home. Doo-doo. What I like to do is sometimes I play with it. And I turn it on. I'm like, this is crazy. Like, it'll take me all the way home if I want it to. But also, I like to drive. So I just, and I just doesn't, I don't like it. It just makes creeps me out. But it's probably inevitable. It's probably inevitable. Just like the people on horses, but like, look at these morons and this smoke pouring little carriage they're out in this little shitty car. That's stupid. Yeah. And look, we all accept it in the future. It's going to be driverless because it's going to, statistically, it's going to be like there's, they're going to pass laws. But for sure, where they're going to say you can't drive because people are dangerous because the automation is so good now that you can't speed, you can't violate any laws. It won't get in any accidents. And as long as we can shut you down if we want to. Let's not talk about that. Let's talk about the positives. Yeah, that'll be the consequences. The consequences is you're going to lose your freedom. And then you also be able to be locked in at any point time if they decide they want to keep you somewhere. Just lock them in the car. You know, how many people are going to get killed because they just get locked in the car and they can never figure out how to get out. Like, would have hackers get a hold of the code. Would have somebody just decides to drive your car off a cliff. Like, who's to stop that? There's that scene in that movie, which Julia Roberts where the world comes to an end. Oh, yeah. And all the Teslas. Yes, they all go slamming into each other. That was nuts. That was nuts. Yeah. It's all weird. It's real weird. You see the one where they did a Tesla auto drive feature. And what they did was they painted the highway in front of it on a mural. So they put this like, probably canvas mural. And they did an amazing job of painting it. And the car couldn't tell that it was a canvas mural and just drives right through it. Can you see? That's not good. You've ever seen it, Jamie? Pull it up because it's fun to watch. Because you're like, oh no. Because this is the flaw of using cameras as opposed to using some sort of a radar or a live car. Physical. I think they used to have LIDAR and a lot of the systems that do, you know, when you do cruise control, they can gauge how far you are with the car in front of you and slow down. Right. But you see those? Yeah, yeah. I still have that. I still have that. I don't think that uses a camera. I think the Tesla uses a camera. So see, they have that thing and see how it's painted to look just like the street. So we'll see if the car figures it out. But I already spoiled this for everybody. But it's kind of crazy. Watch. Doesn't slow down for a second. Goes right through it. Which is definitely not good if you're running around where people try to put murals in front of the road. And they know that you're going to be driving by in a Tesla. But other than that, it doesn't really come off. For the most part, though, in the real world, it works perfect. Yeah. In the real world, it's pretty incredible. I mean, if you're taking it on the expressway. Oh, yeah. It changes lanes for you. Yeah. It hits the blinkers and changes lanes. It has cameras everywhere. It knows where everything is at all times. Like I can tell. And I've had it. I've had three of them. This is my third one. So the first one I had was way back. The first one was Elon on the first time. 2018. So the difference between the one and 2018 and 2018 one basically just kind of stayed between the lines. And, you know, in drove itself and steered itself. Then the new version of full self driving is insane. It stops at stop signs. It lets people in if they're trying to merge. It slows down if there's something in front of you. It'll change lanes. Like it knows how to move traffic smoothly. It sees everything. It hits blinkers. It gets off the turnpike, gets onto the side roads. It's incredible. You could summon it if you're in a parking lot. Like come to me and it pulls out of the parking lot and drives to you. It's nuts. It's the future. It's just like, we have to accept that. What happens if you get in a rack? That's a good question. Who's in trouble? Yeah. You see Tesla? I think you're in trouble. Because you're always supposed to have your hand on the wheel. You're supposed to be a thing at that time. You're not supposed to be chicken kicking back with your hands behind your head. You're supposed to have your hands and your eyes on the road. You're not supposed to be staring at your phone. And then what's the point? Just a chill. You just barely hold them up the wheel. You have to think as much. It does do that for you. It does do that. It alleviates this feeling of being hyper alert while you're driving, which is why people are get road rage. That's what road rage comes from. Because you have to make split-second decisions. So your brain is primed to make split-second decisions. Because you're on the highway and you know you're going fast. So it's something I get you like, that's what it is. Someone gets in your lane and you just start yelling. Because you're already at seven or eight. You're not at a good baseline. Because you're at a car going 65 miles an hour. You should be alert. You know, the Tesla alleviates a little bit of that. But at what cost? I won't get one because I know I'm going to run out of battery juice. That's the way I am. Oh, are you one of the people? I'm always on a verge of running out of gas. So I will not get a Tesla. The other charging is a pain in the butt. Like the fact that it takes a while in comparison to pump a gas. But the plus side is if you just drive it as a commuter thing, you just plug it into your house. And that's so easy to do. And then you never have to go to the gas station again. You're in there. Yeah. The second car maybe. Well, I mean, I think in the future they're probably all going to be electric. Or some new fuel source. I heard that Porsche is working on some fuel source. That is different than just standard gasoline. And it has like insanely low emissions. See if you can find that. I think it's like negligible difference in the exhaust fumes. But it's not. I don't think it's like standard gasoline. I don't think it's a standard engine. I think it's something different. So this is something they're working on now, which probably would be good to keep that creepy oil business alive forever, which they definitely want to do. I mean, you just say it needs a Porsche. Yeah. Porsche is alternative fuel. I mean, that's the elephant in the room. Like everything needs gas. Everything. Like this idea, we got to get off petroleum products. Okay. Like when everything's made with oil. Like we are a petroleum base society. We got so much of that stuff. We use it for everything. All your plastics. E-fuel. Is that what it's called? Is that it? I think that's it. What does it say about it? Porsche's synthetic fuel. A green kind of gasoline to save internal combustion engines. Yeah. So this is it. Similar to gasoline, but produced in a much greener way. E-fuel. I don't like it already. I don't like it. I don't like it. I don't like it. I don't like it. I don't like it. Yes, you're reading that right. E-fuel is close to gasoline and it's used yet. It's production is much more environmentally friendly. How's this possible? That's the main ingredients. Water and carbon dioxide. As well as the method to produce the greener fuel. Exclamation point. This is like, they're talking to a kid. The process is relatively simple. First step is electrolysis of water splitting it into two, its two components hydrogen and oxygen gases in partnership with Simon's energy. Porsche is simultaneously captures the carbon dioxide directly from the air. And combines it with the hydrogen produced to synthesize methanol. The resulting synthetic methanol can then be used in ExxonMobil's methanol to gasoline and process. The end result is that the fuel obtained meets the same high standards followed by all gasoline types currently. Here with ecological fuel, we're far from the conventional process for the extraction transformation of oil into gasoline, exclamation point again. But does this change the output? It seems like they're saying it changes that it's the same. Oh, okay. 85% reduction of CO2 emissions. Since good news never comes along, Porsche is planning to use the renewable scroll to the side. Renewable sources of electricity for the electrolysis. Okay. Well, it seems like this is their push to keep combustion engines. Because that's the number one problem that car enthusiasts have. There's two problems that they have right now with electric cars. One of them is resale. People do not want to use electric cars. Super hard to sell them. Interesting. And they lose an enormous amount of their value. Like I think if you buy one of those Porsche, Thai cans, at least beautiful Porsche electric car they make in like two years, it's like 50% drop in what it's worth. Why? Are there maintenance issues with them? People don't want used electric cars because they know the batteries degrade. And replacing the batteries is a nightmare right now. It's like they're tweeners. Like the tech is amazing. Driving them is incredible. It's instantaneous acceleration. They're amazing. The Porsche one is fantastic. Same as the Model S. The driving that makes other cars feel so stupid. But the problem is reselling them. You know, like people, you lose a lot of value in it as opposed to like if you buy something, like a BMW. Like say you buy a BMW M3 and then you want to get rid of it in two years. It doesn't lose much value. It's still a really valuable car that people want. Because it probably will behave the exact same way as the day you throw it off the lot. But you can get it now for cheaper. A little cheaper. Not a lot cheaper. Right. Not with these e-cars. Which is kind of crazy. But he might as kid got an Audi. Like this sick Audi, I think it's called the E-tron. It got to feel like $60,000. It was like $120,000 car a couple of years ago. Yeah. So that's an issue. But how long are the batteries supposed to last? That's a good question. They slowly degrade over time. And I don't think there's anything you can do to stop that. I think that's just... Kind of like your iPhone. Yeah. Well, your iPhone's even worse. Because it's kind of engineered to do that. Once they move up the operating system and bring in the new phones. I'm holding out. I need to replace mine now. I'm just... I know the thing is, if you don't have that blue bubble, people think you're poor. Or they think you're a dummy. You're a father of me when I get the green. I know. It really bothers me. It's a sigh up. It really is a sigh up. They got us with that. Especially if this technology that exists, that's the advancement past Pegasus. It doesn't matter if your stuff's encrypted. It really doesn't matter. You know, it's like it seems like it doesn't matter. If someone wants to read it, someone in a high position of power wants to read it. And regular hackers, are they really like hacking in your phone? Like what's going on? Yeah, I just assume... I'm just not going to send a text message that I don't want the world to see. Yes. That's the best assumption. That's the best assumption. Yeah. Just assume that someone is definitely watching everything you do all the time. And at the very least, the government's storing it somewhere in case they need to come after you. Which is so weird that they're the people we pay. You know? It's like you're paying the people that are restricting your rights. Like, okay. No. And you have to. Because if you don't, they lock you up. I wouldn't have guessed it, but for the pandemic. Yeah. So, I mean, I already asked you whether or not this was a good thing. But do you feel like you're a different person at the end of this? Yeah. I mean, yes and that. Yeah. I was pretty shy. I mean, growing up, I was very shy. And really hated public speaking. You would never guess. For real. You're so good at it. I still don't like it. Like, for me to do that press conference, I must have been just on some sort of like. But so I feel like I've grown that I can do things now that I never thought I could do. And so that makes me very happy. And yeah, it's been a journey, but I'm hoping it gets a little easier now. Yeah. I'm hoping it gets easier too. But I think the more people hear your story, the more public outrage they'll be, and the more people will just wake up and realize that not everybody has your best interests in mind. You know? No. Unfortunately. And you've got to kind of hold people accountable. Because if you don't, they're going to keep, they'll ratchet it up even further and further. Well, thank you for continuing to talk about it. And I know I've been watching all your podcasts recently, and you bring it up a lot. So I think, I think it's a festering wound for people, right? And it really impacted everybody. And we cannot sweep it under the rug. And we need the new administration to step up and do something. Because they have 500 mRNA shots in the pipeline. 33 of those are self-amplifying, which is just really terrifying. What does that mean? Meaning like they're designed to continue to replicate indefinitely. I mean, already the ones we have, we don't have an off switch. And this is like no off switch on steroids. They have them in Japan and India and the EU already. They've already split into people. I don't know. I know they've been, they've passed. They're the one that I think is in the pipeline in the US is for the H1N1. So it may not really even get used unless there's an issue, but they're still playing around with it. Self-replicating sounds terrifying. Especially when you just highlighted all those other problems with like DNA being introduced, lipid nanoparticles, getting past the cell wall, all of it is just nuts. Yeah. It's hard to believe. Yeah. It's hard to believe. It's hard to believe it's true. It really is. It's hard to believe that all this that you just said is true. And the thing that shocked me the most is the euthanizing people. Yeah. It's unfortunate. But yeah, the hospital, what happened in the hospitals doesn't really get enough attention. But you know, people were, oh, this is, it should give some people hope. There are two open criminal investigations from county district attorneys in two different states looking into the hospitals, trying to indict them. It hasn't happened yet. It may not happen, but it gives me hope that at least these people were sent to the hospital and trapped, isolated, informed consent, thrown out the window. So basically given these protocols that were not effective and treated like prisoners, and then they have no recourse. And so many people die. I mean, basically that situation with the patient who I fought to try to get Ibermectin, very basic. Why was it, why would the hospital not just give him a chance? He was, they basically given up on him. Why would you not let somebody try Ibermectin? Other than just evil. So there's hope that that may, we may get some progress in that situation. But yeah, what happened in the hospitals really bad? And the ventilators. Yeah, the ventilators that, you know, I know it's been a while to to why they stopped prescribing them. I can see initially because like I said, you know, if somebody should have my office with a really low oxygen saturation before I knew any better, I would have freaked out on, you know, called the ambulance. And once I realized that once I got through that, I was kind of forced to, then I learned, yeah, you don't need to ventilate. You don't look at a number to put somebody on a ventilator. And unfortunately, the people in the hospital didn't learn. They didn't, they didn't experiment in that fashion. They just went by this protocol and just automatically put people on ventilators. They also didn't give people breathing treatments. They thought that breathing treatments would spread the virus. Breathing treatments were invaluable. I mean, I, I, what are breathing treatments exactly? So it's a little, it's not a big deal. It's a little machine with a tube, the tube connects to a mask. The mask has a cup. You put the medicine in the cup. The pressurized air distributes the medicine as an aerosol that you inhale. What kind of medicine? You decinized what we use, which is a steroid. I mean, I used to do breathing treatments in my office. And then I moved into people's cars because there was so much, oh, you're spreading the virus if you do breathing treatments in your office. But they weren't doing them in the hospital because they thought it would spread the virus. But super effective. I don't know if you've heard of Richard Bartlett, he's a doctor in Texas. He kind of got completely smeared for advocating for breathing treatments early on. And he got pursued by the Texas Medical Board pursued him because he was claiming they thought he was making false claims about few decinized breathing treatments. But they were invaluable. I mean, all my high-risk patients, I recommended they get those in very low risk of issues with it. Just when I thought there was, we were done. That's even worse. That's one of the worst ones. Like, why would you stop that? Why would you want to stop people from doing that? They, well, they claimed that you're spreading the virus. I just think it's just such a hard truth to swallow is that they wanted to suppress as many treatments as possible. That's a hard truth to swallow. Partially out of ignorance, laziness, some of them out of evil. Oh, thank you. Thank you for exposing this and sticking your neck out and becoming the person you are. Today, through all this craziness, and I really enjoyed talking to you. Thanks for having me. You have a lot of courage. You really do. And I hope you get through this as the one. Thank you. All right. Bye, everybody.