Well, amazingly, we're just a few weeks from our nationwide tour going coast to coast. The Atlantic to the Pacific and back doing live shows with big audiences, uncensorable, and bringing along very good friends of ours, our special guests. We hope to see you there. Tickets at Tucker Carlson dot com. We're hitting the road all of September. Here's our latest episode with Rob Schuy. So I hate to start with this, but I read what looked like a family tragedy playing out of the news, your daughter going after you. Fun being a parent, isn't it? It can be hard. What was that? Well, I want to just tell my daughter, L. L., I love you. I wish I was the father of my twenties that you needed. And clearly I wasn't. And I hope you can forgive me for my shortcomings. I love you completely. I love you entirely. And I just want you to be well and happy with you and your beautiful baby lucky. And I wish you the best. I feel terrible. And I just want to, you know, that I don't take anything you say personally. I love you. And I feel that God has gifted this moment and gifted me to be able to just tell you, I love you. And I accept you and I apologize for any of my shortcomings that I have. And I wish, I wish for you that they heal and be well. And then you have everything that you want, including the dad that you want from me to be. I'm here. I'm here for you. I love you whenever you need me. I'll be there. And anything that you said, I don't take personally. And if I could take away all your pain, I would gladly do it. And if I need to take the hit for you, now I'll do it. I'll do it again gladly. My heart is your home and a home is a place when you go there. They have to let you in. And I love you. And I'm sorry that you're having to deal with this. But this is a great opportunity because we can talk about families. I mean, show me a perfect family out there. And I'll be shocked. But families, this is, I have to ask, like, God, I mean, I mean, new Catholic. God has presented this to me. And I'm going to use it. And I'm going to say that this is the one you have opportunities like when you're being attacked or you feel like what the world is caving in on, like a lot of people feel now, whether it's financially, whether it's politically, people or separating. And especially with people that are dealing with addiction and families that are dealing with addiction, it's hard. It's really tough on the family. And it really is crushing. And so if we're able to discuss and talk about that and help heal people and help, they give them the opportunity to let them know that this is common and that there are roots you can do to heal. And for people suffering and family suffering from addiction, and unfortunately, it is bigger now than any time in my life, we need to have a path for healing. And part of that path is not just getting clean, but I was talking to my good friend, Dr. Drew Pinsky. And he said, we also, addiction, people have to deal with resentment. That's a really important thing. And I'm glad this has all been brought up because resentment has to be addressed and managed to help keep the person sober, the families who are dealing with addiction. It's really important. This resentment, resentful people use it as a way to justify bad behavior and any kind of behavior and not taking responsibility for their own actions, blaming others and in the destructive behavior, including even using again. So it's important that we heal that address that so that doesn't become this destructive thing. That's part of the healing and part of really staying sober and remaining sober and getting back to a place of happiness. So when your daughter attacks you in public, how hard is it not to you didn't make any excuses or blame her or attack back? Well, how hard is that? If you love somebody completely, you just, you know, I love her. And all I want for her is to be happy and to vee heal from this. And I really feel there's anything that I can, you know, I apologize completely for and accept responsibility for not being the parent that I am now with my new kids. She didn't get that. And I missed a lot. And as a parent, you're going to pay for everything you miss. And I thought that just because I was starting my career at the time and I thought, well, I'm able to provide this, this school, this school. How old were you? I was 26. Oh, so and got to work young about a year later. Yeah. And she's got a great mom. There's a great job to do the best job she could. But it's hard, you know, not having a fractured home from the start is not a, is not the ideal thing. So it's difficult. And then I get it. And I really feel like I'm here now. And whatever I can do for you, I'll be the father that you need me to be now. And I love you. And thank God that I'm here now and that if there's something that you need for me, my heart, my, you know, is open. So and it's okay though, you know, I feel like it's a good opportunity. It's a beautiful thing when God presents you with something. You know, when God says to you, you know, here, you know, when they enemy, when the, when people will like, when you have attacks in your life, you know, when they say hand it over to God, they don't mean just hand some of it over. I mean, they got to hand it over. And when you do, you will have peace. You will have peace. And there's nothing the world can do to you when you have God. There's nothing. They can't touch you. My most important relationship is with God. And if that's good, they can't touch me. There's nothing. It might, you know, wonderful priest. It was talked to me about this and about like if you got a good relationship with God, then you're set. But when you hand it over, you got to really hand it over. Go, okay, you take it. And like, okay, God, I need your help because you'll be, you'll be tested in this world. They go like, yeah, because I feel I'm in a good place. They said, oh yeah, well, what about they say this? I'm still okay. What if somebody in your family says this? They said, what? How do I know? We all have work. Yeah. We have temptations to want to, to, to get angry, to strike back. Does it real temptation for people? What's an overwhelming temptation? It is. But, you know, our job, what we need to do as a parent is to love and accept and be tolerant and forgive. And this is the way to love God shows us the way to love. And our job is to reflect God's love, which is everything and tolerant and loving. And to just have compassion for what people are going through, especially in your family. And to know that it's not about me. It's about the pain that they're suffering. And how can we heal it? And we're seeing a lot of that. Unfortunately, not just, you know, in my family, we're seeing, we're seeing addiction and problems all over. And it's not just about particularly with drugs. And the difference is when we were kids, if somebody had like an addiction to particular narcotic or something, you know, unless it was heroin, there's cocaine and speed and other stuff. And crystal math around the 80s. You had a chance to, you know, to get therapy and do something. We have families now who are dealing with a kind of a different kind of healing because they've lost their child. Yes. We have these porous borders now. And we have this and talking about, you know, for the, the, the Democrats who want to change the voting habits of whatever main, remain power in every state, it's a really an ugly thing because what they're really doing is they're just bringing in death and misery. Because the people who are coming into the border also being abused, it needs to be a, I'm all for immigration, it has to be legal. But what's coming in now is causing this massive wave of drugs and it's death. And I got, and it's everywhere now, it's every city in America, it's 65,000 people a year. It's like more than everyone who died in that 19 years of Vietnam or dying a year from this fentanyl. I was at the airport and sometimes you meet somebody who just has so much grace that it's just, it takes your breath away. I mean, what's more than I have or could have. This woman came up to me and said, hi, I'm, you know, I really appreciate what you've been saying and I said, oh, thank you. And at the airport waiting for a bags and I was just getting a cup of coffee waiting. And this is in Phoenix where I live now. And we started talking a little bit and I was flattered by that. So this nice, some people say something nice about you. And then I said, so how was your, where'd you come back? He said, oh, Hawaii. And I said, oh, it was beautiful. She said, yeah, but it wasn't a happy occasion. I said, what is it? Oh, it was spreading my son, my 17 year old son's ashes. I was like, what? She said he wasn't an addict. He wasn't, he just was a dabbler and he didn't realize what he just thought it was, he just thought it was cocaine. And he's gone. There's no rehab. There's no getting better. There's no education. There's no 12 step thing. You have, it's just people are dead. They're gone. And this family is crushed. But this one has such grace about her. It's like, you know, thank God has to carry people at the moments like that. And it's for sure. So how did you respond when you saw that you were being attacked? Like what was your first, well, the first 24 hours. Well, if you feel hurt, obviously, you know, you know, you check within. But then what would you, as soon as you get out of me and get into like, well, what is, you know, how can we do this? Well, I was like kind of stunned by it. Right. And they're like, what? No warning at all. No. And you know, then you got like, well, I love you. And I want you to be, and I can't get into the specifics of like what she's going through now, right? Obviously, you know, I wanted to be to be happy and well and to heal and to heal means not just, you know, doing something to make yourself feel better, but to really get to some of the issues that you need to do and and look and to just, well, like, I love you. And if you take yourself out of the equation and you say, hand it over to God, you have to because if you make it about me and what this is like, you know, I have an adult child now. She's going to have to figure things out and God bless her and that she's, she's had a tremendous success with her career. And I wanted to have that piece, yes, that piece that I've found and that love that I've had. And I'm grateful for this situation because maybe this is what it takes for her to heal. And for, for whatever, for other people to know that about this and so that they can reach out and they can know that to not take it personal, but go, what can I do? How can I love? How can I heal? What will God do here? How can I work through this? How could I use this as an introduction for her to get closer to God? So maybe there's all this potential there, but there's also the potential to realize that when you are attacked and the media by anything is to know this isn't, you cannot take this in. And if, if you have, I mean, it was a beautiful thing. My wife and I, Patrice, you have just the best thing ever happened to me. My, that God gave me was this, we never did the Rosary together in bed. And whenever did the Rosary together ever? So we were in bed the, you know, the other night before I flew out here and let's do it. And we didn't, you know, even remember, no, she didn't remember exactly how to do it. And I'm a new Catholic. So we're literally like going over each bead and doing, you know, hail Mary's and then our fathers and then what's this bead for? And I would tell you it was beautiful and the piece that I felt after that. And the whole next day was, was really the power of prayer. And so as I hope, you know, I'm praying for my daughter and I hope that people will pray for her. So even in the midst of that, you found peace. Yeah, I did. And not right away. But I did find, I mean, the piece is there for you. When you can, when you accept God and have God, you hand it over to him, you got to really do it. And I said, God, I know there's a purpose here. There's got to be something. As soon as I took it out of me and look my heart, my needs, my heart, my injury and go this ain't about this is, this is cannot be what this is about. This has to be how to heal something and how to maybe bring this up for other people and other families that are dealing with similar things. And, and, you know, some goods are going to come from it. It already has. How did you get to this? But I mean, describe how you got here to facing, I mean, I got to say probably a tougher moment than like a diagnosis of illness. Like having a conflict with a child is the hardest thing. I would say for a parent and yet you're at peace. So how did you get here? Well, it's a long story. It's a beautiful thing where, you know, where I, I felt close to Jesus Christ when I was a young boy. And then I straight, but the thing about Jesus is it only let you go so far. And all that stuff was necessary for me to learn and come back. But he was always kind of there in the back of my, in the back there like he was never left. And I think through getting lost and into the world and getting thinking about my career and this and that and, and the frustrations of it and thinking too much about what other people think about you and like where your position is and show business and how much money you make or where you are. Are you on the A list? Are you off list? You make in movies. It's, it's just a, it's a hamster wheel. And I think the, the more important thing is to, and what I think what our culture is suffering from now is this in this social media hamster wheel we're on and their politics and our political parties are not helping the mental health of Americans. So there's today's understatement. Yeah. So there if we could step back and find a piece more peaceful way to exist and to not live in fear. And I, I stopped being fearful about, because once you do get attacked, like the, when the pharmaceutical industry attacked me for what I thought was just the basic humanity. And to even question it was destroying your career. It's like questioning it. I thought we live in the free is country in the world. Well, you're allowed to talk about politics and you can be, you know, you used to be. And, and you can talk about things like that. You could talk about, you know, at the United States Army, spend $25,000 for a toilet, which is, you know, or a hammer. But if you talk about the underpinnings of power, if you talk about the, an industry that is the real drug cartel, we're not talking about the Mexican drug cartel. Let's just, a measly $10 billion a year. If you're talking about the pharmaceutical industry, $300 billion here, you're talking about power. You're talking about an industry. You're talking about the real drug cartel that pays for the biggest donors to not just federal legislature, the legislators, but state legislators. They not only, they not only control the medical establishment. They also control the medical boards that recommend things and that recommend the, what Americans are mandated to get children are. And then when you open your eyes to it and you realize that something that was astounding to me that Robert Kennedy talks about and he's one of the few who has the courage to talk about it. And thank you for letting him talk about this on your, on your show. All right. Consider doing this. Imagine going to your computer, looking at your entire browsing history on the web, everything you've looked at. I'm actually hitting print and then signing your full name at the bottom. Maybe with your social security number, printing out that browsing history with your name on it and nailing it to the front door of say, your house for everybody in the world to see. That'd be fine. Maybe not. And while you're at it, actually, take a copy of that same list of everything you've looked at on the internet and posted in the break room at work. And then in fact, go farther than that. Blow that up and put it on a billboard over a major highway on your commute to work. There's everything I've been looking at on the internet. Would you want to do that? You don't have to be a creep to think, maybe that's not something I'd want to do. But in effect, that's what you're already doing every single day unless you already use the sponsor of this video Express VPN, you are allowing all of your online activity to become public. Why? Because internet service providers can see every website you have ever visited. Yes, even if you're in incognito or private browsing mode, that doesn't really work. And in the United States, your internet service provider can then sell your data to whomever they please, including the government. And they do, by the way. So what can you do about that? Well, you can do what people in our office do, particularly when we're abroad, but also when we're here. And that's encrypt your online activity before it even reaches the internet service provider. So no one can see it. It's private. The idea is to correct was it for freedom. So keep it close. We use Express VPN to do that. That's our internet provider. Our internet provider cannot see what we're doing on the internet because we use Express VPN. They can't record it. They can't share it. They can't sell our browsing history because they never have it to begin with. Why don't they have it to begin with? Because Express VPN rerouts our online activity through secure servers and changes our IP address and makes you more anonymous to apps and websites trying to track it. Because it'll do the same for you. What we like about it is it's so easy to use, even if you're not a tech genius. You tap one button on whatever device you're using, whether it's your phone, your laptop, your tablet, your desktop. And you know that your privacy is secure. Once again, privacy is a prerequisite for freedom. You can't be free unless you have privacy. And if you want to start reclaiming your privacy, do yourself a favor and use our special link to get three months of Express VPN for free. There's going to express VPN slash Tucker. That's Express EXPR ESS VPN dot com slash Tucker. In vaccines or drugs, either you have either you have a choice for your own body autonomy. You don't freedom of choice when there's risks, take a risks or you don't have that freedom to avoid risks. Then you don't have then you have tyranny. Then you're a slave. Then someone owns your body and can make you hurt yourself. And then somebody could shut down that same group can shut down the world and they did. So what happened when you made these points, which I think any rational person, even people who disagree, they would say, those are reasonable points. I mean, maybe I've got, you know, evidence to show you wrong. Here it is, but those are not, you're not making crazy points. Well, we'll discuss. We're supposed to be the idea and what happened during COVID was the idea was like, you're supposed to discuss things in a free society and debate and then take the, take the best of those ideas. Exactly. And let's see which ones are evidence based. Exactly. Use the evidence. What happened was we were taking people like Dr. Butakaria and Peter McCullough and you know we said, well, this is evidence here, Dr. Corey and what this is evidence. Well, yeah, but you're not allowed to use that evidence. That evidence. No, it's always said if you say the drug companies don't want to see that evidence. Instead of adjusting the, instead of adjusting the, what should happen because based on evidence what they did was they just denounced people who brought the evidence and said, well, those people, let's demonize them, let's denounce them, whatever. And so when I first brought this up, I was like, you know, I did a commercial with Aaron Rogers who coincidentally for state farm, who coincidentally became vaccine hesitant himself and rightfully so realizing what a good guy he is. He's a great guy. Yeah. But realizing the human immune system, this is before he knew any of this. So he cleared himself yet. Nothing. He never talked to me about this after we did a commercial with state farm. And he hasn't done any sense. So he's been vaccine hesitant. But the human immune system, which has been proved through is like, you can't trust the human immune system. That's been working for millions of hundreds of thousands of years. Why would you do that when you could take this drug and we just made yesterday at warp speed? You know, so it's kind of a weird logic. So I came out and then so I got attacked by the goons and about that, you know, this is 10 years ago, we're like a few people can attack, you know, a company like state farm and say this is dangerous blah, blah, blah, you know. And then they could think it's a lot of people and then they took it, you know, so I got slammed and the media is this anti-vaxxer, which is a very interesting term anti-vaxxer. You can complain about the Boeing 737 Maxxer, but not because it is dangerous. We did have an engine fallout, a piece did fallout. You can say, you know what, there's a problem with these these problems. Nobody says these are anti-planar. This guy over here, they're playing retarget by an airplane. You don't talk bad about an airplane. But if you question any of the 72 different doses of 16 vaccines before the age of six, then you're an anti-vaxxer. So anti-vaxxer, I said, I said, my stand back, they said, you know, if a woman doesn't want to have sex with you, that doesn't make her anti dick. She's just anti your dick. She may be open to a lot of other, you know, members. But yours specifically, she doesn't, it doesn't make her anti-all. So you make it by the way, it doesn't make her a bad person. And it doesn't make her a bad person exactly. So we went from, so that, but anyway, the attack happens and then you, when you survive an attack, that's the most interesting part. Because anybody can get attacked. It's like, do you cow? Do you buckle under? Or do you just go, you know, I'm still here. I've survived. And now, and I'm one of those guys who as a little person, and they said, and they entered it, it's like five, three. I'm just five, five, by the way. I don't know why that matters. Only my wife says, the only men care about that stuff. You never hear a woman say, I'm five, six and a half. They never say that. Men, your egos, you got to have five, four and a half. Who cares about the half, you know? But I'm one of those guys, like when you're little, you got to defend yourself. I remember fighting a super nice guy. He's a pilot. Now, Bob McPeek and I got, and he was like six, three. Great guy, Feliz and Florida, lovely guy. He lives on neighbor. We're friends. We got to fight. I got to like, okay, as kids, as kids. We're like, you know, like, you know, junior high, and you know, we got to fight. And I'm looking at going like, this guy's going to clean my clock. The only way I'm going to get out of this is if I just get him in the nose, just whack him. And then just, so just wait for it, wait for it, wait for it. And it's, you know, a lot of guys fighting. It's like this, you know, big guy. They think the bigger the swing, the better. But the guys who know about fighting, especially Filipinos who changed fighting, we can talk about that, it's all the shoulder. It's just right here. And it's the short one that's got, and use the hip and you turn. And then, so I just waited and I go, pop. And it was like, that was it. Fight over. I got out of that one. So but you have to defend yourself. And so I just, like, when you survive and you get a little, I got to be crafty about this, but I'm not going to bow to this pressure. And I never have, and I've never apologized or rebutted it because I'm right about it. And then, and I'm going to continue to believe these people because the health of American children is more important than my me making douche big, a little four, you know, so I don't, you know, whatever. But we're going to, we have to continue to fight to get Americans healthy, mentally, healthy, physically healthy, and get them off these drugs and to also have awareness for all our people about how they can learn to get healthy. Because if you go off the food pyramid, you're going to be, you're going to be, you're going to be fat, obese, you're going to have diabetes. My dad had diabetes, which is what I'm concerned about my children. And, you know, and I know that was one of the things that I got. But it was that I got an acute diabetes for all time, right? Well, that is a dangerous drug that we don't even understand the full implications of what that drug is going to do. And I've just heard, you know, I was just talking to Dr. Drew Pinsky about that, just the other night, that's a dangerous drug. Get off that drug. There's never such a thing as it, as an easy cheat. You can get off. I would just tell Americans get off sugar and things that turn into sugar, grains and get off processed oils, seed oils, anything. It's tough, flour, sunflower oil, all that seed oil. You got to get rid of because it's toxic, it's rancid, and it will make you sick and it causes diseases. And if you look specifically since the processed foods, and the only reason they put it in, so it doesn't rot on the shelf. When you have something that doesn't rot and go bad, it doesn't grow mold. If mold just, I don't want any of that. And don't put it in your body. And if the palm oil, all this stuff is not real food. It's just to keep it on the shelf so it doesn't rot. So all that stuff, we got to start learning them. That's what's interesting is like, you know, the liberals are attacking what they can attack. Like the problem with vaccines and the problem with is they think they could do something so that they do it. And it's the same thing with like choosing a particular gas. Like, you know, we're choosing CO2. That's the problem. That's what's causing the warming of the planet, not the fact that we're, you know, there's a giant fireball that we're circling around, but it's the gas. It's you cooking and gardening. That's what's causing it in cows farting. So it's a, it's a lunacy. But going to back just because you think you could do something doesn't mean you should do it. You know, the scarlet fever killed more people than smallpox. And tuberculosis, but you don't see a scarlet fever. There's no scarlet fever vaccine and you don't see it rampant around the world. And tuberculosis, nobody takes it tuberculosis vaccine, but you don't see it rampant around. So they're doing these other ones because they can do something like the measles. This is all you can all look it up. And it's in my book. You can do it. Speak your mind, America, that, thankless, I mean, obvious plug is that just because you can do something doesn't mean you should. So because they could do something like they put in the measles vaccine in 1961. And by that time, you know, all of the deaths from measles had disappeared. They just literally there was none by the 61 and yet they put this in because what really, and you can go to the CDC to look it up. It made the difference with human health, what changed, it was the fact that people weren't living in squalor, toilets, sanitation. So what happened was all the success of sanitation, which increased people's life expectancies, made people healthy. That is what saved society and cleaned up society literally toilets, sanitation drinking water and nutrition. But vaccine, mythology, vaccines piggybacked on the success of that. And that's why we're dealing with this now. Yeah, no, it's interesting because the big killers, cholera, bubonic plague are really diseases of squalor. Well, people were living in the 19th century and in early 20th century, they were literally, they didn't have a clean water source. They literally was like animals defecating and in the same places as their water source. I mean, right? So that people defecating. were literally they didn't have a clean water source that literally was like animals defecating and in the same place as their water source. I mean, right? So people defecate and people. Yeah, it was all going. I remember, you know, um, uh, anders, who's, you know, the writer of a co-writer of, um, of Marx, his father was an industrialist and he was in 1857 in Manchester, England. He was walking around and he described the people there as white ghosts, even the, um, even the common cold. He knew would wipe these people out. So that is, is an important, um, you know, getting that sanitation and clean drinking water and cleaning things up is what would really mean to you. So you sort of waved away. I beg your pardon. My question, um, because you don't want to talk about yourself, but the, but the effect of saying what you did, yeah, it was about health. Like what, what like did that affect, did it affect your prospect? Absolutely work. Oh, yeah. I got a call from a friend of mine who's a CEO of Fortune 500 company. I don't have a lot of those, by the way. You know, but he called me and I was in Boston and I just got off and it was the big, the whole state farm affair that happened. And, um, I just got off stage and I was kind of still shaken by the thing because I'd never been like attacked like by like every newspaper and all this stuff in the internet was new and like, yeah. And you know, I was, um, still a working actor at the time making, making movies and stuff. My friend called me and he said, listen, you're really famous. Now you're just a nuisance right now. But if you hurt them, if you cost them money, you will never work again. And these companies will sue not just you, they'll sue these other places to make sure that you never work again. And I said, well, hey, what I said, but I'm right about this. And he says, he said, and somebody's got a stand up. He said, you have, and he said this to me, you have a daughter. Is it fair that she has to do this fight too? I was like, whoa, that took me out of my knees. That's very heavy. It is. It was this just to clarify was this was this a friend offering you constructive advice or is this someone threatening you or both maybe? It was a really good friend who was giving me advice that he thought and obviously somebody had talked to him or he just knew enough to know that this is what's happening because that's the world that he travels in. He's a really good guy and a dear friend. And I think he was trying to just help me from of what he knew could happen. Yes, you want to continue. I like to continue my habit. I have an addiction of keeping wanting to keep my family eating and sleeping indoors and private school and nice, you know, I have, you know, a car with the, you know, charger in my house. I like to keep that. You know, going out needing a night's a week and maybe traveling once a year with the kids, you know, in the front of the plane. I have my habits that I want to continue. And, but at the same time, I said, you have to be and I would just tell other people, you have to be smart about this and and and questioning things and that we have to stand up because to not stand up and speak, it's dangerous to stand up and speak and it's going to cost you money. It's going to cost you money if you stand up and speak your mind. If you stand up, but when you knowingly go along with something that you know, it's false, that's going to cost you more. And that's something in our society. We have to go by evidence. We have to, we have to just confront these lies. We can't continue or we're going to have a nationalize. And I had people that call me. I have a thank you for saying that. I think everything you said is true and important to say. Thank you. Well, among the things you really can't live without are antibiotics. They are life saving, get infection, you need antibiotics or you could die. But one of the things a lot of us have learned over the last few years is that most of our antibiotics come from outside the country. So that means to stay alive, many of us are depending on a supply chain from China. So if you're in a family or a people around you you care about, just remember that supply chain from China could be the thing keeping them alive. What if something went wrong with the supply chain from China? Well, we don't have to imagine that we just saw that during COVID, the lunacy of COVID. Foreign supply chains collapsed in some cases, leaving American consumers without products they needed. Products as simple as toilet paper, machine parts, and potentially antibiotics. This is something we're thinking about. You're not crazy. You're not some radical prepper to want to have a steady supply of life saving medicine in case something went wrong. We spend a lot of time thinking about this because you need to. You need an emergency supply of course of water, food, everyone knows that, but also medication. And here's the part you can do right now. There's a company that can do this for you. It's called Jase Medical. You can get a Jase case from Jase Medical. Super simple. It's a pack of essential antibiotics to treat a long list of bacterial illnesses, including UTIs, respiratory infections, skin infections, a lot of other common potentially pretty serious medical conditions that could threaten you and your family if there's ever a supply chain problem. It's worth having that stuff at home and it's not crazy expensive. In fact, it's fast and it's simple. You go to Jase Medical JASE Medical.com, fill out a form that gets reviewed by a board-certified physician and your medications get dispensed by a licensed pharmacy at a fraction of the regular cost. It's actually cheaper than normal. If you want it even cheaper, use the promo code TUCKER at checkout for an extra discount. So get prepared, not just for an emergency, but for the future, Jase Medical.com promo code TUCKER. I have this young actor who was a son of a very famous Academy Award winning actor who called me and said, I wish I could say what you say because I agree with you. I agree with you. I wish I could say it. I want to say it sometimes. I said, be careful. You have to beat you dishes about it. He said, I'm worried about losing work. And here's the thing because I forget which one. There was a survey that was done by my great friend, Andrew Doyle, talks about it in his book. It was survey done by the group. But they said two thirds of Americans are afraid to speak their mind. Two thirds because they might cause offense. And another third are worried that it might affect their job opportunities. So this is a real thing that we can't continue as a society if everybody's so afraid. That was what Alexander D'Tokeville admired most about America when he came here was the Frenchman seeing like people speak their mind here. That is a unique thing. That is the idea of freedom of speech is there's not an accident that that was put first before guns. They know that they want to really protect society in your best weapon against tyrannies to be able to speak your mind, to be able to speak freely without reproach and recrimination from your government. That isn't to say there are not consequences for it. But the consequences of not speaking are going to be much, much higher. So this young person was telling me, you know, I want to speak my mind and I want to, I want to talk about it. But I'm afraid about losing work. And I said, just be judicious. Talk about it in your life, but it will affect your work if you do. Yeah. Some people need to stand up, but I said it affects yours. Absolutely. 100%. So your friend was right. My friend was right. He was right. But I want to say that you with that young actor, I said, look, you can talk to the makeup person. You can talk to the driver. Yeah. They'll always agree with you. I've noticed through long experience. People who work for a living, they know this is all bullshit. Yes. They talk to your driver. Talk to your Uber driver. Talk to the makeup person. Talk to the boom man between shots. Exactly. But don't talk to the producer. Don't talk to the director. Don't talk to the studio executive because they're all captured. They're stuck in an ideological, you know, woke, my envires and they're not going to get out of it because it could affect their work because they don't operate like an actor operates. I just want to get hired. I just want to get worked and every actor who wants to get hired. But they operate from a different perspective, the executives, the studios in Hollywood. They offer, they know they're going to get fired. They know it. It's a matter of time. But they operate not what's the best movie. What can I do that is meaningful to me? They don't operate that way. When they make decisions to make projects, they operate like what will delay my inevitable firing the longest? How do I keep this beach house? How do I keep traveling on weekends? How do I keep dating these beautiful girls who are only dating me because I'm an executive? So that's the crux I think. So I hope people watching this know how true what you just said. It's not just the entertainment. I'm sure it's everywhere. People are like, they just worry. I got to ride this out as long as I can. But it did affect me. But it freed me. And you know what that's like. It does. It liberates you when you no longer feel a slave to the system. When they don't own you, you are free. I mean, you got to figure out how to make a living elsewhere. But like I said to myself, and that's why I like, I love Chris Rock. Chris Rock was like, sometimes you have a friend who like, and we were, they grown up together. We were together every day. And I just watched him in his mind. And he's, he changed the stand up comedy. And he's the one to talk to me and do and stand up again. Because Adam Sandler, he loves me and he won't. And I had listened to what he says. But he wasn't doing stand up at that time. But Chris Rock was and he was the best at it. He changed modern stand up to what it is now. He was a real influence on the, you know, that we built on. And he talked me into doing it again. And I was like, wow, that changed me. And I said, they can take away the movies. They could take away doing it TV show. But they can't stop me. I said this to myself. They can't stop me from performing with a bunch of other malcontents in a dark and drinking establishment. You know what they want to come see me. They can't take that away. And you know what Tucker? They did. They did take it away. They COVID. They took it away. I didn't even perform. And then they said, you know, you can perform. And I would go to every state that was still open. I did 14 shows for whatever capacity that they would do during COVID in the one place that was open in Nashville at that time. Because they said 50% capacity. So I'll just keep doing shows as long as people come. And I did 14. I have the record for shows there for half sold out. For I sold out every show with half capacity. And so people didn't want to come anymore. I did four days. I stayed for a week. I could have stayed longer. There was a week was long enough. I didn't mean to sound like Trump. It was the greatest show because they've been pretty here for the greatest show where the men are amazing. So I had the shows where disaster is that. But what was really interesting was people, especially for conservatives, they felt like, well, here's a guy who agrees with me. And I don't see it on TV. I don't hear that. I don't hear other comedians. It's like, because it's a fearful thing. You know what? You're not going to get on TV. You don't see me on late night TV. You don't see me going on Colbert talking about any of this stuff. And that's okay. But so people has created an audience for me. I didn't have one show one sold out last year. I mean, we're rolling out. I don't know what happened there. But anyway, it's a tough town. It's just tough. I don't know what's happening there. We can maybe there's a festival or something. But people want to hear another opposing point of view. They want to hear something and relate to. It's like, thank you. I did this thing about, you know, you talked about United Airlines hiring. Claring, you know, we don't want these white pilots. Yeah. I don't want white. I don't care what it is. I want somebody who's the highest likelihood of best pilot of us landing this thing. This is a, we're in a tin can 37,000 feet. I want the guy, I'm sorry if this, if you're ideological, your ideological problems or your, what your ideological vision is, but mine is landing safely. And so I did a thing about that and, and I cannot fly without a pilot coming. I think thank you. Thank you. You know, so it's, so but there's an audience for it and they want to hear it. So it's a pleasure. So you felt no bitterness. Yeah, I did. I definitely felt like man, that was rough. Did you ever, did you take your friends advice seriously when it gave it to you? Yeah. Now I realized that like, if I'm going to continue to, if I'm going to continue to make a living in this business, I'm going to have to be very judicious about it and be careful and take care of my family. Because also because my wife didn't understand. I like to understand. It's like, you know, my wife from Mexico, which is tougher than the United States. You know, and that made hardworking people. Thank God for Mexicans. You're going to come be one of people that want to work on the work hard and, and you want, and I want, you know, legal immigration. These people are lovely, hardworking people and she didn't understand. It's like, why would you, why would you want to risk things for this? And, and the most beautiful thing and I talked to Robert Kennedy about this and my wife when she said to me, she came to me, I was literally in the bathtub and she came to me. She said, I didn't understand why you would do this, why you would risk your career and income and our, and our family by speaking up about this issue. Because I always thought as long as you protect them inside the house, they're protected. And then we got this and then let the world take care of itself. But now I realize that you have to also protect the kids outside the home. And she sees the encroachment of this, this woke mind virus and the fact that, you know, all of a sudden there's a real attack on women in our society that I didn't, nobody saw that coming. And for her to recognize that and I mean, it was really a really beautiful special thing that I experienced and Bobby Kennedy related to that. Do you think that issue is proud of you? Your wife? Not before that. No, I mean, so she comes to you and says, which I think is pretty common. She says, look, I get you got these opinions, but you also have a family to feed. What are you doing? Yeah. And you explained to her that there's something bigger at stake. But what is that? How can you think about what I mean? There's a beautiful expression and we all have to be careful about this too. And it's a Mexican expression and I've been doing do a lingo for like, you have a do a lingo for two years. Nice to know. I'm just nervous about learning. I've always had that. But that's my excuse. There's a beautiful expression in Mexico, which is the light of the world is the darkness of the house. So be careful about how about just going out there and trying to heal the world and do all these things and then your house is dark. You have to take care of the house first. That's right. I strongly grew without you have to make sure everything's okay in there. And that you're protecting and taking care of your kids that they know that they're loved. They know where their father is and that they feel safe and that they feel loved, that they're embraced and they're being raised with a faith in God, that they know their country is a good country and that they know that they have a that their future is secure. And that's something that's tougher and it's encroaching on every aspect of it. And so, you know, while I've been blessed and that people find what I have to say, some of them interesting and hopefully funny, I've been able to continue to take care of my family. But and to give the kids, you know, all my children, the best education I can get. And I went to public school and I didn't think there was anything wrong with it because I didn't have anything to compare it to. But I will say that like, can you put your kids if you're lucky enough to have the opportunity to put your kids the best schools you can. But the majority of our country is being educated in public school. And we have to make sure that that education with the majority of these people is good and that they're learning something that's useful and they're being taught to be critical thinkers, to be useful, you know, for themselves and for society that they can come up and make decisions and not just crank out what's happening now at the university level in academia, which is just, they're just not cranking out. They're not making or helping people think critically. These young people, they're cranking out advocates for a particular partisan ideology. And that's it. And so, this is going on for a long time. We're late to the party to try to fix this. The ideology which James Lindsey talks about has been infiltrated into our society. And they know the Marxist knew that, oh, well, the revolution is not going to happen with the worker. Like, ah, well, why? Because capitalism works. If you work your ass off to the people here, they work their ass off, your life's going to get better. The workers actually hate revolution more than anything. But notice, it interrupts their lives, though, the weekend. Exactly. Well, here's a secret that you can get 50% cut right off your phone bill every month, which for a lot of Americans is a big savings. Here's the secret. For rise in AT&T and T-Mobile, want you to believe that you need something called unlimited data, unlimited data. But the fact is that most people don't need unlimited data and nobody should be forced to pay for it. It's really expensive. That's where pure talk comes in. Pure talk only charges you for the data you want. How's that for an idea? So talk, text, and five gigs of data is just 25 bucks per month. How much is five gigs of data? Well, you can browse the internet for 135 hours. You can stream a thousand songs. You can watch 10 hours of video. So you're probably overpaying for what you use. You don't have to anymore. Switch to pure talk and America is most dependable 5G network for just $25 a month. And you can feel good about it because pure talk is probably veteran led and supports American jobs. Their whole customer service team is here in the United States of America where you live. There's no offshoring. The average family saves almost $1,000 a year by switching to pure talk. There's no contract, no cancellation fees. There's a 30 day money day back guarantee. It makes switching wireless companies easy. So go to puretalk.com slash tucker and you save an additional 50% off your very first month. That's puretalk.com slash tucker. Switch to your cell phone service to a company. You can be proud and happy to do business with. But so they did it through education. They did it through people who had grievances. They did it through small angry groups. And they, they, as you know, they got into the educational system and they infiltrated it. And by the 1970s, let's get K through 12 and then let's move on through to the university in academia by the late 1970s, they have infiltrated it. And so you have this ideology now and this, whether you want to call it Marxist or or what, you know, this woke terminology, which is just Trojan horse terms like social justice. Who would be against social justice? I'm for social justice. But when you realize that's a Trojan horse term and you go in and it's not social justice, it's racism. It's just the same crap that progressives are doing 100 years ago inverse. Exactly. So you have like these, these same progressives who were like 120 years ago, the eugenics talking about how these people are inferior. We shouldn't, you know, we've got a column. Yeah, we got a can we got a lot to let them breathe. And then you realize like, well, these are inferior people, these people of color inferior and these people, you know, this is an, you know, this is eugenics, you know, science back 110 years ago. And, and this, you know, but we, with the Nazi Germany, you saw what the apex of eugenics was was mass murder. 100, the Nazis killed hundreds of thousands of children and sick adults in hospitals, hundreds of, I think 300 over 300,000. And, and, and by the way, that's the one crime, you know, we spent a lot of time talking about the crimes of the Nazis, which is fine, but that's the one crime no one mentions. Oh, even more. It's a matter of fact, for it. That's why. Well, it's what you're having now is the same racism, but it's inverse. You're taking these people who, and they're like, well, it, these people are automatically victims, just because of the color of their skin. These are their victims now, and they're oppressed by these people. So it's just an, it's just a, it's easy to see what it really is as it's just another way to just attack and use the same Marxist, Maoist thing where these are the people are the goods, and these are the bads. We're going to have utopia. It's part, which is these people are, there's the ones stopping it. And all you have to do is give up your guns and your rights, and then we're going to have it. And then, well, what's, why don't we have all those people? Well, let's get those people. And so it's, it's, um, you know, James Lindsey really helped educate me and a lot of others in his new discourses about what this really is. And it's important to people to get educated and to people to realize so that they can identify it in their life and their daily life at work. Don't apologize if people want, if, if you're saying something, don't apologize for it. No apologies. I don't apologize for my jokes. No matter what, these are jokes people get over it. It's funny like in a horror film, you have like a slasher and they go like, some slash and movie, nobody comes out after horror film. I did not, I did not approve of those slashings and those murders. I just was horrible about nobody for coming by, but stand up, a guy talking and they go like, I don't agree with that. That's, you know, homophobic transphobic and that's, you know, sex, you know, so it's your hell to a different standard. I don't understand why. So I'm not a very good interviewer. Sometimes you said a minute ago that you were a Christian as a young man. Yeah. Then you go in the internet to hell to you and you went into the entertainment business. Gosh, I was just trying to avoid a normal job, you know, because I didn't like them. Yeah. And the most fun thing ever was telling jokes with your friends. And then I saw when I was 11, my dad took me to see George Carlin. You know, by the way, remember where kids did parents did watch whatever you want. They didn't say, it took you to the movies. It was too expensive to get a babysitter. So my parents took me to see Planet of the Apes when I was five, you know, 2001, a space out of sea. They didn't ask you, was that okay? Was that too much? You know, now with my wife's like, it's not a busy third thing. They're not a busy third thing. They're not going to watch any of your movies. My wife's still has never let me see any movie. They've never let my kids see any movie I've ever made except Daddy daughter trip. So, so, so that was, you know, how I wait your wife doesn't watch your kids. She won the moment. We can see, you know, see your movies. Once you want to see do speak a little, it was a man horror or like the hot chick. It does see when they're 13. So, um, so you go to the entertainment business. And I, so I've got into it. I saw George Carlin. It was the funniest thing I've ever seen. And then when I was 14, I saw, or 15, I saw Steve Martin perform in front of 2000 people. And back then I was starting to put it together. Like, because, you know, TV movies, they're not real. It's like, those are people aren't real. You know, it's like that guy, it's not real. He's a movie star. It doesn't, it don't realize, you know, he doesn't go to the bathroom that guys, and so when I saw Steve Martin in person who just who also changed comedy is the first guy to to just stay to him as a guy. And, um, it was so funny and I was laughing. But I saw him as a human being in the same room as me. And I said, well, he did it. He figured it out. He was able to figure out how to be a performer. Maybe I could. And I was it. And I said, then I told my dad, who, my dad Marvin, who was a lovely man, who loved comedy. And he had comedy albums. So, that I grew up with that. And I said, dad, you know, on Monday night, they let anybody go up and perform at this one club. And he said, what is it? It's the Holy City Zoo in San Francisco. They let anybody go up on Mondays. I said, it's Monday. He said, let's go. So I won. He took me that night. And that was it, you know, and you performed? Yeah. It was really awkward. It's like seeing those, you know, drunk people in the dark bars that were still smoking heavily at the time. They don't want to see a kid up on stage. They're reminding them of what they're ignoring at heart of your dad. Yeah. That takes a grasp. He was great. You're funny. You guys, great. Yeah. You're terrific. You're funny. And hey, where was he from? He was from San Francisco. His parents were East European Jews from his grandfather was from Tarnapold. I mean, his father was from Tarnapold, who came over. And that's one of those things when they came over. They thought they'd save money somehow if they lie about the age. So he, you know, they put the different age there. They saved money by lying about their age. And he's only, you know, he's 15. But he's, he's eight. He's not nine. He's eight. I don't know why they did. But so he found out when he's older, is that I'm really a year old or what happened? You know, so, um, and then my grandmother, Molly, Molly Hoffman, she came from, uh, Ukraine. And they came over and they would be worked. They worked hard. He had my grandfather had a, um, barbershop on right next to the Fox Theater on seventh street, um, on market street in San Francisco, seven street and market. And, um, he had a little barbershop. He got hair and, and my, my dad with the shine shoes during World War II. And they, you know, he would get a nickel, dime, you know, and, and, uh, it was a great place to grow up. They would give him, he told me, uh, they give him like literally like a quarter. And he'd be able to take that, um, um, you know, I think I'm wrong about it. They gave him like, it was like a dollar and he was able to spend the whole day and go to the world fair on a dollar by himself. And this is 1939 World Fair in San Francisco. So he was eight just walking around by himself, like not a care of the world. What did he do in later life? He went, he wanted to real estate and carved out a little, uh, alone business where for people, remember, for people complaining about the price of the interest rates for, for homes and banks now in 1980 in the early days, it was 18%. Yeah. And it was, you know, I think thanks thanks to the Carter administration. They were able to jack it up. And, uh, so he would, he would get figure out a way. It was some investors to help get people to loan the money for a loan on their home or to help be their first private banking. Yeah. And he was, he, you know, he, he did that. And he was also, um, just a really good guy who realized after the, uh, Brown versus Board of Education, 1954, that, you know, this racism stuff was, you know, it's stupid. It's wrong. And, um, so he was one of the first real attorneys in San Francisco to rent two African Americans in places that weren't that would, that, that, that, that wasn't that. And so that was an easy for him. And so I mean, it was with that. My mother was a school teacher. And I think it did, my mother was a war survivor in World War II. So I think that was a good where was she in World War II? The Philippines. Her father was an American soldier. She never met until she accidentally met him in San Francisco, but she, her, both her brothers were killed and they're in the World War by the Japanese, by the Japanese. And, uh, but she had no bitterness about it. And she really was a strong person. And I didn't really, you know, still come into grips with what that, what my upbringing was with her. Um, I respected tremendously. And she just said she was never fearful. The reason I survived, I was never afraid. I know I was going to survive. And so she literally, her mother would make bedsheets, take bedsheets and so them because, you know, the thing about America, it's, this is unique experiment and freedom in the history of the world. That's why it's so important to, we need to keep freedom of speech and keep, keep our freedom, because there's no one going to come and rescue us if anything happens. And, uh, so she would make with her mother, they would make these, um, um, pajamas out of these soft bedsheets that they'd had, and they would trade them because the cat, the case system, which is a lot of the world, if you're, you know, my mother used to say even maids have maids in the Philippines. There's a descending, cascading poverty level that just keeps going down and down. So she would trade these with the people, the farmers who suddenly had the most valuable thing, food. So she would walk for hours, you know, a day to get up to where the, they were to get this kamote, which was sweet potato. And she would trade for that. And, uh, she'd have to be really, really nice to these, you know, the people and they knew that that, that things have changed. And, um, and that's how she survived. And she said, um, not everybody did her, her brother's 17, bill was drafted, uh, Baruzevelt under a agreement that, um, you could be in the US Army, if you're Filipino, uh, you could be drafted to be US, go in the US Army. So he did it 17, he was them, but, uh, death march. And he survived it and then died of this, this century in their at 17. Damn. And her brother also died at 15. He said, he refused to believe that, uh, that his brother had died. He's got to be with the gorillas. I'm going to go get him and my mother said, don't don't. She stayed up all night with him trying to talk her brother John and to not going. And, uh, she wasn't successful in the morning. He said, here's, she gave him a, he gave her a hundred pesos. Hang on to this. I'm going to come back and he never did. And then it wasn't until my mother's like 60th high school and a high school reunion, where there's only a few people that survived. We're, back and he never did. And then it wasn't until my mother's like 60th high school and a high school reunion, there's only a few people that survived where she found out why the Japanese captured him and interrogated him and killed him. It's because he was and she didn't realize it, but one of her classmates did because he was wearing her brother was wearing their brothers, US Army boots, so that the Japanese thought, well, he must know something and they killed him. They killed him. Well, what happened is at that time, there was the form of information was rumored in new endo. So the rumor got back that the Japanese had him and what they had Japanese said was, you know, come and get your son, my grandmother, Victoria, but my grandmother, Victoria knew from what other happened to other families. If you go, the Japanese will torture you in front of him to make him talk and then they'll just kill you both. So she had to make her Filipino Sophie's choice and she had three daughters and she was going to, so she stayed and they killed him. But my mother didn't have a bitterness towards the Japanese. I never, I never had one hateful thing. My mother ever said it was war. So and one of her brother-in-law was half Japanese who helped one of the reasons they survived. So that's just another. What would she like as a mother? She was tough. Yeah, like that. She was tough. She would not your average bear, your mom. Well, there was a lot of Filipinos. That was a beautiful thing about because on my birth certificate, it says father white mother Oriental. Back then that's what in 1963, that's what you recall. If you're Asian, you're not Asian or Oriental. I think Asian was like a slur. Yeah, I'm not Asian. I'm Oriental. What are you talking about? It just means Eastern. So my dad, yeah, my dad was open to this and it was beautiful. He was very open-minded, a traditional liberal. Which is the best, you know, free speech, don't judge people by the color of their skin, women's rights, gay rights. That traditional liberalism, which has been abused to me and other stuff now. But so she was tough. If you wasted food, that was a problem. My dad had to tell her, we got to throw this food out. He said, we're going to talk about this. It's still good. He said, but there's mold on it. Yeah, but we can cut them all off. She's no what we do. We'll just buy, we'll throw it away and just buy new stuff of that. And that was just like, that was, I mean, my mother, that was a bizarre concept, throwing food away that you could still eat. She told me like she said, they took the kamote and they would mix it and mix it until it was basically water just to stretch it out. So she had something. She starved during the war and she had some problems her whole life. She lived almost 93. She said, then they would take the skin of the kamote and we'd burn that. My mother would burn it. That would be our coffee because it looked like coffee. But she didn't say with bitterness, it looked like coffee. What's that? Some coffee. So it's like growing up with that, I didn't truly understand it. What happens, I think, and now that I understand what I learned from great people, like, MCOT Peck and Dr. Gabor Mate was that there's traditional, I mean, I'm sorry, generational trauma. Because I work with the, you know, Gabor Mate worked with me on a couple of sessions and talked to me about generational trauma. I said, what is that? I didn't go through the war. Why? I know it's not my problem. He said, yes, but it's passed on to you because he was you know, his mother's womb during, in Hungary during World War II. And he said, your mother, you know, she suffered as he'd must have passed on to you. And I said, no, I don't, what are you? I said, I don't think so. He said, well, when you travel places, what is that like? What do you do? And he talked about what I do. And I said, what did you do? Bring anything with you? And I went, food. You bring food with you everywhere I go. I got a bag. I got some food in there. I said, what do you think you got that from? It's like, it's true. If it gets moldy, do you throw it away? Yes. And I go, right back to sprouts. And I buy another, we hear a lot from viewers about big tech censorship. And those reports are more frequent than ever right now. Censorship meaning shutting down your access to information, not wise or misinformation, but true things. It's only the truth that they censor facts that get in the way of the lies are trying to tell you. The net effect of this, of course, is interfering in the 2024 presidential elections. That's what they're censoring more than ever now because the stakes are even higher. You're probably not shocked by this. But the specific examples of it, do throw you back a little bit. We've seen screenshots and videos showing how a Google search learned more about the attempts of assassination on Donald instead push users to information on Harry Truman or Bob Marley or the Pope, anything other than the relevant truth, which is that they just shot Trump in the face. They don't want you to know that because it might help Trump. We've seen examples where Facebook marked true photos of a buddy and defiant Trump as misleading. Somehow those pictures rely and then limited their visibility. Its AI assistant explicitly denied the shooting ever took place. This is insanity, but it's at the core of big text editorial policy, which is denying the truth to you in order to control the outcome of this presidential election. It's not democracy. We've seen examples where a generic search for information about Donald Trump was automatically rephrased to show positive stories about Kamala Harris instead. Is there any clear example of election interference? So what do you do about it? Well, parlor has been down this road. Parlor is pulled right off the internet for telling the truth, but it's back and it's reaffirmed its lifelong unwavering commitment to free speech. On parlor, the Bill of Rights lives. The first amendment is real. You can say what you think because you're a human being in an American citizen and not a slave. On parlor, users can freely express themselves, tell the truth, express their conscience, and connect with others who are doing the same and they will not be interfered with. They will not be censored. Designers support a wide range of viewpoints. Everyone is welcome on parlor. Parlor is committed to ensuring that everybody is hurt. And so it's become a place where independent journalism is protected and respected. It's protected because it's respected. So is this censorship by big tech intensifies standing up for your God-given right as an American to say what you think is essential? Where on parlor, that's why we're on parlor. Our handle is at Tucker Carlson and we encourage you to join us there. You have the right to say what you believe so does every American and you can do it on parlor. Get the parlor wrap today. I think my siblings got it worse than me. Definitely because I was the youngest. They bring food with them too. I didn't, I don't ask him about that. I should. But my, I just remember being a really young boy. My mother, my dad, he took her place as you know and it was nice they would travel together and they would go out to dinner. And I remember my mom yelling, all right, we're going out. Anybody touch a hair on Robbie? I murder all of you. Tough for the other kids, but I'm Robbie's over here. I think he helped create a monster. Was she a Christian? She was Catholic, but then she got divorced and she met my father, who was Jewish. And I'll say both didn't. I think they both made a decision about him. She survived the Japanese. She could survive not being accepted by the Catholic Church. And I tried to get my priest, Father Passo. It was a great guy to speak with her towards the end of her life. And she just declined. And I wanted her to really make peace. And, and I think in a lot of ways she did. And, and I, as time goes by, I, I realized, look at my sister told me sister April, who's lovely, lovely girl who had a worse than me. She was older. And, um, and her parents divorced. My mother's first husband, husband. And, she said, you realize we were raised by a 12 year old girl, right? Because that's when that trauma happened. And that's what like Dr. Gabor talked about with me. It's at that time of trauma. It's where they revert back to. And that's, and it's still made sense. I get it. So how did you, if your parents weren't believers, how'd you become a Christian? I found it. I just, it was a, I found some really happy content people. And I go, what's going on with these people? They were not in the entertainment business. I'm betting. They were not. And I was, I was in junior high and I go, what's with these people? And my, my, uh, my friend's brother, Ed Marcus's brother, he just, he was having very conflicted kids and had some problems. And, you know, it was, it was experimenting with different things. And, uh, and then he just was suddenly the most peaceful guy to be around. I mean, what's happening with this guy? He said, I said, what's happening with you? So come find out. And I went to this place and everybody in there was like, hey, so nice to have you. Welcome. This is our house. This is your house. It was like, wow. And that's a beautiful thing that Mexicans say when you go to their house, they go like, it's too cost at them being. This is your house as well. Yes. What a beautiful thing to say to people. And I went in and I was just really moved by how welcoming this was. And this was, it didn't feel like what I was in, you know, my house, you know, how people like, anytime somebody called my mom and answered, what is Robbie there? Why? Well, I'm, I go to school with him. So well, I just want to talk to him. Why? Well, because he's my friend and I want to check it out. You know, so I grew up with that, you know, my mom, she just with the world was dangerous place for her. Why are you going? Don't go outside. It's dangerous. I think because for her, she grew up, that was a dangerous place. So, you know, you have to have a balance with that. So you wind up in a classmate's church, and that seems like a place of refuge, a place of peace. And I'm like, what is this? And then you, and then, you know, when you spend time reading the Bible, when you spend time with other Christians, you feel the presence of Christ. You just do. When I, you know, when I was doing the rosary, with, and I have no problem with any other religions. If you believe in Christ, you're my brother. And if you're not, you're my brother too. You know, those who are not against us are with us. And those who are against us are potentially with us too. We just have to be there. You feel the presence of God. And that is a powerful thing. That's moving and it's healing. And so while I strayed, you know, there's always in the back of my mind, you go like, you know, I'm never going to go away. There's that, you know, Jesus, I'm never going to go away. And when you need me most, I'll be there. And so it's times like this, though. It's just like, wow, it's beautiful. And I hope I can, you know, I'm just very grateful and lucky and fortunate. And, you know, I feel so close to them with my family. I feel so gifted by everything. And all the problems that you have are just, you got to interpret it. Like this is a potential to bring you closer to God and to help people and to bring you closer to, to where you need to be. This is all opportunities. And so I think as, as people are going to get really angry when the election happens, whoever wins. And I would just tell people like, it's not Robert Kennedy talks about this too. It's not the end of our republic. It's not the end of democracy. It's, it's going to be more encroachments. If the Democrats, when I believe there will be more encroachments on freedom, but it's not the end, we still have the, you know, this tried and true legislative executive judicial. And even though the legislative still continues to abdicate their power to the executive, which, you know, it's not supposed to happen where the, you know, Biden comes in. He does 125 executive orders. He's growing, it's more basically hiring an emperor, but still get involved at the state level, get involved with your school board. And I would say one of the biggest dangers of an uncoming of an incoming continuation of the Democratic Party. And I'm not to say that the Republicans haven't done their abuse and like, you know, the lies that the Bush administration, the wars they cause. But the problem is if the Democrats get back in, I'm worried about the educational system. And his, his mom's for liberty to talk about this is giving more money from the, from the feds to our school boards and the state to control what happens at this state and our local school boards. So the school board meetings will mean nothing. It's that it does it's all be the feds will, they're funding most of it, 26% they want to go to. I think it's 13. Now if they do that and then control, then then we're really talking about another, you know, problem with indoctrination of children. And that's going to be a real, I mean, that's one thing which should really, really be aware about, be act locally, get involved. What do you, what will you say to people who's candidate loses in November? Calm, no violence, no violence. And, and know that it's going to be two years, hold your, hold the reins. If you had no better, who wins, hold the reins is going to be two years of what damage they can do. And then they're going to be a lame duck for the next two years. And just hold the reins. And I'm saying, don't give into violence. Don't be, and unfortunately our social media is creating and exploiting and making money off of, of turning people as extreme as they can so they can increase their addictions. And these addictions that we started with, these are addictions of social media. And that's something we got to control, get a handle on. And I was just tell people like anything new that's coming into the world, like whether it's airplanes, okay, well, it's first invented in, in 1903 by the Wright Brothers. Supposedly, the Russians and French, they otherwise. However, 15 years later, if this new invention, 15 years later, they were using it to drop bombs at and kill people. Yes. And then it took another 20 years for it to become aviation, where people can actually get the places by the early 1930s. So it was, so right now, social media is just at the time where it's just dropping bombs, killing people, destroying people and canceling people and that stuff. So we'll have to give it time. And just for schools, can you imagine if you and I took our television set to school in the morning and our newspaper and our daddy's dirty porn magazines, imagine that I found underneath the stairs, by the way. I noticed that we didn't have the same money for makeup as Playboy. But anyway, my point is, can you imagine bringing all that? That's what you allow when you, when you have phones and schools now. So this is a real problem. We have to get a handle on and like, when you get bullied or whatever, or people would say bad things about you, you farted in the middle of the class and it was humiliating. Well, at least when you went home, it was like, well, stops, it turns off. I got it now. No, never stops. They got the phone and they got people saying stuff about you and this and how many likes you have. So like no phones. I mean, just flip phone, no social media to 16 minimum. So calm down and say that no violence, don't give into it and just know that you can't act. And this is a country, it's a republic. It's not this parliamentary system in Europe, which is, and we're these unelected people, the European Commission now are controlling what happens in other countries. And thankfully, Hungary is still holding firm. And it really is under threat. Right now we have free speech. There's the free speech in England is under attack. Yeah, I would say. And comedians are under attack now. So that's a, you know, Jay, we talk about in the book. You can do it. The, the comedians under attack and now they have this hate laws and free speech has to be open to to protect the, it's not the safe stuff for stuff everybody agrees with and needs to be protected. You know, appropriate or approved speech is not the stuff that needs to protect me and say unapproved stuff. And you have to have all of it to have friction and society to have the best ideas or eyes. You know, and let them, like ACLU, when it used to be a decent organization that used to protect rights, you know, they've defended the Nazis right in Skokiel and Oye to March, not because they agreed with the Nazis, but because the Jewish guy who's in charge of ACLU at the time said the best way to defeat the Nazis is to let them speak. Of course. So they went to the Supreme Court in a lot and then to fight for them to put their right to speak. Well, that's how a self-confident country behaves, a country that believes in its own values and its founding documents, they're, they're happy to tolerate disagreement because they know that they're right and that if people are given the freedom to choose, they'll choose them, you know, and I feel like censorship suggests the people in charge know how hated they are and how stupid their ideas are. And that's why they can't handle the challenge to them. Well, if you, if you abdicate your free speech, your, your right to unfettered speech and you let some other, the state decide, well, then they're going to decide what's in their best interests. Of course, and they're going to limit the speech and, and they are trying to. And it's really a, it shouldn't be surprising, but it was, it was like, it was surprising to me that when it was discovered through the, thank God for Elon Musk and, and God bless him and protect him and pray for Elon Musk. His protection. Thank God for the Twitter files because the terrific work of Matthew, it's Matthew, Shelynberger and Matt Taebee, they, this was really happening. They, they were able to discover that the government was infringing on the, on the rights of Americans and limiting and censoring speech that they disagreed with for what the government wanted to do. So for, and then when they had congressional hearings, instead of correcting the situation, which was egregious and a violation of a, of the first amendment rights of Americans, instead of adjusting it based on this new evidence, this anti-American attack on our system and free speech, the Democrats were just like attacking the messengers, attacking the people who brought this and trying to undermine them and demonize them. And it's like, wow, this is the time to regroup and go, hey, this is bad. Let's fix this. Yes. But they didn't do that. And that's what George Washington warns us about when partisanship, when people worry more about parties, then they can really be a threat to the nation. That's for sure. So you started on Saturday, live in 89, I think 89, 89 90 season with the glory years. Well, I should, I think that's best fair. I mean, the cast that you started with, you know, they're all still famous to this day. We had a great cast, but I, I'll remember from that time was the, I mean, the, the newspapers saying how much we sucked that we weren't as good as the first one. Who was on, can you just remind us who was on the show that year? Oh, well, you know, the, the great Danic Harvey, Dennis Miller, Mike Myers, really talented guy and Phil Hartman, of course. And the new guys coming in, which, you know, was Norardin was there and Jan Hook's Kevin, the great Kevin, Meland, great guy and talent. And it would then do what the new guys was me, David Spade got hired together as writers. And then the next fall, 1990, Adam Sandler ended up coming. And my buddy who I lived right across the street with, with, he lived with Judd Apatow right across the street from me in North Hollywood. And then Chris Farley came in at that time. And it was a, a really good time for a comedy and it was a great place to be in their 20s. And that's, so that's 35 years at least that you've lived in that world. What's the response from your colleagues, peers, friends to some of the things that you've been saying, the last hour? Um, they're coming around. I don't know, they don't agree with all of it. But I would say that, um, they're agreeing more to what they're seeing because it's, it's tough because it is insulated. You, you do, you can, you can stay in your political echo chamber. You can absolutely avoid any, um, you know, any questioning of your belief systems, because belief systems what we're talking about is the toughest thing to really to, um, to have challenged for sure. Once you, you can talk about like my good cook, I don't know if I'm a good cook or whatever. You can talk about, but if you talk about your belief systems, you talk about like, you talk about somebody's sense of humor. Do you have a good sense of humor? Yes, absolutely. Why wouldn't I? Not everybody. Like you can't be good cook. Not everybody's best sense of humor. When you get to that belief system, you start to question people get angry. And, um, but I think people are waking up and you got to have people with differences of opinion. The difference is, as you know now, it's like as we've seen before, if you disagree, you disagree, then you work, whatever. You know, now, if you have a different, if you have a different opinion, you're a bad person. Yes. And you're judged for that. So now people don't want to give their opinion, which is, makes our, which makes the expression and it makes our culture poor because we need everybody to talk and let the best ideas rise to the surface. Exactly. Not judge them from particular thing and, and for a particular point of view that they have every right to have. So do you think that people in the world that you've spent your life and would agree with what you just said? I mean, I think so if you get them one on one, not on Twitter, not on Twitter. Not on her face has it, um, but have you been able to preserve your friendships despite political differences? Most, some people sadly, yeah, from the Bay Area, who, uh, watch, um, one of the networks that has four letters. All right. Was it? That's five. They, um, they used to work there. I didn't know that. They love me. Uh, but I don't hear from them as much. And they're lovely people and I love them. And I, I feel like if they did see me, they'd hug me, but they just, you know, they said to me, there's a lot of people like Gavin Newsom. Actually, well, that, that's what they're from Northern California. There's a lot of people they really like him. And you know what, um, he's, he's in power and there, there was a chance that we were like, you know, worried because we saw what he did the same. It was just go, it's interesting because like you take guys that are, that really authoritarian. They have no problem closing your business. Oh, no. But if it's, if it's a business that they're associated with or they get him, they'll keep open and just intro doe the dictator of the North. Yeah. He will, um, have no problem trouncing on the rights of, uh, Canadians who are protesting, who, um, really would help to open and end COVID was those truckers who risk everything and this a whole dick cold, cold weather dictator closed their bank accounts and just completely took away their rights. And, and that's the thing about it. Man, your rights, they are on a piece of paper and unless they're backed by the will and by the, the goodwill and by the people insist on it. It's just going to be a piece of paper. And so that's what happened in Canada. And, um, those people's rights were, were trounced upon. So luckily though, but that, that, that, that was enough to like wake people up, I think in the United States who had guns. Yeah. And I, and I, Robert Kennedy talked about this is the reason why we got out of COVID because when I said that I, you know, I told him years ago, you know, if you ever run for president, I'm going to support you no matter what. And I do. It's a great thinker and a wonderful man and really wants to help educate, uh, people and get people healthy. I don't agree with everything he says, but who does? The point is we agree on enough. We can't go Republicans, Democrats, if you're willing to work with us on this issue, I'll work with you. I don't care about what, you know, you know, man crazy as well. And so I'm willing to, to, to work with them and to, you know, to move this forward. I said, but the guns, here's the thing. The only reason we got out of COVID is because there are at least 400 million guns in America and the government can only push the citizenry so far. And I said, that something that I, as someone in California didn't understand that, I understood pretty quickly during tyranny where the people could shut you down or like a governor could say, you can no longer open your business. Even though, you know, scientifically, you can't, there was no science behind it and never had been. And so they were allowed to do that. And the fact that there has been no legislatures that have restricted the government's executive powers to prevent that rapid again is worrisome. And I said, this, this, you know, they could turn it off at any minute. So I do think that because of that situation, because of COVID, because people saw the COVID tyranny and now it's been exposed that there was no reason for the six, you know, the six feet of distance is all was just made up by Fauci and, you know, his cronies over there who were all paid by the pharmaceutical industry. They have, you know, my friends have come around to go, you know, maybe around if not so crazy. I've been friends ago, like, you know what, I didn't realize, you know, we just thought you're, we just thought you're nuts. But now they've come around. When did your view start changing? And why? I've always questioned things. I mean, I hate to say this, but like, I've always kind of been kind of a contrarian. Why do we have to do that? That sucks. Let's do something else. I bet that guy grew up with my dad, my dad, you know, set an example for just a troublemaker, you know, so I kind of, you know, this way I didn't start out and comedians aren't intellectuals were de facto intellectuals. We got forced into it because everybody else got demonized and silenced academics were like, they couldn't talk about stuff scientists and doctors and comedians could still get on stage and still talk about it. But so these other people got science. So we kind of have to step into that vacuum. It's true. And I just do what I can. And, you know, this college dropout. Um, so that's, I mean, it's, you know, Dave Chappelle becomes a leading public intellectual people. Exactly. I saw him in 2016 because I go, what is happening here? What is this like? And I went, I'm going to go see a show and there's two shows happening. There was the show of his show, which is brilliant. And it was a show of the audience looking at him with that was another show because they were looking at him. Please make sense of the world for me. Please because it's not making sense anymore. And he would. And it's like, and that changed me. And I realized, well, that's what, you know, that's the way direction to go. And that was 2016. So what my dad was a guy who would like, he was friends with this IRS guy who's behind up on the IRS. I can't say his name. My public good friend. Yeah. He said, he said, he said, because my dad was pissed off. He had to pay these taxes, which were much higher in the late 60s than they are now. Yeah. Very high. You know, just it was crazy higher than now. People think about, I got to pay they were higher than like 60s in the 60%. So my, and he said, yeah, I'm pissed. Like he said, he said, so what happens? I get out of it every year because he had a private, you know, business, basically private, little bank. And he said, what do you do when the IRS agent comes over? He said, well, you know, I give him his own room and I, you know, they give him a box and a cup of coffee, whatever they need. He said, don't do that. So what do you mean? He said, um, just give him a box, put the stuff on the floor, you know, put the stuff on another box and, you know, and said, bring the kids over, let them play and run around the room. He said, he'll be gone in an hour. Don't make it easy for him to harass you. He said, just, yeah, just go to have the kids run around. Don't make it comfortable too comfortable. You know, and so we would run around and I couldn't believe like my, because my dad would never let me run around with his people in the office. And I got this people, he said, thank you, he said, just play do what you want. My brother and like, what? Really? So it was a disaster or run around, dropping and breaking stuff and all this stuff. And it was my dad was like, I said, this is different. I didn't understand what it was till now. It's a years later. But that was my dad's kind of way like, ah, you know, ha, giving it back to the man in some small, fun way where he can get laugh out of it. My dad used to love to laugh and get laughs out of situations and whatever way he could. And I guess some of that rubbed off. Did they stop auditing him? Ha ha ha. It's not as much. And they were definitely quicker. But he was a genius with math. I that was a math genius. He broke calculator. He just figured out, just like, I couldn't believe what he would do. And did he live to see your career? He lived thankfully. He got to see like, a movie mine become a big hit. And it was like, he called me on left message of my machine. And he said, well, Robbie, I think you finally got a hit on your hands here. I went to the theater San Bruno two theaters had your movie to and they're both sold out. So I think you got a hit. And my mom started getting this show business. She said, you know, the back man movie made 400 million, but they had, but their per screen average was higher because there was in 4,500 screens. So the per screen average when you look at it, there's not as much as your movie when you're Did you know that the Batman movie made 400 million, but they had, but their screen average was higher because there was in 4,500 screens. So the first screen average when you look at it, there's not as much as your movie and yes. So they got into it quick and they're very proud of me. So that was, that was really my dad got to see that and he got to go and be there and he died a month later. But that was just beautiful. He got to see that and go to a premiere and my dad dressed up. I got to sit next to him and my daughter, Ellen, this sign and it was just, um, that was beautiful. I missed those times and I missed the phone calls and, you know, calling and checking in on me and going, hey, dad, let me call you back. He says, you always say that. Okay, do you talk now? And I wish I could have that conversation back. Yeah. But those are beautiful times and to have that support of your father, that's why it's so important to support and love your kids unconditionally and give them the reflect God's love onto them. And that's, that's our job as a parent and society. I fail. I fail at, um, and being the best person I could be and I get angry and sometimes I spout my mouth off. But when some people, you know, attack people and I care about it, it really bothers me and I got to calm down. No, so, but so they always tell you it's the most important election of your lifetime. But of course, this one actually is that's demonstrable and it's also because it is so important being censored at every level by the tech companies. So we were thinking about this a couple of months ago and we thought, why not get on the road live in front of actual people, live audiences, coast to coast to nationwide tour, where we can't be censored. That'd be good. It would also be fun. So we're doing it. We're going to be on stage with some of our friends, some of the most fascinating people we know, the most recognizable people we know, responding to what is happening in America this September in real time. It'll be just like the podcast, but it's going to be live. So we're excited to announce that our friend Larry Elder is coming to join us in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, our friend John Rich, who will be there with us in Sunrise, Florida, ranting more stops. You just added another stadium show in Reading, Pennsylvania, will be joined on stage by Alex Jones. They tell you what Alex Jones is like. Have you seen him in person? You should make up your own mind. It's going to be fun, as hell and interesting and intense. And we hope you will join us. Go to tuckercross and dot com right now to get your tickets. See you there. So you got cut off your time about Canada and the tyranny there. Obviously lots of great Canadian people. I know you agree. But the country's in turmoil. It's an authoritarian country, but you were punished by the Canadians for telling us all the jokes. I was. They really went after me and it hurt not at all. I loved it. I remember the, my favorite thing was because it was accused of being, you know, transphobe, which is like it's just to fill in the blank, whatever you are. Yeah. So he could tell jokes. And his father is like, if we're just going to throw biological reality out, the truth, you could be, you know, not nice, but it's never hateful. No. The fact that I, you know, and I said, I did some jokes about that. I do my stand-up back there. If I had a son and if he sucked at sports like I did and I wanted him to be a champion and victory. I said, well, just go, you know, listen, there's not nice, but just go tell, I want you to, you know, you're losing all the guys. I want you to go and tell the coach that you're a girl, you know, and then, you know, no, no, no, that's the best part. You get to keep your dick. You can keep the whole thing, the whole thing. It doesn't matter. No, you just tell them and they have to accept you. You just say it. You just say it. And I said, and you win that, then you're in order to do this thing. And anyway, it gets big laughs, but it's also like, that's what things they complain about. And people were laughing at that outrageous, you know, humor. And I said, the Canadians were mad that the audience laughed. So one guy who was the same guy in all the complaining. And I remember like they were really laughing and then they kind of got quiet because they're too polite. Canadians are too polite. They don't want to hurt anybody's feelings, which ends up hurting everybody's feelings because then you end up having some guy who loves China running your country. So it's important to speak up and speak your speak freely and say when this, when you're countrymen, I have nothing to apologize to you, Canada. If you know what you, I will consider an apology, consider it when you apologize for what you did to those truckers and what you that that that ugliness of not supporting those people who are risking everything to drive all the way across the country, shut the country down so that this tyranny could end. And it was a powerful movement. And it was a movement not and to not to stand there and let your government officials call them terrorists. Yes. And put them in prison, which they did. This graceful. It is disgraceful. And so when you make that official apology, I'll talk about like how I felt them, why I did certain jokes and I have no apologies to you at all. And I'm glad I did it. And I do it again if you let me back in the country, which I assume they won't. I will not be allowed back in the country. Just for hate speech for jokes. And you're not allowed only to leave TV either. I don't get invited to please hair. No, I mean, like it's not, I mean, as I said, you know, it got on Twitter in the Fox News, of course. What's I said, they know much late night TV is just a political indoctrination with comedic imposition. Yeah. It's just these and it's it was no longer resembles comedy as much as, you know, cheering on the rhetoric and, you know, attacking a particular one half of the country. You know, when I saw the dancing syringes, I was like, oh, but you know all those, that's the weird things you know all those guys I assume. Because you lived in that world. I know most of them. But it's, I mean, it's easy to, I mean, and God bless them. And I hope that they can come around to become more independent in their thinking. Because whether they're they, you can literally replace the, the, the dialogue, I mean, the jokes from one late night guy to the next guy and then put him on the mouth of this guy. And it's just, it's just there's no individual point of view. Because it is, it is really ideologically captured and trapped. And I, you know, I hope that they would realize that that's limiting. I would hope that like you didn't, you realize, you know, limiting soul destroying. I think it's, I don't think it's good. And I think people have, have woken up to it. And I think like that ain't that that's not, that's not representative of our country. And I think it's a job to question authority no matter who's in authority. Exactly. And I live at its best truthfully was to run trying to make our friends laugh and question authority no matter. I make fun of authority no matter who's in charge. I remember we were making fun of Bill Clinton. We had Julie a Sweeney played Hillary. I misplayed a played Monica Lewinsky. No, no, no, she played the, the daughter, what's in the Chelsea. Yeah. And I'm like, you can't go after somebody's kid. How dare you know, but like, well, it's a kid, you know, we're not, she just put braces on. So they seem to be like an outrage with liberals. They don't have as good a sense of humor. They just, well, I should say that I'm sorry. They have the more sensitive and they just, they get outraged and they could, they don't like it. So, but at the time, the center I don't like did it anyway. Yeah, they did. And they're coming back to it. I really think that they've, you know, they're making fun of, of Biden they have and they got a good crew there really talented new group. And they're going to, it's, it's an institution. And like any institution, whether it's a particular late night show where a network or or Saturday night life, any institution is going to be susceptible to this ideological clap trap. And it is, but it's also you can understand it. And I think as I, you know, I was angry about it and, you know, I have to come to have from a place of peace and understanding if I'm going to help it. If I'm going to participate in this culture, I have to come from a place of understanding and it kind, you know, I doesn't come naturally to me, but I got to come from a place of of understanding tolerance for giving this an empathy. And it's hard to fight against that. When you are getting this, you can only talk about this and everything's got to attack half of the country and they are susceptible to that. And hopefully they'll realize because the ratings get smaller. Yeah. The number one guy is a very funny Greg, Greg, the gut felt, you know, my buddy Jamie Listle goes on the show all the time. That's the number one show. So if you want to, if it's about ratings, about money, well, then think about the money. And I think eventually Hollywood, if there anything there, whores and they will do what makes money. They did, you think that Sony pictures wants to have a Christian division? Because they didn't care about that, but they do now why? Because people like angel studios are making money, not traditionally. And they didn't see that coming when, when, uh, Mel Gibson made passion with the Christ, they tried to destroy that. Oh, I remember very, very well. They hated him for that. They did not take him out and that became the first real internet like sensation. Uh, and they couldn't stop. He's a tough man. He can take you because he is a faith in God. And he's like, and Catholicism is the closest to the original words of Jesus. And that's why it works for me. Um, and I, there's a film that I want to make called about the, the shroud of Turin. And it's, the shroud of Turin is the burial cloth of Jesus of Nazareth. It is. And the fact that the Stirp scientists tested it in the wrong place and didn't, um, put quantify that, that there is these French nuns who were trying to repair in the 16th century, the lords, their lords, burial cloth, that they would do this, this French thing called this French weave called an invisible weave. And that altered the findings of the, of the testing of the carbon dating. Yeah. And so there's this beautiful movie that we want to make. And I'm going to make that. And it's, it's just expensive to make movies. And obviously, you know, I'm, don't find myself in the good graces of Hollywood right now. But luckily, um, there are enough people who, who want to bring a message of, of healing or give them footage Disney with that movie. No. I don't think Disney's going to come around anytime soon. You know, it's so funny is that like, you know, when I got the Disney channel, and my ego was like, maybe they have the, the, the, I'm the Disney channel to have the hot chick. And they would never make that movie now. And I, I said, they didn't have it on there. But it's on Amazon Prime, baby. So Disney also is another organization that caught up in what sounds good social justice. You know, the, the equity, equity, yeah, whatever it is. Okay. But what equity is is a grievance with the, it's people like I want this and these, the idea that somehow we're going to get the same outcomes and that they're guaranteed. It was like the, you know, Kamala Harris's dog whistle now is this, this, this equity thing. And what it, if we don't have, as Thomas Sol says, if we don't have the same outcomes in the same family, how are we going to have that in society? We have to have a meritocracy. We have to have the best people and we have the opportunity. So but Disney, no, they're not going to make a better movie. And I hope that they do well. It's a company that is that I worked for many, many years ago. It's a best brand in show business. I will tell you a funny story that when I was there, I think Bob Iger had just taken over from a great man. I really loved Heisner. He's the one who turned that company around. And he's a fan of my, my movies. So I love the guy. Of course. But when I here came in and then I was still there and you know, you're out when the new regime comes in. Yeah. Yeah. It's been there. Yeah. It was for a few months and they were talking about the movies. And unfortunately, I was involved in, you know, at the regime, it wasn't making a lot of money for movies at that time. We were on our way out. We all knew it. And then there was a meeting with the board of directors and I think Senator Mitchell was one of the, yeah, on the board and they said, and I was, I'm sorry, I'm going to anger. Well, you know, this is what they looked into the boat. Well, the boats made 18 million last year profit. And then the, the parks made this made the 34 million profit the way. Why the movies? The loss money. Why do we need to make these movies? Let's just not make movies. Just do the boats. He said, who? Mr. Secretary, I think the movies are what get people on the books. So so US senators aren't the best judges of no surprisingly. Yeah. Aren't the best judges of what movies should be made for children and their families. I hope Disney comes around. They've see what happens when they get to woke. They get spanked. Yeah. They get spanked. And they, you know, that's a company that I got a route for and I got to hope that they write the ship. And, you know, money has a strange way. American, that's the thing about America. People come from all over, you know, in America, whatever they believe system. America's a wonderful seductiveness about working your butt off. You get successful making money. And so we've had a wonderful check and balance here. Usually with what makes the most money, let's keep doing that. Yes. But I hope that Disney writes its ship and gets away from this trying to indoctrinate our children how awful is that? The pressing. It was really bummer that the fact that I, you know, my wife and I would have to watch the movies first before we let our kids, the last few years we have to watch the movie first before we let our kids see it. And let's see what's, let's just check it first. My parents never did that to me. They took me to see the Godfather, Sonny Corleone. They didn't ask me how did you deal with that. You know, we just, we, they don't want to get a babysitter. So but so what we would watch these movies is just to make sure all my wife would, you know, she does most 90% of the child ring. But and to make sure that they're not getting any stuff that we don't want them to have. Yes. And that that's not okay. That's not good for their business. It's not good for society to like that you're putting out stuff there that is undermining its traditional family and trying to destroy the lives of kids. I mean, that's pretty dark. It doesn't get any worse than that. How would you rate Trump not politically, not personally, but from a comedy stand? Well, I've met him a few times. Nice guy. I like them. Very likable. Absolutely. That's the thing about it. It's like, you know, you have a guy who's genuinely as a sense of humor tries to make jokes. And then the jokes are like, he said this, you know, we'd be a dictator on day one. But then that's, you know, it's okay. It's a joke. He's joking. He doesn't mean it. Like, no, he's going to be, you know, so he's got to be super careful. That's why I feel sorry for anybody in the public eye. And unfortunately, during COVID, he listened to the wrong people and he trusted the wrong people. But I think he learned from that. And I think this time, hopefully, you know, I don't think he's going to, I don't think he's going to make that mistake. I hope not. You know, I mean, I hope he doesn't just put in the bankers and charge the banks and then the, you know, farm of people in charge of the CDC and the FDA. I'm hopeful. But I think anybody who doesn't need it, who do I mean, I wouldn't want to run for president of the meow chance. But he's subjecting himself to this. I mean, wow, that's rough. And I admire anybody who wants to serve their country in the capacity. And if you think about traditionally with John Adams to be a doctor, an attorney, the highest thing he could be was to be a public servant and going to politics. That's what he felt was the, his highest calling. And I think we've moved away from that now. So I, you know, I want what's best for this country. And I do think I like governments that are less administrations, I should say, they're less confident so that they won't don't want to go around and start more wars blow up the world. And I think we're at a time financially in this country. You just can't keep spending another trillions and trillions of dollars in expect this, this just just to be magically taken care of. This is an issue that's just a real problem. And this administration and the same thing with the Republicans in Congress, this Ukraine war has to end. We had to get out of it. Whether it's Robert Kennedy, it was a great guy or whether Trump gets in. And we have to end this war because it's different than just these skirmishes and smashing up parts of the world, which is also awful. What they did with, you know, what Obama and Hillary Clinton administration did, Bolivia was just dreadfully awful. And you could saw that you killed all those people for no reason. There are no reason. And then that what's happening in Europe and the people who are leaving and it's still a mess there. That is something that's, that's a war crime, that's a human rights violation. And we got to stop this war because this, this guy has the most nuclear weapons. And I'm saying he's going to use it. We might. If you push, you keep poking a bear in the eye enough, that bear is going to lash out and do something. And 300 over 350,000 Russians died, have died at least in this war. That's like seven, eight Vietnam's for us over 19 year period for us. They lost more people in World War II. They're the ones that won World War II. They 20 million people. They know what that sacrifice is. And they're not going to bend for this. We have to, it's not going to be perfect. Like in any divorce, Ukraine's not going to get everything they want. Russia's not going to get everything they want. But there has to be a cessation of human carnage. This has to stop. And whatever we got to do to do that, whoever administration is going to do that. And the Republicans also have the, the spinelessly, you know, Senator Graham is just the warmongering weasel. We have to, these people need to be kicked out of office. Even if they're replaced by party that I don't not fond of right now, we got to get rid of these people who, who, and if you are for war, get rid of them, vote them out. If you find out who your Senator and Congressman are voting for so that we can end this and stop it. What, as a Christian, what do you make of politicians who call themselves Christians and then cheer lead and vote to fund carnage that doesn't help anyone that results only in killing? Because that doesn't seem like a Christian position to me. They are hypocrites. And they are hypocrites because not only are they continuing to slaughter, but they're also financially benefiting from it. So you have like, I mean, at least in some ways, the cats out of the bag, Biden, what's left of Biden admitted that the money's not leaving the country. It's just going down the street to the pharmaceutical, I mean, sorry, to the military industrial complex. Right down, it's got that, these hundred billions. Still don't worry. You see, no, let us worry. Let us worry very much that we are exporting this murder that we're exporting the slaughter and the taxpayers and then the Congressman also can invest in this, that, you know, Congressman and senators, I mean, that can make money off the slaughter. That, that is truly evil. I agree with you completely. We need to stop that and hopefully this will, there's no election. We'll bring about an end to it. It's got to stop. We can't let it spread. We can't let it fester and it's not going to be perfect, but no divorce, no end of war is, but it has to stop. So I want to circle back to where I began, which is your conversion or your evolution through Christianity Catholicism. How did that happen? Well, there's two beautiful things. One is to know that there is far too many stars in the, in the sky that are necessary for the universe to continue. It seems to be, and there's far too much spermazoa and flowers for flowers to continue. And they don't need to be that beautiful color. There seems to be an exuberance in creation. There's just too much and there seems to be a celebration. Celestial whoopie as Alan Watts would say. And that's a really beautiful thing. There's too much exuberance in nature. I love that. And there's definitely a joyfulness to all of it. It's like, wow, look at that. Sometimes you look up with the clouds and you go like, that's as beautiful as anything that Monet could have ever made. Yes. And it's temporary and everything is temporary. So that's like that when you realize that the pyramids are at their half-life 5,000 years and 5,000 years they'll be dust and they go like, wow, how much more so us? And if you think, if our works, whatever we do, if you think our good works are, but dirty rags in the face of the Lord, how much more are pride, are vanity. So that came to me by having children and the incredible beauty and gift that they are and how they see the world and that their eyes point out to see everything and that they know that they're connected to everything and they have to be taught that there's a separation between them and their mother. This is something that they just naturally, they know they're a part of everything. When they asked her not to look back from the moon if they ever went, they saw one thing if they had gone, if they had gone on the set that they were on where they were shown a picture in the world canyon, I think. They saw the picture of Earth and they saw one thing and where that one thing. And then at the same time when this is coming to me and my beautiful children are, and I'm having a second chance at to be the father, be a better father this time, more present father to see the rise of evil in the world and to be concerned about that and to know that now is the time to be courageous. Now is the time for people to step up and say injustice, whether it's the courage of tack on women, whether it's the educational system, not educating kids. I think take your kids out of college right now. Now is not the time they let your kids come. How much do you have to hate your kids to send them to Harvard undergrad right now? I agree completely. The business schools are great. They're all conservative to 80%. So you see a rise in evil and you have to know that like this is happening. And I've been very blessed that I got to meet some people who educated me about evil and in a meeting, Dr. Emps got peck when I was young man and reading his books about the first self-help book was his. It was the road less traveled. And it was a book about how to be a better person, how to grow as a human being spiritually and not take the easy road of just repetitive behavior or just not learning, not growing, but take the harder road, becoming a better person, learning, loving, being tolerant, being forgiving, being patient, which is, you can easily see how we transitioned into Christianity because he was a Christian without saying he was just already had the the following of Jesus in his heart. And so is a natural opening. And he had a very interesting story about him, about how he was the doctor and the Master of my life, which is the Vietnam Massacre in the late 60s. And he was assigned as a psychologist by the Army, the US Army, to kind of figure out the psychological makeup of the company baker who did the massacre. And so he did. And it was very interesting his findings. One thing is the only reason we ever learned about the massacre of my life was because the helicopter pilot who witnessed it flying above couldn't live with it anymore. And so a year later to the day, he confessed and just said, well, this is what happened. This is this is what these people were massacre. And so during that psychological evaluation, which the Army never released, he said that these people want, or people wasn't like these particular company had members in it that were, that had some grievances and that they, they, you know, had other issues and problems and some of them maybe had joined the Army for to avoid this or that or were in prison or whatever. And then that also was just one aspect of it. The other aspect of it is that they were being in a war that wasn't as much support back home. So they were, and they were going through and they were getting sniped at by the enemy, sniper fire and they were killing their friends and they weren't able to get the enemy. They weren't able to get them. And they would just kept happening. And this is why the time they got to a village is it, where is it? Where are they? And the people. And this is something that interesting because it reflected on my childhood because Asian people, when they are nervous, when they are frightened, they laugh. That is true when like all my relatives, when they are nervous or when they, they laughed that's their go to thing. So when the Vietnamese people who were having guns pointed at them were nervous and afraid they laughed. And if these people went ballistic at that point and just murdered the entire village, just murdered them all, killed them all. And so he did this and handed it in and the army never released it. So moving further, he wrote a book about after he became a Christian and then wrote a book about healing human evil called People of the Lie. It's a short book, a very good book about evil and it's important now to identify and to help heal human evil. And it's a fascinating book but it helps you identify people in your life and people who are capable and who are evil and evil does exist and we need to arm ourselves with God and arm ourselves with knowledge so we can protect ourselves for what's a rise in evil. And the last chapter of the book, well one of the chapters which is really stunningly awful was just one kid was depressed and he went to go see Dr. M Scott Peck and he found out that his brother killed himself. And he realized this is a really good kid and he's depressed obviously, his brother killed and then he found out that for birth, his parents gave him a gun. He's like that, which is absolutely stunned. But it wasn't just that, it was the same gun that his brother killed himself with. So there was a realization and he talked to the parents and he realized these were evil people. And so that potentiality for human evil, we need to recognize and help heal, protect ourselves, protect our families. And the last chapter on it, which is demonic and satanic possession, and there was like, you know, I'm reading this book. It's three o'clock in the morning at this point. I'm sort of freak out like this. And but he postulated this theory. He said like the people who seem to be possessed seem to be very angelic people that this entity is trying to overtake and they're fighting back for it to free themselves and evil, even evil, it has to succumb to the will and the end of Jesus Christ and must submit to it. And which he, the theory that depostulates, well, this is somebody who's fighting back. So therefore it makes sense that there are people that don't fight back and just accept it and go with that. And that kind of demonic possession becomes complete. And I think we have to, we have to know that that's something that exists as real human evil, whatever you want to call it. And so what Dr. M. Scott Peck and the bigger picture tried to explain was that like, obviously science and theology had to split at a certain point to survive because theology was crushing science. Yes. When you have when Copernicus discovers that the sun is a solar, you know, the beginning of the middle of our solar system, not the earth. And it's not part of the church doctrine that has to be recanted. Obviously science had to split. So you had the, the laws of nature, which is just, you know, did you just look the lawmaker out and they still the laws, you know, just like we have theological laws. So when you have that separation, what Dr. M. Scott Peck tried to do is to bring it back together. So when somebody's like a murder or somebody's bad, you know, in science medicine, you call them sick, theologically you call them evil, they're one and the same. So in the attempt to cure human evil, I think it's, it makes us, we need to do both and to work together. And I think through through. attempt to cure human evil, I think it's, it makes us we need to do both and to work together. And I think through bringing people closer to God, bringing our nation, which was founded under God, I think we have a chance to heal our nation. And because there is a rise in evil, I think we all see it. So it sounds like you're saying the rise in evil turned you toward God. Well, I think both bookends, the beauty of it and my children and the beauty of seeing what God's gifts are. And there's so many. And also, but also to be, you have to recognize that this, you know, whether it's a cycle or what happens, you know, that there is evil, there seems to be a rise in evil in the world. What's happening. And just like with, you know, in Europe in the 1920s, Yes, the New York Times called these small group of people, a bunch of misfits and nothing. Never come of them, the national socialists. I think we need to be very careful how we move. And I believe the United States must continue to be the guide for the world as an example of freedom, not perfect freedom, not a perfect society by any stretch, but a one that that aims for equality, that aims to be able to express itself, which in free speech is the beacon call for freedom in the world. And there, you know, nobody's swimming away from America. And I'm trying to get out. They're trying to get in for a reason. Because this is the greatest experiment in freedom in human history and continues to be. And we must fight and be vigilant and now is the time for courage to protect it. So that's why I wrote this book. What an amazing conversation. Rod, thank you. Thank you for having me, Tucker. I feel like I'll be up for therapy. Let me see what money I got on. For therapy. Oh, this has been a great. I said silent like a good shrink. Just taking notes, which I'm going to fire. I'm sorry. That's trouble with his mother. I have a lot. Yeah. Robert, what do you doing? Put that down, Robert. Robert, stop messing around. Stop. Stop. Robbie, see what happens. I grew up with that. See what happens. You're fell down. You heard yourself. See what happens. Did your siblings become comedians, by the way? No, they came a very good audience. They did. Yeah. That's sweet. My sister, oh, she's my favorite laugh. My dad was the best. He had a great laugh. My mother would laugh at the right time every time. And then she'd go, what does it mean? What does he saying? But she was laughing. She was nervous and afraid. Well, she was laughing because you know, everyone else was. So she said I'm sure she was nervous. So, but she would laugh and to be polite. I mean, that's what they fill up. Penos are so the nicest people. They really are. They live. They even have a country not even named after anything Filipino. It's named after King Philip. They said they don't even want to change it. They're not working good. But it's not. I think Filipinos, what about this cultural appropriate? No, no, no, it's okay. We like it. We're used to it. They're a great combination of sweet and tough. They were tough under the Japanese. Really tough. They are tough. They never stop fighting. No, they they're tough and they love America. I know you will not go to a home in Manila. You won't find in one of the homes there. You you're not you will find a picture of General MacArthur. You will find it for sure. They love America. When I was there in 1972, a little boy, I'll never forget. They still had the bayonets of the Marines. American Marines who died. They still had the bayonets there with the helmet on it. They were still taking care of it every day. I was like, this is 1972. It's like, it was absolutely stunning. But they that's how much that's I'm grateful they were for the sacrifice for some other people coming from another country to save them. Yeah. You know, that's from true oppression. The Japanese were, I love Japan, but the Japanese were in pure armies. Very, very harsh. Unbelievably brutal. But you know that they thought themselves as liberators. That's why they hated the the Philippine. That's why they didn't take them prisoner during the baton death march. Yeah. My uncle was in it was a soldier. So, you know, if you fell down, they just killed you and they just big the Japanese killed maybe upwards of of 70,000 Filipinos. Then nobody knows. Nobody knows what how many because they didn't take them prisoners because they were fellow Asians that were fighting against them. Yeah. So they didn't take, they took on bridge to that. Um, they wouldn't take them prisoners. They didn't like the whole idea of it. So that brutality for such an incredible culture. It is an incredible culture and an incredible people and a beautiful, clean, organized, wonderful country. But just let you know that like there's no no country that is, um, that is not susceptible to do horrible things and to perpetuate evil in the world. And we have to, you know, be a buttress to it, you know, to really think about our actions. Um, and to make sure that we're coming from a place of of reflection and that we're doing the work of God. Hmm. This country is a good country. I love this country. I'll fight for this country. And I want to raise my kids in this country. I'm not going to know where the place to go. It's like, you know, we'll just go to this other place. This is it. This is the last stand for freedom in the world. This is it. So we're staying, we're going to, we're going to fix. We're going to fight and we're not going anywhere. I want to make sure whatever time I have left and God willing that God is giving me my health and beautiful family. I'm whatever time I have. I want to make sure that the, the potential for my kids to have the same, to live their dreams. This is crazy kid, Filipino, Jew and have a chance to live his dreams, get on Saturday night live and say live from New York, Saturday night and to make movies that my dad could see. I just, what, what an amazing, what an amazing country this is. How beautiful. My mother, she never thought of herself. She's the, she only, I was American. I'm my father's American. Her father was an American soldier, which is a meat, so she was older. So she came to ask him, she's going to buy accident. Um, but she said, I love this country. Don't anybody ever say anything bad about this country ever. I love this country. And she did with a passion. People who come here from, and had, you know, from other countries, they get it. Yeah, I know. They understand what an incredible, unique society and what this offers. So that, that was drill into my head. You said he wanted to end on a prayer? Yes, I would. I'd like to end, um, I'd like to end on something that my friend said right before this, this new flap in the media about me. He said, what are incredible coincidence? And there are no coincidence. Everything's meant. This is a reflection for the day. August 10th. We've been our own worst enemies most of our lives. And we've often injured ourselves seriously as a result of a justified resentment or a slight wrong doubtless. There are many causes for resentment in the world. Most of them providing justification, but we can never begin to settle all the world's grievances or even arrange things. So as to please everybody, if we've been treated unjustly by others or simply by life itself, we can avoid compounding the difficulty by completely forgiving the person's involved and abandoning the destructive habit of reviewing our hurts and humiliations. So I would say, um, you know, thank you for this time. Thank you for this time, Jesus and allow me to speak my mind with this, this was wonderful conversation and with my new friend, Dr. and God bless this great country and protective children. God bless my daughter and God bless all the daughters and all the people that are having problems in the world. And we thank you for all these opportunities that you give us in Jesus name. We pray in the name of the brothers. Amen. Amen. So it turns out that YouTube is suppressing our show. I know shocking that in an election year with everything at stake, Google will be putting its thumb on the scale and preventing you from hearing anything that the people in charge don't want you to hear, but it turns out it's happening. So what can you do about it? Well, we could whine about it, but that's a waste of time, not in charge of Google, or we could find a way around it, a way that you could actually get information that's true. It's not intentionally deceptive. And the way to do that on YouTube, we think is to subscribe to our channel, subscribe. You'll have a much higher chance of hearing what we say and we hope you will.