One of our plans when we started TCN was to run great long-form content, documentary-cent topics that other people were ignoring, what we have the best so far. It's called Wine in the Sand, and it's by James O'Keefe, when the last brave and honest journalists in this country. How brave? James O'Keefe embedded with the cartels. As they moved, migrants, engaging in human trafficking at the largest scale in modern times were Latin America to the United States, embedded with the cartels, with hidden cameras, and the results is this document-er-8. Wine in the Sand is we are proud to run exclusively on TCN. Wine in the Sand October 10. Highly recommended. You are so nice to do this. Oh, it's my pleasure. I asked him backstage, how many nights have you even home in the last month? He's like, home? Oh, it likes, he called me. I was like, I guess yesterday morning, and they're like, they weren't sure if Russell or John were able to make it to the show in Fort Lauderdale, and I lived a couple hours north of there. Can you do it? I'm like, of course, I do that for Tucker. They're like, well, they're able to make it now. So can you come in as like a fourth person? I'm like, can I have one night with my children, please? For the love of God, it's been 30 days. You're the only non-Mormon man I know who has more children than I do, and I say that within V. But you got to do what you love. Yeah, man, I was listening to your intro. I have five kids. I know how that happens now, so I took up something much less vicious like politics. So where are we? I just how does you as someone who has this finger in the pulse, and I happen to know for a fact that that's true. That was not a sales job. Where are we, do you think, in this race? Honestly, we're in a place, and I'm a guy that is my third time around. We're in a place that's better than we've ever been in a comparable position. And as I am the guy that's sort of willing to go into the ground and go into the parts of Forgotten America, and those are sort of my friends despite where, you know, I grew up, and I appreciate it and understand the irony of it, but it's sort of the way I was always just brought up. And in 16, it was like, you still believe the media narrative. It's like, we're supposed to lose. I was like, but we're going to over-perform, but we'll probably lose. In 20, I was like, man, it's actually significantly better. And just as in October of 2020, I did 104 rallies myself. So like, you know, four a day for 30 days, like, it was, but you do get a pulse and you see it, it's like, we're going to do better. And of course we did, but, you know, we should. Yeah, yeah. This time around, like, they got over a billion votes, I think, that year. The real problem is, if they showed up with a billion votes on November 6, they would tell us it was the freest and most fair election ever. They would present no evidence of that. They would say it and if you don't believe that you're racist or you're an insurrectionist or some other thing that you're obviously not, they can give you something that's statistically impossible and they'll jam it down your throats. And what's really good about this cycle is people get it. They're sick of it. But more importantly, so many are now finally emerging as unafraid to say it. Right there. If people get unafraid, if they start talking about the realities of it, if, you know, before it was like, well, you're canceled. You know, and then it's not like things that would have gotten you canceled two, three years ago. People are saying, out in open, I mean, they're not even canceling you on social media for saying some of these things. They're still censoring the hell out of you. But it's just different. So the atmosphere is so good. It feels so strong, unlike anything I've experienced so far. Really? Even compared to 2020. Yeah, by the way, now even compared to like closer to the election. Because I mean, I've been on the road now for weeks. You know, even in June, I was like, wow, I mean, people have had enough. They're sick of being lied to. They're sick of being told, no, no, Biden, now I'm making this working for you. And I know it for myself. Listen, I've been blessed. I know that I don't pretend to be otherwise. But I think I told you the story one time we were hanging out. And I was like, I was coming back from a fishing trip with my son. He was 10 and 14 at the time to eat the last year. And we went to McDonald's. And it was my 10 year old, my 14 year old, and me. And it was $48. And I was like, hold crap. Like, if Donald Trump Jr. has sticker shocks, folks. I'll give up like 30-day fuel. It's like, if I'm kids. What did you get? Do you mind if I ask? You know, I don't even remember. It didn't matter. It was just, it wasn't like excessive. But if I'm sitting there, be like, I don't get it. You know, I'm not in again. I'm not like you see it on the Sunday shows. You know, some liberal, my three-week-old baby was recently crying about nuclear proliferation on the Korean peninsula. Like, they're very chu-signaling. I'm not pretending it's going to change my habits. Or I'm lucky enough that it doesn't have to, it doesn't affect me. But I know it affects some family that's making $50,000 a year or $60,000 a year. If I'm pissed off, they're livid. And they've had enough of being told, you just have to accept it. It's going to be good. While we send another $250 billion to Ukraine to fight a war, that no one has articulated to me. Or you do this now. I don't really make any money in politics, but like, I'm sort of just like, I'm a fighter. I'm like, I'm in the game now. No ones are taking it. We must do this. Like, oh, but why? What does victory look like? Well, we don't really know. Well, so does it stop at a trillion dollars? 10 trillion? When the interest on our debt is now a trillion dollars a year. Just the interest on the money that we borrow. So we can send Pakistan $25 million to fund transgender programs in their schools. It's like, see what I mean? Everyone knows it. Like, everyone is sick of it. It has to stop. Well, can I ask you questions? So you do travel and speak to audiences more than anybody, I wouldn't anybody actually that I'm aware of. And you always have. In Washington where I spent my whole life until recently, I don't think there are four Republicans in the house who've asked the questions about Ukraine than you have. Do you ever meet an audience that is like, no, we really need to keep going funding this war in Ukraine? So I do this in a lot of this speech. I'll do it right here because I haven't done it in a while. And I've had two responses. And so let's say over the last year, I've spoken to 50, 60,000 people probably. You know, opening up for DJT. A rally, a group of 300 people here. That may be 10,000, 5,000. This is 10,000, whatever it is. And I do it. Show of hands, raise your hand if Ukraine is a top 10 priority for you in your life. Top 10. And I'll do it. Like if it is, I'll give you the mic. About a top three. It doesn't exist. I found two people. Two people of now, let's call it 65,000 people that I speak to, weekly. That was, it was not top three, but it was top 10. First guy, sir, what, why? I am from Kiev, Ukraine. I was like, okay, fine. I'm going to give you a pass. And the other was a guy that's like a beltway warmonger. I was like, so you're from the board of Ray the owner, something like that. He's like, well, no, not exactly. Northrop Grumman, there he just walks away. And yet, I get the calls, by the way, what's nice about me, I'm not a policy, so I'll call it bus size. I get the calls from Republicans. Hey, Don, can you not go so tough on the Ukraine? Because some of that money is getting funneled back to a missile maker. And I was like, look at that. I'm all about American businesses. Like our family's done that before we got sued to a blip. Like we've done this. I get it. I want to support American business. None of it's just for abject death, for no reason around the world. Like I'm not there to support American business in genocide. And like, I talked to these guys. I'm like, you're making trillion dollar decisions. Have you surveyed your constituents? And they're like, well, no. But I'm sure they took six figures from Raytheon. And so therefore, they're on their team. They should get sponsorships, things. Who's parallel are you on? Because it's shocking to me that a guy like me who grew up on the 70th floor of Trump Tower in Manhattan. Again, I don't forget that. I don't pretend it didn't happen. I'm very self aware of that way. But it's like, how do I know this? And you don't. Like you live there. You live amongst these people. You literally chose to represent your district. I was there last week and you have no idea what they actually stand for. And it's disgusting. That it just thank you. Thank you for that. So I think one of the great promises of the second Trump term is that the party that nominated him will really change and change in a specific way. It will represent its voters. The Democratic Party actually kind of represents its voters. If you're into child castration, you've got a party. But why wouldn't normal people have a political party that represents them? I don't know how it got that way. And again, it's sort of amazing, right? Because you would think they'd be able to get voted out. But you know what? No one's ever had again, sort of being unafraid, right? They can go to their little constituents and they should go speak to a room, you know, other than maybe DJT. No one can assemble a room like this and conserve it at politics or frankly in politics. But they go home. And they speak to a group of five people that shows up and they tell them everything they want to hear, everything. And then they go to DC and they vote opposite. Because there's no consequence in DC. You can be like 75% Republican hell. You can be 90% Republican. As long as it actually matters, you fold. It's an easy existence to be a weak Republican or Washington DC. The Washington Post isn't going to do the hit piece on your arm. You know, I'd say they'd get invited to the cool person Christmas party, but we can't say Christmas party in DC, right? That's, you know, they can get away with a lot. And so you have people that they get away with it. They lie and they don't know. That guy's really forebailing it. But have you looked at his voter record? No, he's just the Republican. It's sort of like why we end up with why are the weakest Republicans in the most conservative states? Oh. Right? If you look at our- I'm sick of you, Dan Krenshaw. You go through the list. I mean, whether it's Oklahoma, you have senators that are like, I'm like, with Republicans like those, you talk. You know, with Republicans like Mitt Romney, who needs Democrats? But in the strong conservative states, the Democrats sort of get together. They do this really well and they say, hey, we're going to just forget about the Democrat. We're just going to install the weakest Republican. Half the Republicans don't know the difference. They think that's the guy that's leading. So we'll just vote for him. And you end up with conservative states that have the least conservative leadership in the world. And so so much of this is really an education process. People have to understand and start paying attention. And again, I think it takes, unfortunately, sort of whether it's addiction or otherwise. Sometimes you have to hit rock bottom. And I think the American populace watching, what we've been told has been a great success over the last three and a half years. Under Joe Biden, that's the rock bottom we actually needed to get people woken up and engaged in politics. We could have never done something like this. Five years ago, 10 years ago, it didn't exist. You got four people in a room. People are fed up. Raise your hand if you're fed up. But I don't, you may be missing something important. And I'm getting this directly from Ben Stiller. The election of Kamala Harris will be, and I'm quoting now, the change we need. By the way, just so we're clear, Kamala Harris has changed a lot. Unfortunately, it's all been for the worse. What's amazing about this whole thing, I'm watching the media. She's the candidate of change. I go, she's the vice president. Like, she has been there. They want change. Like, they, they cut and paste Joe Biden's policies when they finally after a month of being the nominee, put up her policies. And they forgot to cover up the source code to say it's the same thing. Like, what changes that could be? Like, she is the vice president to the most absentee president in the history of the United States. Beyond, beyond the dementia, beyond the basics of the dementia, he spent 40 plus percent of his presidency on vacation. If she wanted to do something, she had the opportunity to literally do anything. She could have taken the reins. And by the way, Joe Biden said that the other day, what was it, what was it, what was the clowns on the view? What he was like, no, I delegated everything to her. I trust, she totally ran with everything. And so the media is like, it's like, she has a clean slate. It's like, she's never been in politics. She's literally the daughter of a Marxist professor who is a San Francisco liberal who has rated the most radically left person in the United States Senate. Left of Bernie Sanders, because at least, I think he kind of believed in at least American jobs, she couldn't care less. And they're like, no, no, no, no. Her political career started three weeks ago when she won, one, you know, one, we used that word loosely in the democracy they throw it around. She got zero votes, but one, this position, I'm like, yeah, you saw it during the base. I'm not anti-gun. Like, 10 days before mandatory gun by back program, they wanted it, that's part of their platform. She's not for taking your guns, but like a mandatory program, the key word in this is mandatory, seems like you're actually really for taking your guns. Then four days later, she wants to institute and assault weapons ban. The media will tell you whatever you need to hear to get you to vote that way. She will tell you anything. I mean, she's gonna crack down on the board. I mean, she was the borders are. I got fact check that couple of months ago when she was talking about it, because I was like, she is the borders are. If she wanted to do something about the border, they had the materials, they're all the labor was paid for. They just said to the workers, it said, take the contract we gave you, it doesn't matter. Leave the materials, we'll sell it for pennies on the dollar. Now she's gonna be tough on the border. Like the fact that we still fall for it, we saw it during the Biden administration of the 2020 Democrat debate. Who's against fracking in American energy independence? Everyone's hand went up. You know, a couple of months later, the debate with my father, I would never do that. It's like, but you raised your hand like three weeks ago that you would do it, you would never do it. And the media, of course he would never do it because they knew not that it would be the end of the American energy sector. Tens of thousands of good paying jobs for hardworking Americans, energy independence and the national security that comes with it, they knew it would cost them votes in Pennsylvania and Michigan and then on day one, Keystone Pipeline. First executive order, they got rid of it all. They'll tell you anything you need to hear. Why would the media, I mean, I guess I've been to the media my whole life, but there's a self-respect problem at a certain point if you're parroting the dumbest possible talking points that no child would believe, but you're doing it with a straight face if you're David Muir. Who is judging by as abs a great reporter? Why are they willing to be used as basically prostitutes by a political party? Again, they've become part of the machine. They're not journalists, they're just propagandists. They're all on that team. There's a reason what is it? 97% of all political donations from the media go to the Democrat Party. They're not the ones that are dealing with the consequences of illegal immigration, the rape. I mean, the statistics that came out, what was it? Yesterday, right? 16,000 rapists led into the country as part of this flow, like 13,000 murderers. They're reporting on it. That means they know. They knew and they let them in anyway. I mean, think about the insanity of that. What civilization could survive? They're like, wow, it's a rapist and a murder. But fine, we're going to give this one a pass. I mean, that came out yesterday. Not just to pass the borders are of free iPhone and airplane tickets and how it works. Those sex offenders and the rapists that came over across the border, they don't even have to register on the sex offender registries that Americans could do because we've been made second-class citizens in our own country. It's bad enough that they let them in. But then it's like, well, we wouldn't want you to be stigmatized. You're only a rapist in your country. Think of how insane that is. It's not sustainable. But again, no one's going to actually report on it. That's why I think what you're doing and maybe, at least we have a soapbox and have the balls to actually say this stuff because we need that. Sorry for, sometimes you just got to say it. Sometimes there's words that are more effective than others. I went with way of those, but not everyone speaks Spanish. I got it. Just in case someone is influent and we're a host. If the campaign loses, if Trump loses, does the Republican party, they can't wait to go back to the party of Cheney and Bush. That's the way it feels to be. And that's the idea. And again, it's why it's actually why I'm so glad that stuff like this is happening. The fact that you can do this when I see a JD on TV and then putting up crowds, we finally actually have a bench. That was why I went so hard for him to be VP because there's so few nonprofits in our party. I want to create a pathway to be like, I don't want just Donald Trump. He's my father. He's great. He's the guy we need at the time. And now, what about in four years after Trump? What about in 15 years? How do we create? We've told you before about how low it is a great app that I am proud to say I use my whole family use is it's for daily prayer and Christian meditation. And it's transformative. As we head into the starter school in the height of election season, you need it. Trust me, we all do. Things are going to get crazier and crazier and crazier. Sometimes it's hard to imagine even what is coming next. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's prayer. Ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road, headed to kids sports, there was always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family, but it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity obviously is attack under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Did you see the opening of the Paris Olympics? There's a reason because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle, obviously. So try Hallo, get three months completely free at Hallo. That's Hallo.com slash Tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually and tuning ground yourself in prayer, it's now. Hallo will help personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended. Hallo.com slash Tucker. And now I understand I am not the upstanding citizen that Hunter Biden is. I can't, can I just interject? But I am working on getting better, but like I have a feeling if that was my laptop it would be a problem. Well, I don't think I'm pretty sure that most people in this room don't understand because you never talked about it. I happen to watch it. I mean, they really tried to send you to prison. Yeah, well, I knew that. And again, it was one of those. It was like, even my lawyers were like, you can't go on TV that night and talk about these things. Though everything you say can and will be used against you. They were trying to throw me in jail. And I was like, you don't understand. Like I'm just not built that way. It doesn't matter. But what was interesting after 50 hours of testimony, again, just so we're clear, Adam Schiff, the head of the intelligence committee, and I used that word loosely. I was the one that crowned the term Adam Bullshiff and or and or full of Schiff. But like they want to try you for treason. Just so we're clear, that's a crime punishable by death. For me these days, that's like an average Tuesday. You get used to it. But but again, when it, when it, I had to fight. Then two years later, these lawyers, these high price guys that are just, you know, they're weak. And I, you know, I get the game, but I was like, I can't just win the legal battle. I actually also have to sort of win the PR battle, the public perception. And I'm just not going to roll over. And two years later, they're like, you know what? You're right. Like if you just curled up in a ball and died, that's exactly what they wanted. That would have just been the start of a much worse, much more if they smell that blood on the water, if you're not going to defend yourself and you're going to roll over and be a weakling like they're used to. That's just the beginning. That's when it gets worse. And so you see that. And like I was talking about these Republicans, you know, you shouldn't build up a guy like JD because one day I want to make millions of dollars in your campaign guy taking pieces. I was like, I'm not doing this for me. Like I'm doing this for my country. I'm doing this. I want to leave my children in a country they recognize. Like what I watched the JD thing happen. And I'm just so grateful, truly grateful for what you did. And I admire the reasons. You did a big part of that too. And I'm not going to admit that. But I will say that it happened despite the wishes of some of the biggest donors in the Republican Party. And I just don't think people who aren't from DC understand how rare that is. Almost nothing happens against the wishes of the biggest donors. And that only made it so much more personal. You know, when you get in, we don't need to go through the names. But it's a lot of times like, oh, that guy's going up it now. I'm just going harder. Now, I think I expended about 4,000% of my political capital with my father. That month, I may never gain it back. But now I watched JD on the Sunday shows. I watched him get up on there with these hostile communist media and just dismantle them one by one. And every Sunday, every time he's on TV, I'm like, I am vindicated because no one else in our party. But perhaps you or me would actually, maybe a couple others, but no one that was in the running would actually have the guts to get out there and do that and do it effectively and do it each and every day. You know, because we're not in a fair fight, right? I mean, we got to, you know, everyone's like, it's our ideas versus their ideas. They go, no, no, no, no. It's our ideas that are smothered and censored and suppressed and cut off. And it's their ideas that are artificially boosted by a trillion dollar big tech enterprise, by a trillion dollars in mainstream media that is functioning literally as the marketing department of the other side. Like, that's not a fair fight. The fact that, like, if I was running the Democrats, we'd be winning elections like 99.99 to 0.001. That's how low upside it is. But their ideas are so insane. They've gone so far. It's hard to rationalize it. And I'm like, you know, I grew up in Manhattan. Like, I have friends that are like Democrats and liberals. And it's like, most of them are like, well, we're kind of jumping the shark on some of this stuff. And some have just lost their minds. But you see it with the stuff with RFK. I mean, like, Kennedy is now endorsing Donald Trump or the, like, not only endorsing Donald Trump, but by endorsing Donald Trump, losing, I don't know, like all of his friends and watching his own family denounce him. And he's doing it anyway. And that's what it is. You know what? It's exactly the point. That was the story. Like, you guys all remember the escalator ride down before the announcement back. June 16, 2015. It was actually one of those moments where, like, I was like, I'm always impressed with my father. But like, that one, like, he just got the world. Like, I was like, this is why. Like, he understands the world. Like, most people don't. Before the escalator ride, there was an elevator ride. It was the whole family going down from his office. And then it became him and Melania. And he just looks me at the dead pan in the eyes. He goes, and now we find out who our real friends are. And it wasn't that he's just running. He just, he knew what would happen. All the Hollywood people that was kissing his, maybe there's children. So kissing his butt on a daily basis. And the billionaires in New York that, you know, just wanted to be seen with him and R on TV with him. Or what? He's like, that all ends right now. But more importantly, like RFK, who has become really good friends with him in the last couple of months and really worked on that one, too. More importantly, he knew what was going to happen. He knew the consequence. And he did it anyway. That's good. That's real courage. We're lacking in courage. That was real courage. Well, I mean, especially because the thing that most people fear above all things is exile is being cast out. It's being the weird kid. Is having all the people you liked and whose praise you so enjoyed reject you. Like people will do anything to avoid that. That is like the bravest thing there is, in my opinion. Why were you, but you didn't need to do that? You couldn't, I mean, why didn't you just stay in New York? Listen for, you know, for me, it's just sort of, again, I guess I found out I had enough of the Trump team to just be like, okay, we're in a fight, I'm going to fight. And you know, and he's my dad. He's like, like, don't you? And he's the radical. You heard him say that. He's the radical. He's the narrative of the family. But I was always that way. Like, you know, I shut up when it made sense because like we're building buildings in Manhattan and Chicago and around me. It's like, fine. Do you know, my first political fundraiser was literally for Andrew Cuomo. It wasn't because I wanted to support it. No, hear me out. It wasn't because I wanted to support a Democrat. It was because he was the attorney general of New York. And if you're going to build a building, he's the guy that starts off on your offering. So you play the game. It was like my father in the debate with Hillary. It was like, well Donald Trump doesn't pay taxes. He goes, yeah, and if you wanted to do something about taxes that your billionaire friends also don't pay, you to change to in the tax code when you're in the Senate for it. But you're not going to do that. That makes me smart, not stupid. So you know, you have to ask, I understand the game. How long before Andrew Cuomo becomes a Republican? I look at that guy and I'm like, I just judge everything on testosterone level. And Tim Walz is the perfect Democratic man. Yeah. I mean, you could just feel the self-hate and the creepiness and the passive aggression, the sweaty palms. And nothing about it. And if I'm going to slam Boann, so when they, a couple of weeks ago when they're like, the Republican, the party, they fear Tim Walz. I'm watching him like, prance out. Like, I'm like, I'm like, but no, but that's what they think is masculine. I'm like, I don't know. And I wouldn't last like three seconds with anyone I know. I don't know. Totally. But Andrew Cuomo, who I think was a horrible governor and horrible during COVID, I'm not in any way endorsing Andrew Cuomo, but not a low-key character. So how long can he remain in that party? I think both Cuomo brothers, like Chris Cuomo's like a frat boy meathead. Like, do you, does he really believe you know, as narrow as you get transgender, sir? Like, he's playing that game and he's getting paid well to do it. And sometimes you need to put out the guy that looks like the masculine guy. And it's like, come on. Like, you know those guys are one day they're going to be like, OK, we were just kidding. Like, it's just 100% shit. All your percentage. But I know these guys for years, like, you know, like I said, with Andrew, I mean, his, like mother used to sit fixed to my grandmother, right, the salon in Queens, New York. Like, we go back a long way. And so when he did that like a abrupt turn, that's when you're like, the politics is such nonsense. Like, I see that. I got to be a fly on the wall on these things. And he went back channel through me, because I was best friends with one of his biggest fundraisers. Like, it was a big real estate guy in New York. And they'd be like, all right, we're going to do this. We're going to do that. And he's like, thanks for setting that up, Don, the administration got us everything we need. But the second he got on TV, it was. It was a big real estate guy in New York and they'd be like, all right, we're gonna do this, we're gonna do that. And he's like, thanks for setting that up, Don, the administration got us everything we needed. But the second he got on TV, it was politically expedient to just lie about it. You know, just telling you the opposite. It was almost, honestly, I almost had like, I had a lot more respect, frankly, for Gavin Newsom in California when he was like, you know what, Trump said he was gonna get us this and he did. He was like, at least he's being intellectually honest. But Cuomo, whether he wanted to continue his political career, you know, the media was like, everyone now in the room, if they're a Cuomo sexual, like, he was this big sex symbol all of a sudden. Right, and he gets me too, and that was over. That's like a whole new category, a Cuomo sexual? Yeah, you know, it's CNN was saying that all these women for Cuomo, they were Cuomo sexual. Well, I think it's been the record. I'm against Cuomo sexual. I'm with you. But he knew what was really going on. He had the opportunity to be honest, but he wasn't able to forego the hate. Anything you say against Trump, like we'll make you a hero. We're gonna elevate your stature in the Democrat Party. We're gonna give you that shot at the presidency next. You just have to bastardize literally everything you know to be good and true about what was going on. And so, you know, that was hard to watch because I was part of some of these conversations. So what did, I mean, what do you're friend, you know the guys you grew up with or the people you worked with in New York City? I mean, you're so on the record about what you really think. You're clearly saying exactly what you actually think. What do they say to you now? You know, it was actually, honestly, it was one of, for me, it was one of the more refreshing things. In life, that doesn't mean it wasn't brutal and sort of like a shock at the time, but like there are guys that I've been friends with for life. I'm still friends with for life. There are guys that are literally like hardcore Democrats that were like that have just been successful. Like here's, you know, literally one of my buddies who's very left, he was like, here's $100,000 for your campaign. Why? Like what do you mean? I just believe in you and I don't believe in it, but like it's just a show of support. And then there are the guys that would be like texting me. Hey, Don, I love everything that you're doing. I love you guys a great, keep it up, keep it up. And then I'd watch them on Facebook where there's an audience. I can't believe they'd say this, this is a disgrace. I'm like dude, I follow you on both sides. Like you don't think I'm gonna see that? And then there are the guys that sort of, you know, stay radio silent. And you know, the day after we won, hey man, I was with you all along. So for me, you have like, they weren't, you know, I really was. I was like, that didn't call you like 15 times. You ever return my phone call in six months. Like like, not an impassor. Like, so for me, it was great. I actually, all those people, and we all probably have them. You know that guy, you meet every year, every other year for sort of the obligatory lunch, and you're like, ah, I gotta do it, because I knew him some college or whatever. And you're not really excited about it. Cause like all of those people in my life just gone. It's so refreshing. It was just cathartic. And I was like, you know, it was great. So what I was, I've been brooding about this as I said earlier all month. Have those relationships been replaced by new relationships? 100%. You know, I see it. And again, the amount of people that I meet just around the country now, and frankly, I'm that guy that shows up by myself. And you know, I don't have teams of handlers that like, well, this person has access. And like, I just, you know, I actually have no handlers at all. Yeah. Yeah, you see that. I have no way. You showed up on your places, including here tonight. You know, just like, yeah, I'm here. Like, whatever, give me a mic. I'm not bad at this. I can probably handle it and be fine. You know, I've met so, so many incredible people. And you know, it's been awesome actually. And so again, to your point about just sort of having a pulse, it's like those people that were like, rich out of touch people because there's no consequence to sort of, you know, well, be really woke. And we convert you signal all day long. And you know, who cares if someone, you know, in a far off state is getting murdered? Like, my kids have security driving to school. It's like, those people have been replaced by like real Americans who are just genuinely good people. And like, and it's been awesome for me. It's been awesome. I believe that. I mean, just moving to Florida, right? It's like, I was a political refugee from the People's Republic of New York. No. It's, what's that been like moving to Florida? Honestly, it's surreal. And I honestly, I wasn't sure I'd like. And I was like, I've been coming here my whole life. We've had the assets and like, we vacation here. But like, you know, I was like, you know, I love like the seasons and I love my cabin on the river. And you know, what the stuff I'm into, I was like, no, Florida's kind of flat. And like, that looks like very flat. Yeah. Now I'm like, I literally like, you couldn't pay me to move back. Like, you couldn't. Yeah. Like, you know, where I live, I mean, I can show up to the nicest restaurant in town and like flip-flops in a t-shirt. And I'm usually that, and it's like, hey, you know what's going on? It's like, I feel like normed years. Like, over an entire state with a population of like 25 million people, like that is an awesome feeling. That is an awesome feeling. I mean, you, I don't know what the bill does, but you're like bombing around fine commercial. You're always out. How do people treat you? I honestly go out and listen. When I do that, I go casually. But that's what I'm saying. When I talk about the pulse, like, I can't, I literally can't name a negative instance in like a year. Like, every once in a while you get some guy like, ah, usually, you know, everyone's a badass on the internet. Everyone's a tough guy. You know, behind a keyboard, but like face to face, it's like, they shut up. So, you know, when I tried just going into it, I took 75 selfies getting from like the door of the hotel here today to the elevator and back out. And it's like, so people have been great. I literally can't name an instance that's been negative. And in 16, I'm not saying it was terrible, but it definitely was like, you know, 5% of it was this little reaction. 10% was a negative reaction. Like, I can't remember like the last negative reaction I've gotten publicly. And now, to what we sort of started on, when I talk about what I see changing, this shift now is like, it's demographics that you'd be like, no way. Like, what do you mean? I was talking with Kimberly the other day. She's like, you know, the amount, the African American men and women now coming up to be back. You guys, I love you. Like, you have to win. Before there could have been some people be like, interesting, maybe take a selfie, like, you know, screaming, make America great again across an airport. And they like, you know, Hispanic, you know, just all of them. I mean, I mean, you know, on the African Americans, it's definitely more men, but it's like, we're in a place where it's like, Kim was like, you took it as a selfie with every black guy that was in this room came up to you to take a selfie, like be like, you gotta win. Like, that would have never happened. It's just, you know, the Hispanic demographic across the country, they get what's going on, they understand what's happening. You know, the people who came into America legally and went through that process, like, there's some of the greatest patriots in our country. Like, they get it. And what's happening now is so insulting to them, to the rest of us who are born here, so they're using our country, like a rental car, just bumping into things, not changing the oil. They have no respect at all for our country, which we love. Well, and that's precisely the point. I think the Democrat Party is aware that they've literally ostracized the reliable floating blocks for the Democrat Party. So it's like, well, you know, rather than maybe do the right thing for them, you know, at the risk of like some offending, maybe suburban women or something like that, whatever, it may be. They're just like, why don't we just import 20 million people who will be permanent dependence? Like I said, you know, when you look at a graph, like I was talking about, you know, half a million known criminals, you know, 16,000, you know, sex offenders, 13,000 murderers. They're like, ah, fine, it's just, it's, yeah. Think about that. I mean, it's insane. And people get it, but rather than just do the right thing for all of America, they're like, now we can't do that. We gotta stick with our nonsense in this. We'll just bring in 20 million people who will permanently be dependent on government. And if you're permanently dependent on government because you're unwilling, incapable of doing it otherwise, yeah, you're going to be a Democrat voter. They recognize that this is not in the anomaly. This is not out of the kindness of their hearts. There's a reason like a genius computer programmer from Eastern Europe cannot get into America. That guy could create jobs, be a business, be a value ad. You know, an actual political refugee from Havana, Cuba that's being shot at like, oh, that guy doesn't get the same treatment as if you come across the southern border. Because they're escaping the system that the Democrats are trying to instill right here in America. They're not voting for that. Like, and like, I guess, you know, the intro of like my political leanings is like, my mom escaped the communist country. She did so legally, maybe not legally leaving there, but legally getting in here. And like, one of the, and I don't think it was intentional. I think it was more about life than it was about politics. But like, the reason I sort of started feeling the way I always did about politics and life was because as a child, she was like, you're really lucky. Like, you're really spoiled. You've been really blessed. Like, you're going to go see how like, the rest of the world lives. And so she sent me to what was then communist checks in Slovakia behind the Iron Curtain. In the 1980s, I spoke the language fluently. I'd go spend like six weeks every summer there. Like, as I five, six, seven, you know, until I went to college basically, you know, I've waited in those bread lines. Like, I can assure you, they are not as glamorous as Bernie Sanders would have you believe. You notice how there's no one in America? Like, espousing the values of like, pre like, you know, fall of the wall. Like, in America? Like, if a system is so good, why are there no advocates for it? Who actually lived under those systems? Like, if it was so great, you'd think you'd have a couple of guys being like, not an hour, we gotta try it here. Only like, you know, these like, virtue signaling clowns, it's going to be different this time, Tucker. You know, 20 million people dead. It's going to be different. You know, it doesn't happen that way. So, you know, I saw that. I remember it was weird. It was one of the conversations I had with my grandfather early on. I was like, I saw the picture of my parents wedding. I'm looking. I'm like, you know, it's in their little, you know, little communist building in Czlin, Chuxlovacian. Like, like, why is it my grandmother in the picture? I'm like, yeah, I wish you the one taking the picture. No, she wasn't in the picture because the government wouldn't let them both leave because they knew both were never coming back if they were both. So they literally held someone as a political hostage to not go to their daughter's wedding because they understood that if they left the, they're never coming back. Like, what kind of system is that? We're bringing that here right now. They're not even hiding from it anymore. Before we're like, you know, in 16 we're like, they're gotta go to communist. Well, not really. Like, they're saying these things a lot. Price controls on this. We're gonna, everything. I mean, it's literally a playbook. They're not even pretending anymore. And we are gonna be aware of that. And they're using violence as a political tool. I hate to say that. I hate to believe it. And I hate even to bring this up on them going to. And if you don't want to talk, we don't have to. But from what I can tell, the Biden administration, which controls the security of the Trump campaign is withholding security. And that's an incitement to violence. That's election interference using the threat of violence. Yeah, no, I mean, yeah. No, listen, it's a little hard. I have five young kids as we discuss. And I've now had to have 10 conversations about their grandfather who they love almost being killed because I've had to do it twice. Like as the nominee of one of the major parties and maybe the leading candidate for president of the United States, like how does that happen even once? I was with my daughter who, you know, she spoke at the RNC. Some of you guys may have seen that. She's a great kid. She's a competitive athlete. She's got it. But she was never political. But like, she plays golf with my dad every weekend. She was with me like, yeah, I got the rare call from my daughter. And again, when you're 17, it's like, dad, I want to go fishing and spend time with you. I'm like, who are you and what have you done to tie? Like, you know, I got that call that Saturday. And so, you know, it was like, we're going fishing. Didn't matter what we're going to fish. We're out there. We have a great, you know, having a great day. And, you know, I get a call like, you know, done, your dad's been shot. I'm like, wait, what? Like, there, you know, some calls you get that are good or bad. Like, when the call is your father's been shot, there's only degrees of bad. It's a question of how bad. It's like, well, how bad. Like, and what? And what, we don't know. I'm like, well, so we don't know. And so, we're out and I'm like, okay, we're going back home fast. And I'm trying to call. I guess the one thing that was done right by Secret Service that day, I guess they shut off communication. So I couldn't get in or out. Like, you know, everything else seems like a total disaster. And I don't mean like, one lapse of error. I'm like, you let a shooter on a roof for 20 minutes. Like, you know, you knew about it 10 minutes before you still let the guy get on stage. You know, you had him in your sights for a while. And like, like, and I know a lot of these guys. I had a Secret Service detail for years. I understand the protocol. I'm best friends with some of these guys. Some of these guys are diehard red blood of the Americans. And others are journeyman bureaucrats. You know, we seem to have gotten all of the bureaucrats that day other than some of the guys on my dad's team that day on the stage. And I'm like, that doesn't happen. So I'm going back with my daughter. You know, we're like, she's visibly upset because this is like her golfing buddy. Like, I walk in on my daughter. She's like talking for 25 minutes. I'm like, can you get off the phone with your friends? Like enough? Like, there's like, no, that was grandpa. I was like, really? And so she's there. We finally get, you know, we finally, I'm watching some of the stuff on social, but I still don't know an answer. Like, you know, then we finally get them on the phone. It's like, you know, we're OK. And I was like, OK, well, when I saw you get up like that, that was the most badass thing I've ever seen someone do. Like, most of us, well, actually all of us go through our daily lives using all sorts of, quote, free technology without paying attention to why it's, quote, free. Who's paying for this and how? Think about it from it. Think about your free email account, the free messenger system used to chat with your friends, the free other weather app or game app you open up and never think about. It's all free. But is it? No, it's not free. These companies are developing expensive products and it's giving them to you because they love you. They're doing it because their programs take all your information. They hoover up your data, private personal data and sell it to data brokers and the government. And all of those people who are not your friends are very interested in manipulating you and your personal, political and financial decisions. It's scary as hell and it's happening out in the open without anybody saying anything about it. This is a huge problem. And we've been talking about this problem to our friend Eric Prince for years. Someone needs to fix this. And he and his partners have. And now we're partners with them. And their company is called unplugged. It's not a software company. It's a hardware company. They actually make a phone. The phone is called unplugged. And it's more than that. The purpose of the phone is to protect you from having your life stolen, your data stolen. It's designed from a privacy first perspective. It's got an operating system that they made. It's called messenger and other apps that help you take charge of your personal data and prevent it from getting passed around to data brokers and government agencies that will use it to manipulate you. Unplugged skin min is to its customers. They will promise you and they mean it that your data are not being sold or monetized or shared with anyone. From basics like its custom Libertas operating system, which they wrote, which is designed from the very first data, keep your personal data on your device. It also has, believe it or not, a true on-off switch that shuts off the power to actually disconnect your battery and ensures that your microphone and your camera are turned off completely when you want them to be. So they're not spying on you and say your bedroom, which your iPhone is. That's a fact. So it is a great way, one of the few ways to actually protect yourself from big tech and big government to reclaim your personal privacy. Without privacy, there is no freedom. The unplug phone, you can get a $25 discount when you use the code TUCKER at the checkout. So go to unplug.com slash Tucker to get yours today. Highly recommended. And that should have never been allowed to happen. We all know it's sort of no one understand that. And then the sort of uncomfortable conversation for a little bit. And then finally, I'm usually the inappropriate one. And sounds like I listened to dad most importantly. How's the hair? Hey, Don, Don, the hair is fine, Don. Little bloody, lots of blood. But the hair is fine. You see, if Uncle's eyes are rolling in that bus, we needed to break the ice. And I was like, everything was OK. But the next day was Sunday and you're sort of getting over this adrenaline dump. And you're figuring out all these lapses. At this point, I'm just furious. Going back and forth with Dan Bunch, he was a secret server. All day long. We're just getting each other more and more worked up. But that Monday morning, I woke up. And it's, I get a call. It's like my daughter, she's like, dad, it was the week of the RNC. She's like, it's Monday morning over the RNC. She's like, I want to speak at the RNC. And I'm like, that's kind of a big one. That's your first speech ever. When I was that age, I'd been nervous for another 10 people in my classroom. But she understood what it was. And she was like, I'm sick of this crap. I'm sick of the lies about him. I'm sick of the day. So she did that. But the fact then, then I have to have a conversation with her two months later. It almost happened again. And by the way, just so we're clear. Within minutes, you have Hillary Clinton saying, he's literally the greatest threat to democracy ever. He's worse than Hitler. I'm like, I don't know. We had a prosperous economy. We had no wars. We went from prosperity to poverty as a country. We went from peace to war. I mean, I don't know. Probably, but they've been doing it for nine years. You're telling me it's not on purpose. You're telling me it's not intentional radicalization. You're telling me they're not asking for it. I mean, this week I had to get the call. Be like, hey, you're like one of the Iran targets. Because if they can't get your dad, they want to inflict as much damage. And they know you're a lower profile. And you can do just as much damage to someone. But maybe if it's the sun or someone else in the family, maybe that won't elicit a response from the American military so they can inflict pain without actually doing it. I thought a conversation I love having. I've grown probably far too accustomed to it. But it's why we just all have to say enough of this stuff. The media attacks. It's disgusting. With no actual evidence, say every day for nine years. Of course, they're asking for it to happen. There's no other plausible explanation. It's like Wuhan Lab League. Of course it came from the lab that studies the exact virus in the town that was ground zero for the violent. No, no, no. Anthony Fauci said it didn't. And if you agree with him and you're a doctor, you'll lose your government funding and you'll lose your research grant. I got canceled for that one at the time because I was like, of course it did. You're not a virologist, Anna. I was like, you don't have to be a virologist. You just have to not be an impassile. Like, like, it's not that hard. Of course it did. But like all great conspiracy theories, we know we find out the truth a couple weeks later. So I don't understand two things. One, how the Congress hasn't gotten to the bottom of the security lapses. Yeah, like how hard is that? No one's been fired. Now one person's been fired in the entire federal government for that. I don't know. It's almost like there's a lot of people that are OK with it, Tucker. I mean, no, but like what else is it? I mean, we've had some conversation with people that we can't sort of, we're not going to out because they know more than we do. But it's like, well, they have the ability to get that information. And they're not given it by the three letter agencies that are literally supposed to report to them. It's like, no, no, we know better. At some point, where's what you're like a sit-in in someone's office? Like, I'm not moving until you answer the question. Or we cut off the funding immediately. Or you just, no, seriously, you have a march on DHS headquarters where 500,000 bills shut up and say, we're not leaving until you give us the answer. They'll all get thrown in jail for being insurrectionists, whether they do any, you know. Now it's January 6th, right? It was literally, it's almost amazing. It was the first unarmed insurrection in the history of the world. The only people that were armed were the tour guides that magically worked for the FBI that were all there. They couldn't release the videos because it would expose too many of their assets implanted in the group. I'm like, well, why didn't any of those assets actually try to stop it? It's almost like it was a plan. All right, almost. Yeah. Almost. Like, but you know, there are grandmothers that are sitting in jugs where they were within 500 miles of DC or they're taking selfies inside the velvet robes. Like, that's not an insurrectionist. They didn't even know what they're supposed to be in the room. Like, also, isn't it, doesn't it belong to them? Yeah. Isn't it the people's house? Isn't this our country? Don't we pay for it? They go to jail or ancestors built it? I thought that was the story. They go to jail, but if you burn down Seattle or Portland or Cadocia Wisconsin, you know, you get to be vice president under the Democrat regime. You can allow that to happen. It's fine. There's no consequence. No one does the jail. Billions dollar of jamming. Actually, people murdered. That's different. The existing vice president who's running at the top of the ticket can fundraise for those people publicly. And the guy that let the city, the major city in the state that he's the governor of, can allow it to burn down. And that's fine, as long as you put tampons and boys' bathrooms. You're forgiven. It's OK. No, no, no. What makes you a real leader? Do it, those. Don't even tell me. So vote. Vote. Call all your friends. Vote like your republic depends on it because it does. I'm not worried in Florida, but I'm sure everyone from Florida is basically from somewhere else. You make sure your friends in the swing state, you'll appeth these what's going to kill this. Because they're going to play games. All right, listen. Like we discussed, Neil. If they showed up with 12 billion votes on the morning after election day, they'll tell you it's the most free of fair election ever. We can't take any of it for granted. You've discussed sort of polling in your opening. It's like the polling is all BS. Half of it's designed to demoralize you. The other half is designed to make you overconfident. None of it matters. The only poll that matters is the final tally on November 5th. But the way I look at in many of the places, usually those places that are swing states, you know, they're controlled entirely by a Democrat legislature or the Republicans are so weak that they're worried about the bad article in the local paper. Like to win by win, we got to win by five. That's it. Act accordingly. So give, and this is my last question, but I'm looking for a hope. The core problem is corruption. Every institution, many institutions in American life have been revealed to be corrupt. It's so distressing to see it. It's so demoralizing to watch it. It has to be fixed. It's too corrupt to continue if they can allow the other party's presidential candidate to be shot on the face and no one's even fired, then we've reached a point where can't have any more of this. So starting January 20th, do you have hope that that corruption can be rooted out? I do. I do. The reality is this. And I honestly, I think it's why both sides, frankly, are going so much harder against my father this time around. Now he actually knows. He knows who the liars are. He knows who the scumbags are. He knows who. I'm on your side. It's like, here's a tweet from seven minutes ago when I walked into your endorsement to get an endorsement. I'll disregard the last five years of everything I've been saying that's bad about you. Now he knows, and that's why he's a greater threat. When he before, when we were talking about transition last time around, it was like, who do you know in DC? It's like, I've been in DC for less than two days of my entire life. He didn't know. So you trust even those people on your side. You had no other way to do it. You know, in business it's different. It's like, you sort of understand what people's motivation is. It's usually a prophet or they're like, in politics, like, your best friend will snake you to get a good favorable article that lets him get the next consulting gig. They'll bastardize everything they believe in. There's no, there's no honor in it. There's no, there's no one actually has a belief system in watching today. In DC, but for three or four people, the belief system is power. And they'll do whatever they can to have that power. There's no real consequence to a law. So if your party's not in charge, fine. You sit in the wings waiting till the next opportunity for you to make your seven-figure gig a month representing the scumbags. I think the fact that he gets that now, he's seen those people turn on them. I think that scares it again, especially the people on our side, that much more. So there is hope. Beyond that, there's hope that people also getting it. They're showing up. They're not just listening to sort of the two minutes of news in the background of being, like, oh, that must be true. I saw it on CNN. It's probably the opposite of that. And so, again, the fact that we're five weeks out from an election, we're filling up a stadium like this. It's hard to... That's amazing. I mean, people, they're now finally vested in the success of their country. That should have always been, but we took it for granted as Americans. I mean, when I got into this, I was naive, man. I was a baby. What I... Well, listen, you know, the CIA and FBI said I was colluding with Russia. I must have taken a selfie with something like, there had to be something to it. I genuinely believed there had to be some truth to it. Because I wanted to believe everything I had been told about our country. And it turns out it was all nonsense. There doesn't have to be any truth to any of it. So then I was sort of fighting to preserve an America, I believe, existed for my kids. Turns out, you know, it may have never existed, but certainly not in my lifetime and maybe longer than that. It was just sort of, you know, a visual representation here. We must get into these wars because of patriotic reasons. And I'm like, well, I don't know. Like, why? It's like, why I get in trouble still for questioning, you know, what's going on in Ukraine? It's like, what's our benefit? You know, there's no benefit. You know, it's insane. And so now, you know, I'm fighting to actually make real the myth that I was sold about our country to actually make that exist. That's why I do this now. And I'll just say, and I mean this truly, I sincerely hope that you will run for president at some point. I mean that. You never know, folks. You never know. How about this? Let's worry about 2024 right now. But beyond that, though, not just president. You know, that's the thing. Like, hey, I've been through it. I've done my testimony for treason. And I don't want to just win the president without the house or without the Senate. Like, that'll be hell for me and my family for everyone for the day. And for America. Like, we got to win everything. We got to win down to the dog catcher. We got to win our state legislatures. So we can like, I don't know, maybe educate our children. So maybe they learn like math rather than the 4,379 genders. Like, we got to win, you know, all of our school boards. We got to win everything because we've sat back as conservators. Well, you know, whether we're building a business or we're, you know, I get it. It's hard to get involved. It's hard to get in that fray. No one probably understands it better than, you know, my family, other than maybe all as conservatives or whether we're building up businesses or I get it. It's hard to get involved. It's hard to get in that fray. No one probably understands it better than my family, other than maybe RFK Jr. No one understands the consequence better than perhaps the collective ticket now. But we don't have a choice or it's not gonna exist. Again, they're saying all of the things. Like you think if they can literally, if impeaching Trump doesn't work twice, well they would just try to take his businesses and we'll find him half a billion dollars for paying back loans on time with interest. Well, change the statute of limitation of certain things for one year, not in perpetuity because we wanna be able to, like they did in New York, they literally did, state of New York changed the statute of limitations to allow them to go back 30 years for a nonsense case because they figured, hey, we could probably get a favorable jury. The second they charge Trump, it changes back. Is that a democracy? Like, yeah, think about it. I mean, if that doesn't work, you know, well, we'll try to throw him in jail. And if that doesn't work, we'll just scream loudly enough that he's worse than Hitler to make people literally try to kill him and then not give him the appropriate security protocol to protect him. Like, if they can do that to Donald Trump, a guy that has the means to be able to fight back, a guy that has arguably one of the greatest political platforms ever assembled, what's some of the greatest, most patriotic people backing him, the soap box to get it out there. If they can do it to him, who can't they do it to? But more importantly, if they will do it to him and they'll do it to him so aggressively and so flingently, who won't they do it to? You think it stops with Trump? No, no, no, guys. Each and every one of you is in the firing line. At this point, almost no pun intended. Like, we have to act accordingly. We have to take back our country. And so how many times have you heard it in your journalistic career talker? It's literally the most important thing to ever. Some guy running for dog catcher. It's literally the world depends on this. We're used to hearing that. This time, that's real. Look at the stakes. Look at where we are as a world. Look at where we are as a country. The fact that it's even close in some of these places show just how brainwashed so many people are. Again, it's not a fair fight. We know that it doesn't matter. To win, we actually have to play by the rules they've set. Well, elections. In Europe last week for it today, they're like, what do you mean you don't have paper ballots? You don't have voter ID. These basic things, they're like, these are socialist countries. And they think we're insane. That's, you know, but guess what? To win, you have to play the hand that you're dealt. They have dealt that hand. They have stacked that hand. They've done it every, it doesn't matter. We still have to play. They want us to be demoralized. They want us to take our ball and go cry to mommy. Like, they would love to see that. We can't do it. We have to fight. The same resolve I saw for my father coming up that day. We all have to have that same spirit because that is the embodiment of the America we know and love. We just have to come out and actually do it all. Donald Trump Jr. Ladies and gentlemen.