So whenever something big happens, particularly something really big, like a war that will change world history, the first four questions you have to ask are these. One, why did this happen? Two, what was the point of it? Three, where does it go from here and four, how do we respond? So let's assess the war in Iran now ongoing in its second day and and try to answer those four questions. First, why did this happen? Now in this case, there's a really simple answer. This happened because Israel wanted it to happen. This is Israel's war. This is not the United States's war. This war is not being waged on behalf of American national security objectives to make the United States safer or richer. It's not actually even about weapons mass destruction. Nukes, Kembio, no, this war is waged purely because Israel wanted it to be waged. Now why say that out loud this early in the conflict? Isn't that dispiriting for, say, American troops fighting this war? Yes, it is. And we thought a lot about whether it was wise or decent even to say something like that out loud. And have decided that it is for the following reason. First, because the truth is always the only basis for wise decision-making. When you lie to yourself or you lie to your people, you normally commit, well, a kind of moral crime by lying, but you also tend to hurt yourself. Hubris is the product of lies, for example, and get way over your skis. If you're not honest with yourself and the people around you about what's happening and why it's happening. But long-term, that is also true. In other words, it's important to say why this war is happening because 50 years from now, people may not know. Your grandkids may learn that this war started because the Ayatollah showed up in Miami and started machine-cutting people on a shopping mall and so we responded. There was a kind of Iranian Pearl Harbor. You don't know what the future will believe about the present. You don't know how history will be written. And if you're skeptical of that, if you're asking yourself, well, how could historians popular historians, how could future cultures so misunderstand something so big? How could people lie about something so obvious, so giant? History is your guide. A lot of the big events we think we understand, including the wars from the past and not so distant past, are completely distorted in our memories. In other words, that's not actually what happened at all. And the truth is, if enough people lie about something at a high enough volume and they do it for long enough, loudly enough, while threatening anyone who refuses to lie about it, over time their lies become conventional wisdom. Everyone believes them. There is something about repeating a lie over and over and over again that's almost like a spell or an incantation. It's almost a form of witchcraft. It assumes reality or a version of reality, an earth's reality, a fake reality, but reality nevertheless. And if you're interested in all in history, going back thousands of years or even more recently, you know that the understandings of certain events that you grew up hearing about, probably totally inverted. The opposite is true, but you didn't know that until you dug a little deeper, in some cases a lot deeper, to find out because they have been distorted in the retelling. And because they have been, because a lot of our most basic assumptions are based on untruths, we wind up getting into the same mess as again and again. So it's just important to tell the truth about this now in the early stages. This is, by the way, widely known, this is not a conspiracy theory. Everyone's saying it out loud now because it's true. The United States committed troops to this conflict because the prime minister of Israel not Israel's nation, but the guy who runs it, Benjamin Netanyahu, BB demanded it seven trips to the White House over the last year. And the point of those trips never varied. The United States needs to commit to regime change in Iran. We need the US military to overthrow the government of Iran. And BB himself has basically said that, that it wasn't that we thought Iran was going to get nukes this week. And that's why we did this. Nobody's even saying that now. They will be in the future when our memories get a little dimmer and they can manipulate us more. But right now, they're been, oh, actually, they were not in the verge of getting nukes. BB himself said, you can pull up the video. I've been dreaming about this for 40 years. We've finally done it. So this is the culmination of a long time plan of strategy. And actually, if you look at it backwards and try to assess recent events, even in this country, an American political life over the past several years, certainly over the past six or eight months, you can see that a lot of what was happening here was preparation for where we are right now. In other words, people who wanted war in Iran were softening up the public for it were manipulating the US government in order to affect it. And we're doing their very best to silence anyone who doubted its wisdom. A lot of the things we have seen in the recent past are, and now it's very obvious, they were all designed to get us to where we are now war with the wrong on behalf of Israel. Now, just to caveat at the outset, just because the prime minister of Israel wanted to regime change war with Iran does not mean in any sense that it was a wise idea for Israel. It certainly wasn't a good idea for the United States. That's no one just really disputes that. But was it a good idea for the country or for the prime minister who advocated for it? No, probably not actually. Just because we want something doesn't mean it's good for us. Sometimes when we get what we want most were destroyed by it. Hope that doesn't happen to Israel. Of course, or anybody, but it could. So when you get to the truth of things and you see who's pushing for them, that doesn't mean that person understands his own best interest or his country's own best interest. Often they don't. Often we don't. But it doesn't change the fact that we got here because Israel lobbied for it. And virtually everyone in the US government, certainly in the Pentagon, understood the risks. The risk for obvious from day one. First, if you knock off a government, we have a long history doing that. It's not that hard. The individual bravery of the US military personnel, the soldiers who do it is laudable, impressive, amazing sometimes. But that is, we have learned the easy part killing Saddam. Okay, amazing. What comes next, etc., etc. This is all very, very well known. And it was very well known 48 hours ago that there was no real plan to replace the government we were hoping to topple. At which point, what? Well, now you have a country Iran, the size of Western Europe with 92 million people, a country that's only a little over half Persian that has its own internal divisions and dynamics and rivalries. You have that country potentially breaking apart. And what does that mean? Well, I mean, hard to see that as a good thing for the rest of the world. On so many levels, which we pray don't become more obvious, but they're even now becoming obvious. That could be a true, true disaster. So why would we want that? Well, of course, we wouldn't want that. The only country that seems to want that are the only leader to be fair once again, not speaking for every Israeli anymore than Joe Biden or Donald Trump or anybody else who runs this country speaks for every American, of course. But Benjamin Netanyahu wanted that. He thought that was his mission, but more than his mission, maybe his destiny. He suggested that in his remarks today. And that's why. But nobody in the US government, why ever talked to her quoted on TV, seemed to believe that this was primarily in America's interest. There might be ancillary benefit. So when you hear these analyses of how, you know, the world is changing and it went from being unipolar to multi polar, all true in the United States, ran the world uncontested from the summer of 1991 until I don't know, pick a date pretty recently, the rise of and all of a sudden you have multi poles. You have more than one great power vying for control of the world and its trade routes and its resources, etc., etc. And that somehow knocking off the government of Iran would be good for us in that complex, just game. And that's a real argument. I guess these things are kind of hard to understand. And any wise person looks at the world and says, okay, there's no stopping the rise of China. Their manufacturing capacity, their economic power is really the world's largest real economy is not going to end tomorrow. So there has to be a way to strike a kind of power sharing agreement with China, with the East. The United States doesn't rule the world uncontested. And for the foreseeable future is probably not going to. So how do we live in some semblance of peace and preserve our own interests? And again, you enter into some informal power sharing agreement with the other great power or powers probably can't stop that process. It's probably too late to stop China from controlling the East at this point, killing the eye at toll is probably not going to do it. So there's probably a better way to do this. But anyway, there are people who disagree and if we do this, it'll be better for us long term. At least you have to give them credit for trying to think of a way in which this might benefit the United States. But most people who assess this new nothing whatsoever to do with us. This is Israel's war. That's what it is. It's not an attack. It's not an attack on Israel. By the way, it's hardly anti-Semitism or Jew hatred. It's just it's a fact ahead of state came to our country ahead of state of 9 million people came to a country of 350 million people and demanded that we help them or in effect do it ourselves topple the regime in Tehran. Now, how do they deliver to do this? That's a complicated question. And it's something really worth thinking about. But how did this tiny country with no resources and 9 million people convince the world's great superpower with the greatest military in history to do its bidding in a way that was going to hurt it? Well, again, many layers to that question. But the most obvious and immediate answer is because BB told the President of the United States, you can join me or not. But I'm going in the Secretary of State Marco Rubio said this in a call to congressional leaders yesterday. He said Israel said they were going. And at that point, you really only have two choices. You can get on board and try and help or contain Israel's war. That's part of the calculation here. Israel's going. Let's try and keep this within bounds. Let's try to be a moderating force on this adventure, whatever it turns out to be, or you can tell Israel no, and they'll just do it. And if they did it, that would not protect us because there are hundreds of thousands of Americans in the Middle East, both in uniform and out civilians and military personnel. And there are also the world's most important oil projects, oil, energy infrastructure, oil and gas, which has more than any other factor determining effect on the global economy. So everybody needs their oil and gas period. You can't change that. Sorry. And so if that infrastructure is damaged or destroyed, it affects all of us, all of us everybody, but us. So you can't just let Israel go and do this. Now, of course, there's a third potential theoretical option, which you say to Israel, which is a client state, which we pay for, whose creation we made possible, you say, no, we're not doing that. I get it. You don't like a, you don't like Iran, but this is bad for us and we're not going to let you do this. And if you do it, we're going to, I don't know what, cut off aid, something. We can apply the pressure that is inherently ours to apply since we're paying for all of this. But that was not even on the table. That's never been on the table. No one is ever in the last 63 years considered doing that. Really, the last president to do that was John F. Kennedy in 1962. And he got in a, not as famous as it should be, dispute with the founding prime minister of Israel, then the prime minister of Israel, David Ben Gurion over Israel's nuclear program at Domena. And then president Kennedy said, no, I don't believe in nuclear proliferation. This is one of the pillars of administration and you can't keep testing. And I'm demanding inspections. And of course, he was not able to make good on those promises because he was killed in November of 1963. And the person who took his place, his vice president, Lyndon Johnson, gave a green light to the Israeli nuclear program. So that was the last time an American president said no, hard no to Israel, tried to restrain its core ambitions, not like, you know, be nice to the Palestinian is the West Bank, but no, you can't have nukes or no, you can't, I don't know, bum blab it on or whatever. That was the last time. So that's not for some reason, even on the table. So the choice was, do you go along with what Israel is doing, try to constrain it or do you just sit back and then inevitably get drawn into it? So the truth is, and this is hard to say, as a proud American and as someone who wants the United States to remain powerful in the world, force for decency and order in the world. But above all, wants America to remain prosperous and peaceful at home in the country that we actually live in. It's hard to say this, but the United States didn't make the decision here, Benjamin Netanyahu did. And again, it's important to say that not to discourage anybody or make anybody feel despondent or hopeless. There's no reason for hopelessness at this point. But in order that it doesn't happen again, tell the truth so people can learn, hopefully improve and grow, but tell the truth no matter what. So then the question becomes we know why it started because Israel wanted it and demanded the U.S. military in order to do it. Why would Israel want this? We've already established that this may or may not be a good idea for Israel, but why would they want it? What was their thinking here? If it was really about the threat of Iran building and deploying a nuclear weapon or a nuclear-tipped ICBM aimed at Miami in New York, as Mark Levin told his poor listeners the other day, none of that's true. But if it was really about that, how could this threat have lasted for 40 years? How could, as Benjamin Netanyahu said yesterday, how could Iran's nuclear program bid on the very verge, the cusp, of building and deploying a nuclear weapon for 40 years? Of course, it wasn't. What we can argue about Iran's aims with nuclear weapons, they probably wanted one who wouldn't want one. Look at what happens to countries that don't have one. Everyone wants a nuclear weapon, but where they actually about to get one. No. So what was the point? What is the point of this from Israel's perspective? Well, the point is regional hegemony. Super simple. Israel has been around for almost 80 years. Israel has nuclear weapons. Israel's got a pretty robust tech economy, but above all, Israel has big ambitions. And by the way, not an attack on Israel, which growing country doesn't have greater ambitions in which megalomania, a leader of said country, and there are many of those around the world, by the way, wouldn't want regional hegemony. Regional hegemony means you get to control your region, kind of a Middle Eastern Monroe doctrine. Israel wants to be able to determine roughly speaking what happens in its region, and it doesn't want constraints on its own behavior. In the same way, again, trying to be as generous and universally minded as possible here in this analysis, because it's true, who wouldn't want that? Do we want that? Of course we do. We're not, you know, we put up with a lot from Mexico and Canada, but if they, all of a sudden, started constraining our actual ambitions, we'd do something about it, I think, or the old America would have, a normal country would. And Israel wants to control the Middle East, and they are the only announced nuclear power in the Middle East. Are they the only actual nuclear power in the Middle East? No. You could debate that. People can guess. But they're the only country we know for certain has a big nuclear arsenal. So they want to be unrivaled in their power in their region. Again, this is not a conspiracy theory or something weird to want. It's what every country wants, and they want it, and BB wants it. And he sees himself as a figure out of history, not simply as a prime minister who's, you know, fighting to keep his job, what he also is. But as, as a great man, there's a modern Moses or whatever, as a, as a, as a figure. And men like that, men of destiny, change the calculation for their nation forever. They don't take small steps. They take big steps. They think big. He thinks big to his credit or detriment, but it's a fact. And so this war is an effort, not simply in, in addition everything else. No, no, it is exclusively an effort on the part of Israel to achieve regional hegemony, total control. So what does that mean exactly? Well, it means you have to sweep away your enemies. And in the case of Iran, Iran wasn't an enemy of Israel, by the way. And Iran was also funding, insurgencies and militant groups in the region to kind of pick it Israel and hassle Israel kill Israelis. That's all true. As Bala, Hamas, Iran funded absolutely Houthis, Iran funded absolutely. Iran was doing that. That's true. And Israel didn't like it. Why would they? But it's also true that, and this is not to make use of for anybody, but these are all dynamics. You know, one country does one thing and other country does another thing. I mean, like a marriage, no party is wholly responsible for what went wrong or what went well. This is a relationship. And people act against each other with each other, but always on each other. Each action provokes a reaction. And so this history goes back a long way and historians can untangle it, a few honest ones left. But if you want to control the Middle East and your Israel, you have to decapitate Iran. You don't have to rebuild it. Probably don't even want to. It's too big. It has too much mineral wealth, has too much energy, that huge gas field they share with Qatar, etc. You probably just want to decapitate it and make it helpless. You want to turn into a hellscape because it's better for you because you can dominate a hellscape. Now, that may cause massive downstream problems for everybody else. You could have like a refugee crisis in Europe. Oh, that already happened when Israel destabilized Syria. You could have this open bleeding wound. Oh, that already happened when Israel destabilized Lebanon, when Israel pushed the United States to kill Gaddafi in Libya. This is an ongoing thing. It's runches the biggest and the final. So getting rid of the Iranian government had one purpose to give Israel the ability to do exactly what it wants in the Middle East without getting hassled. And what it wants among other things is territorial expansion. Small country. They want parts of Libya. Rather, excuse me, they want parts of Syria, parts of Lebanon. They're an expansionist power, like most powers. Actually, let's demystify this. It's not about the Jews. It's about a nation state that is growing and trying to exert its power. So that's simple. You can take all the spooky stuff out and just see it in terms of conventional politics. And it makes total sense. And part of the reason we can't see this clearly is because we've been so propagandized in the United States to see every contest between nations as a moral contest in which we somehow have to pick aside and somebody's Churchill and somebody's Neville Jake Berlin and somebody's Hitler and this absurd template, which narrows our vision and prevents us from seeing that this is just what's always happened, which is a contest between powers for primacy. But there's another actually two other components, two other speed bumps on the way to regional dominance for Israel. The first is something called the GCC. GCC is an informal alliance, maybe a little more formal as of today, but it's the six Gulf monarchies. It's the energy-producing Gulf states. And those would be Bahrain, Oman, Kuwait, UAE, Qatar, and Saudi. And these are some of the biggest, most important energy producers in the world. They're all Sunni Arab states. They're all rich and all of a sudden they are all now internationally or some of them are internationally influential because they are the site of global diplomacy. They are filling the void left by Switzerland, which not to get too boring about it, but basically took sides in the Russia Ukraine conflict and is therefore kind of not really a place where people can negotiate in good faith. They are in a fact controlled by the EU and NATO. They would never admit that the Swiss, but they are. They give up their banking secrecy. They're basically not not aligned anymore. But some of these Gulf states are as close to an online as you can possibly get. Certainly Qatar is. And all of a sudden, every conflict around the world is being negotiated in Qatar, or most recently in Oman. And so they have a kind of moral authority on the global stage, right? They have very effective diplomacy. People like them. People also go their invocation. They have the best airlines in the world. They are the obvious regional travel, travel hub for the globe. They're literally where East meets West. So if you're flying from New York to Delhi, you're going to stop and Dubai. And they have government subsidized airlines that are absolutely fantastic. So people have a familiarity, a first-hand familiarity with these countries, which were mysteries to most Westerners 25 years ago. When 9-11 happened, it was the first time I went to the Gulf. Most Americans has never been there unless you were in the oil business, or something. You've never been there. And she could imagine that it was all belly dancers and camels and slavery or whatever you thought. But all of a sudden, you know, like every other rich person in America has been to Dubai, because they're all traveling some of the going in safari and Africa. So people that it's been demystified to the West. And people like it. These are societies with problems of course. But they're also orderly and clean and elaborately polite and welcoming to outsiders and rich and kind of a little less gaudy than you would expect. They're actually some of the most functional societies in the world. And people like them, despite a lot of propaganda. And by the way, despite some complications, there are plenty of things about the Gulf states that Westerners won't like and or some things anyway. And certainly parts of their form of policy that make you wonder. But these are not North Korea. They're the opposite. These are actually very civilized countries. And they're not all on board with Israel's programs because they've got populations that disagree with how Israel is treated the Palestinians. In the case of Saudi Arabia, they have Mecca and Medina, the two holy places in Islam. Every Muslim who can is required to go to Saudi Arabia on the hodge on to go visit Mecca. So these are countries with inherent power in the Islamic world, growing power globally and resources. And so they can't be ignored. And if they were ever to get together, if these six countries were ever to form say like a real military alliance, they would be a massive threat to Israel. So Israel has spent decades fomenting dissent between them, of course. And that's not necessarily just on attack on Israel. I mean, does anyone can tell you who's spent time in the Middle East, the Arabs, many great qualities, but love to fight with each other. It's like their favorite hobby, more than camel racing. Like they it's very easy to get Arab nations bickering and fighting. And the distrust goes back a long time and it's impenetrable to the outsider. But if you were trying to divide six countries from each other, it's not that hard. And the Israelis have worked really, really hard to do that. But the truth is, if you really want control, the Middle East, you kind of have to degrade if not destroy the Gulf states. And just to the Israelis knew and the Americans knew as well, maybe not quite quite as realistic an assessment, but they had some sense, the Israelis definitely knew that if you start lobbying missiles into Iran, and if you start killing the leadership of Iran, and if you were to say kill the head of state slash religious leader of one branch of Islam, the I atola, if you were to do that, it would provoke a military response that would hurt the Gulf badly and that it would in some countries like Bahrain, sight of the fleet, you could potentially stoke like a true revolution because that country is almost, I think, half shy. So you could cause massive chaos in the Gulf, if you were to do this. Now that wasn't a risk from the Israeli standpoint. That was the point. That was the point. They wanted to diminish the Gulf. And in two days, they have, and I think anyone who likes to decency and order and cleanliness is hoping that the Gulf will recover. The Gulf is not a threat to us. We have military bases in these countries. These are some of our closest allies, all of them are closer allies than Israel by far. There are friends, but they've been really hurt. And in a place like Dubai, which is basically part of a country. It's an emirate within the United Arab Arab Emirates, but it's also a, it's a luxury brand basically. People go to Dubai because it's beautiful and rich and clean and above all because it's safe and orderly. It's got the busiest airport in the world. You start seeing video and Instagram of smoke in the Dubai airport. And you're like, I think I'm going to combo this year. Oh, sorry, drug cartels, whatever. Maybe you go to Sedona this year. It really, really hurts these countries. And Israel wanted to hurt these countries. That's the point. Wanted to hurt these countries, wanted to sow chaos and disorder because they are rivals of Israel. So it was probably not hasn't been reported, but it's a fact that last night in Qatar and Saudi Arabia authorities arrested Mossad agents planning on committing bombings in those countries. Now that's weird. That doesn't make any sense. Why would these rallies be committing bombings into Gulf countries, which are also being attacked by Iran? Aren't they on the same side? No, no, Israel wants to hurt Iran and Qatar and UAE and Saudi and Bahrain and Oman and Kuwait. And they've succeeded. And the third thing you would have to do if you wanted true control over the region, which as we've established Israel wants and shouldn't be attacked for wanting. It's a natural thing to want. But the final thing you'd have to do is get the US out of the Middle East. Since 1948, the United States. actual thing to want. But the final thing you'd have to do is get the US out of the Middle East. Since 1948, the United States, from Harry Truman until present, US presidents and as noted with diminishing success, but have tried to constrain or shape Israel's policies. It's foreign policy. And we've arrived to do that because we're the most powerful country in the world and have been since 1945. And also because we pay for it. You know, Israel couldn't exist without us right now. And we give them the defense umbrella. We defend them in their wars. And so why would you want the United States out? Well, because the United States, while not doing a very good job of constraining Israel, has been issuing requests in any case to Israel for a long time. And that's very annoying. Imagine if we were getting the same kind of communiqués from, I don't know, Ottawa. And they were like, you can't do this. You can't do that. We'd say buzz off at a certain point. Back off Canada, we're doing what we want. We're a great power. So you have to get the United States out. And this war is designed to do it because the Israelis who are very well aware of domestic American politics know that there is no appetite whatsoever for casualties among the American public that this word did not have anything approaching majority support. In fact, it had small minority support. And that's shrunk even in 36 hours. And that this would cause a political crisis in the United States. And that it would most critically convince our Arab allies in the region, meaning really the Gulf States and Jordan, poor Jordan, wonderful country. It would convince them that the United States is a bad ally. Why? Because the second you hit Iran and the persons are not stupid at all, you know that they're going to hit American bases in those countries, which they have, except in one. But in the other six they have. And you know, those countries are not going to be defended by the United States. And they haven't been very well. Some of these countries are on fire right now and they feel completely vulnerable. And they are low and not letting loose with any operational secret that you can't find on the internet. They're running low on missile defense. And so a country like Saudi or UAE or Qatar, Bahrain or Kuwait, I mean, they're all right on the Gulf directly across Iran. They live on their energy production and that's being damaged and no one's protecting them. A Saudi Aramco facility went up last night. Saudi Aramco being the long time joint U.S. Saudi energy production company, biggest oil company in the world. And part of it's on fire today. The Iranians said they didn't do it. Why would they say they didn't do it? But possible Israel did it. Why wouldn't they? Because if you think about it, scaring our other allies in the region, letting them know that they can get attacked and the U.S. will not defend you. You put up with all this crap for decades because you got American troops on your soil and your population doesn't like it, but you do it anyway because you've been told if there was ever a problem, the U.S. will come rescue you. Well, guess what we just learned, the U.S. is not coming to rescue you. There are hundreds of thousands of Americans, civilians, caught in the Middle East and the governments of those countries are panicked and they're enraged. And the message to them is the U.S. is not a reliable partner. What's the point of this partnership? What's the point of allowing you to have an air base in my country if when missiles come raining down or drones attack our airport or international airport, you're not going to do anything about it. That's how they feel and you can understand why they do. So what's this message to them? There's no upside in dealing with the United States. There's no upside in foreign investment in the United States. You go to any of these countries. You just go to the airport, go to a restaurant. Who do you run to American businessmen? And some of them have good ideas. Some of them have ideas that are so stupid that they couldn't sell them in Silicon Valley. They couldn't go to VCs in the United States and raise the money. So they go to the Gulf and it's not that the Gulf Arabs are dumb. In some sense, they're doing this because they see the United States as they're only real ally. So they're investing in American business ventures. A lot hundreds of billions of dollars. And part of that is economic calculation. They think these companies are going to grow and they're going to make money. Part of it is friendship. You're an ally and have been all these years since the British left. What do they think now? They don't feel that way quite as much. Because for them, this is very serious. I mean, these countries don't grow their own food. So if you close the airport and the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea are closed in effect, what do you get your food? That's a real issue. These are countries that are supplied by, in some cases, de-south, de-salmization plants, pulling seawater through a membrane and then piping it to the urban centers. What happens if those pipes get blown up? You have no water, millions and millions of people. So you can see that getting too into it just how vulnerable these countries, our strongest allies in the region now feel and how their calculation about the United States in the region has changed dramatically. The British lost their influence in the Middle East in 1956 and what is known as the Suez crisis. A crisis that was so complex it's hard to even to understand it now, 70 years later, but the net effect was the UK was not able to restore order in the region. They had less power than people thought they did. And that was it. That was the true end of Britain's empire. Certainly the end of its control over the Middle East. That's what this is. And it's on purpose. They did this. The Israelis want us out and they did this on purpose. And then as the last sort of footnote, there's another big loser in this war, in Israel's war. And this was obvious years ago, and that's Europe. Europe, who cares about Europe? Well, the Neocons care about Europe for reasons that are not entirely clear, but you often hear the Neocons, the War Hawks, the Chills for Israel, whatever you call them, but people who supported what we're seeing now. And they're mad at the Shiites and the Eitola and the Arabs and of course got it. But if you listen carefully, there is a deep hostility hatred, in fact, toward Western Europe. Now, where does that come from? Someone should think deeply about this because it's had a big effect over the past 80 years. It doesn't even matter where it comes from. The hate Western Europe. And maybe the biggest loser of all right now is Western Europe. So last night, Qatar shut down its LNG exports. LNG is liquefied natural gas without getting boring about it. LNG is essential to the global economy. It's essential to Asia, South Korea, subsists on Qatari LNG exports. China is a huge consumer of them. And Western Europe, Britain, 40% of homes in Britain are powered by Qatari LNG. Lots of reasons for this. We blew up the nursery pipeline as one of them, but it doesn't matter. That's the truth. So when you shut off natural gas from Qatar and it's now shut down, 20% of the world's total supply is shut down. Well, all kinds of effects on that. It crushes markets. It hikes inflation. It can wreak havoc on the global economy. Say it prayer that it doesn't, but it could. But the first thing that it does is totally shafts Europe. And then here's the second order effect, refugee crises. Let's say that this operation achieves its only real state of day, which is to decapitate the government of Iran. It doesn't seem to have happened yet. I mean, who knows what's actually going on? But the atola was killed. The government's still sending missiles. So someone's making decisions. But let's say over the course of however long this takes, chaos becomes this data play in Iran. The thing just falls apart. It's chaos. It's a huge chaotic country with no one in charge. And lots of different ethnic groups and religious splinter groups fighting with each other heavily armed. And the normal things start to break down like food distribution and water schools. What do you have? Well, you have what we've had in Lebanon and Syria. Fleet every country that Israel has destabilized on purpose. You have a refugee crisis. And where do they go? Well, of course, a lot will come here. Of course. But a lot will go to Europe just as Syrians flooded into Europe 10 or 12 years ago in the aftermath of that conflict, which was underneath at all, fermented by Israel in order to destabilize its neighbor in order to increase its own authority in the region. That's a fact. So if you think you're of some bad shape now, oh boy, give it a year. So it's Europe, the United States and the Gulf States. Those are the losers. And if you're trying to ascertain motive, which is hard and you probably should pull back from that most of the time. But if you're trying to understand why this is happening, why would you want that? Look at the effects. Don't look at the ideology they're telling you about or whatever motive they're claiming they have or that you have shut up. She I look at the effects. The point of the system is what it does. And what does this system? What does this war do? Hurts the Gulf States, crushes the Western Europeans and it hurts the United States. That's the point. And if you doubt that, if you doubt that that's actually what's going on, this is a long time Israeli politician leader, Neftali Bennett explaining Israel's next step. Here's where they're going next. Watch a new Turkish threat is emerging. I want to be very clear. Turkey and Qatar have gained influence in Syria are seeking influence elsewhere and everywhere throughout the region. And from here, I warn Turkey is the new Iran. Erdogan is sophisticated, dangerous, and he seeks to encircle Israel. We can't close our eyes again. He's sophisticated and dangerous. It's hardly an endorsement of Erdogan or Erdogan, the Turkish leader, hardly an endorsement of him to say when Bennett says he's dangerous, what he really means is he's sovereign. We can't tell him what to do. We don't fully control him. We can influence him. And it's clear that Israel and Turkey did have some kind of relationship in the overthrow of Bashar al-Assad in Syria last year, just to guess. But the real problem with Turkey is that it can't be controlled. So it is therefore a threat to Israel. And again, non-attacking Israel, that's true. That is true. In the same sense that when we have hostile leaders and big countries in our hemisphere, it really bothers us. And sometimes we kill them, regime change them. And we make up this whole, no, it's really important that people of country X need to be free. But really, we need to be unconstrained because we're a great power. That's what it is. It's important to say this not to allege some sort of dark conspiracy by these Israelis, but to explain that it's not unusual at all. It's the most usual thing in the world. What's unusual is to live in a country that is so controlled whose media environment is so precisely constructed to keep you from knowing anything that matters for seeing the most obvious things. And that it has been constructed, not a conspiracy theory, over the course of many, many years to keep you from not knowing. Barry Weiss may run CNN. Who thought that would happen? Okay, now. But the point of these moves is to, in the media, is to control the way things are described so you can't see things clearly and to muddy the conversation with anti-Semitism, the Nazis. No, no, this is classic great power competition. And we just can't see it because we have been so thoroughly propagandized, we think that this is some sort of effort to liberate somebody. It's not. But then the question becomes like, what is our role in this? So now that we know, in other words, it's perilous that we know. And one of the reasons I almost didn't do this, not that I'm like saying anything that is an obvious, it's all very obvious. But to say it out loud, does not make things more stable. In other words, once you have a war going on, and everybody knows that it's not being waged on behalf of the people who are dying in it or the families they leave behind, then things can, things don't get more stable. So, and no one wants to add to the present instability. But I just think it's important to know the truth and to know what our leaders have planned because as you already know, they lie. And they have no struples at all. And there are very few people in Washington who have fewer scruples than Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas. Hate to say that no more. But this clip from the yester from a Sunday show, which apparently still exists yesterday, really tells you a lot about how they're thinking and about where they'd like to take us next. So this is Senator Tom Cotton of Arkansas yesterday. Good morning, Margaret. The president of the United States warned the American public that there could be casualties. American casualties. Does that mean the US is putting boots on the ground? No, Margaret. The president has been clear that what we should expect to see is an extended air and naval campaign that's designed not only to continue to set back Iran's nuclear ambitions, but most importantly, to destroy its vast missile arsenal. Many more missiles in the United States and Israel have air defenses combined as well as the missile launchers and its missile manufacturing capability. Now, obviously one risk of that kind of campaign is that an aircraft could be shot down and the president would never leave a pilot behind. So no doubt we have combat search and rescue assets in the region that are prepared to go in and extract any down pilot. But barring that kind of unusual circumstance, Margaret, the president has no plan for any kind of large-scale ground force inside of Iran. The president has no plan for any sort of large-scale ground force, large-scale ground force in Iran. Oh, really? So a small-scale ground force. Is that what you're saying? Well, that is what he's saying. And the Secretary of War was just interviewed moments ago and pressed on this little bit and he said it's possible because of course it's possible. By the way, you shouldn't even attack people for telling the truth ever. You should attack people who try to prevent you from telling the truth and what Secretary of War Pete Haggis has just said is of course obviously true and it was always true. There's not one person who understands a situation like this, kinetic war, who thinks you can affect regime change from the air. But you know what's ever thought that? No one thinks that now. If you're sincere about changing the leadership of a country, it by definition requires you to get in there. Not well of course not you, but some young guy, some younger man, fighting for freedom to get in there in risk of life to do it. You need troops, ground troops, boots on the ground or whatever dumb euphemism they're using for putting young Americans in the path of potential death. And so of course that's always been the plan and shame on the rest of us for not just saying that out loud. Shame on the rest of us for being so cowed by their relentless incantations, whatever they are. No ground troops! This is not the point is not regime change. It's to stop their nuclear program. Some of us understood Charlie Kirk understood back in June that was a lie. The point was that Iran could never have a nuclear weapon. Nobody wants Iran to have a nuclear weapon. Why does Israel have a nuclear weapon? What does France have a nuclear weapon? Nobody wants nuclear weapons. Nobody thinks that Iran should have a nuclear weapon outside of Iran. But no honest person believed in June. No, those people vindicated that this was about stopping them for getting a nuclear weapon. As regime change and regime change requires ground troops. And therefore, if you're serious about it, you're going to get ground troops. The only group left out of this calculation was the American public who probably had no idea and probably still don't have any idea that that would even be a remote consideration given everything that's going on in this country right now and given that tiny percentage relatively speaking of Americans who wanted this, who voted for it, who supported it. The leaders of both parties supported it, Chuck Schumer supports it more fervently than Trump. MSNBC just did a walk segment on this, which I've watched about this war and it's the fault of the Gulf States. So it's the Gulf States. Yeah, it's guitar again. Barely even mentioned Israel. They're all in the same page. They're all neo-cons when it comes right down to it. They'll support this. But the public doesn't support it and it's terrible for the United States. And by the way, if you think it's a good idea for the U.S. to get out of the Middle East, which it might be, by the way, that's not a crazy desire. This is not the way to do it. Humiliated with American dead, that's not the way to get out of the Middle East. But that's how Israel wants to sound the Middle East. So you won't come back. They can pivot to their new partner China and Israel can provide the tech that will even up the match against the Chinese tech that Pakistan used in their last confrontation scared China. They realize we need better tech. China's like, oh yeah, we've got the better tech. So it's a natural alliance and there are other reasons it's a natural alliance. But Israel is moving on to India and the United States is, if Israel gets its way, going to be humiliated and weaker, mourning its dead, and very resistant to getting involved in the Middle East politics ever again. You want to annihilate every last child in Gaza? Go ahead. You want to kick the Palestinians, the Christians out of the West Bank and fill it full people from Brooklyn? Go ahead. We're not going to do anything about it. That's the goal right there. So along the way to that happening, Americans are going to die. The Department of War has said that has confirmed that there are four Americans who've died. That's what they've said. They have not done their normal briefings. They haven't told us any information as of Monday afternoon, which is what it is right now. They have not told us more. But it's pretty clear that that, tragically, more have died. And I think that's upsetting to people in the administration. I don't think that they make these decisions lightly. And I think a lot of the commanders who sent those young men into this war had ambivalent feelings about it. I mean, they did for sure. So it's not attacking anyone who gave the order, because again, their employees giving orders. But the people who advocated for this, their attitudes about the death of young Americans, really the best Americans that we have on behalf of a foreign power that really has contempt for us. Is there any other world leader was more contempt for the United States than Benjamin Netanyahu? No. No. There's just isn't pure contempt for the United States. And these people died for him. If you're commenting on this, if you're trying to understand it from afar, you've got to grieve over that. It's so unfair. It's so wrong. And yet the people who've advocated for this don't seem to care at all. Here is someone who's been advocating for a war against Iran. I'm not going to go to motive and accuse them of being paid to advocate for it. Be interesting to know. But Frank Gaffney, who's been around Washington forever and nonprofits and think tanks. There's no place on the planet where less thinking takes place than a think tank. But they're basically lobbying organizations with tax exempt status. And he has been lobbying for a war with Iran. Well, I don't know since I started shaving probably. But here he is yesterday on the possibility of Americans dying. This isn't going to be over tomorrow. I pray it will be. But I don't think we should expect that. Will we take more casualties? I'm more in the loss of three American servicemen as much as anybody. But this is essentially cost free to us at this point. Will there be more losses you saw? Rabbi will like you talking about the miniserial. Of course, should we be operating on any basis other than this is likely to be a slog, a hard slog. But the fight is is incalculably important because if we do in fact render a decisive defeat of sharia supremacist and miniron, it will help us with all of the other places. So I want to put that up there, not because Frank Gaffney is the worst person in Washington or because that's the most insane thing anyone said in the last 24 hours. But because it's so perfectly representative. So at first there's the sort of proforma nod to we really were mourning, we're praying, I'm warned for the deaths. When in fact what you're seeing in America right now from people like Frank Gaffney is a total disrespect for death, a refusal to be reverent in the face of death, which is always in everywhere a sign of refusal to be reverent in the face of life. If you can't appreciate death, if you don't bow before it in silence knowing that you don't fully understand what it is, but that it's bigger than you. If you refuse to do that instead, well, I'm so glad he's dead. No matter who it is, if another human being is died, then you don't pause and acknowledge that you didn't create that life because you can't because you're not God. And if there is something mysterious about death, something bigger than you, if you don't, you are dangerous. Even animals do that. You're bringing your dog to the vet and the dog doesn't want to go in. Why? Because the dog can smell death. And the dog is afraid of death, the dog is in awe of death as we should all be. But almost no one in Washington feels that way about death. Just cremated them and throw them away like he never existed. Functional countries more in their dead. They bury them and they visit them. Why? Because functional countries understand that they're not in charge of life because they don't have that power. And people who forget that are seized by something called hubris, which is always the beginning of the end for people and civilizations. And so the, oh, yeah, so three died. We mourn their deal. We're saying prayers really. What kind of prayers have you said, set of prayer? Do you know their names? Oh, their names are in public. That might get us thinking about it too much. But despite or maybe because of, and you just heard Gaffney say this, not being mean, not being unfair. He said, this is essentially cost-free for us. Really? Three Americans just died for BB in a war that nobody wants in a war designed to hurt the United States. And that's cost free. And it's a lot more than three. And I say that with real sadness. It's that attitude that God is here. But it won't stay that way. It's already changing. The thing that people need to remember is that war accelerates trends in progress. Nothing accelerates change like violence. And that's true for big broad social changes, women in the workforce that happen after World War II integration after World War II. It would be good and bad, right? But things change fast once people start dying. Not just because of demographic changes, a lot of people die and you need others to move into their jobs and they're a broad, so the women, no, it's more than that. A different spirit descends on a society in war. And lots of things happen. People become way less free. That's the greatest lie of all embedded in neo-con theology. We're killing these people so we can be free. Oh, right now, find a war in which people in the homeland became more free. Oh, no, it's always the opposite. The second Britain went to war. What did the British government do? In turned their opposition, their domestic opposition with their families, with their wives for the duration of the war for years. That was in Britain, which was at least we thought a pretty free country that gave us the Magna Carta. Yeah. So no, countries don't become more free. They become much less free during war, a spirit of violence descends. And people change fast and calculations change political calculations change really fast. Social trends change really fast. And people's attitudes change. And part of it is not political or temporal. It's spiritual. You can feel on people the bloodlust, the hate, and it accelerates. And that explains what you're watching right now, which is the rage of the neo-cons, which doesn't make sense. That doesn't make any sense. They've been advocating for years that the US government on behalf of Israel kill the Ayatollah Khomeini. They've been saying that for years, I've been in this 35 years and I've heard that every single year, they got it yesterday. Community are killed. Okay, you got what you wanted. It's Christmas morning. You just opened the present. Why are you mad? They're angrier than ever. This is the key to their psychology and it's a spiritual principle. Bloodlust is never sated just like any other kind of lust. It's never sated. Nothing is ever enough. You taste it and you're talking and you want more. It's like eating candy. It doesn't satisfy you. You're always hungry or for more and killing is the same. Always. But there's a specific psychology at work here. And it's a graceless anti-human psychology that has no room for forgiveness or good sportsmanship or decency. The second people like this win, they want to kill the people they vanquished. So imagine this where I don't know, a tennis match, and you win. If you're a sort of normal Western person, you walk up to the net and you say, good game, trying to display what your father beat into your head as a child, which is good sportsmanship. Just grace and victory. Don't lord it over them. Don't hurt them. You already won. Be graceful. What you see in the advocates of this war in the Neocons is the opposite. You beat someone in a tennis match. You leap across the net and beat them to death with your racket. That's what you're seeing now. And so you're seeing this crazed, hysterical, in fact, effort to purge anyone in the conservative movement or maggo. Whatever those are, to purge anyone who had any doubt about the wisdom of this war and not just to purge them, but to discredit them. Your name is the law-meshed. There's a lot of these people who are like sincere Christians, right, who opposed, on religious grounds. Your name is law-meshed. You're taking money. And of course, it's all projection. You accuse people of what you're actually doing yourself. Of course. Here in Islam, as you're taking money. And of course it's all projection. You accuse people of what you're actually doing yourself. Of course. But it's more than that. It's bloodlust. They shouldn't just be silenced and deplatformed and prevent it from speaking at this or that conference or from having a podcast, but they should be interned. They should be arrested. How long before it's they should be killed. Not long. That's how quickly these things are moving. Because a spirit has been unleashed. And violence does this every time a spirit of violence and hate has been unleashed. My personal advice, having thought a lot about this, is don't feed it. This is demonic influence clearly. This is not rational. Of course. Why would you be angrier when you win? Why would you be mad or when you got what you wanted? Hehehe. That tells you. This is not in the realm normal human desire. You wouldn't be. And these people feed evil itself feeds on hate. They project hate, but they also intend consciously or not to inspire hate because hate makes them stronger. And this happens not just in this country, not just in 2026. It happens every single time war brings people like that to the fore and it makes them more powerful. And that's why you're seeing as you have for the last several years an increase in true radicalism in this country. And by radicalism, I mean, we hate these people because of how they were born and we want to hurt them or kill them. That's I think all would agree actual radicalism. That's not hey, what happened to the USS Liberty. That's not radicalism. That's like a lot of question. And the answer of course is Israel targeted on purpose because we're in their way. Just like they're doing now. That's not radicalism. Radicalism is hey, let's kill people who we don't like. And you're seeing a massive increase in that in this country in Israel would then give your smotrisch, would they even have been conceivable 20 years ago? Of course not. No one no one like that had power in Israel 20 years ago. I was there. There was nothing like that. Well, it's nothing like it was because war has unleashed this and it's empowered people like we have figures like that in this country. Several of them who have actual power, not in government yet. Thank Kevin, but certainly on its periphery and certainly influencing government. Yes, they do more power than ever. And it's also true by the way in Iran. And one of the reasons this is going to be difficult to get out of is because this war has already, the day and a half in radicalized, the leadership to extend it still exists in Iran. Oh, but weren't they so radical already? Yes, some were some work. A huge country. Lots of divisions and differences within it. Very complicated country. And even if you try to learn anything about Iran or deals with the Iranians, we'll tell you, if he's being honest, who complicated, hard to understand. So yeah, their radical factions and they were less radical factions. And now of course, maybe you could have predicted this if you're planning to kill the Pope of Shia Islam. The radical elements are more powerful than they were because the gates of hell have been opened. That's the truth. And the people who do this knew they would be. And so in a moment like this, chaos and violence being its hallmarks, in a moment like this, only the worst people benefit. And that's true of every conflict like this, every single time. If chaos breaks out any place, what's the first effect, the police, the military, the emulto way, there's no civil authority. There's no legitimate authority. Who's in charge? Drunk 15 year olds with automatic weapons. They're in charge. They make all the life or death decisions. That happens in governments as well as intersections. That's just a constant fact. That's what you build civilization is to protect the weak and to make sure that drunk 15 year olds with automatic weapons don't have all the power. That's the whole point of it. But now they do once again. So how do we respond to this? Because this is only 36 hours in and because you don't want to make things sound worse than they really are, we could go through all the many, many risks, some of which are becoming even clearer than they were. You don't want to go through the mall. But clearly the United States is not going to benefit from staying longer in Iran. And sorry, Tom Cotton putting troops on the ground, boots on the ground, whatever you call it. Committing young American men to go die in Iran is not in our interest at all. And it would cause not simply heartbreak in the families of those killed. But it would cause potentially real turmoil here domestically and render already fragile, fragile social fabric. So where do you go from here? Well, get out right away. It's just that simple. Of course, it's also incredibly complicated. But the first step is deciding that we're leaving. It's only been less than two days, but it's pretty clear that we're not going to gain anything more. And how do we know that? Because no one has explained what we're there to gain. No one has described the mission. Ask anybody. What's the point of how we know we've won? And some of us spent 20 years asking, what are we doing in Afghanistan? Shut up. Are you a pro Taliban? No, but I would like to know when we've won. Sorry, you can't know that it's classified. Okay. But now is the time to be totally honest, we're not going to get anything more than we've already got in assuming we've gotten anything by staying. And the longer we stay, the greater the risk. What are the risks? Oh, well, here just two, the usually paying attention to one is that Israel gets really hurt. And in case you think this is a long video attacking Israel for Nazi reasons or anti-Semitic reasons, it's not, it's a really an effort to try and think through what's good for the United States. But also, with someone who wishes Israel no harm to think through clearly what's going to be terrible for Israel. And one thing to be terrible for Israel is getting hit with the hypersonic missile, which as of right now, Iran has not yet fired. And they may never. But let's say they did. What would Israel, which is a country the size of Maryland, how would it respond? How could it respond? Well, it might respond with nuclear weapons, which it has and which it is threatened to use before, and which is it has implied it might use many times. One of the reasons that you can't let Israel go alone is they imply like, hey, don't make us go crazy and do something wild. And that would include the use of nuclear weapons. Not saying it's going to happen, God forbid, but it could. And if Israel was legitimately threatened, not performatively threatened, but actually threatened like with a hypersonic missile into downtown Jerusalem, then yeah, it might. And in that case, who knows? Because nuclear weapons have not been used since August 1945, but a number of countries have them, including Pakistan and possibly others. And so it could get there. And you'd hate to be in a spot where you were relying once again as we did in June on Iranian restraint, relying on the Iranians to call your airbase and guitar before hitting it and giving you a warning. You hate to say that. But if you find yourself in a place where you're relying on the restraint of a country you have described as morally diseased, a terrorist nation, a Nazi country, is there telling you one fox, if you're relying on their reasonable behavior, you may have exposed yourself a little bit. So if this continues, you could see potentially things going really crazy. And of course, the craziest of all would be a nuclear exchange. And that could happen. That's not off the table. Ask anybody who's dealing with this or thinking about it. Doesn't mean it's going to, again, God forbid, but it could. And the possibility even that it could is terrifying. That's number one. Number two is oxamask in Jerusalem, which was built on apparently, built on the site of the second temple. If you've been to Jerusalem, big gold dome, a whole complex, and that is one of the holiest sites in Islam, not an expert in Islam, despite many accusations. But it is. It appears to be coequal in Islam from what I can tell with Mecca and Medina. It's a huge deal. And since 1967, it's been under the control, the military control of Israel. It's controlled legally by Jordan, but it's a holy place for every Muslim, about two billion of them. And there are people, Orthodox Jews in Israel, not all some, and some evangelical Christians in Texas, not all, but some who would like to see it blown up and replaced by this third temple. And I'm not going to get into the theology of it, which is deranged and demonic, actually. But it's a fact that people want this. And that is the beginning of really, of the end for the world as we know it, because that would set off looking for religious conflict, killing the Ayatollah didn't get you there. Okay, blow up the mosque. And then you will be there. And that's not good for anyone. It's not good for the United States. And if this continues, there are already people in Israel, at least one well-known rabbi is calling for a false flag against that mosque, just blow it up and blame the Iranians. And the truth is, whether the Iranians blow it up intentionally or unlikely, but let's just say or by mistake or there's a false flag by Israel and blames Iran, it doesn't matter. Even blows up. That's not a solvable problem. That's the end of everything that we know. And that's an enduring generational thousand years, as long as the world lasts, religious conflict that no one wants to be a part of, only the craziest, darkest people want any part of that at all. That's the opposite of what you want. And that could happen. So the point is once things start getting crazy, they can potentially indeed, they tend to get really crazy. And so stop the craziness. So how would we affect that? It's the extent that we can at this point, declare victory in go home or pull back. It's hard to negotiate with the Iranians. They've turned down our offer three times. Yeah, true. Iran has decided to accent, they decide anything who knows who's actually making the decisions completely being made by compartments or it seems that way. But to the extent that the Iranian government can respond as a cohesive whole, they have responded, no, we're not negotiating with you. Okay, she can't negotiate with them. We're stopping defensive measures only. We don't want this. The global economy is at stake. The global order is at stake. American lives are at stake. American prestige, certainly on the line, our ability to control anything beyond our borders or maybe even within them. We're at we killed the atola. We came. We did it. We're going home. At this point, that would be a wise decision. And it was very clear from the outset, whatever revisionism people want to add to the story, but it was very clear that Donald Trump did not want any extended war. Iran certainly didn't want a protracted boots in the ground or certainly doesn't want the kind of war that Tom Cotton wants, obviously. And we are on the way to getting that really quickly into a lot of suffering. So declare victory, get out. That would be move one. Second, at some point, the United States has to get BB under control. Sorry, Don anti-Semitism. This is a head of state. Whose decisions are getting Americans killed and affecting the history of the world and the fortunes of literally the fortunes, but also the future of the United States? It's some point very soon the United States has to say to the government of Israel, you are not in charge. And no president has noted since John F. Kennedy has been willing to say that, but no administration has paid a higher cost for going along than the current administration. And it's tragic when you think about it. And of course, it's not simply the administration, the president and everyone works for him. It's the country and the people who voted for this president in the hope that he would improve their lives. And none of that will be possible if this continues. And the fault, of course, is with anyone who went along with BB's demands or threats or whatever. But it's their fault for going along with this. But the root cause is BB and his ambitions. And so somebody immediately needs to say, no, third thing that we need to do is protect Americans abroad. Hundreds of thousands of Americans live in the Middle East a lot of them are stuck in the Gulf right now without getting too specific about it. But Americans who live or work there, of course, Americans in uniform at our military bases, which are getting hammered and not just in the Gulf, but in Iraq and Jordan, and other places getting hammered, dying. But Americans who work in the embassies, who are their invocation, kids on spring break, who are stuck in the Abu Dhabi or Dubai airports, there are a lot of those right now. And they kick it out. And to its great shame, the State Department did not order an evacuation of even embassy employees before these strikes because they didn't want to give away when the strikes were. Maybe they didn't know. But all of us who are watching carefully knew something was likely to happen. And the State Department did not encourage these people to leave it. And they didn't help them leave. And as noted, hundreds of thousands of Americans are still stuck there. And in some places, they can't get out. Without making it sound more dire than it really is, just put out that it actually could be dire. These are countries that are highly dependent on imports for food and water. And if you close the sea routes out and close the airports, they're pretty stuck. So right now, you're seeing Americans try to get into Oman, the one Gulf country not under attack from Iran. And fly out, you're seeing people pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to get out, which are not seeing as of right now, anyway, is the U.S. State Department make an effort to prioritize Americans. So it's possible in Doha, for example, that polls, Polish citizens will be assisted by their government in getting out of the Gulf before Americans are assisted by their government. There's no excuse for that at all. The point of the U.S. government is to serve Americans, the point of U.S. diplomats is to serve the country they represent and to serve Americans in need abroad. And this has been degrading for a long time, a long time. If you ever go into an embassy in Mexico, because you've got to rest it for something you know what I'm talking about. But the point is, when a war breaks out started by your country, you have an expectation of help from that government when it breaks out, and they haven't received it. And it's outrageous. And the fact that the U.S. government moved, apparently a Thad battery or some kind of anti-missile defense from Saudi, where it would protect critical infrastructure and Americans, or a lot of Americans, and Saudi to Israel, not only shaft Saudi, a critical partner in the world, a much more important partner than Israel has ever been, or ever will be. It shafts Saudi, but it shafts Americans. How many energy employees, American energy employees live in Saudi? There's a direct flight to Houston from Riyadh. Like, what is this? Underneath it all, at its core is the obligation of the U.S. government to serve the people it represents, who pay for it in whose name all these things happen. And they've completely lost sight of that. And that gets to a deeper and more taboo problem, which is a real problem, and whose fruits we're seeing now, which is there are a bunch of people in the U.S. government who do not put the United States before the interest of Israel, period. And you saw that very clearly with my Huckabee. We interviewed him last week in Tel Aviv. And there was no sense at all that he represents the United States, or is any interest in what happens to the United States. At all, his party is in defending Israel. Now, Huckabee, thank heaven, is not Jewish. He's like some kind of, who knows what his religion is, but he's not Jewish. So you can't, you know, it's not anti-Semitic to say that it's the fact. My Huckabee's loyalty is to Israel over the United States, but he's hardly alone in that. How could there possibly be in 2026, a dual citizen, sharing citizenship with any other country, including Israel, but not limited to Israel, any country. How could there be any dual citizen at a high level of government? You can't serve two masters. You can't be loyal to two countries simultaneously. This is why we're against polygamy in the West, right? Right? But we allow it. Why? Because no one wants to be called names if they oppose it. And it's not just dual citizenship. It's a confusion about whose behalf we're working on. And in some cases, it's unintentional. No one has spelled out the rules. It's, it's not malign. It's just dumb. No one has had the brass to say, Hey, you work for the US government. Every decision you make has to put at the top of the queue of American citizens, is this good for my nation or not? No one ever gets that lecture. There's no culture of that. And it's not under this administration. It's every administration of my lifetime. Certainly since 911, we need to have a government that has as it stated goal, the protection of American citizens, period. And if other nations benefit from that, great, we're not against anybody, but the point has to be America and serving America's interests. And if it idea sounds good, but it's going to hurt the United States, we're against it. That's our official position as a country. And if you work for the government and you don't share that view, you can't work for the government and you certainly can't serve it a foreign military. What are we even doing? That's so real. All these people in public life have served in the Israeli military, but not the US military. That's fine. But you can't have influence over my country at that point. You served in a foreign military and not an hours. And no one just want to talk about this, but it's going on a long time. Bill Clinton famously said when he got out of office during speech, I wish I'd served in the IDF really. He dodged the draft. It's not a defense of the Vietnam War, which was idiotic, but it's a clear statement of priorities. I would serve in a foreign country's military before my own. Well, you can't be in my leadership then. Sorry, you're not a loyal American. How are we defining loyal? Like putting on a uniform, putting on a uniform of a foreign military and showing up in the US Congress, waving a foreign flag in the US Congress? Those are totally disqualifying acts. And the fact that we've lost the capacity to see that says that we're all but under some kind of spell, hopefully it breaks now because you can't continue with the system that we have. It's not an attack on anybody. It's the standard that Israel would apply to itself or any sovereign country would apply to itself. You have to be for us or you can't work here. And we very much don't have that. Most upsettingly really is the possibility of what might happen here. And that's the next thing we need to do is brace for a lot of domestic change. As I said, the spirit of violence, of hate, of killing has been unleashed. And you see it in people. If you read online commentary, you certainly see it in evidence there. People are angry. They taste blood on the tongue and they want to kill. You don't want that here. You don't want that in your country. That defeats the whole point. The only reason we have a a military is to ensure peace and prosperity in the United States. That's it. And if military action increases poverty and violence in your country, which it always does, it's bad. So you are seeing now a concerted effort by people acting on behalf of Benjamin Netanyahu, some technically American citizens, to ferment religious conflict here. Payed the Muslims. I'm not sure what I think about Israel, but we have the same enemies. No, the only enemies we have are enemies of the United States. And we know who our enemies are by what they do to us, how they treat us, what they demand of us. And by that measure, Israel is not an ally. And I don't know who these Muslims you're talking about are. If you're against mass immigration, of course, how do we get mass immigration? Is anyone know? We got it after we got mass Muslim immigration after 9-11. And the people who pushed it, because I was here, and I remember it very well, are the very same people in some cases, literally the same people who are now screaming about how Islam is our enemy. It's an endorsement of Islam at all as a Christian. I don't endorse Islam, but I hate lying because it's never accidental. It's always in the service of some darker end. And in this case, it's in the service of the darkest of all ends, which is to divide this country against itself along religious lines. And yet people are standing up and saying something, and never would have said 20 years ago, paid all Muslims. How is that better than hate all Jews? I'll pause while you explain. And of course, they can't explain because it is in no sense better than I hate all Jews. It's the same thing. And I hate all Christians for that reason, matter. But you are seeing a concerted effort to do that. And you will almost certainly see as we have seen before, acts of violence that may or may not be organic designed to move public opinion strongly in one direction to benefit people outside our country. It's just a fact. And if you think that's not a fact, if that's a conspiracy theory, if that's an anti-Semitic conspiracy theory, oh, you will let you go false flag. Oh, yeah, they've been documented at length. But there is a way to end this argument. We don't need to debate this. We can declassify it. We just classify it. We can know the truth. We can let, as Justice Brandeis said, sunlight in, which will disinfect. Why don't we do that? And we'll start with the Kennedy assassination 63 years ago. Those documents have not been declassified. Why is that? What are there thousands of Kennedy assassination related documents that have not been declassified? That's a fact. Despite an executive order, last January, acts of Congress over 63 years. I don't know. We're dyspeculating now. Let's find out. Why are there millions of 911 documents still classified? And the same people who call you a nut for speculating as to why they might be classified, demand they remain classified. There's no justification for it. Secrecy, a bet's evil. That's the point of it. There's no national security consideration of play in the Kennedy documents, the 911 documents. I call BS on that. You're lying. So let's end it. And by the way, if you wanted hate and ethnic strife and conspiracy theories, if you wanted to make Americans distrust and dislike each other, if you wanted to eliminate all confidence in government, if you wanted no authority to have legitimacy in a country, you would make everything secret. So everyone had to speculate as to what was actually going on. You would create a nation of conspiracy mongers. That's the effect of classifying over a billion federal documents. You end democracy, because you can't really meaningfully participate in a government if you don't know what it's doing. There's a democracy with a billion classified documents. It's gone. It's an oligarchy. And you would make the population suspicious. You would make them distrust each other. You would sow division, which is what you always do when you want to dominate and control anybody. You divide them from each other. And of course, you would hide your own crimes. But there's a way to end that. So Kennedy assassination, 911. But let's start with the purported assassination attempts on Donald Trump. Now, why are those significant? Because yesterday the president of the United States said I did this. And by this, I mean, killed the head of state of Iran, the Eitola community. He tried to kill me twice, but I got him first. It's almost for verbatim quote from the president who who thinks that he's been told that get it. What do we know about that? Where did that intelligence come from that prove that the government of Iran run by the Eitola, this religious leader, tried to assassinate the president of the United States twice? Do we know where that came from? Oh, it came from Israel. That's where that intel came from. Well, let's see it. Why not at this point? He's dead. What can't we see that? Oh, sources and methods tough. We went to war over this. Americans are dead because of this. You can't hide behind that anymore. Show us. And maybe we'll find that there's really good intel and just absolutely shows to the government of Iran run by the Eitola, tried to assassinate the president of the United States. That might have been a good reason for war right there, but maybe it doesn't show that because this country has certainly been manipulated a lot by Israeli intelligence and other foreign countries intelligence. But certainly by Israeli intelligence, that's why we thought there were weapons of ass destruction in Iraq. I said I'm saying was paying the families of suicide bombers in Israel, which is bad. Not endorsing that. Israel wanted him out. Get it. Why did we do that? Because Israeli intelligence told us that he was working on Kim Bio weapons and a nuke totally false. We got that from Israeli intelligence. So at that point, the track record suggests, Hey, and no offense to Ted Cruz or all the other dumbos are always saying, no, we get all this actionable intelligence. It's so important. We need them so desperately really well. It's a value weight the quality of that intelligence. And what percentage is true? Upper percentage is sincerely mistaken. And what percentage is designed to manipulate us into military action on their behalf? It'd be interesting to know. And until we do know, the rest of us are going to just speculate. And some of us will put breaks on our own imaginations and try not to be too dark about it. Trying to imagine evil where there's no evidence for it. But others will let their imaginations go. And you can see why does that bring the country closer together? No, it makes people hate each other. So the next person who talks about anti-Semitism, the rising to the rise of anti-Semitism, fair, it's real. It's bad. Totally bad. How do we fix it? We'll be declassified the 911 files. And then all those people, the internet were like, oh, the dancing Israelis, they did it. Israel had four knowledge of 911. There were text messages sent to Israel. Warning of 911. All true, by the way. What is that up to? Maybe nothing. I don't know. They won't declassify the files. They lie about it. Why? Just tell the truth. And by the way, if there are ugly truths involved in the dump of documents, people can generally handle it. What they can't handle is being lied to generationally and then attacked for trying to figure out what the omissions amount to, which is exactly where we are now. And so they're telling us today that they're going to be attacks in the United States by Iranian sleep ourselves. Maybe. Sounds plausible. They blew up our base in Bahrain. They hit the air basin outside. Doha. Okay. I mean, I believe it. But if those things actually do happen to the United States, we're going to need to believe it. If there is any real doubt, if there is a sense that actually maybe the FBI manufacturer, they're not telling us everything. If we have the same feeling about whatever those attacks, pray they don't happen, but about whatever those attacks turn out to be as we had about, say, January 6th, or Charlie Kirk's assassination. Can you imagine a more divisive thing to happen to this country? If you really wanted to bring America love. or Charlie Kirk's assassination. Can you imagine a more divisive thing to happen to this country if you really wanted to bring America low? That's what you would do. So it's actually essential that the government has the trust of the governed. Absolutely essential, not just morally but operationally, it won't work without it. And the only way to do that is to tell the truth and to call out people who lie, scream at you, call you names. We're going to turn you through you, a jail. All right. But first to class for the 9-11 files and then we can all calm down. How's that? That's not just your provocation, that's sincere. The next thing we need to do is get foreign lobbies under control and it's not just day pack, it's not just Israel, it's a lot of them. It's a lot of them. And the downside to mass immigration, of course, is that you can import other people's conflicts and ancient ethnic rivalries into your own country and then be destroyed by them. This was well known at the turn of the century when the United States had its last biggest, second biggest wave of mass immigration people fleeing Eastern Europe mostly. And the sense strongly was this can work, we can use them for their labor, actually population hated it to be totally honest, it's always hated it but no one cares what they think. But a more evolved and selfless and wiser class of leaders at the time thought to themselves, this can work with feeding our factories with the labor we need but we could also get a lot of trouble. So let's invent this concept called the melting pot where everyone is welcome, we'll put a little plaque on the Statue of Liberty kind of explaining this idea and but everyone has to kind of share in the common culture and common values. You leave your ancient grudges behind and it doesn't matter. Kind of like if your ancestors killed my ancestors, we're not going to kill each other. And that's the only way it's going to work and they were absolutely right and we've abandoned that. And so it was intentional, it was an effort to divide the country against itself in order to dominate it and lead to events like today. But it's it's accelerating to a point where the country won't hang together unless we get this under control and people don't seem aware of this or maybe they are but our pretending it's not happening. But in the last two conflicts today being won, Venezuela on January 3rd being the other but you could pick a bunch more. You had really active lobbies of exiles from those countries lobbying the US government and it's military to overthrow the dictatorship they left because they're mad. And that's not a good reason for the US government to act like people who've been here for a while or born here as ancestors fought in the Civil War, founded the country. They have a say too and they don't want anything to do with that. They built this country actually and they have a right to say no, you know, if you're mad, go back and fight for that country's freedom. But now you're an American. But we've gotten to a point where well, here's CNN from yesterday. Watch this. The largest Iranian population's outside of the Middle East. You see the gathering there behind her. Julia, how is the Iranian community responding? Well, this gathering has only grown Jessica over the past few hours. Since we've gotten here, it has a massive large number of people. And the celebration is striking. So the Persians in LA are really psyched. And by the way, if you're running into Persians, then LA great people. Muslims, Jews, probably a few Christians, but great people. Larry is interesting, super successful, fun to be with. Really one of the most entertaining and riching immigrant groups just to be honest, having dealt with them a lot. They're great. Handsome people too. Smart. However, their anger at the Ayatollah should play precisely no role in what our military does. It's just not relevant at all. Making this specific group of voters happy because they were thrown out of a country or the parents were thrown out of a country. I mean, that is talk about wag the dog. And that's not Israel. In this case, it's the Persians of LA on the west side of LA where it could be the Cubans of South Florida, another awesome group, great people. Lindsey Graham said yesterday, next stop, drained by hubris. Iran has gone so well, we're going to overthrow the Cuban government next. Goolee Bay. Okay, now after 65 years. But the point is, Lindsey Graham was worked into a frenzy by the very awesome, super nice, productive, smart, attractive, everything great about them. Cuban lobby in South Florida, very conservative, Christian, they're great. Love them. They can't have control of America's foreign policy. No ethnic group can have control of American foreign policy, whether it's the Venezuelan's, how many South Asian immigrants are in this country now? I don't even know. It's a ton. Talk about a region riven by ethnic strife. Ever been there? I mean, there's obviously Pakistan and Bangladesh and India, but then even within. Libraries of books have been written about this. If you were to import those conflicts into your country, you'd be Canada where there's like a Bengali killing a Punjabi and a high profile assassination. No one who was actually born in Canada understands. It's a nightmare. It's not an attack on the Bengali's Punjabi's or anyone else. It's just a very obvious point that these are functional countries, the anglosphere. They were created by Anglo-Saxon immigrants with a certain system and they work. And everyone wants to move here because they work. And the fastest way to keep them from working is to import the bad habits or centuries old grudges of the homeland. So come here, bring your ambition, your kindness, your decency, your commitment to the American project. But don't bring your lobbying efforts to get us to go to war with anyone, not Iran, Cuba, Venezuela, anybody. Because if we allow this to continue in 10 years, we will be fighting a war in Somalia on behalf of the Somali state of Minnesota or Portland, Maine or whatever. If you import this stuff here, this country will fall apart. And here's the last point which I think needs to be made is that this is a spiritual war. And you hear that thrown around, it's been thrown around for the last, I don't know, five or six years as people are paying attention have begun to realize there's no rational explanation for a lot of things that we're seeing, transgenderism or that just love of abortion for its own sake. Like, wow, what's that? Well, obviously it's human sacrifice. Like the Mayans and the Incas and the Canaanites and never other civilizations. It's human sacrifice. You kill a human being to appease the gods and to get power for yourself. Like it's the oldest religious ritual there is. And we're just seeing its modern manifestation of it. So people are more familiar with this term, spiritual war. But its manifestations are not always so obvious. But if you look back at various points in history, two things become really clear. Underneath it all its aimed at Christians, it's aimed at sincere Christians. They are always the main victims. Everyone lies about it. No, the Bolshevik Revolution really wasn't about Christianity. Really? The French Revolution really was about Christianity. Why were they beheading nuns? Spanish Civil War. Same thing. The Hungarian Soviet Republic of 1919 lasted four and a half months. What's the first thing to do? You see all the Christians? The clergy, of course. So the spiritual war can have a little finer point on it. It's Jesus who's like the center of this, actually. Prove me wrong. Ask an Armenian. So okay. What do you do with that information? Well first, just know it. If we go to war in Iraq on false pretenses and the group that suffers more than any other group disproportionately, more than any group by far, turns out to be the Christians who weren't really raising arms against anybody, that kind of proves the point. If Syria goes upside down and the first people to get genocide or the Christians, if Christians in Bethlehem can actually drive the 12 miles or whatever it is to the church of the Holy Sepulchre and Jerusalem because who knows why they're the target. Of course. Why is Western Europe being destroyed? Why do you think? Because that's where Rome moved, obviously. Because it's the seat of Christian civilization, of course, of course. So that's what's actually happening. And one of the things that you need in order to understand that and to fight against it is strong, consistent spiritual leadership. I'm a military leadership. You need that in another realm. But in the spiritual, I mean, strong spiritual leadership. And you'll notice when that leadership becomes completely corrupted, like truly corrupted when the leaders of Christianity or parts of Christianity in the United States are not simply like wrong or flawed or off base. That's all of us. But are actively trying to lead people in the wrong direction when Paul a white, which is like some craze totally discredited, televangelist who commands her followers in church to give her money or they're not going to be saved or something. It's like female Jimmy Swaggart when she's the head of the White House faith office. Literally, then you know there has been a concerted attempt to corrupt your spiritual leaders so that you won't know what's going on. You see that with my Huckabee, an ordained Baptist preacher. And one of the ways this happens is subtle and not obvious to a lot of American Christians, but that's the endorsement of violence. Franklin Graham, who's the son of a great man, of course, one of the most Billy Graham was his dad, the advisor to many presidents, great evangelist, probably the greatest evangelist this country has ever produced. Franklin Graham is his son, kind of evangelist, an sort of a aid worker of sorts who flies around the world, you know, plain giving food to people, but consider a Christian leader in the United States, gave a sermon, if you could call it that, at the Pentagon, I think over Christmas in which he described the Christian God, and I'm quoting now, as a God of war. We follow a God of war. And we don't actually not a God of physical war, not a God of dropping bombs on kids. That's not the Christian God. It's not Jesus, and there is no place in the Gospels that suggest that. In fact, there's a lot that suggests just the opposite. And so if you find yourself in a position where, as a Christian trying to figure out the right position to take or the right spirit to have the right approach, what do I do? And you find yourself listening to a Christian leader who is endorsing violence against innocence, you know that it's not going to die personally. You're not hearing the Christian message. That's not the Gospel. That's the opposite of the Gospel. And yet it's everywhere. The acceptance in the United States by Christian leaders of violence against innocence should be shocking to our ears, but we have spent so many decades listening to it that it seems normal and it's not normal. It's a deception and it will lead to people's destruction, not just the people being bombed, but the people calling for the bombings. And then of course, there are examples like John Higgy, one of the most prominent evangelical pastors in the United States, head of Christians United for Israel, sort of the face of Christian Zionism, politically active, a huge proponent of the war we're currently in. And he is even now considered a Christian leader. Here's John Higgy, in case you're not familiar with him. What you do to Israel, America, God will do to us. The day we stop blessing Israel will be the day God stops blessing the United States of America. The U.S. Congress must quit arguing every year or whether or not we should send military assistance to Israel. We must continue to provide Israel with the specific capabilities and intelligence support they need to target and destroy these savages once and for all. We should seek any Iranian naval boats that threaten international shipping. If you don't really fully understand what I've just said, let me say it to you in plain Texas speech. America should roll up its sleeve and knock the living daylights out of Tehran for what they have done to Israel. That's not Frank Gaffney. That's a Christian preacher. That's a man who tells you he is proclaiming the gospel, demanding that the U.S. government's sink Iranian boats and kill these savages. That is not Christianity and it is a deception. It's a heresy and it is the path to total destruction, not simply of our bodies, but of our souls. We had a reading in church yesterday, which I'm going to try to get through without getting emotional, that provides, I think, a different path than the right path. This was written in the 19th century by John Henry Newman. This was the peace call, it was the call of the day in our church yesterday. My wife wrote it out for me and I just want to read this on the way out because I think this is the truth. Eternal God in whose perfect kingdom knows sword is drawn, but the sword of righteousness. No strength known, but the strength of love. So mightily spread abroad your spirit that all peoples may be gathered under the banner of the Prince of Peace as children of one, father to whom be dominion and glory now and forever. Amen. John Henry Newman, who was both a Protestant and a Catholic priest. That is the truth right there. No sword is drawn, but the sword of righteousness. God bless this country. for it every day and we'll be back. Thank you.