Okay, I get all that. But it went beyond that. I mean, they actively prevented people from getting in better physical shape, cardiovascular health, and then all the women's magazines, which are still influential, decided to put fat women on the cover and say this is the new body ideal and the soap companies and the makeup companies. This was clearly an orchestrated attempt to make people think it was okay to be fat. In the middle of a pandemic, it was killing fat people. So that's the point where I'm like, hmm, actually they are trying to kill people. Because like, what could, no, I'm serious. What could, if I encouraged my children to smoke cigarettes, maybe I'm trying to hurt them. Or maybe you're trying to sell cigarettes. Maybe you have 60% of the country's fat and you're dumb. You want to sell soap. Maybe, but like they'd never tried that before. There'd never been a time- Well, more has tried to sell cigarettes for a long time. Of course, but being fat, you know, no woman wants to be fat. And all the women's magazines spent decades telling women, you know, you shouldn't be fat. That's where they don't want to be fat. And then during COVID, it's like, no, no, be fat. At the exact time we're being fat can kill you. I think they're trying to- I see malice like, whatever. I think they're trying to what's happening before. I do. I do. They've like the DEI stuff on obesity. Which I agree, like obesity is, obesity's terrible for people in general. I mean, even if it doesn't, look, I'm not, I personally am not judging fatness at all. I'm just saying- Oh, but physically it's terrible. I'm so good for you, right? And for public health authorities to be promoting it and stopping people from getting on the treadmill. That's true. I don't know. I don't know. They literally started- They literally started these people from, yes, they were closing gyms. But keeping liquor stores open. But keeping liquor stores open. And we'd dispenseries. So that's the point where it's like, look, I'm not some cookie internet conspiracy guy. But how many signs do I need that you're trying to kill me before I say you're trying to kill me? I think people make bad decisions. So I happen, they're all consistent. It's like, they're all pro deaf. It's like, oh no, we're not gonna spend any time working on therapeutics at all. Well, they did. They came up with one that didn't work at all. Redesivir. But people are kinda trying all this different stuff and like the media immediately jump, you can't do that. How dare you try something other than the vaccine. And then, you know, I wait, I repeat this, Jim owner, Ian Smith. I remember 20 times. And he's like, I just want people to work out cause that might help. Shut up, criminal. That's right. And so I don't know. I think it's important to be more like your dog. Your dog can't speak English. He has no idea what you're saying. He just watches you and then he knows you're intent. I'm watching them and I can tell their intent which is to kill me. What an amazing thing. Their intent is to make you feel good about yourself even if it kills you. I don't see those as separate categories. They are though. They are. Yeah. I don't know what you need to do. I don't know what you need to do. It's just one opioid OD. One feels good, the other doesn't, but they both kill me, right? Again, you're not gonna give me the same. No, I don't really believe it. I don't understand what happened during COVID, but at all, and I'm lasting them to do is gonna speculate or say anything that I mean. You were speculate all the time. I do, but on this like as to motive, it always makes me uncomfortable with the speculate. Though of course I do do it and I regret it every time I do it cause you can't know one of the persons voted. But you can watch what they do. Now, I got some of them where you talk to her. I'm ready. This is one of a kind. These are four of the great villains. I'm coming. I love that. Here, I'm gonna put this next to the camera. And next time you're shooting, can you tell me what this says and what it means? Okay, Fauci and Gottlieb and Slavitt and Borla. Now, I remember no Sootone Fauci. The bottom guys are better in area now. He is. He's also the head of the world's largest, or what was the world's largest in 2022? Oh, I'm a Sootone company. Great. Andy Slavitt was the senior advisor for COVID response under the Biden administration from in early 2021. And Scott Gottlieb is the former head of the FDA who left the FDA in three months. I believe they're meant to the day later, which was the earliest he could, joined the Pfizer board, where he's a senior board member of Pfizer. He also is on CNBC all the time. Where he always manages to say something good about Pfizer's products. So these three of these four men, not Tony Fauci, are defendants in my lawsuit against the Biden administration and Pfizer for their unconstitutional efforts to silence me and get me thrown off Twitter in 2021. Shup, can I just, thank you for that. I will wear this with pride or without hands. But either way, I will have this on. It's one of the kind of money. It leads to my, to a question I've been wanting to ask you since we've had so many interviews of the years, but like two questions. One, you became very focused. I mean, you were a successful novelist. Your books are in my shelves at home actually. For when you're a time supporter, like you have this whole life that had nothing to do with any of this and you just like, basically threw it all away to go after this story. Why did you do that and what have the effects been? I did because I didn't have any choice because it's like you take one step and one step and one step and one step. I remember once being in a room. We would not have a choice. You go right in your novel. No, no, you don't have a choice. If you're a certain type of person or a certain type of reporter. It was once in a rack in 2004. And like I'm not particularly physically courageous, first of all, it's a war zone. And I was talking to a colonel, a lieutenant colonel who is a tough guy. And we were sort of out there and he said, this is just what you do. Like you just, all of a sudden you're in the mail. Like you should say just that at a time and then there's kind of no going back. And I pursued the story and the truth to the best of my ability. You weren't even a reporter at the time. You'd given up for 40 years of writing novels. I always been a reporter. I even, even the novels would be better if they were a little bit less reported and a little bit more flights of fancy. That's my one regret as a novelist that I could never, you know, not time, I mean, I'm writing about Islamic terror and various, they're spy novels about modern events. But a really great novel, whatever the nominal category has some magic in it. And that's something hard for me to put in my novels. I'm very fact grounded. And so, so when, and you know, I write about this on unreported truths. Like we talked a time at about, you know, the baby bus was just something I'm now interested in. Because, because I look for stories that, you know, as an individual reporter who's not working for the near times, I can, you know, I can do in a credible, reasonable way. You know, be hard for me right now to go to Israel because I don't have a big organization backing me up if I get shot in the head or something. So, so, so these are COVID believe it or not. It's very data driven and is a story that, you know, I could, I could follow. I look for stories where I think, I think I can add something to the conversation because because the mainstream media, usually for political reasons, doesn't want to report on it. And, and I look for stories that are important. And COVID obviously was the most important story. Do you look for stories that will make you super unpopular with everyone you've ever known during the course of your life? That's just an added bonus. It was an losing three quarters of my friends. I'm messing up my marriage. Was just an added bonus. But you kind of knew that, I don't mean to pick it in open wound, but you kind of knew that going in because anyone who asked, I mean, I remember the first couple posts you wrote on this were greeted with ferocity. People were very angry. I don't like being told what I can and can't ask. That's a spirit by anybody. And certainly not by the Biden administration or Pfizer. Okay. And that, and, you know, this lawsuit, you know, we have, we have filed our initial suit. They have filed a motion to dismiss all three of which are the federal defendants. Andy Slavitt is his own defendant. And then Albert Borla, who's again, the chairman of Pfizer and Scott Gottlieb have their own lawyers. I guarantee you they're, you know, guarantee you they, this is a good day for the law firm. It's right. But so they've tried to dismiss it. We've now filed a response to the motions to dismiss, which I think is very strong. And by the way, we're now asking for third party discovery. Meaning we want Twitter to turn over everything that Pfizer or the White House said about me. And Elon, I'm hoping Elon, you'll hear this. And you will tell your lawyers to do this and not fight the third party subpoena. But so if we can get past the motions to dismiss, and I believe we can, we will get the discovery on what the White House and Pfizer were saying through each other about me and possibly somewhat more broadly in the summer of 2021 about the vaccines. And that, the world needs to know what was really going on. Why everything changed? Why the public attitudes towards vaccine skeptics got so much harsher. Why there was a push for boosters. Why there was a push for mandates. I'm not really exaggerating. I say that this lawsuit is maybe the only chance that we're ever going to have. Has anyone come up to you in your personal life to say, you know, congratulations you've been vindicated? You took a lot of crap, but you turned out to be right. One person in my town has said to me, you know what? You're right about the lockdowns. No one's ever said about the vaccines. I think people just want to forget the vaccines, whether the most people were vaccinated obviously. And they certainly want to forget what they thought and said to unvaccinated people. Yeah, there's a, there's a fascist strain right beneath the surface that I did not perceive until that moment and it was very distressing. I mean, one thing my wife said to me, I can't remember when and she was right. She said, you know, there's a large country. I spent 20.1 that if Tony thought she said to them, this will just end if we just burn parents in at the stake just run at the stake. So we have to do like there would have been people with pitchforks on our doorstep. You know, and she's Canadian. I think she was, she was all the Canadians who were there terribly. Well, the Canadians are very easy to control. I mean, it doesn't take much. But Americans I, well, you're from this country grew up here. Were you surprised? Yes. Oh, this is, this is what I want to say. to you earlier when we were talking, heard instinct. Okay, again, we were talking about the baby guest and how easy it is and why parents don't challenge, let's say, as you mentioned, you know, DEI stuff in classrooms that they might not like for their kids. I mean, just go back 3000 years. Okay, when somebody committed a crime, there were no prisons, right? So how did you punish that person? You left them. You left them on their own without the protection of the herd and mostly those people died, right? We are, we think we're long wolves, but we're herd animals. And if you can get, you know, 60, 70, much less 80 or 90% of the population moving a certain way, it gets harder and harder to stand up. And so, I mean, I think, I think that force is overwhelming and it doesn't, and I think the US actually has more people willing to stand up, but that doesn't mean it has a lot. And speaking of last question, but you alluded to this second ago, your new interest or one of your new interests is in the population and it's declined because people are not having kids. What's the overview? So all over the world, and certainly in the US and in Europe and in East Asia, birth rates have suddenly gone off a cliff. I mean, the South Korean birth rate now is barely one third of replacement level. And there doesn't seem to be a bottom to this. And I mean, it's really stunning in that it's happening across every culture or every religion, every ethnicity, you'd be only remember the countries having common, you know, attitudes for women are different in these countries. The only things that these countries have in common is that they're wealthy. So you're saying, and I think that it's probably true, that birth rate in South Korea is lower than the birth rate in North Korea. That's a great question, but probably true. I've been looked by the yes. I wonder if there's a clearer indicator of the health of society than it's birth rate. I mean, it's certainly, it's certainly hard to square that with a healthy society or not a lot of anxiety among young people. And the idea that this is, this is happening in wealthy societies, but it doesn't seem to be driven by economics because there's still pockets of high fertility worth of ultra worth of, the dark shoes and various other religious sects. And those people are very rarely wealthy. So it's not a problem of lack of abundance. It's caused by abundance. Well, I mean, the richer you are, the fewer kids you have. Although at the very top, certainly in places like New York City. Well, there's no, right. No, you see this where there is a little bit of- I'm trying my best. Kids is a luxury good at the very, very top. But not broadly. So this is something I'm just beginning to explore. I know you want me to make some grandpa. I really, I find it fascinating. It's obviously fascinating to readers. Because I wonder what's more important than reproducing it. Right. Well, you know, I mean, my joke is it's the future of humanity in steak. Now, obviously we're not gonna get to zero anytime soon. But it's pretty striking. And somebody said to me yesterday, well, you know, it's about the earth's caring capacity. And that's just nonsense. I mean, we can support form more than eight billion people. I wonder though, you hear a lot of chatter about, you know, a depopulation strategy. I don't know if it's a strategy. I doubt it was hammered out it. You know, Davos or anything. But clearly there's a depopulation instinct. Yeah, that's what's so bizarre, right? Clearly. Clearly. What's with the effects? I mean, if you're trying, if you cared about your country, you'd want people to have kids, right? Yeah. Do you want your grandchildren? Of course. Because you love your children. Right. So if you love your population, you want them to kids. I mean, I agree. It seems like a very basic idea that a healthy society contains at least retains its population. And you know, the countries in East Asia are already being shrink amazingly. Now, Taiwan is shrinking. I mean, it's, and as Elon said to me, this was a few months ago, he said, you know, you can make it very complicated demographically, but it's actually very simple. Multiply the current level of births right now by 85. And that's what the population will be in 85 years. Assuming the trend doesn't continue. So for a country like Taiwan, they have 130,000 births this year. They have 23 million people. 85 times 130,000 is about 10 million. So, so that when I say they're not close to replacement level, I mean, they're not close to replacement level. They're going state. Well, I mean, if that continued at that level, you would be, you know, you'd be down 90% in 100 years. I mean, that's, it's pretty stunning. I look, these things get reverse. If you look at, you know, the popularity of the baby boom, you know, post World War II, there were tremendous, you know, growth and population in the US and Japan and other countries. So these things can reverse, but there's no sign. It's even stopping. Can I show one final thing at you? So the, the conventional view has always been, well, this is a result of birth control. It's much more sophisticated than widespread in the past 50 years. But if you look at the rate at which people are like having sex, they're not having sex. They're not having sex. Young men not having sex. So, I mean, who saw that coming? But that's probably but the darkest thing I can think of, what is that? Right. That's part of this. I mean, you know, and it's funny, right? Because for a couple of years in the, in the odds, there was, oh, the internet is, you know, it's gonna like, there's gonna tinder, they're all, they're all gonna be screwing all the time, all the youth, it turned out that's exactly the opposite. It didn't happen at all. And, which is worse. Wow. The latter is worse. Not is worse. I think we're way worse. Way worse. Yeah. Well, I just wanted, first of all, thank you for the lovely sweatshirt, which I will wear this afternoon. All right. And, and also to congratulate you when being vindicated. No one else is getting it. Even if no one else notices. No one else notices, but I noticed. Unreported truth, my friend. Dishonused and dangerous. Yeah. Young people say the news is full of wine. Unkinders these motor games. Unreported and 39. No, no, no. That's a Jeffrey Epstein.