So he beats Italian. It's Italian by way of Lebanese. It's like Sicilian. It's Arabs. It's silly. Yes. Yeah, but I'm neither my father's sholipino, my mother's Irish. He was adopted. Oh, my dad was adopted too. Really? Yeah. Oh, wow. Okay. So here's my question. Your reporter, you've been a reporter your entire life. Your dad was a reporter, well-known reporter. So you grew up in journalism. Journalism is now justly. I would say the most hated profession. The Sackler family is more popular than NBC News at this point. Right. And Congress is more popular. Yeah. People are like, you know, maybe a child balister can be fixed. We don't need to execute them. But NBC News. Okay. So that's bewildering. I'm sure for you. But for those of us who haven't had trouble remembering what the media landscape looked like in like 1990 when you're finishing college, what were your assumptions about journalism? What did you think you were getting into when you started? So I grew up around my dad's work. Yeah. He was a TV reporter in kind of the heyday of local affiliate news like as portrayed in Anchorman. Yeah. The bad facial hair, all that stuff. So I used to hang around the newsroom all the time. And my father is sort of a reporter's reporter. He's very gifted at striking up conversations with people. He's really good at that aspect of the job, which is, you know, I would say probably the most important thing, which is being able to talk to people and get everybody's perspective. He would be able to go to, you know, any scene, a fire or murder or whatever instantaneously get people talking to him and trusting him. And what where does that skill come from? I think you just have to be born with it. Yeah. Yeah. Certain nice sort of grigariousness. Right. That some people have likes people. Yeah. He likes people. He's, he's able to, you know, sort of strike up conversations quickly. And I was very shy growing up. So the first thing I concluded was I'm never going to be able to do that. Right. So this is, you know, this is like a superpower that he has that I don't. Yeah. And I thought I would have to go in a different direction. I also grew up wanting to be a fiction writer. Right. I was really obsessed with that growing up. And then when I got out of college, I realized that the only thing I really knew how to do was his job because I had watched it so much growing up. And so it was something that would keep me at least tangentially in the writing business. So I got into it. And only over time that I really appreciate the way they did reporting back then, it was a much different thing than what people do now. Do you think it was honorable? Like when you were a kid, did you think like my dad does something embarrassing or my dad does something important and useful? No, I thought what he did was important useful and honest. And, you know, there was something very egalitarian about the way reporters carried themselves once upon a time they, you know, only now our journalists, you know, universally called from the Ivy leagues and these upper class schools. In fact, you know, I was part of that generation of sort of rich kids who went into journalism. When my father went into it, he started when he was 18, journalism was more of a trade than a profession. It wasn't necessary to have a college education. And most of the people who went into it, they had kind of a natural antithepe for people in power. They overwhelmingly sided with the ordinary person just reflexively. And they were, you know, they told the news from that perspective very often, right? And it was the classic editorialist at the time with somebody like, you know, Jimmy Brezzlin or Mike Roy co this sort of voice of the people kind of a thing. And so I grew up always imagining that the reporter was somebody who was on the side of ordinary people. And that was one. Right. Yeah, exactly. And, you know, my father carried it that way for sure. And so I did your father ever go to college. No, he did. He went to, he went to Rutgers. He had me while he was at Rutgers. That's why he had to go into reporting. He worked at the home news and in New Brunswick, New Jersey. And then, you know, as soon as he graduated, he went to the TV. But no, I always had this vision of journalism as this thing that, you know, it wasn't, it wasn't for intellectuals. It wasn't for the, you know, people who had graduate degrees. It was for people who hustled, who worked hard and had, you know, kind of a common touch, right? Like that's kind of the key to the job is being willing to listen to people and all that. So I had a very specific idea of what journalism was when I went into it. I just thought I wasn't going to be particularly good at it because of that, you know, deficit, right? Like I didn't have that gift that he had. But I started overseas in Russia. And because I was able to, I spoke Russian already early, I had an advantage over other American reporters at the time. What year did you go to Russia? So I studied in 80, 90 when it was still Soviet. You know, it was like took a year and a half abroad. And then went back as soon as I graduated. Actually, I went back before I graduated and started stringing and working for a bunch of different organizations there and finally got a job in an expat page. So 91 ish. Yeah, 91 ish 92 right after the revolution, basically, which was 91 August. Yeah, summer August 91. Yeah. So shortly after that. What was it like? It was amazing. It was the wild west. You know, I mean, the funny thing for me is if people ask me why did I love Russia so much? The first reason was is that all my favorite writers growing up, or Russians in my, you know, nickel, like, Google was my hero. I wanted to be a comic novelist and the Russians have so many amazingly funny writers as you know, right? You know, from Bogotch off to, you know, to dove lots of all these people. I wanted to learn the language. Then when I got there, I had been a very depressed teenager had, you know, struggled socially, behaviorally, all these other things. I got to late Soviet Russian, everybody's depressed. And, you know, nobody's happy. And I thought this is amazing. I fit right in. And you would a dark Slavic soul and you didn't even know yeah, exactly. And, and you know, in America, there's this incredible pressure on young people. You have to succeed right away. Right. Yeah. Be cheerful. Look good. Be in shape like all these other things. Russians. No way that there was none of that. Nobody was going anywhere. And when I got there, that was just incredibly attractive to me. And, and so, you know, I've never heard that take before that is awesome. No, it was, it was really funny. And because of that, you know, I, I got along with Russians in a way probably that other Americans didn't, you know, I think there there was a connection or that was, that was very natural. And I really took to the place early on. How did you speak the language? Well, I mean, it's like any, anybody who, like, you know, you come to the United States if you have no choice and you have to speak English, you learn it pretty quickly. So, I studied in St. Petersburg, but then I briefly went to Uzbekistan because I had this idea that there weren't that many stringers in Uzbekistan. So, it would get more work. And there was no, I don't know that there are stringers anymore. What's a stringer? So, a stringer is like a person who is not on staff for a newspaper, but just sort of sits in a place and waits for something to happen. And then, you know, like the New York Times or the AP will call them and say, hey, can you, can you chase down that, you know, thing that happened? In my case, an earthquake that happened in Kyrgyzstan gave me an early chance to write a couple of stories, right? And who should you write it before? I think I wrote one for AP in 1991. I ended up getting thrown out of Uzbekistan because I had a bad visa. But while I was there, I really learned Russian because nobody there spoke English. And I also was on the Uzbek National Baseball team, which was hilarious. How? So, one day I was walking past one of the colleges and I saw people playing baseball. And I was going to keep walking and then I thought, I mean, Uzbekistan, what is that? It turned out that there was, I think it was like a refrigeration school. And there were a whole bunch of students from Cuba. And, you know, those guys could really play, right? So I just went and asked, you guys, might if I play with you. And so I ended up being a catcher on a team full of Cubans with a Russian coach. And we played other central Asian countries. And it was hilarious. Yeah. Yeah. We had we had ground rules. This is going to sound like a fake story. But it's true. We had ground rules when we played in a pasture. If you hit a sheep, it was a double. I'm sorry. He had a cow. It was a double. If he had a sheep, it was a triple. That is a true story. That actually hit a coward. No, no, no, not we only played like two games in that place. So, but, but that actually happened. I was actually playing baseball when I when I got thrown out of the country. So Uzbekistan in 1991 was not a first world place. No, Uzbekistan was you know, it's kind of a typical Soviet, Soviet satellite country. It was really struggling economically. It had all kinds of problems, you know, environmentally. You know, it used to be at the big cotton producer for the Soviet Union. And then, you know, they that sort of dried up for a variety of reasons. The sea of ours office is now gone. Right. So it was a troubled place. There was a war going on into Jikistan. Right next to us. And so it was an interesting place to be. But of, you know, it was sort of my first experience. What is your hair, I think? My mother was terrified. When I when I got thrown out of the country, I got a visit by these people who are I guess their worth it was the S and B, the the sludge but not seen only in business capacity, which is just the their version of the KGB. And they asked me for my papers. I had the wrong papers. I was there in a student visa that I kind of, you know, was kind of phony. And but I had this in a telegram telling my parents that I've been kicked out of the country. So I wrote KGB kicking me out. We'll call for Moscow. But she got KGB kicking me gut. Well, a call when I get to Moscow. So she was worried. But, but no, it's fine. But your dad was for it. Yeah. I think he thought the whole, you know, adventure thing was interesting. And then when he finally visited Russia in the mid 90s, you know, and saw what the place was like at the time. He thought it was, you know, a paradise for journalists, which it was because there was so much crazy stuff going on. And it was a great place to learn the profession really. Yeah. What was press freedom like then? It was really interesting. There was a very vibrant community of really hardcore great investigative reporters who suddenly appeared out of nowhere. Because remember the press had been suppressed almost completely for, you know, 88 years, right? And after as soon as there was a, you know, a little bit of an opening to do real reporting, there were suddenly these very brave reporters who showed up and, you know, they were, they were risking their lives every time they wrote because the way the system was set up was that every newspaper was basically owned by a different gangster. And he would get material. They called it selling jeans over there. Right? So somebody would get give you a, a packet of information. You would write it up about the rival gangline figure or politician. And then, but if they wanted to you to pay the price, you would, you know, you might get shot in a doorway or something like that. So there were people who got killed by exploding briefcases. For instance, there was a guy named Dima Holodof who worked for Moscow, he comes some moments when I was there who had written about Yeltsin's defense minister. He got blown up in a train station. But, you know, the Russian, those guys were my heroes. I tagged on to a bunch of those people really early. And that's really kind of really learned the whole investigative journalism thing was from those people. You know, not all of whom stayed in the business for very long, sometimes not voluntarily. You stay 10 years. Yes. Yeah. How come? I mean, I love the place. I was planning on staying forever really. You know, then things definitely turned weird when the transformation from Yeltsin to Putin happened. Yes. You know, we all, none of us had any illusions about who Putin was. Putin was known quantity. He was the deputy mayor of St. Petersburg when I was a student in St. Petersburg. He was kind of known as, well, I mean, there were all sorts of stories that were told about him back then. And when he first came to power in Moscow, it was sort of widely understood that he was doing it. And Yeltsin even writes about this in his biography because Yeltsin needed help getting out of the country and escaping prosecution. And there there had been some indication that Putin had done that for his previous boss, the the mayor of St. Petersburg, and I'm going to totally sub-check. So, you know, the sort of investigative journalism community was very suspicious of Putin when he when he first arrived. But the Western journalism community loved him. And this was Putin. Yeah. Yeah. And this was, you know, I had already become disillusioned with American journalism before that for because they had misreported a lot of things about post-communist Russia. But that was kind of the last straw for me. I think traditionally think tanks do a lot of thinking and the heritage foundation still does that. But it also, thankfully, has begun doing heritage has built a massive investigative and litigation operation out of its headquarters to save this country from the corruption that is taking it over both actual literal corruption, financial corruption, there's a lot of that, but also ideological and moral corruption. And to fight back, heritage is engaging in almost 50 separate lawsuits against various government entities to try and pry out information to bring a little sunlight to the process that even Congress can't get. And it's been working. They produce documents exposing the Biden crime family to the rest of the world. You've read those stories and help kill the sweetheart deal that Biden's DOJ tried to make with his son, Hunter Biden. Heritage has also developed a comprehensive plan to dismantle the deep state, the swamp by staffing the next administration with people who know what they're doing thousands of Americans who on day one can start to make this country better. So it's important work. Again, it's not just thinking it's doing. And if you want to support it, go to heritage.org slash Tucker. Kish back one click. What did they miss report? So they would they would send somebody out to some provincial town like Samara with a with an assignment, fine, the thriving emerging middle class, right? And so you'd go out to a place where there's like a barter economy, right? And people are doing subsistence farming, you know, and they would ask around until they found somebody who had you know, a VCR who had been on a vacation to a beach or once or something like that. And then they would do a whole story like, you know, transition to capitalism, you know, flourishing, uh, you know, the emerging middle class is, you know, everything's happening right on schedule. And meanwhile, the country was really in the yells seniors was really doing very badly, right? It's in contrast to now, you know, Russia was experiencing sort of record levels of early deaths. Yes. All kinds of horrific things that they weren't telling people back home. And so why? Because the the the expa community, and you know, I don't really know exactly how this works, but there was a monoculture about the reporting there that is very similar to what it's like now in America. But there it was sort of cartoonized. It's a very small community. Everybody knew everybody else. And you know, whatever the Washington Post in the New York Times wrote about, pretty much everybody else followed their lead. There was almost nobody among the reporters who even spoke Russian, right? That was total. How can you cover a country? He doesn't speak the language? Because that was the tradition. I mean, if people would come in, they would cycle in there for a few years. They would work with translators. They stayed in a little compound on Kootzyski prospect, which is, you know, right near the center of the city. In the Soviet days, it was sort of walled off by by design, but they continued living there for some reason that I didn't really understand. And with a couple of exceptions, you know, I can think there was a bossing low reporter who was fantastic, right? Well, I was there. But for the most part, you know, people came in and they just treated it as a, you know, as a third world backwater. It's like, you know, if you read the quiet American, it was it was that attitude toward, but I don't understand. So if you don't speak a language, I've lived here for 55 years. I speak English as a native speaker barely understand the country. It's just too complicated. Right. But if you can't speak the language, you just don't understand that at all. You have no hope of understanding it. Do you? Absolutely. That's what I thought, right? And this was not just the journalists, but also the diplomats there, but you know, this is a simple master and speak Russian. Diplomats and speak Russian. You're, you know, we have the ambassador to to to Russian Michael McFolly, couldn't he could barely do put a sentence together in Russian. So it was what is that? That just seems like a baseline requirement. So the way it was explained to us was that this was something that was a hangover from the American diplomatic experience in China before the Maoist revolution, where the diplomats were deemed to have been too close to the local population, didn't warn the people back home, what was happening. So they made a habit out of cycling people from spot to spot so that they wouldn't become too accustomed to the culture or too acculturated, right? Which I can maybe see the rationale for a diplomat maybe, but for a journalist, it makes no sense at all, right? So to not to not understand the call the the place that you're reporting on. So it by then I it doesn't it doesn't make sense to not understand the place you're reporting on that. I think I think we can agree on that. Right. Yeah. But so so it was it was a strange activity that a lot of them were involved in where they they mostly interviewed the English speaking officials in the Yeltsin government, right? A lot of them had gone to Harvard. And they were getting one very specific version of what Russia was going through, what its challenges were. And at the time, by then I already branched off. I had left the expat paper, the Moscow Times. I started up my own newspaper, which was like a nightlife guide. And I started doing this thing in opposition to that, which was I would go around the country getting jobs in weird places like I was worked as a bricklayer in Siberia. Yeah. I did I worked at a monastery in more dovia. What did you do in a monastery at construction? You know, so well, just the tour of the country and kind of find it exactly how people were doing what what the situation was like. And it was an an amazing discovery every every place I want. I learned about a new lie that was being told, you know, to people back home. And it was deeply disillusioning for me. I mean, I know you've had experiences like this in journalism too, right? Where you find out that something you thought is totally wrong. And and that was a real eye opener for me. A completely wrong completely wrong. Yeah, exactly. And and more of it that was proven relatively quickly, right? There was a massive financial collapse in 1998. And then Putin came in and there was a huge popular repudiation of, you know, the American style version of managed democracy that exists in under Yeltsin. And that was real. I mean, Putin for for all of his problems. And I was a real critic of Putin when I was there. There was no question that he was much more popular than Yeltsin. The country was very embarrassed by Yeltsin because he was publicly drunk all the time. He was dysfunctional. I mean, we're living through some of those emotions now. Yes, we are. That's right. It's shameful. Yeah. And so they they wanted to, you know, that there were was a cune out of Ruka, right? They wanted a strong hand who would come in and kind of set things right and compete with the Americans. And they didn't like being thought of as a vassal state to the West. This is an ancient conflict for Russia and America. This goes back to the days of Peter, the great, you know, the slaw of files versus the roof. Yes, the Western, you know, the pro Western crew. And it pendulum swung the other way while I was there, you know, and that was, you know, fascinating to watch, but it had some pretty serious consequences too. Wow. Yeah. The fact turned out to be right. Yeah. So, but as for journalism, like you you began to become disillusioned with the American version in the 90s. Yes. Yeah, absolutely. While while I was in Russia, I became disillusioned both with the format of it. You know, the kind of neutral third person version of reporting where we pretend we're not having a point of view. I didn't like that. You know, like, for instance, I would get sent out when I was at the Moscow Times, which was a paper I loved, but they would send me to all these events where funny things would happen. I would come back and write it up with humor and they would tell me to take out the humor and write it in some other way that was like more serious. And I think that's a lie. Right. Like if you go to a scene that's funny, like for instance, I had to cover this ridiculous press conference where Prince Philip appeared for I think the world wildlife fund or something like that. And he's giving a speech to all these Russians about, you know, their backward attitudes about conservation and everything. And in the middle of the speech, the hotel brings the spread, which includes booze and all the reporters get up and leave Prince Philip talking by himself while they just eat all the food and drink, drink all the booze. And to me, that's the story. Yeah. Yeah. You know, so I went home and I wrote that up and they, you know, they kind of wanted me to do something else. Like, pretend it didn't happen. Right. Exactly. And I thought, well, this this isn't right. You know, I mean, I was just a kid. I didn't really know, but I thought there's something not quite right about this. What extent in retrospect do you think that Western news organizations were taking their cues from Western businesses or Western governments? Oh, I mean, 90%, 95%, really? Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, if you go back and look at the coverage of you know, the New York Times, the Washington Post, you know, some other organizations, you know, the current Deputy Prime Minister of Canada, Kristia Freeland was sort of a colleague at the time. She was part of that whole crew of Western journalists there. What was she like? Well, they were all doing kind of the same thing. Like, the basic line was that there was a new group of robber-bearing capitalists who had appeared. And yes, it was a messy transition to capitalism. It was the word they used for it. Now, actually, it was just pure gangsterism. And most of the people who got rich did so through absolutely corrupt privatization. Yeah. Skines were like, for instance, there was a thing called loans for shares. But the government was literally lending the money to cronies so that they could buy companies like Exxon for pennies on the dollar. You know, I mean, like you coast, for instance, was a gigantic oil company worth, you know, as much as any Western oil company would be worth. They bought it for nothing, basically, for repentance because there were piles of the people in government. So they created an instant billionaire class and that was completely passed over. Nobody reported on that. Then once these people had a money, they were treated as sort of a legitimate wealth creators and, you know, exactly, they weren't even with the robber-bearing, so at least like built railroads. Exactly. Right? You know, like these guys didn't do anything except steel, you know, they were wealth extractors. And it was amazing watching the hype of these figures, the whitewashing of Yeltsin's completeness rule. His brutalizing of domestic journalists, right? I mean, there was a ton of that going on in the 90s, long before Putin came to office and really infamous for me. Yes, there were so many journalists who were killed before Putin came to law. Under Yeltsin, yeah, the guy eventually- Only Putin kills journalists. No, no. This started from the very beginning they were doing this. I mean, that guy told you about the exploding briefcase. That was 1994 when that happened. You know, there were a lot- I had a friend, not exactly a friend. Somebody I knew well, Alexander Hinschstein, who also worked for a newspaper there. He got thrown in a mental institution in the Yeltsin years. There were all sorts of reporters shot. If he go in and shot, shot, killed, beaten. You know, I had another friend in Leonid Kritakov, who was not only fired every time he did an exposite, but you know, he would be attacked. He had somebody come through his window one night, if I remember correctly. So it was a dangerous profession before Putin came to office. Now, obviously, it went to a new level once he came in. And, you know, there were people I knew who died, right? In the years after he became president, but it wasn't an appreciably different vibe for journalists. The difference was that Putin concentrated government authority in a way that had not been done previously. Before, it was more of like a gangland. Free-for-all, Putin came in. He took over the last remaining independent television station and TV. He had one of the oligarchs arrested, Vladimir Guesinski. And, you know, the owner of Bank Manatef, Mikhail Khartakovski, famously, famously put in jail. You know, they were sponsors of media as well. But the only thing that was different is that the government was exerting sort of over control over media. And they were stamping out the individual pockets of opposition. So during the else in years, it was very dangerous. You just, you did still have some freedom to do really good work. And that's why those people were amazing. Like, you know, they were risking everything. In years it was very dangerous. You just you did still have some freedom to do really good work. And that's why those people were amazing. Like, you know, they were risking everything. Every time they did a story and they were still doing it. They had such balls. It was incredible. It's just interesting. And then the contrast, by the way, between that and the Americans, right, was just so striking for me. But why would American journalists be providing cover for Yeltsin or ignoring the downside of Yeltsin? So some of it was cultural, you know, you come in, you don't speak the language as temporary and assignment. You're hanging around with a bunch of other Westerners. And so you don't see, right? Like that, that was a very typical thing. The few reporters who, you know, spoke the language and or, you know, married Russian women, right, or were Russian men. They were better, right? Because they were at least in tune to what was going on in the country. But Moscow was still in St. Petersburg. We're like a different country compared to what was going on the rest of Russia. Yeah, you could be in Moscow. And it would seem like a more or less functional place. You go 40 miles outside the city. And again, they're subsistence farming, you know, and or there's whole stretches where there's no government and people are just setting up toll roads. You know, they're putting on cam of fatigues and creating their own toll booths. So it's like Beirut. Yeah, exactly. And, but if you didn't know, if you didn't go out, you wouldn't see it, you know? So I think that was, it was a problem of perception for a lot of these folks. And, but I thought it was inexcusable because, you know, as a report of your first job is to find out, you know, to check for yourself. And how are you treated by government there? So we had a unique position because we were publishing in Russia. So unlike all those other reporter American reporters, I was technically a Russian news organization. We had a Russian newspaper. We had a Russian business, right? So even though we were in any English, we were regulated by, you know, the Russian government, we got visited every now and then by the tax police asking for bribes. And then after after I left, they eventually shut the paper down. So, but they, you know, they paid attention to us, but it wasn't the same as the way they paid attention to, you know, the New York Times and other reporters. I mean, there were people who were Paul 11 to call from member of that name. Yeah. Yeah. So he got shot, right? While he was there. And I don't know that it was a Russian government interest that did that, but they were paying attention to coverage that went out overseas. They weren't, they didn't care so much. But what I was doing, which was writing for people who were in Russia and, you know, and also we were writing in English. So the God knows how many Russian officials even were even understanding what we were doing. So yeah. So how did, well, for so why do you leave? Well, it became harder and harder than the X-Pec community shrank when Putin came to power, which killed our advertiser base. And I, we had a human newspaper that was sort of loosely based on like a cross between spy magazine and screw. And I kind of thought that we had, you know, run the course yeah, creatively while out is there. And you know, I at some point I just wanted to come home. But but also, you know, it kind of turned nasty. You know, some of the people who I knew, I like, I vaguely knew at a political skiff, for instance, who got killed while I was there. And there was another reporter who was sort of a mentor to me. This guy, Yuri Shekachikin, who became a do-men deputy. He died under mysterious circumstances. Some people said it was a poison telephone. I mean, who knows, right? But it got kind of unpleasant. And, you know, the community was just not as big as it had been in the 90s. I mean, Moscow in the late 90s wasn't an incredible scene. It was like Chicago in the 30s. It's very difficult to describe what it was actually the like. You know, gangsters everywhere, bodies, you know, all over the place. People being thrown out of windows. There were terrorist explosions happening all the time. It was, it was a wild place to be. And, you know, that story kind of ran a court. It's chorus while I was while I was there. And the city started to transform into what you saw when you went. Yeah, the most functional city I've ever been. Yeah, which is so amazing for me to hear. She will certainly shocking for me. So this winner, I'm standing in the kitchen with my dogs, and my wife comes in. She's just come back from a long walk. And she has this look on her face, this look of tranquility and joy and peace. And I said, what are you even doing? And she said, I was praying. And I said, where she said on my walk for an hour and a half. And it turns out, she was listening to something I never heard of before, which is an app called Howlow, Howlow, H-A-L-L-O-W. Howlow. And a friend of hers gave it to her. And this set off a training reaction in my family, where pretty much everyone in my family started to listen to Howlow every day. It's a prayer app. And it's the best way, as you know, to find peace. And this makes it very easy to set aside the to deeply pray every single day. And I was so impressed by Howlow that I tracked down the number the CEO. And I called him and I said, I want to advertise this on our podcast because it's something that I really believe in. And I think you do an amazing job. And it's basically non-denominational Christian. You don't have to be Catholic. You can be any kind of Christian. But Howlow will help you focus your prayer in a way that will be very obvious to your husband when you walk into the the kitchen. I can't promise you that. It's an amazing, amazing resource. They've got like 10,000 audio guided prayers, meditations, Bible studies, famously Mark Wahlberg leads one of them. It's just really, really good. You can download it for three months free at Howlow.com slash Tucker. And strongly recommend that you do that. So you missed in the 10 years you were gone, the entire span of the Clinton years. Yep. And on 11th. And so I think as fair to say it was a completely different country in 2002 from one of the been in 1992. What did you think when you go back? Well, I mean, I was I was shocked when I got back and I was thinking about this just the other day because, you know, I think a lot now about kind of America's slide toward autocracy because I had this vision with the whole time I was there. I, you know, watching the Russian government in action was like getting this incredible advanced education into autocratic, autocratic methods and how things work, right? You know, the jailing of political opponents, you know, on Trump up charges or, you know, blackmail and how things are leaked by the intelligence services. Like if that's that just happens out in the open there, right? And I always had this image that won't in America. That doesn't go on. And then I come home to post 911 America and the whole vibe is, well, we have to start throwing all of our democratic guarantees overboard because I think as Dick Cheney put it, we have to start exploring the dark side because, you know, the Bill of Rights is inadequate to keep us safe. We need to start doing, you know, all these things that I thought were crazy, you know, the Patriot Act, the authorization used military force, right? Like, so, moving the authority to declare war out of Congress to basically to the White House, mass surveillance, you know, Guantanamo Bay, all these things were really shocking to me. And it was kind of, I thought it was also ironic to come back from Russia to this developing situation. So what years you get back? 2002. So was it clear to you then where the trajectory was headed? Well, I thought there would be, I was really naive and retrospect. I thought I took all of my sort of fellow political liberals seriously when they said they were, you know, ardently opposed to this secretive revolution, right? And the spy state and drone warfare and all these other things, and when Barack Obama, the constitutional lawyer came along and there was this belief that a transfer, he would usher in a transformative presidency that would undo, you know, this Cheney vision, which scared me, you know, which I thought was sort of going to undo the schoolhouse rock version of America that I grew up believing in. And I believe that I'm kind of a a Barrett and Barris now. I actually thought that was going to happen that when Barack Obama got elected that all that would turn back. But in hindsight, you know, they never had any intention, it seems that of changing anything. If you go back and look at the statements, you know, they were saying things like, well, we're not, we're not, we might not change the status quo right away, right? And I had, you know, I had been very positive about Barack Obama, I covered him on the campaign trail. Because my job, by the way, when I came back, I lucked into getting the greatest job in journalism, which is covering campaigns for Rolling Stone, right? And I was very impressed by Barack Obama. I thought he was incredible, but it wasn't disillusioning to see what happened afterwards. And what point did you realize he wasn't what you thought he was? So right after he got elected, I got assigned to cover the causes of the financial crisis. And which was funny because I had no background in finance. I didn't have any clue what a mortgage back security was or how any of that works. But one of the first things that happened was that, you know, I got calls from people in the Democratic Party who said, you should look at the president's relationship to Citigroup. And, you know, how the Citigroup bailout happened, you know, he put a Citigroup executive who had been a college buddy of his in charge of his economic transition during which they gave a very, you know, sweetheart bailout deal to, to, to Citigroup. And this was an early indication that, you know, this president was maybe not exactly what I thought he was not transformative in the way you imagined. Right. Yeah, exactly. And, and even though Rolling Stone couldn't, they were over the moon about Obama, right? That was true love. I remember that right. Yeah. It was almost erotic. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, everybody in liberal media loved Obama. But particularly at our magazine where, you know, the people who owned it were, they were just still curious about Obama. And so when I came to them and I said, look, I have to do the story about how this, this bailout situation is corrupt. They weren't pleased, but they ran, you can go back and look, you'll see there's a story called Obama's big sellout. It was like a 9,000 word feature that they let me run. And so that was like a year after he got into office. But that was kind of the beginning of what did he say? It basically said that Obama had run as an economic populist and had talked a lot about reforming certain things that had gone on Wall Street that had allowed you know, the excesses of the mortgage bubble to happen. And then as soon as he got elected, he brought in all these accolades of, sorry, the Clinton's former Treasury Secretary Rubin, Bob Rubin. So they're all these Rubin was that city group. Obama brought a whole bunch of people close to Bob Rubin into the government. And, you know, these were the same kind of people who had caused the crash. Right. So to me, I wrote it as kind of a bait and switch. You know, he ran as somebody he was going to change the system. He brought in people who were the system. And in addition, there was this bailout deal with city group in particular that was kind of malleturous. And there were people who ended up paying fines in that situation. But it was very critical of basically who Obama had brought in to run his economic policy. And the idea was he had run as one thing and he was really another thing. So that was one of the first stories of that type. How did the Obama administration react to the piece? They weren't happy. If you go back and look, there's an interview with Obama. They did an official Rolling Stone interview with him years later where he sort of brought up the fact that even your magazine talked about how I didn't do enough. And this was like years after the fact. And by the way, I had been incredibly complimentary of him while he was running. Right. So of all of the things that had been written about him, what he remembered was this one slight, you know, which I thought was very telling. Yeah, to sign up his character, you know. And but at the time, I wasn't paying attention to the other things like about the continued prosecution of the war on terror, you know, the drone assassination thing, the kill list, you know, terror Tuesdays, all that stuff. I didn't really clue into that. Killing an American citizen with a drone. Yeah. No, exactly. That whole thing was incredible. You know, I mean, I did a story later about another American who sued the government for because he thought he was on the kill list. And you know, the government's response was you're not entitled to find out whether you're on it or not. You're on the kill list. Yeah. And the whole idea that we even have something called like lethal action that it might apply to an American citizen that you can do that without due process. And, you know, if you go back and look, they basically invented, I mean, I don't know how dislodioning this was for you, but they just made up on the fly legal legal justifications for what they were doing that weren't grounded in any law that was passed or any court case. They just sort of wrote themselves white papers, giving themselves permission to do this stuff, which I think is crazy. To this day, I think it's crazy. Well, I found it totally shocking. And I think I'm basically opposed to death penalty anyway. But, you know, I think reasonable people can support the death penalty. Absolutely. There's a trial. Well, that's the point. Right. But there's a trial. And the one thing you can never do is murder your own citizens because you exist to help your citizens. That's the only reason we have the government. Right. Why do we have government is a collective action on our everyone's behalf, who's a citizen? So the idea that you could kill an American citizen. And the first time, I mean, I think they've actually killed quite a few American citizens. It turns out I didn't know that. But the first time I became aware of it, it was effectively a foreign national with the US passport. The all-alaki, Kawaki. And then, you know, supporting was like, well, is he really an American? Well, yeah, actually, he's an American citizen. Yeah. Like, that's the whole point. You're either a citizen or not. Right. And I remember being really shocked by that. Actually, it was glossed over in this weird way, right? People were like, yeah, he's a terrorist. Yeah, he's a terrorist. But for terrorists to Jason, right. Terroristy. Yeah. I mean, that's, you could probably call him a terrorist, but they killed a 16 year old son too. Um, and, but I had a Obama explained that. So I mean, I remember he gave a speech. I was looking at this just the other day where he, he talked about, among other things, they said that all a lot he had been tied to the coal bombing. And I remember reading that and thinking, okay, well, he's saying that this is punishment for a crime. Um, but there's no trial, right? Uh, we're pronouncing him guilty. Uh, and just executing the guy for something that we say he did, uh, that seemed crazy to me. Yeah. And I remember there was, there was another white paper. Uh, I'm trying, I believe Leon Panetta was involved. What were the, the concept was, yes, um, due process is required, but it doesn't have to involve the defendant, right? As long as there is a process, right? Uh, it can be unilaterally us just talking about it. Yeah. And it can be post execution. Right. Exactly. Yeah. But that stuff's all, it's all madness. And I don't know. I mean, uh, be curious to hear what you think. I mean, I think when we, when we did those things and didn't make a big think about it, psychologically, we just cross the line. Yes. And to something else. And, uh, I feel like there's no going back once you, once you, once you. So we're talking about this at dinner last night. I mean, obviously you're coming from different polls, I guess, you know, probably, well, it turns out not, but yeah, in 1995, we would have been on exactly opposite sides. But I think we both given our similar age had the same sort of gut level belief, which is whatever the US does abroad is in a completely different category from the way the government conducts itself domestically. In other words, you can't treat American citizens like you would, you know, the Houthis or something. Right. It's like there's one standard standards for the way we deal conundrum form policy with foreigners and a completely different standard for the way the US government treats its own citizens who own the government is their government, right? Right. Right. Exactly. I guess what I didn't realize because I was morally deficient and young and dumb was that once you start doing really evil things abroad, you're going to do them at home actually. Absolutely. And you can't defend democracy by subverting democracy. No. And also you're, you're, you're, you're basically denaturing the whole idea of democracy. You're, you're diluting it. Once you, once you start murdering people without due process, you know, it's not democracy anymore. I mean, they use that term in a very fast way now constantly. Oh, we have to protect democracy. Well, what do you mean by that? Are you, you're going to protect democracy by censoring? Right. Like this is, this is the whole thing that I've spent the last two years on. Um, if, if that's what you mean, that's contradictory, right? And you know, that, that thing you treat in what sense? Well, the first amendment says that we don't do that, right? Well, like, you can't protect the bill of rights by violating it. Right. And, you know, this, this whole switch, and I was, I think I, like most Americans, I was like you, I, I will knew that America, United States was whacking people all over the world, right? I mean, even though the church committee hearings came along and we basically said we weren't going to do that anymore. Of course we were doing it, right? We were doing all kinds of horrible things. We were probably fixing elections, you know, in half the places on earth, but not here, right? Like that was a, a bright line for Americans. Now, maybe that's showmanistic to, to believe in that. But I was like you, I didn't, I didn't think they would ever cross that line and come and bring these ideas home. But, you know, this is what we're finding out now. I mean, this is the big theme of the, of the Twitter files was, you know, when we tried to figure out where, so what are the twar? Can you explain for people who didn't follow at the time? So in late 2022 after Elon Musk acquired, Twitter, you know, there started to be rumors that he was going to open up the internal communications of old Twitter and sort of give them to the world, right? And it turned out to be true. I got a call one day or I got a note sort of summoning me to San Francisco and from somebody at Twitter, let's put it that way. And, and so I was the first person who was put on this project of looking, rummaging through old Twitter's, you know, correspondence. And I, you know, I think he said that, Elon said that his idea was that he wanted to restore trust in the platform by telling people about the different kinds of censorship techniques that were going on. It's not clear exactly what, what he was up to. But, you know, he seems to here at the time. He brought in me, he brought in Barry Wise, Barry brought in a couple of other people like Michael Shellenberger, Lee Fong ended up being involved in other report of really good young investigative report, maybe the last one, right? Probably. You know, he appeared and so there was a group of us. And for about three months, we got to look through the internal correspondence one of the world's biggest communications companies. And the big thing that we found was that there was this nexus of communication between government enforcement and intelligence agencies and the internet platforms. And they had a very sophisticated organized bureaucracy that was involved with controlling content in a variety of different ways. And when we started to try to figure out, first of all, this was shocking to us. We've seen all these documents that said flag by FBI, flag by DHS. That's a crime. They're committing a crime by doing that. That's illegal. Probably. That's just really couldn't be clear. Yeah, you would think, right? You know, I mean, I'm not a lawyer, but it looked bad to me, right? Certainly it looked like a story. Yeah, no question, right? But we had to figure out, where did this come from? Like, how did this start? And when we started asking questions, you know, it turned out that a lot of the programs that were now targeting domestic speech began as overseas counter terrorism, sort of messaging programs, right? So the State Department of Friends has a thing called the Global Engagement Center, which is now very much interested in speech, both abroad and at home. But they were once exclusively a sort of counter-ISIS platform. In fact, they had a different name back then. They were called the CSCC. But in 2016, Obama re-christened them the Global Engagement Center. And they started to look inward. And when I asked people who, I managed to talk to a couple of sources who worked at that agency, one phrase really stuck out. It was CT to CP. So that's counter-terrorism, the counter-populism. And the idea was the whole mission abroad of counter-ISIS or al-Qaeda contracting-wise, it was kind of drying up, right? Because those threats had been somewhat neutralized. But populism, you know, was now a very serious threat after Occupy Wall Street, the Tea Party, the Arab Spring was something that maybe they didn't see as a bad thing, but they certainly saw the transformative power of the internet platforms. I think that freaked them out. And the virus is communicable. Exactly. Exactly. Then it was Brexit. Then I think Trump was the last, you know, the last stand for a lot of these folks. And that's when you start to see all these communications like we have to, we need to get a more formalized control over these platforms. And so yeah, that's when the war on terror mission turned inward. And I think that's a huge story, right? Well, it's the end of the country we grew up in. Yeah, you would think, you know, and that's, for me it's been, and I think probably for you too, this new theme of the sudden explosion of the liberal tactics and politics, that even if they're directed at somebody that liberals hate like Donald Trump or Steve Bannon, how can you not be freaked out by stuff like that? And we haven't used contempt of Congress to jail people since the Un-American Affairs Committee in 1947, right? This is like third world kind of stuff that we're seeing, you know, accusing the front runner in a presidential campaign of 100 different felonies. Is that happening if he's not running for president? I mean, who could honestly say that, right? Um, it's, but you can't talk about it now. And if you, if you mention it, you're, you're out of the club and, and mainstream press now, which is incredible to me. You may have come to the obvious conclusion that the real debate is not between Republican and Democrat or socialist and capitalist, right left. The real battles between people who are lying on purpose and people who are trying to tell you the truth, it's between good and evil, it's between honesty and falsehood and we hope we are on the former side. That's why we created this network, the Tucker Carlson Network, and we invite you to subscribe to it. Go to Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast, our entire archive is there. A lot of behind the scenes footage of what actually happens in this barn, when only an iPhone is running, Tucker Carlson dot com slash podcast, you will not regret it. So I mean, it raises some question, but, uh, most obviously then if uncovering the abuse of power by the powerful, particularly by government, isn't the point of journalism, it's clearly not the point of journalism anymore. What is the point? Well, I mean, then you become courtiers, right? I mean, I think that's again, with ironic for me is that, you know, this is I saw this process happening full circle, you know, when I got first got to Russia, the first reporters I met had worked at places like Comse, Alaska, Probe, the 80s, right? Which were at one time was the world's largest newspaper, it had a circulation of 21 million or something like that. And, you know, I worked in the old prop of the building. Um, when I was at the, the Moscow times and the people there, you know, they would tell me stories about what their jobs were in the 80s. And, you know, it was like taking dictation, they were clerks basically, right? Yes, you know, they would get the, whatever the message of the day was and they would do it and then go home to their wives and they would go fishing on the weekends and there was no, you know, intellectual anything involved with it. You couldn't take it in that direction. It would be hazardous to your, to your health if you, if you did. Well, that's what journalism is now in America. I mean, look, what just happened with the Nord Stream thing, just take an example, right? Nord Stream happens and there's no investigation whatsoever in any of the major newspapers. How can that happen? It's this major consequential thing that might have an impact on starting a war with a nuclear power. And it just wrecked the economy of what's turning you're up like. And it's a major ecological disaster, which you claimed to care about. So largest man made a mission of CO2 in history. Right. So in a few things, CO2 is driving the greatest threat that we face the existential threat of climate change. Then you kind of want to know how that happened, right? Right. Right. You would think you know, why wouldn't I mean, it's, it is an environment. I've spent a lot of time thinking about this because, like the only person in mainstream news to point out that no Russia did that blow up Nord Stream and was attacked for it. But I was wondering, like if I'm in the New York Times, like a lot of people I know, why would I just like The only person in mainstream news to point out that no rush you did that blow up on our dream and was attacked for it But I was wondering like if I'm at the New York Times Like a lot of people I know Why would I just like try to report that story out? It's so interesting. Right? Why wouldn't they? Yeah, I have no idea You know, I mean obviously you're getting a signal from down on high that you know, that's not wanted But it's different okay, so in the in the early 2000s Yes, there were high profile instances where people like Jesse Ventura were un-hired from MSNBC because they they mistakenly thought he was pro-war when they hired him right Phil Donny Hughes getting good ratings, but he's bounced right was there for that. Yes Chris Hedges, you know, and and Chris Chris was sort of a classic example of a phenomenon that no chompsky once wrote about in Manufacturing consent, which is that they don't fire you necessarily but like you just don't get promoted if you're considered the wrong kind of personality Which is weird because good investigative reporters Should be difficult personalities, right? If they're not they're probably not good reporters. Yes, you know I mean just look at who are great reporters are They're independent minded people independent minded people and you know you You want to experience them in little bursts But they're all kind of crazy to be honest. Yeah, but that's okay, which part of the job right? But this is different like that there were a few instances like that back then where of people who are critics of the war whatever Now it's just this blanket If you step out of line on any one of two dozen different topics you're out, you know, um and I think everybody's gotten that message and That's the only thing that makes sense to me is like what so there are no breathe people on all of journalism They're no honest men left. Well, how can that mean? That it can't be possible, but it kind of is right. I mean there's there are a few people who Who I think tried to do a few things, you know But just to take the look at the rush of AIDS story. They made so many mistakes on that Jeff Girth Okay, so before you I want let's put you at the center of this because you were one of the reasons for having this conversation Is you're one of the only Liberals in all media Who sit and you speak Russian you live there for 10 years that you have credibility on this question I would say And you were the only ones you said, you know, I don't like Trump. I didn't vote for Trump, but like I don't think this is real I had a book out at the time called insane clown president about Donald Trump Right, I mean, I'm not a fan of the guy right But they came to me. So where were you when the rush of gay thing started? I was that rolling stone and What did you think when you first heard that he was a Russian agent? So? It was in late 2016 is right after he had gotten elected Remember that list that came out proper not Well, the Washington posted this story about this weird blacklist that they had discovered of people who The Russians were supposedly in league with and it was this shadowy organization called proper not and they linked to this list of sites and You know without any evidence at all. They were they were linking all kinds of independent journalists to to Russia and I thought well That's crazy and then Then there was this whole thing about I actually had to do a segment On MSNBC with Chris Hayes the other guest was Malcolm Nancy of all people and It was all about you know is Trump in league before he got inaugurated his Trump You know in league with the Russians There have been just been a big leak about that and I thought well there's no evidence for this right like we we just had a catastrophic Episode in journalism with a WMD thing where anonymous sources get us in a lot of trouble If you can't recreate the experiment in the lab You got to be careful of that story right and that's all I said I wasn't like he's innocent, you know like I just thought This is a dangerous story. Let's all be careful with this and immediately there was this Reaction that was just shocking to me. It was like this shunning thing. It happened to me. It happened to you know green walled Obviously Aaron Mate at the nation there was like a group letter that was written by the rest of the staff You know denouncing him The you know the husband of the editor of the of the nation also the Stephen Cohen. They didn't want him around Wonderful man. He was yeah, absolutely. He was a good friend of mine but It was crazy because this was so early in the process and Everybody had already predetermined that something this thing was true this extraordinary complicated thesis they had somehow already arrived at the conclusion that it was proven and Just point you didn't know either way. I didn't really know either way But I had a strong suspicion that it was wrong, right like you can do this You know Journalists have a sense or the sixth sense. It doesn't smell right right like it's kind of like the French connection where Where you know Jean Hackman looks over and he says that's a wrong table, right? Yeah, this was a wrong table. It didn't look right and I thought the same way. Yeah, and It was too complicated for me to see it. I wish I had known at the time. It had been in in right wing world where I then worked and lived I Feel like everyone believed it Yeah, but how how is that possible? I remember saying to somebody You know, I think this is I think this could be like complete bullshit like actual bullshit and my friend goes be careful Think something there. I was like, okay. I'm by the way I'm I try to be very open-minded like I don't know right if you're actually a space alien I don't know prove it to me right. I should I really try to keep every possibility open But I kept asking people like what okay, how do we know this? Right everybody believed it. Yeah, why I? You know they hated Trump that was obvious You know But that wasn't enough for me, right? Like Just on a superficial level it didn't fit Donald Trump You went and tell me he's involved in some mob deal To build a casino in Atlantic City or something like that I believe that Donald Trump being James Bond involved in a five-year conspiracy with The Russian government, you know, what what it's you'll call it a well-developed conspiracy of five years That's ridiculous. This is the guy who can't if you've been to any of his campaign speeches He can't get through the first sentence of one of his scripts like his brain is already off in another direction How is that guy gonna keep a secret? It didn't make any sense and Nobody had any evidence And then even when things came out that should have been Fatal to the story like when it finally came out in October of 2017 that the Clinton campaign had funded the steel dossier I Thought well that This it's over now right? I think a Republican donor, too Well, yes. Yeah, sort of previously right still steel Didn't come on until later, but still once that came out and You know you knew that campaign research had ended up in an intelligence assessment um That should have been it. I thought and everybody just plowed ahead like it was still a thing and So what happened to you in the middle of all so you're at Rolling Stone you're this famous liberal reporter one of the most famous liberal reporters actually And you make the mistake of saying well We don't know for a fact. This is true people start shutting you. Where does it go from there? so then I started to get angry about it and At one point I went why oh because Uh, you know, I don't like to be told what to do I don't like to be told that I got to ignore something right Um, you know like I'm one of those difficult personalities and journalism right like you know It just happens that way But I I went to Rolling Stone at one point I had really good editors there for the most part But I went to them and I said um Look this story's wrong right and it's gonna come out that it's wrong Give me eight weeks to chase this down and let's let's be the first mainstream organization to get it right and and put it to bed and it'll be a coup for us right You know, let me let me do my thing on this and They said no the first time they ever said no to me on you know like an investigative project Just to restate you speak Russian. You can read Russian So there's like probably no one better to do the story You know, I would think right, you know, I even had some sources over there Right who could have chased it down, you know Certain aspects of it down like you know the Trump tower deal and all that stuff like that would have been relatively easy to To go through and I had cover Congress So the people who were investigating this like I I knew some of those folks too Um, and it's a it's a great story. I mean When it first came out it was obvious this is either the biggest intelligence A coup in history right the Russians getting a mentoring in Canada in the White House or It's the biggest fake in history Right the biggest setup in history somebody's either telling the biggest wapper ever or Or the Russians have just pulled off this the most amazing thing. I can't there's no other option. Yes, right? So If it's not this it's that and we might as well be the first to report that right? Yes So what did they say when you make it? No on look rounds I don't even I mean I don't remember what the excuse was I they just weren't enthused about the idea, you know and And I understood that, you know like the look they're rolling stone. They have a they have an audience that has certain expectations, but That was a that was a big moment for me, you know I now is naive I actually thought they You know that the the magazine would be interested in going there because they had let me You know go against Obama before they let me do other things but not on this so So How what did your colleagues say to you because by this point Think it was becoming Public to anyone who was watching like me that you were dissenting from the line on this question. Yeah, so I would say Glenn Greenwald took the brunt of it You know there were stories in the New Yorker Profiles, you know the bane of their resistance, right? Like why is Glenn Greenwald being a stick in the mud about this Russia thing? It was like a feature topic in that in magazines like a bunch of them and You know and they concluded by the way that he was motivated by His impatience with the rise of women and minorities in the Democratic Party Right, I was a racist. I actually had the physical copy of the New Yorker I say that they did yeah, and it was it was an on-the-record quote by one of his former editors of all things The cleanse are racist. Yeah, well, they didn't right. He's a patient with the rise of women of an ore So when I saw that I'm like wow, this is What is going on with this right and then meanwhile, you know I was getting it from all angles. You know there were former Russian former American diplomats who were going after me online saying I was in league with Putin and you know Seriously? Yeah, yeah, it's kind of a heavy charge. Yeah, you would think you know and That was becoming increasingly common It was an implication of a lot of the the back and forth on social media You know this person is too close to Russia or You know he loves Putin right like that that kind of a thing had you ever worked as a secret agent for Putin? Of course not I am getting actually so nuts You just said you left Russia because you didn't like the vibe under Putin. I mean We put Putin in the cover of our newspaper like in drag carrying a dominatrix whip, you know like yeah We we lamppooned him constantly and And I actually I did some journalism in Russian for another paper that was very critical of him and talked about the apartment bombings and some other stuff and So I was no friend of letting her Putin's but that became a common thing in journalism and it's It was just so shocking and I knew at that point that my time isn't Limited at you know at Rolling Stone which I love the place that I really love that place It was it's a great gig too But there was no way I was gonna be able to stay under the rest of those circumstances. How long did you last? until 2020 I guess so 15 years roughly You know, maybe maybe 16 I guess So it was it was a great time. So when it became clear that You know the claim that Putin had installed Trump is the American president when it became Clear that was like malicious fantasy. It was a total why did any of the people who attacked you and called you a Russian agent? Apologize or change the not of course not did anything apologize to you No, it's a little different because by that point I was like such an outlaw that like I had no expectation of being treated fairly by anyone ever Other than my wife so I I was no I'm serious by that. You know, it's just like your head changes, but you were very much it Like everyone liked you and I mean you were not an outlaw for it, but you became an outlaw kind of overnight right. Yes. No. No. No my name is sort of You know synonymous with You know reactionary troll that you know that kind of thing And that happened basically overnight It was a little tough to take for a few years there, but um But you know I got over it relatively quickly I moved to substack which was um It turned out to be a great thing and Which is an independent platform and you know I was one of the first people who um Kind of left big mainstream media to do the self publishing thing and and uh discovered that there was actually You know um Functioning business model there. I mean um I'd been in journalism for 30 years and had never seen it as anything, but a dying business right there was never any money that you're actually gonna make right If you're making a hundred grand you're like psyched. Yeah exactly And then all of a sudden it turns out that there's actually this huge market out there because people hate journalism right like that That's the problem when you're in mainstream media. You don't see That there's actually this screaming need for something else The people aren't getting Because they don't trust regular media So I was an early beneficiary of that whole thing But it was a default though I mean you probably would have stayed at Of course in New Yorker or Rolling or where you were rolling stone Forever right? Absolutely. Yeah had this not happen I would have been there You know I was very loyal to the magazine You know I stuck up for them always even when they were wrong even during the UVA thing You know I said Look they made a mistake, but we're doing the right thing. We're odd. We're self auditing like you know This is a great magazine. We have a great history Tradition etc. etc. I was kind of a company man in an embarrassing kind of way But when the Russia thing happened You know all bets were off and I wasn't the only one or other you know there were other people in the business This also happened too, so But none of them came back the way that you did That would mean glen to go Glen yeah sure yeah, you know Very few yeah a few Do you think about just hanging it up and becoming a translator or doing something else? No, I mean I love this job. I you know I After initially not really loving Journalism I learned to really love it while I was at while it was at Rolling Stone, you know and And then you know now Additionally, I think the country needs journalists they need and and there the thing that that you need most of all in journalism to be good at it is You need to be you need to have some bravery. Yeah, that wasn't true in American journalism for a long time probably You know not not since the Vietnam days or or the red scare You know was there a situation where there was a real social price to pay for for taking You know a certain stance on things um now there is right and if you're gonna do certain cons of reporting Um You're gonna lose all your friends But that's the job, you know and not many people are willing to do that I am willing to do that because because I never expected to keep friends in this business, so um I think it's an it's unfortunately an exciting time to be a journalist, but um You know, I would feel wrong to quit now, you know, I'm sure you'd probably feel the same way You feel as soon as exactly how I feel actually right nicely put. Yeah, you don't yeah That's right if you're gonna make friends you're proud, you know, yeah, probably the wrong business could a church right yeah exactly but um Tell us about like having been in institutional journalism, you know at the top of it really and then finding yourself like having to Work for yourself like what are the advantages and disadvantages? well First of all being in institutional journalism there is a little bit overrated right like I think um because I came from alternative journalism. Yeah, I I had financed my my own newspaper in Moscow um and You know, I did everything from to running the plates to to the printing press and um, you know selling ads everything so uh You know the business is something that I've always been familiar with and suddenly being involved with a big organization It's nice, but I don't see it as a prerequisite I thought it was really funny at the beginning of Trump's rain when a couple of the reporters were uh complaining about losing their White House press credentials. It's like Cares right you're all you're supposed to be on the outside exactly right like what are you whining about? You know do the job You've been to a White House briefing. I have yes. Yes. Yes. And you know how soul killing it is. Yeah, I learned nothing you're captive You eat lunch out of a vending machine Everybody has got like the most distorted value system like they're so impressed by their hard passes and they're all such a loser's like if you Would you quit the business right if you had to do that? Absolutely. In fact, one of the first things that I was assigned to do When I went to to Rolling Stone They sent me on a campaign junket with John Kerry, so I was on the plane With Kerry during that campaign for like a month or something like that and you know It's a similar dynamic to the White House press corps. It's the same people every single day It's very clubby. They have extremely right so the there's even seating arrangements right? So the first the New York Times gets to sit in the front and then they they kind of it's almost it's like Heather's or Mean Girls You did they you know according to how How well knowing you are in the business you you have to sit further and further back in the plane right or farther back in the plane And at the very back or the cameraman yeah exactly and And they at the time they were angry at Alexander Pelosi because she had filmed some of them So she was in the back with a bunch of count a bunch of piles of equipment, but um But I got frustrated very quickly by the fact that all they were doing all day long was just taking You know press releases from flax and then they would eat they were they would be given the back of me and cheese butter fingers Yeah, so I went on a hunger streak Wait in my first trip. I had this like epiphany That they're just giving me too much stuff I'm just not going to take anything from any of these people and I stopped eating. I stopped taking the press releases I only wanted to get fat on a campaign. Yeah exactly right And when we got to the events I would not go to the event I would run a mile in any direction and just talk to anybody about anything but the campaign because Like this isn't Journalism you're sitting there just be just taking something and then converting it into a press release like what is that? You know, but the White House is even worse because they have they have heirs about it, right? And you know even though I haven't done that beat, you know For I think it's an important beat like you have to somebody has to ask the president questions But they don't for the most part right. I know they I've never seen it right so you know I don't know at best you get some reporter whose goal is not to elicit information but just to prove that he's Like a antagonist of the president right exactly I'm I'm you know, thanks to another But it doesn't advance the story in any meaningful way right Right exactly what they want is and that's what they were They were upset about the Jimicosses of the world. They were upset that they were being denied this this You know saleable piece of video where they could stand up and do this, you know and just to heal it Um, I always wondered what Jimicoss to who I don't know But I was wondering if Jimicoss was always telling me what a journalism was and a lot of guys were like this Including some I've worked with but I'm a journalism Okay, tornado comes to trailer park give me 750 words on that The kind of capable of writing a story. Do you ever think that? Like can Jimicoss to actually just write like a news story or even an expository essay? Well, I wonder about that because are they even You know once not that long they not to be all back in the day about it, but You wouldn't have gotten a job in the White House press where you hadn't come through You know covering town meetings and all that stuff. I mean You know, I did that I covered I covered all of them in I covered you know The police beat fires stuff like that. You have to be able to do that stuff and that's the basics of the job is You know showing up talking to people on the street talking to this person that that person you have to be able to do crime reporting You know, oh, don't it and You got to talk to people who are on the other so law all that stuff. I don't think they can do that I mean I remember seeing somebody Forget what organization it was but somebody one of the kind of mainstream sort of web-only sites One of their column this was talking about how much he hated the telephone and I thought what journalists hates the telephone How can you do this job if you hate the telephone right if you and and because the the new thing is they decide what they think They find links that support Their ideas and then they just type the thing whereas You know what you're supposed to do is talk to everybody then figure out what the story to add information to the story right right not just You know snake eating his tail. It's based. It's just also reference actually right exactly exactly Oh, so you get out of that you go so the business model works in independent media Well kind of right so it works if you are if you're cranking out content The I what I don't think it's they figured out how to do is how to monetize Like investigative journalism right which takes a long time. It's expensive. It's expensive and you don't you're not producing stuff that's You know every couple of days and even when you do It's not always the stuff that people like people like reading You know op-eds that with strong takes that you can take money doing that right Well, so you whiff sometimes I mean a lot of stories don't Happens to me even now a lot you waste a lot of time on stuff that's not real or not provable Right, right or or you think that people are gonna go bananas or something and they don't there's that right Yeah, what stories if you had that you thought would make a splash having a fact but that were It's really forgotten Well, I don't know if forgotten, but I would say that a lot of the Twitter file stuff I expected that to be I mean I naively expected a lot of that stuff to be picked up Give us an example of what shocked you that you discovered during that reporting so one of the things was that Twitter Heading into the 2020 election Had worked out a system with the FBI and the Department of Homeland Security and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence whereby they had what they called an industry meeting where Once it started off once a month then it was once a week where these intelligence officials Were meeting with Twitter and about two dozen other internet platforms and briefing them on things that they might expect in the information landscape and then there was a system by which Basically Twitter was receiving Recommendations about content from the federal government through the FBI and then from the states Through the Department of Homeland Security. It was it was that organized They've like they had worked it out that like if it comes from You know a local police department. It's gonna come from the DHS if it comes from the HHS It's gonna come through the FBI right like so they had a very organized system of flags that You would see the FBI say you know for your Consideration Here are some accounts that may violate your terms of service and there'd be an attached spreadsheet with You know 400 account names on it and that was just happening constantly. It was an industrial process that they had worked out Um, I thought that's a huge story right like this here's the FBI That's the voting Resources to looking at social media accounts of ordinary people and worrying about terms of service violations like what is that? Why are they not looking for child predators? Like right And so what was that? well It's it's part of this sort of spiraling sprawling thing where a whole series of government agencies are very intensely interested in what's online and who's reading what and and in developing new ways of Um, you know suppressing content, de-applifying other things and with COVID there was a really really intense effort to To create rules about what couldn't could not be seen like what you know They were they would decide that things were One of the key concepts that I thought was really really disturbing was This whole idea that anything that promotes vaccine hesitancy is a kind of disinformation even if it's not Factually incorrect. So if somebody dies after they get the shot right that may be true um, but Internally at the company they they but knowing that might convince other people not to take the shot exactly and so The they looked at that as a kind of disinformation even though it's true Um, one of this information doesn't mean untrue correct exactly It carries the connotation like the definition in the definition involves falsity right or misinformation even right So disinformation is like the intentional spreading of right of lies right But even misinformation they they the home and security has something they called them MDM or they had at the MDM committee which is misinformation disinformation and mal information committee and mal information is It's just material. It's true, but kind of politically wrong right Or inconvenient this and that could be something that you know promotes vaccine It's just material. It's true, but kind of politically wrong, right? Or inconvenient. This is not going to be something that, you know, promotes vaccine hesitancy or, you know, we have the Supreme Court case number, if you Missouri, that's partly related to the Twitter files. And the plaintiffs in a couple of the three of the plaintiffs in that case are doctors who had published true research about COVID. But we're suppressed, we're de-amplified. They were put on, you know, in Twitter, they were put on trends, blacklists. Because, you know, there are research tended to go against federal policies about lockdowns and vaccination and all kinds of things. So to me, that's what the First Amendment is, therefore, right? Like we do not want the government in a role of deciding what's true and untrue. Because once you do that, the government has monopoly on misinformation. The only protection against that happening is absolutely unfettered free speech. And they're messing with that, you know, because I think there's just this gradual moving away from belief that all the concepts and the bill of rights work. And so this, but we looked at in terms of the censorship, it's very much an evidence there, wherever they just don't believe that the First Amendment works. I don't think. But there the government, they exist to protect the First Amendment. That's the whole point of having a government, right? So again, that seems like a prima facie crime to me. And as you said, at very least a huge story, what happened to that story once you reported it? I was denounced as a right wing tool, right? The Washington Post, their first story about the Twitter, about the Twitter files described me as conservative journalist Matt Taile. And then they did asylum. I would beg to differ. Yeah. This is ridiculous. And then, and you know, that that was the line all the way through, even though the reports really, they weren't really about suppression of one political party or another, they were really much more about this process, which is just so scary, right? And nobody, nobody in the regular press really picked it up. And that wasn't shocker to me because I thought, well, somebody's got to be interested in this, you know, and they weren't, you know, how long were you there? At Twitter, doing the story, you know, three and a half months, I would say. So we got a lot of stuff. We got, you know, probably, I mean, not a lot, you know, 200,000 emails, something like that attachments. We still haven't gone through all of it. But the big thing was that there's just lots of evidence of this interplay between government and these platforms. I think you on at one point said publicly that there were intel operatives working at at Twitter, rather. Lots of them working there. Lots of them. And that was another thing we didn't understand. You know, when we first got there, we're like, why is there a CIA person here? Why is this person a former national security council operative? Like, what value do they bring to a tech company? A tech company. I couldn't understand that. But they're actually working there as employees. Yeah. And they were making a lot of the big decisions about content too. In fact, one of the biggest emails that we found was there was a debate about whether or not Twitter had the ability to say no to, in this case, it was a state department request about content. And the former CIA employees says, you know, our window on that is closing. As our government partners become more aggressive in their attributions. Right. So what they were basically saying is we're running our ability to like pushback is evaporating. You know, and that I think has turned out to be true with these platforms. I think they're increasingly just sort of intertwined with the government of the state. Yeah. So state media. Yeah. And this is another continuation of the war on terror thing because they began by demanding that these companies fork over, you know, information about geolocation of users and other places around the world or even in the United States. But now they're venturing into content. The content domestically that people see. So Google is the biggest, of course, of all these companies and by far the most influential as an employee on search, which is your window into all information. Right. If we were ever to see what goes on internally at Google, what do you think we would learn? Well, I think we would find that they're they have massively change the formula for, you know, search returns. I mean, they even talked about this in 2017, 2018 when they had this thing called project owl, which was designed to change the parameters of the search towards something they call the authority. And authority was basically the way it was explained to me when I talked to somebody at Google, it was like if you search for baseball five years ago, you might have seen your local little league team. Now you'll see MLB.com come up first, right? And you know, you've probably noticed this when you do a Google search, you know, the first 40 or 50 results will all be of a certain type. And you'll have to it's much, much harder to find kind of this counter narrative version of reality now, even if you know exactly what you're looking for, type in the title of the story, it's made reporting harder. Don't you think? I mean, yeah, I mean, it's, yeah, it actually challenges your understand like what is reality, right? Right. So, I mean, the potential for mind control or in fact, the reality of mind control by the state and by affiliated actors, depending on the state or living in a symbiotic relationship with the state, it's like it's almost impossible to have independent thoughts. Yeah, I mean, if the, if most people are getting their information through these searches, and through social media exchanges and those things are heavily heavily, you know, managed, then everybody's getting a skewed version of reality and that's going to change the way that they think about everything. I think that's really dangerous. Obviously, it's not a new concept, because we all read about it or well and you know, all this, Huxley and all these other books. But you know, what happens to people when they're when they're getting their information in a way that's completely inorganic and false? And you know, I think we have to get to the bottom of that. I don't know. I think it's scary. Do you think there's been any slackening? I mean, we're in the middle of an election season right now. Pretty clear that the people in charge in both parties will do anything to stop Trump. And for reasons, probably nothing to do with Trump actually, but bigger story. But whatever the cause, they're totally determined to control the outcome of this election. Yeah. Well, can you have a democracy under those circumstances? I don't think so. So there was a Supreme Court case that there's one that's still going on, um, Murphy, and Missouri. And originally the lower courts ruled that the federal government can't be, you know, doing that back and forth with all these platforms. And from what I understood, there was a little bit of a backing off point, right? Where they weren't so intimately involved. Just about a month ago, Senator Mark Warner had a talk and he said that essentially the companies have begun talking to the agencies again. This was after the Supreme Court held a hearing on that case. And it didn't look so good for the free speech advocates afterwards. So, you know, that tells me that they're already, you know, thinking of coming up with another program. I know for a fact, for stories that I'm working on that there are a couple of different contracting ideas for new sort of content review programs that would be partnerships with government in the same way that there were the last time around. Like the last time around we had this thing called the election integrity partnership was run out of Stanford, but it was done in partnership with the Department Homeland Security and the Global Engagement Center, which is at the State Department, and the University of Washington and some other partners. But that was a, you know, a thing where there was a big organized content flagging operation that involved the government. They're going to do something like that again. It's just a question of like who's going to do it, what the method it's going to be in my understanding is that there, you know, it's going to be more aggressive this time around. So there've been a number of war games right where academics, NGO officials, government officials, it's all sort of this blob. It's kind of hard to disaggregate, but have game doubt very selection scenarios. And it does, it sounds a little more to me like contingency planning than than like an academic exercise. But tell me what you know about that. Well, it's interesting. You bring that up. So you may have noticed in the news lately that there have been a lot of stories warning about AI deep fakes. Yeah. This is the new, if Russia was the very, very excuse for getting involved in content moderation in 2020 or even 2018, AI and deep fakes are the new buzzword in Washington. And I kind of just to wait to explain it where your porn tapes. That's right. Yeah, exactly. I didn't make this. It's a deep fake. But this is something that somebody took me off to now. This is not like a secret. It's actually public, although nobody has brought it up. There is a website that's out there. But this is a game, especially elections and dragons. It's made by in Q tell. You can see the IQT here, which is the venture capital arm of the CIA. And it's a great stop. Why does the CIA have a venture firm arm? Because the to develop technologies that would otherwise probably be prohibited. And you know, because there's a lot of things that they get into that maybe our money good money, making ideas. I mean, part of what being in the intelligence businesses about is getting out and making money, right? So. So, but that's I mean, that's kind of a problem if your intel agencies have venture arms. Yes, right. You would think that would be a problem. So this is a CIA funded election game. Yeah, it's a CIA funded election game. And just to start just like Dungeons and Dragons, it has funny dice. This is a 10 set of die. For the record, are you making this up with this real? This is real. This is real. Hey, wire is the name of the game. And if you roll the in Q tell symbol, right? It says, I'm laughing. It's so dark. It says on the back. If you roll, basically the whole premise of the game is that you are trying to avoid a haywire situation, meaning an AI induced disaster. Where the voters get what they want. Basically, yeah. So if you roll the in Q tell logo, it says haywire reverted. So basically, if you roll CIA, you win. The CIA venture logo looks a little bit like the symbol for nuclear power. It does look a little bit like that. Yes. So this is this game is used to train from what I understand. It's used to train people in government to working out scenarios that may happen, right? Which is why this is so some of these scenarios are so incredible. Like if an orange populist were to somehow become president again. Well, right. And when I went through these, and obviously I just opened this box, but I have another one. The one that really jumped out of me is this thing called the purple disappeared. The purple disappeared. You might if you can read out what it says. Swing states appear safe on the National Electoral Map and early polling later. It emerges that AI driven election forecasts were wrong because the data scientists overlook significant partisan differences that make swing states highly competitive. It will discuss your response plan then draw two injects real world harm. It says at the bottom misinformation slash social bias, heightened stress, anxiety, and depression. What's social bias mean? I'm actually I have no idea, but that certainly sounds to me like they're asking the game players to come up with a plan for some kind of reaction to election results that don't necessarily square with what the polls were indicating. That's basically what they're saying in that scenario. Here's another one. Mine games. An easy to use voice model helps create a viral video suggesting that one of the candidates may have dementia. Just discuss your response plan and draw two injects. It's just full of stuff like this. We started to hear about this idea that there were people in this information management slash censorship slash content moderation space that were deeply involved with finding new ways to manage information that people see. Back in 2010, the army actually got rid of the term SYOP because they thought it had negative comment connotations. They brought it back in 2017 because there was a widespread belief that we have to engage in influence operations that because Russia is already doing it because China is already doing it, we need to do it. It's the same thing. Same data-owned population. Yeah. That's the thing. We did this before previously. We created phony social media accounts in Arabic and Pashto. That's something that we've understood. What's different is that they're now doing this in English and they're now aiming this at domestic population. I thought that was illegal. I would think it's illegal. I think a lot of this behavior is just unregulated, not looked at. I mean, who's going to go in and tell them they can't do this. What body is going? It's a minute. New York Times. The Washington Post. Democracy dies in darkness. I mean, that's that is the role with the press. Yes, but we expose accesses and roll them back by exposing them. But the problem is that they see, they see, for instance, Donald Trump and the Trump movement as an extension of what they might call the Russian information ecosystem. The global engagement center of the State Department has this concept of information ecosystem. If you're too in alignment with Russian foreign policy views on, say, Ukraine or something like that, you can be part of the ecosystem even if you have nothing to do with that country. The idea that the first head of the global engagement center is a former editor of Time Magazine, Rick Stengel, here at a book called Information Wars that we all had to read when we were doing the Twitter files because we didn't know about this organization. Talked openly about how he thought the Trump campaign, he recognized the same techniques that he saw from ISIS and from Russia. So they're now they see all this is all part of a piece. That is what I think is dangerous, is that we're bringing the ethos of military counter messaging from the war on terror. We're bringing that home and the enemy is now the domestic voter. Right. Okay. So military messaging, but the purpose of military is to kill people in the end and to do a tour war by the threat of killing people. But basically it's killing. That's their business. Killing yes, but also trying to discourage recruitment. Of course. Right. So, but fundamentally, if you were to say like, what's the purpose of military, it's to exert force physical horse. So if the US military is turning its cyops on the country, like that's it's not that far. You know, the nature of organizations in mission creep from there to like hurting people. Exactly. Exactly. And they actually you'll find NATO, we found NATO papers that talked about how they found the American belief in informed not influence or you know, truthfulness that was actually that's part of an old NATO memo about influence operations that we have to see. You can't tell on truths. The more modern belief is that that's outdated that because the Russians don't do that, that we have to we shouldn't have those restraints. So we have to worry now about sort of phony influence operations in the United States. And if you look at it in that thing through that lens, suddenly things like Russia, you start to make a little bit more sense, right? Because you can imagine somebody in the intelligence services saying, well, Donald Trump is part of this nexus of anti-American forces and anything's fair game against that kind of person. So what what Russia is central to all of this in the minds of the people doing it? And from my perspective, as someone who's never been that interested in Russia, the country, you sort of wake up one day and you know, 25 years after the end of the Cold War and realize you're required to hate Russia. And I just refuse to go along with that. I'm principal not because I love Russia. I do kind of like Russia actually haven't been there, but I didn't have any things about it a year ago. Right. And but I just I'm an adult man and I don't want to be told to think and I'm not going to be a period under any circumstances because I'm not a slave. So but unanswered is the question like why why why is that a requirement of living in the United States where I've lived my whole life hating Russia? Like what does that have to do with anything? Like how do we get there of all countries? I don't know. I don't understand that either. And also you don't. I mean, especially compared to when Russia actually was a major, I mean, it wasn't nearly this intense in the 70s and 80s. I was here. It was not right. Oh, we're done. People said, I mean, Russia was actually running actual cyops against the United States. AIDS was created for me to kill black people. You know, all these things like that. That was a Russian act of measures campaigns. Big time. And of course, there were all these proxy wars going on even then in Mozambique and they were like actual wars. And the prevailing view among people I knew was, you know, Soviets are bad. Of course, no one's per Soviet in normal person world. But it would be kind of nice to be a piece in nuclear wars really scary. And like let's avoid that. I mean, that was the view that I remember as a child, right? Sure. Yeah. And we had we had staying telling us the Russians loved their children too. And which is true. And, you know, when Gorbachev came on the scene, I remember very distinctly people saying, you know, that we have to find a way to get along with these people, like that we're spending too much money on on defense and that this is this is costing both of our societies. But that's not what we're at now. And oddly enough, the current American government, it feels a lot like the Soviet government of the early 80s, right? Where Joe Biden would would have fit in perfectly in the pleth bureau of the early. He's fresh now if I thought right? Yeah. I mean, he's the daughtering old, physically dead leader who still has a title because, you know, he hasn't actually expired. He's presiding over a decayed cynical society that no longer believes in the slogans. Right. And the Russians have a joke where Gorbachev gets in the limousine. He's late for work. So he drives too fast. The cops pull him over. And his Gorbachev's driver is drunk, passed out in the back. So he had to drive himself. He gets stopped by the police and the cops season. Salutes goes back to the car. And the other cops says, who is that? And he goes, I don't know, but Gorbachev was his driver. And that's how you feel about America now. Who's running this country? Does anybody know who is running the country? Is it Jake Sullivan? I mean, you'd have to make a guess. Would you? Wouldn't you? I mean, somebody has to have the final say about these things and it can't be Biden. I just think that's a very weird thing to not know. And no one seems curious about it either. Right. Where are the stories about that? Who's that? Well, I mean, then what the Wall Street Journal just did a story about that? They broke the seal on that. But it's kind of a silly dishonest story. But in it, we're quite a silly dishonest story, I thought, but whatever. But there were certainly things in there that had not been in Wall Street Journal or big paper before. Right. They took a, you know, they dipped a toe in the lake. But still, you know, in a real country, we would be scrambling to find out. Well, the president is clearly not capable. So what's going on, you know, nothing. There's not a hint of anything, which is just it's so bizarre. Well, and especially given the consequences of this word, 1995, you could sort of it's sort of runs on autopilot and, you know, Tim Cook in the captains of industry can pitch in and sort of keep us on the track. Or I mean, that would be the view, right? But now we are on the brink. We're closer nuclear war than we've ever been closer than the Cuban Missile Crisis right now. Right. To total nuclear annihilation. And if the commander in chief is noncompass menace and, I mean, we're to the ship is listing this on its side, where are the people saying, you know, I hate Trump, I love by politics, don't even matter at this level. One the verge of nuclear war, that's not acceptable. Let's pull back. I have not even heard any person say that. What is that? I don't know. Where's the public concern about that either? I mean, if this were 1986, and we were at this level of antagonism with Russia, if there had been an exploded pipeline, if there was a shooting war in Ukraine, right? Or some kind of proxy territory, where our weapons were killing Russian troops and vice versa. Because, you know, some of ours were over there too. Quite a few. And, you know, people would be panicking, right? Because at any minute, you know, we're all relying on somebody like Putin being rational, which is already, you know, I made that mistake in thinking that he would never invade Ukraine. I thought that too. And so, what are we banking on the idea that if, you know, we launch some kind of a weapon into the Russian territory that they're not going to hit us? What do you think? I mean, I think the people who are prosecuting the conflict from our side, I'm very familiar with their mindset because I knew a lot of these folks when I was in Russia, they're not, it's kind of like all the president's presidents men. These aren't very bright guys. And things have gotten out of hand. And I think that they have no idea what they're doing. And this could easily get out of hand very, very quickly. Because they're messianic about this. They think they must continue this conflict. Whereas the one thing that I thought Barack Obama was sensible about was like, you know, when the Kremlin Crimea thing happened, you look, it's not, you know, what it's always going to be more important to them than it is to be. Yes, that's right. It's very important to them, by the way. Right. Exactly. So I hear these people, including the U.S. ambassador to Ukraine and but many others just sort of blithely announced that we're going to take Crimea. And that, again, I don't have strong feelings about Crimea. I've never been there, but I think I know as a factual matter that that is a trigger for nuclear war right there. For sure. For sure. And it, you know, it's kind of a jump ball also like, yeah, should that place be? I think it is Russian at this point, but right. And it's been Russian historically. I mean, there's a lot of weird stuff about Ukraine's history, like, you know, the fact that they gave the day they created the territories, sort of on a whim, you know, in the middle of the Soviet period, the lines are very arbitrary. They're not drawn along, you know, real linguistic or cultural lines. And if you've been to the place, you'll find that it's very Russian in some parts and very Ukrainian. Now there's, I'm sure that's changing now, but the people who are pushing this day, they have no knowledge of that whatsoever. It's the same thing as when I was in Russia. They've been told one thing. And so, you know, Ukraine to then is like Switzerland and we're saving it from Russia. Whereas the reality is that it's, it's nothing like that in reality. And I don't know how dangerous do you think that do you think they are? I think they're crazy. I think they're the most dangerous. I think they're seized by hubris. I think there is a messy inequality to this. I think the entire leadership class of the country is determined to commit suicide. I think that they've boxed themselves in their criminals. They know that they will be exposed as such. And they've also reached kind of the apogee of American Empire anyway. It's all downhill from here. I do think that they feel this. And I think they want to extinguish this society. And I do that's such an incredibly dark thing to say. I hesitate even to say it, but I don't see a rational explanation for any of this behavior at all. I don't think it advances anyone's aims, including their own. I don't believe that Larry Fink is like orchestrating all this. So Black Rock can get even richer. I think they want to get richer. I think Larry Fink's a bad guy, obviously. But I don't think it's a little Lockheed Martin. That's exactly right. The defense contractors and that's all true on one level. But that's not the explanation. No, no, it's way deeper than that. I think this is a spiritual thing. And I do think societies kill themselves just as people do. And I think that's what we're clearly that's what we're seeing. I mean, tell me how that's not what we're seeing. And I think that's just such an ugly idea. Again, it hurts me to articulate it, but you asked. So that's what I honestly think. Well, I mean, what other explanation is there? Well, kind of, right? I mean, I've kind of run out of I made the mistake, I think for years of trying to think, well, what's the angle on this? That's right. That's a white. You know, like there's got to be some endgame that they're going for. And the only way to make sense of this is to give that up, I think. Because there's something darker going on in the culture of people who run this country that it's inaccessible if you're trying to like assign motives to it. Right. They could easily, like just stick to the problem with Donald Trump. They could easily defeat Donald Trump as a political entity if they just, if they were thinking as political consultants did in the 90s or 80s, right? Like they would just make some subtle adjustments. as a political entity if they were thinking as political consultants did in the 90s or 80s, right? Like they would just make some subtle adjustments. They would throw a bone to working people and, you know, they would put a forward a candidate who isn't, you know, physically dead and they would win, right? But no, for them, I think it's a principle that a certain kind of voter not have a say in things. And I don't know, that's just totally counterintuitive to me. I don't, I just don't understand that, you know. But so in other words, it's not just Trump. It's the idea that the people who like Trump, those people might have power or be rewarded. Right. We cannot legitimize the negative feelings of those voters is how they think. Whereas it's incredibly obvious if you go out in the campaign trail and talk to people who vote for Trump, that they do it for a million different reasons, right? You know, ranging from, you know, the town that I live in used to be a booming economic center. And now it's, it's dead, right? It, you know, it looks like a a third world country to there, there is been a functioning hospital within 300 miles of where I live. The Walmart is now the only place where you can buy anything for 50 miles. Like there's a million reasons. And then there's some social issues too. But once upon a time, I mean, I remember not so long ago, even Bill Clinton talking about trying to reclaim some of those working class and that was like a legitimate activity. One West Virginia, he won every county in West Virginia. Imagine every county that's a man. Every county in West Virginia in 1992. And of course, I think he lost California. Wow. And so imagine a Democrat winning any county in West Virginia. Well, they wouldn't want to win. Right. Right. I mean, they, they go in over these scolding attitude, like learn to code, like what's wrong with you? Um, like, like there's this punitive attitude about it, which is the, as you know, if you've covered campaigns, you cannot win if you, if you, if you have hostility towards the voters, that's Trump secret is he doesn't hate them. He loves them. I know, I know. Right. And that, that was immediately apparent from his first campaign is that he, he got up there. And you know, people say, what does a billionaire having common was, you know, ordinary people? Well, he, he's liked them in a lot of ways. He has the same, right. He probably does the same thing in the spare time. He goes to the same websites and we to the same restaurant. We know that right exactly. And, and, you know, so when he opens his mouth, people think, yeah, you know, I can connect with this guy. Now, it's a lot of it is fake, right? And, and the policy prescriptions may not make any sense, but you can understand why the level at the, at the, you know, the level of visceral, the, he's, he's affection. And they have hate. And I think that's, that's the thing that shocks me most. Like I, I think I'm way too autistic or something to understand a lot of things are happening right now, but I think in terms of like, well, out, you know, outcomes. And that's not what any of this is about. And the thing that shocks me most is that actual hostility that people in DC were effectively and from have for the rest of the country, like they hate the people in the country. They do. They don't just look down on them. I thought it was just like looking down on them in a snobbish way. Right. Oh, it's like a hostility. Right. When they die, and you saw the string COVID, or you didn't get the vaccine, we died. I'm glad he died. He died. Like I'm glad he died. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. Right. I'm not, I'm not happy when a gang member dies in the South Side of Chicago. No, I'm sure. I'm serious. I couldn't be more opposed to gang member. So I said Chicago, but like, I don't know. It's like a, it's a human being. It's a American. Like I think it's sad, actually. Oh, I mean, the hostility during the COVID thing was also, it was unbelievable to watch that. Yeah. I mean, Jimmy Kimmel does this whole any of that Barbie thing where it's just, you know, it's the worst kind of, you know, cosmopolitan looking down at the, at the heck kind of a thing and, and they hate these people, right? But why? I don't understand. You know, like once upon again, not long ago, entertainers wanted to connect with ordinary people. Now, they, they don't like that audience. They wouldn't want to get, uh, plot it from that audience. Um, and politicians don't either. They, they, they want to be elected by the right people or, um, they want to, they want to do it without the help of the wrong kind of voters, but they can't because they're outnumbered, you know, um, so I, it's a crazy time. But, but, I do think you're right that if you try to figure this out by assigning rational motives to any of this, it doesn't make any sense. It won't work. So we're honest slide is you said at the very outset into authoritarian government, a different, certainly a different form of government, not a democratic government at all. Um, and some kind of oligarchy, I'm already there. Does that, is there any order to arrest that or slow it down? Is it inevitable? Like what, if you could project what would, what do you see? Well, I mean, I don't think so. Um, part of the reason that I'm so spun up about a lot of, a lot of this stuff that's happening is because I got to, I watched what happened when, you know, speech freedoms, even limited ones like the ones in Russia, they, they disappear. They don't come back, you know, like that, that's kind of what happens. And, they don't come back. That's true. Isn't it right? And, and, you know, in the United States, uh, there was a reverence once for, for, um, the first amendment for the whole bill it writes that it just doesn't exist anymore. There's this kind of like defeatist or unbelieving attitude about it. And that's been another revelation of, you know, working on stories like the Twitter files is finding out that people don't really, they don't have the same feeling about the first amendment that people did in the 80s and 90s or even the early 2000s. I mean, even Rob Reiner does the American president, right? And it's all about how, um, you know, the ACLU and, you know, being allowed to burn the flag and yes, and he's, you know, he's on the other side of this thing now, right? Like, and, and so what happened to all those people? What happened to that, that belief, and, and this system may mean for all of them, uh, you know, you mentioned that you and I came from probably from different political places at one point in time. I think we probably both share a belief that America on some of the whole work, right? It had, it had all kinds of flaws. Um, but you know, as immigrants came here from all over the world, they both good lives and they chose to stay here. I mean, my family, you know, came from different parts of the world and, um, this country is screwed up. I like the fact that it's screwed up, uh, but it works. This, this system, um, has been a great thing and people don't believe that. I think they've lost that belief, I think, um, which is so sad. Um, I don't know. Do you feel that? I mean, that, I feel it really strongly and I, and I also feel that, um, any semblance of national unity or common belief shared culture, even shared language, but particularly the culture, um, is gone and I noticed it in talking to you because actually, you know, maybe you voted for one guy voted for the other, but our core beliefs about the, you just articulated them right there. I've never doubted that a day of my life. Right. But it just didn't, you know, because like yeah, America, yeah, screwed up in a lot of ways, first of all, it's huge. So of course it's screwed up. Everything big is screwed up. Sure. But the best system works and, um, I don't feel that there's a national consensus on that or all anymore. And it seems to have evaporated very, very fast and I'm not quite sure how maybe that's the problem with being in your 50s things change and you didn't see the change coming. Yeah. That's still a mystery, right? Like where did that happen? There had to have been a moment at a time where, well, I'll tell you part of what happened is the people who were deputized to defend it refuse to. And true, mixed angles of the world who was supposed to be, he was literally a guardian in the first Amendment. He's the editor of Time Magazine. Right. And all the next thing you know, he's a federal official working for Obama against the first Amendment and you're like, well, that's a dereliction of duty. That's a major sin. I think it's a crime. I think you should be punished for that actually. You can't allow that. I mean, if you're in a battle and the officers deserve, they get shot for that. And all I had to do that, like, you need leadership in order to preserve whatever it is that you have. Right. And so I blame the leaders 100% and without leadership, of course, things fall apart and no one's willing to stand and be like, no, you know, the dignity of the average person is not just a good thing. It's the core of the enterprise. It's essential. You give that up. We're done. And you're not allowed to do this. Period. Yeah. I agree. And no, not now of the role, the role of the media, I think is an important one in American society. We were given a very important responsibility to tell the public when things aren't going right. And to do that continually, no matter what, you know, the which way the political winds are blowing to stick to that. And so now it's kind of more important than ever to keep to keep doing that. I mean, you asked me like, what does this get turned around? I don't know. But the only thing I know is I think, you know, you have to keep doing this stuff and telling people about it and in the hopes that it will get turned around. So last question, you spent 10 years within a society that, you know, punished journalists physically at times for telling the truth, you're watching political figures go to jail. And whatever you think of the charges or convictions or whatever in every single case, you know, for a dead certain fact that person hadn't been in politics on the wrong side. He would not be going to jail. That's just a fact. So they're using jail as a political instrument. How long until that comes to journalists? Like do you worry that at this rate, like you wind up indicted? I've started for the first time to worry about that. You know, because because I spent so much time in Russia and I knew people who, you know, physically suffered what they did right. I whenever people talked about taking risks as a journalist in the United States, I always said, look, please, you know, like in other parts of the world, they actually go through hardship. Yeah, try that in Mexico. Yeah, exactly. See what happens, you know? Um, you know, but it's gotten weird here. I mean, even even even the ban in story, there's an element of that where it may not be as much about him as a political figure as it is about war room necessarily. What's 100% that right? And no one wants to say it, but at this point in his life, as of today, Steve Bannon is a journalist. That's what he is. Do you may disagree with him completely? He always say talk show every day. Right. It's like, what is that? Right. And the most influential one, right? And you know, you hear people like Rick Wilson getting up and saying, yeah, it's four months, but it's it's it's four important months. It's where it's four key months, he said, you know, like, um, the Republican strategist, he said that I like in project, yeah, Lincoln Project guy in the former Dick Cheney, you know, like I saw that and I was like, wow, they were kind of saying that out in the open, you know, and um, even even my experience, look, look, you had the fis of thing happen. Um, when I, when I did Twitter follows an IRS, agent showed up in my house while I was testifying to, to, to Congress. Um, so that's absolutely crazy. Yeah, no idea. I thought it had to be a coincidence, but I don't think I now no longer think it is. And I do worry about it. I mean, I haven't even shared this with my wife yet, but I thought it might be time for us to get another house and some other place that doesn't have an extra addition treaty. Yeah. Well, there aren't many, you know, um, yeah, which is a problem. All right. I'm aware of that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And, um, I never had those stocks even, even a year ago, but you must have had them. Um, I've had some thoughts. Yeah. I've had some experiences at, you know, pretty shocking, I would say, um, not interested in talking about it, but yeah, for sure, really, really shocking. But it's still kind of all hard to believe. I guess it's always that way right when your society changes. It's hard to believe it's actually happening. Well, it's, it's, it's happened slowly. Look, um, somewhere along the line, I became conscious of the fact that obviously somebody must be listening to, yeah, you know, the people who I have in my contacts list, there are a lot of them are out of the country or running from the law or on the wrong side of the intelligence services. And, um, you know, there's no way that somebody's not aware of what's going on, you know, the, of what I do. And that's, that's unnerving on one level. But yes, this, this, this recent thing about, you know, even, even the stuff involving the epic times and, um, Alex Jones, you know, I was never a fan of his. He had some choice things to say about me, but I think this whole thing started with, uh, the decision to take him off um, the internet and, uh, that's troubling, you know, like they, they clearly see in journalists and information as a threat. And, um, I don't think it's an accident that there aren't that many places left to publish. And, uh, there aren't that many people left doing real journalism. So, yeah, Twitter will say open for the duration of the election. Yeah, it, it, it probably, it probably will. Um, but, you know, Trump's not on anymore. I mean, to Trump's Twitter Twitter account is what one hit my think the 2016 election. And that was one of the reasons I think journalists hate him is because, um, he proved that they in the internet age, you don't need reporters. Uh, I try to fear a politician and they couldn't stand that. I mean, I, I listened to those conversations. They, they, they were very resentful. The fact that they, he didn't have to go through their approval system, you know, um, but he's not on Twitter anymore. And, you know, I mean, it's extraordinary that Joe Biden's the only candidate in this election, who hasn't been censored in some way. RFK has been censored. Yeah. Thomas Swami's got been booted off LinkedIn for a period of time. I mean, like, Jill Stein for that matter. Jill Stein, we found her in the Twitter fell. She was on a, on a list called is underscore Russian, uh, which was, Jill Stein. Yes. Yes. Her, she and you hear them. So I mean, can they, by the way, I, I've, like, Jill Stein and no, Jill Stein, not against Jill Stein, not voting for her, but like, fine. But if you find yourself thinking that Jill Stein, Dr. Jill Stein is the threat to America, like you're a buffoon too. But they, they think that right? I mean, they, they have the hostility towards Jill Stein, the same way they had a hostility toward Ralph Nader once in the, once in the day. And, and, and the difference is now, if you're Jill Stein, they see you as part of the Trump, uh, apparatus, you're no different from Trump to them. Assange, uh, Jill Stein, you know, ISIS, whatever, they're all, yeah. Yeah. So Snowden, exactly. Yeah. So it's, it's, it's crazy times. Um, what is there anything you can get you to stop? Uh, no. I mean, I've got kids. So I'm, I'm obviously not completely invulnerable, right? But, um, but I, I think, I think the world, American East journalists and, and again, our first, the first thing that we have to be is, um, you know, tough about it, right? And so you got, you got to get knocked off before you, you give up. I think it, you shouldn't give up, right? I mean, all my heroes and journalism didn't, didn't do that. So I, I'm not going to do that. I don't think. Um, but, I mean, you wouldn't, would you? Under any circumstances? Right. Exactly. So that's how you be. Thank you. Thanks so much, Tucker. I appreciate it. Thanks for watching our YouTube channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it. And by the way, you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that also.