Now three days out from the election, there's a mad scramble, of course, in Washington for people to get positions of power in the new administration. Some of them are good people, some of them are not. You are being widely discussed as potentially the next national security advisor or secretary defense taking over DoD. I don't know what's going to happen. I fairly confident you'll play a large and meaningful role in this administration. You're never going to say any of that, but I just thought I thought that the audience might like some context for where we're having this conversation. I think you're one of the very few people with deep experience in national security who shares the president's priorities in national security, which is amazing. There aren't too many. I would say the leader of them. There's the context. What does this next administration need to do in order to remain true to the president-elect's articulated positions on more in peace? Thank you, Tucker. Thank you very much. First off, for your confidence in me. It's a great deal. I don't make any. Well, I know, and that's why I'm deeply grateful and honored. I clearly don't make any presumptions about any role for myself, but what I would say, and I mean this with all sincerity, is that I think the president-elect is exactly right that we stand on the possible precipice of World War III, and we need a fundamental change before we ram right into the iceberg. I think the election is over, but this remains absolute true, is that what I call the liberal-premises alliance, basically the kind of policies of President Biden and Vice President Harris aligned with the premises. I call them. We could call them the neo-conservatives have led us to a situation in which we're overextended. We're on the brink of war in multiple theaters, and we could lose them. And I really want peace. More importantly, President Trump ran to his historic credit on an agenda, as he said, on his sort of victory speech. I don't start wars. I end them. Now, I think my view is that we have to have how you actually get to peace is a difficult question, and I had the honor of being on your show a few years ago when my book came out, and I remember I don't know if we recall, but I said I was thinking about your question to President Trump about why is it worth defending allies. And I gave that a lot of thought, and that in a sense my book is a response to that question, and I think you do need strength. You do. But- Well, of course. You need peace through strength, but that term has become cheapened and distorted to become basically an excuse for an aggressive expansionist approach to foreign policy. But I think it's real meaning, and President Trump is in a sense going back to the great tradition of the Republican Party, the Weinberger Doctrine, the Palaductrin. Yes. Eisenhower, as Bob Dole used to put it, these are Democrat wars. It used to be Democrats that started wars and Republicans that ended or avoided them. Eisenhower didn't go into Vietnam in 1954. He did not intervene in Hungary in 1956. Again, he nobody thought he was a weak guy. So what needs to happen right now? Before you get into that, I just think it might be helpful to describe where we are now, because a lot of Americans in this category were so absorbed in the election that we may have lost touch with what you open your remarks by noting, which is we're on the brink of war in multiple theaters. We tell us where we are. Absolutely. Well, I think for the first time in basically 150 years, we are not clearly the world's largest economy. We compete for that with China, and they are a far larger industrial power. Russia in purchasing power parity terms is a very large economy with enormous industrial production capacities. So North Korea, advancing into nuclear missile programs. Russia is a larger manufacturing economy than a lot of us appreciated, I think. Yeah, I mean, despite a lot of boasting, they're still out producing the North Atlantic Alliance, including the United States, in artillery production, which is old technology by like a factor of two or three. Iran's two weeks from a nuclear weapon, according to Tony Blinken, and worse, these actors have come together. Now, you will hear from the sort of primeists and liberals that that means that we have to fight them all at the same time. No to the contrary, it means they are collaborating together precisely to tie us down and to Plitus. And that's what's happened in the war in Ukraine, where we have expended a tremendous amount of weapons, dido in places like attacking the Houthis and so forth. At the same time, our defense industrial base has wildly atrophied from where it was 30 years ago. And this is why the agenda for reindustrialization is so important. But that's going to take a long time as Senator Vance has pointed out. Meantime, China. Can I say it's not, I mean, I thought one of the justifications, the main justification for this wildly inflated Ukraine funding was that it was going to help reestablish America's didn't happen, industrial base. And in fact, one of the most kind of often used arguments by a lot of the advocates for the war in Ukraine was that we would sort of degrade the Russian military for a song and restore our defense industrial base at the same time. Actually more or less the reverse that the reverse has happened. The Russian military is larger and this is, you know, General Cavoli, the Saccular, has admitted this. The Russian military is larger. It's battle hardened. I mean, our military has not fought a pure adversary. Well, I mean, really since World War II, but certainly since Vietnam and Korea, the Russians have gone toe to toe with Ukrainians who are capable and they have a revved up defense industry at the same time. So in a sense, war worse means time the Europeans have basically been asleep at the switch, not going through with their defense buildup with a few noble exceptions like Poland. So and then you look at China, which is the by far the most formidable challenger, 10 times the GDP of Russia. This administration, Tony Blinken has said, Xi Jinping has given the instructions, their military to be ready for a war over Taiwan by 2027. Frank Kendall, the Secretary of the Air Force in the Biden administration said the other day that he thinks the Chinese military will say they're ready. We have to be ready for this. My view is desperately want peace. The Chinese are going to look at us both in terms of our strength, but also in terms of our political commitments. This is where I think President Trump has been exactly right, which is being willing to talk to President Xi Jinping, not insulting President Xi Jinping and President Putin and others unnecessarily, not supporting things like Taiwan independence. And at the same time, being prepared to be strong. And this is where I think if we appoint or if people are put into positions of power who think that we can walk and chew gum and do everything and start wars in three different theaters at the same time, not only will that be bad like it was in the Iraq war. And often the same people it will be far more catastrophic. Tucker, I don't think this is an exaggeration. I think we stand on the precipice of losing a major power war for the first time in our history. So people need to know what time it is. And that really requires focusing on China with the purpose of peace like we did in the Cold War, which was to say we're going to be strong. We're not going to go over the line like Eisenhower did in 1950. He's not going to go into Hungary. We're not going to go to Czechoslovakia in 1968. But don't come across our line because you'll see it's not going to succeed for you. So I think we really stand at the crossroads. And I think President Trump has a mandate for peace. So don't I just as an American, whatever happens to me, I so hope that we don't end up with the same failed recipe of starting wars all over the place or getting enmeshed in conflicts when we can't we can't afford to do so. I'm not an interest in American. But from a non expert position, which is my position just as somebody who's watching kind of there does seem to be broad recognition that whatever our objectives in Ukraine were we can we do achieve them and we can't Zelensky immediately comes out upon Trump's election and says actually I'm for peace. That does maybe seem like it's winding down. Oh, who knows? I hope. But the noises are consistent with winding down. So but at the same time, the very people who are pushing that war all of a sudden like very excited about a war with Iran. Yeah. It's like they just seamlessly it's like oh Ukraine whatever actually the real problem is Iran and telling us that Iran's trying to murder President Trump etc. There's I don't know what's true. I don't. But how would the answer what would happen if we went to war with Iran? Well, I mean, I think, you know, look, Iran's a bad regime. We don't want to have a nuclear weapon. We don't want to support is we don't want to be able to support groups attacking Israel etc. But like haven't we learned the lesson over the last 25 years about the ill-advised nature of very significant conflicts in the Middle East that don't have clear goals and clear connection to American interests like haven't we been aware like do we run this experiment a couple times and it's often the like the exact same people calling for war with Iran who were involved in the past and it's like shouldn't there be some degree of accountability moreover? Yeah, it's like a bad idea in itself. I mean, you know, like I was criticized in the bulwark by Eric Edelman who is Dick Chaney his advisor and number three at the Pentagon under Bush. He said my ideas were iconoclastic and I was like thank you. I'm delighted that you think my ideas are iconoclastic. Kid Eric Edelman be writing with an incredibly it all on foreign policy questions after being you know intimately involved in the Iraq war and then never apologizing. I don't know there's some international authority that requires contrition like it like a moral UN where you don't get to say another word until you don't ashes and sack off the apologize who among us is and I'm certainly not in Aaron. I'm certainly not infallible but like at least show some you know it's like Paul is your go the worst Wall Street Journal couple like a year ago gave a speech to the eye treated rock wars like a mulligan. You know it's like I think that's like a big deal and you know obviously a lot of people got it you know had different views etc. But it's like it's kind of show the contrition show the penance show the show the learning and so that I think is in the other thing though Tucker is like it's the same people who are calling for attacking Iran who are also calling for escalating the war in Ukraine or even a no-fly zone recognizing in the to man the Taiwan or getting in a war with China or attacking North Korea. It's like if we do all those things that we know objectively as a fact that our military is not capable of fighting more than one major word at a time so even if you did want to getting in multiple fights with people at the same time is just like full hearty and I mean but the way I think about it is the Washington blob establishment can get us into wars and crises but they can't fix the problem. So it's really important right now and it seems to me that you're listening to President Trump and his historic victory the decisive mandate he got his leadership his mandate his agenda for peace from position of strength use the military sparingly but have it be strong it's really important not to get enmeshed all over the place and and either bleed ourselves out or a catastrophic multi front loss. I think that's the lasting Donald Trump wants. Um, it seems that way I write I mean the the arc of his life is just it's so remarkable the redemption that we just saw in Tuesday. And without President really in American history and so if you wanted to destroy his presidency a second presidency what's you know what's the one foolproof way to destroy it. No president has ever lost a great power war. Donald Trump has run to his enormous historic credit he has been shot. He has been had law fair conducted against him and he has had the bravery and the vision and the persistence and the commitment at great personal physical cost but also to his reputation and his family etc. To stand up for these principles that the United States desperately needs putting Americans interests first peace prosperity etc. Reindustrialization now is the time to put that into practice whoever it is I just I can't stress how how important that is and if you're thinking about a historical legacy Joe Biden is going to leave a legacy that's terrible. I mean where the you know for all the things you know you mentioned the war in Ukraine two and a half years in. Joe Embarnes near time just reported that the intelligence community is reporting that the Ukrainians are losing that it's not a stalemate. So after all that after all the preaching after all the moralism the Ukrainians are losing the war and the Russians are making enormous progress and were unprepared were unprepared for war with China. The Middle East is in the worst situation in years we can't even stop the the Houthis like a third or fourth rate power and we're not prepared. So they've left us on the precipice they've put us on the you know the Titanic is is directing towards the iceberg. It's going to take a sharp turn and the way I think about this and when I worked at the Brown Underwork for President Trump in his first term when we worked on the defense strategy to try to get us to prioritize again in my view with the same logic very consistent with what President Trump I think was trying to lay out. That was like you know we were a couple miles from the iceberg back then. Now we're like right up you know we're a few thousand yards and it's not easy to turn the Titanic and if you turn the Titanic 90 degrees people are going to fall out of their bunks chandeliers and beautiful you know plates are going to get broken but that's where we are but that is the fault of what I call the liberal prime assist alliance that is the fault of Joe Biden the Malah Harris and the prime assist were it should sort of old school Republicans who if they pursued that policy further would lead a sick catastrophe. And how is it that from what I can tell pretty much every person in the running for the big national security jobs other than you is part of that alliance and I know the mall and I like some of them in a couple sitting US senators who I think are really nice guys but they're there are tools of the people you describe like completely there's kind of no doubt about it. How is it that there are so few people on the Republican side of national security with experience who agree with the president-elect who leads the party? So I've thought a lot about this because I've been fighting as you kindly gesture and a sort of lonely battle within the sort of blob to put us on like to me what is common sense. Exactly right and yet so few people do it and why is that it's so weird and honestly so much of your incitement commentaries both on this show and your other podcast interviews shows etc. Because I think it's like I think there's a human sociological element. I mean not to get one of the things that's kind of bizarre is that I think like today people like us we can learn a lot from the new left of the 60s and 70s like there's some wrong with the establishment and the way the establishment. Now I believe there's always an establishment there's an establishment in Mao's China but we need a better establishment. Well that's it. You're a friend of Teddy Roosevelt too. The idea that like the establishment just does what it used to do is like no the point is the establishment is supposed to serve the people right of course but I think there's an element and I try to give credit because like yeah there's money and stuff but there's other ways of making money. I think it's this psychic kind of like network benefit of being part of like essentially functionally an imperial capital and everybody comes to you know this right. They come to the capital as a you're so wise we need your leadership. You're so moral and your vision and it happens in Congress where people come they probably not thought about foreign policy that much. They're all these structures set up to kind of acculturate them and again like I don't want to sound too new left but like this is kind of what happens and so you need I think a clear eye view of how to change and frankly a willingness to buck the system and this to me is like and I'm certainly far from the only person to make this point I think you have as well as like President Trump ran against the system and that is so important because it's the system that liberal prime is just the alliance in other things like trade and economics etc. that need to be a fundamental change and already he's paid the price literally and shown the bravery and commitment to go through that and so now it's about like capitalizing and frankly my hope is if that happened a lot of these people especially in the younger generations would follow and I forgive me for a little bit of patting myself on the back but I think it's an apropos comment I was out at a thing a few months ago and this young guy came up you know strong guy whatever and he said hey you know Miss Colby I'm going in the I'm going in the Marines and I just want to say all the younger publicons love what you're saying and I said to him I was like well that's good because all the older publicans hate it and he's like yeah that's the point what do they what do they do they do they and that's like to me I always I think about so I'm like the first lot not to if this is you know although you know there are people out there you wonder about but like this is this is not like actually getting shot but it's like I'm trying to think about how do we protect Americans from not getting shot of course right and so and so I think the young people can see it you know the young people who are like you know who are not bought in to you know who have not been kind of a culturated worked for ex-Senator on this committee for 10 years and then went to that thing tank and blah blah blah I think I think they if you build it they will come but it's like the first echelon we take a lot of we take a lot of metaphorical flag hopefully metaphorical I just I won't go on about this but I am a little bit distressed by it very distressed by it but like someone like Mike Pompeo I'll just say the name who I don't think is going to get a job in this administration I would pray that he stopped I think he's a criminal I've said that plotted to murder someone who had name been charged with a crime that's criminal act should be arrested for that that's my view um but even if you don't believe that he's been anti-Trump for eight years worked against Trump and he's a crazed neo-con and he's still being talked about and promoted again I don't think he's getting at the job but promoted to run the national securities establishment in the United States how can that even happen well look I mean I think it's if I were advising president Trump I would say um especially now that the mandate has happened yes why pick some anybody who's not aligned with what you're trying to do I mean I saw the last ad that president Trump ran I mean it was a stirring ad like and it won who is in that ad you Tulsi Gabbard Robert F Kennedy Jr. Vivek and vice president elect Vance that is the mandate you know so so like my hope is that he will own that and that is the way for that's the way for peace and there's going to be debates about various policies and how to emphasize this or that but why go back in especially in a situation where as successful as the first term is the situation that Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are leaving president Trump in January is I cannot stress how dangerous it is and he's right I mean the way the president Trump again has commendably talked about the risk of nuclear war I worked on nuclear issues a lot I like my kind of starting point a lot was like working on nuclear weapons and nuclear strategy and arms control I worked on arms control with the Russians we should be afraid of these things you know salutary fear not like an un you know unmanning fear if you will right but like a salutary fear in the beginning of of wisdom is fear or whatever the Bible says to that effect I should know that but you know it's true is true right is understanding and calibrating and to me one of the like touchgrass kind of things about a lot of the people who are calling for like no fly zones in over Ukraine and intervening against the Russians and escalating and allowing us weapons to be overtly used to attack Moscow and Russian strategic you know forces sites like that that is that is obviously crazy it's like time out like that is obviously there are many Republicans yes in fact some of the reply that's why I think that the arguments within the Republican Party in some ways are are fiercer because my hope tucker and I think this is something you've been you know on for a while but it's like the Democrats are like they're sort of inherently out of position right now like where is the left where where the people who are like anti war where the people who say the CIA is not rubber approach or the FBI is not above reproach who are the people you know what current dub right mills or whatever the power elite and all this stuff those people have that those movements have to come back and and and I think that that's something where especially given the mandate that present trump has been has won that hope I mean you know whatever you think of Bernie Sanders the fact he said like we're out of we're out of position you know and others are saying they're out of position for my hope is that Democrats will go back in a sense the kind of arguments that I'm making that I think you could have heard a Democrat make 10 minutes ago right or 30 years ago or 40 years hey we need we've got to be able to talk to our opponents we have to have a strong military but not get into unnecessary wars that's just common sense that's for sure do everyone Democrats used to refer to abortion as something that should be safe legal and rare we'll leave change their view on that it went from a right to a sacrament this isn't the pro choice movement you may remember from 30 years ago this is something much darker and that's why we have joined forces with preborn their sponsor of the show and of our speaking tour to do something about it's the largest pro life organization in the United States and they are doing what they should do which is speaking up against this atrocity killing babies after birth no one seems to have the bravery to call that wrong which it is but preborn is calling it out their networks of clinics are positioned in the highest abortion areas in the country and they've rescued 300 000 babies when a woman considering an abortion searches to enter baby's life preborn is there power of ultrasound combined with the love of god doubles the babies chance of being born a single ultrasound cost 28 bucks five ultrasounds or 140 bucks giving women the information they need to make the decision that many of them actually want to make to have a baby any gift will help and all gifts are tax deductible to donate securely go to preborn.com slash tucker or call pound 250 on your phone and when asked use the word baby you mentioned CIA now is probably a good time to address it your last name is Colby that is familiar that's familiar name to anyone knows the history of the central intelligence agency your grandfather ran it home Colby and there's so there are two interesting things one is I'm sure this will set off just explosions of theorizing on the internet your play so what is your view of CIA how was that's why I think that's why your your family's in Washington because you're yeah well actually but my my great grandfather was a career army officer so I come from a kind of a national security you know background I'm a dad not not so much but but you know look I my view on the intelligence being and I worked on this stuff myself when I was kind of early in my career although on the commission that looked at why I rock intelligence wrong I didn't agree with my grandfather for everything with everything I didn't know him super well I mean I know a lot about how he approached things and how he you know is record and so forth one thing where I do really agree with him and where his legal training and the fact that actually as Jim Slesker said he was the first liberal to become director of central intelligence was that he thought and I agree with him that you need a CIA you need a national security establishment but it's not above reproach and it needs to be accountable and that's what he would you know the interesting thing about him and I you know just distressed that I don't take any credit for it like I'm just tell it just because you asked me but you know he was in World War two he was then a field guy he was in Europe and then he was in Vietnam for a long time and then he kind of ended up as director by happenstances these things sometimes do during Watergate and so in he had not been really involved he wasn't one of the inside club of like they're you know I see you got Dick Helms book the man if you see because he was the kind of ultimate insider washing an operator kind of my grandfather was out unlike me I'm more of a you know DC DC type policy type but but I think he came in and he said there's a chance that I mean remember this the Democrats at the time the the congressional class of 1974 very left wing a lot of them were thinking let's just get rid of this place let's get rid of the intelligence me right and his view is like that's not good for our country but it's not good that they're spying on Americans you know I gotten debates on some of these on Twitter sometimes about like whether the American government is funding some of the stuff you know in Europe or whatever NATO blah blah that's reverberating back into the American political system is like yeah it's happened before you know right so long time for a long time so it's like it's not a reasonable and by the way sunlight is the best disinfectant and and by the way who are some of the people who are opposed at that time Dick Cheney Don Rumsfeld you know they were opposed to any kind of Henry Kissinger any kind of accountability for the intelligence community and so that's how I look at I think there's a real need for accountability also in the professional military what is this going on with four star officers recently retired who have no political vetting they haven't been elected dog catcher weighing in on extremely sensitive points on American political calling one of the presidential candidates a fascist that is wildly inappropriate there needs to be a fundamental change first of all it's wrong second of all it's not consistent with our constitutional order remember that our founding fathers who had gone through the revolution who had fought a war against great power and one they were like the nasty politics is a feature Alexander Hamilton and Thomas Jefferson talking about each other's mother fine standing military uh-uh we only built a serious standing military military American military officers wore civilian clothes into the Pentagon as late as World War II maybe even after so we have come this is since 1947 or since World War II basically and I think we need it given what's happening but it needs to be accountable the third third point I would make about this group is like where do they get off like has as our military been successful have our political military goals been achieved over the last 25 years you know calmly when you win a war yeah if you're like if you're joined as or and by the way that's most of that guilt goes towards the liberal prime assist alliance the politicians who did it yes but also the war leaders who you know for instance a charming master wrote a book called dereliction of duty about how the the the generals in Vietnam did not tell Lyndon Johnson they couldn't successfully prosecute that work okay I agree with you how is how is the senior military done so I think some humility getting back to basics and staying out of politics is really needed it it's infuriating it does challenge like the idea of our constitutional order I agree completely but it's also ominous so when you read that the Pentagon now has a new policy where the direction of civilian leadership they can kill Americans in the United States what is that I mean look I think there's a lot of of things that need to be taken a look at where like we have gotten especially after 9-11 where it's just metastas us right where we need to ask ourselves what is the right and I think you've done this like commendably where you're saying look you know I was here on this position here and I'm same same thing where like you know but look at look at the cost and people like you know who were we would say on the old new left would have said oh my god this is gonna be abused and people like us were like yeah don't worry about it and now they were right so let's take a new look at that again I think we need to have the capabilities but I also think this is where this group I mean practically speaking not only former I mean former CIA leaders implying that President Trump was a Russian agent is a wild abuse of the trust because it's a special trust with classified information and specialties and you have it's almost like a religious obligation where there needs to be a self-discipline and an understanding that there's certain things you can't do you and that and that's been deeply violated and I think frankly Republicans agree that a lot of Democrats or independents or whatever voted for President Trump they've delivered a verdict on this issue so I think you need people who have that balance which to me is the American way is to say look that people have spoken this stuff got out of hand and we need to have a balance but we need to preserve what we need for our security what do you do in Ukraine well one is I hope the President is successful and leans forward on his plan to end the war and I just say we I don't know what that is but nobody knew which white eyes and I was talking about in 1952 nobody knew which Nixon was talking about in 1968 and nobody knew what Ronald Reagan was talking about in 1980 you already see indications that players including President Putin might be it might be changing and the Ukrainians for that matter so I hope there's a basis what exactly that looks like I don't think it you know you're not going to like liberate Crimea right that's obvious and the war's not going I think that's step one and I think that Europeans need to I mean this is something I've been banging on it's just so common sense and by the way you want to talk about who's helping Biden and Harris you know we'll go to Europe and say you don't need to worry about anything but so would kind of prime us this type Republicans they would go to Europe and say don't worry we can do everything we're we're leading they didn't do the Europeans any favors they didn't do the Ukrainians any favors let alone you know anybody else let alone the American people because they promised things they couldn't deliver and this is something where you know and I said this I was Ross Douth it I we had an interview right before the election in the New York Times you know where I get oh isn't it in Boston say this but it's sort of like questioning the morality of what President Trump saying I don't think there's been a stronger case a more important time for a foreign policy that is more moral than what you see which is the moralism which is all intention you see it on the left from Tony Blinken just saying oh the Ukrainians are fighting for freedom so we need to do XYZ and then failing the way I think about it is like no we need a foreign policy that's more like how does a parent think about the responsibility of exactly or let's say you're on the board of an orphanage you know you might have a really good guy he's goes to church every Sunday he's like you know but never cheats at cards or whatever but he sucks at handling the money you know you're going to hire a guy who's actually going to take care of the orphans exactly and that is and and and by the way if all the orphans die it doesn't matter how much you love them exactly or claim that you do you don't actually love them you of course you don't because the purpose of a system is its effect and what's the effect of the war new crane is to depopulate Ukraine and now to allow foreigners including many Americans including black rock to buy the soil of Ukraine I mean certainly not that whatever this has happened has definitely not been better will the Ukrainians just lost Ukraine but not to the Russians but through the encouragement of the body administration that's my view of it but how close do you think we have come to not been better. Well, the Ukraine has just lost Ukraine, but not to the Russians, but through the encouragement of the Biden administration. That's my view of it. But how close do you think we have come to a nuclear exchange with Russia during the last few days? I think it's close. I mean, and would word for, you know, I mean, I'm not sure how reliable he is on everything, but I think the reporting that the Biden administration, which was against interest, was very worried about Russian nuclear employment in later 2022, is very, very concerning. I think it was quite real. And the people who were blind and insulating about it, I think is a incredibly irresponsible and should not be near a serious decision. Who are those people? Well, I think you see this kind of liberal prime minister. There's a lot of people who, who signed the no-fly zone or who made comments on Twitter or otherwise around that time. And I have said since, have said, oh, you know, lift all the restrictions on the employment of US forces. And by the way, what's very clear is a lot of these people, if given the opportunity, if they thought the political environment would bear it, would support direct intervention, which if we go to war with the Russians directly, the Russians are very prepared to use nuclear weapons. So we have to be realistic about what that entails. What does that entail? Well, I mean, I think the Russians, one thing about Putin that's important, and again, like you don't have to like the person to understand that we need to take this guy seriously, right, is he, you know, as he was as he assumed power and took over from Yeltsin, which in the Russian mine was a catastrophically disastrous period. One of the first things Putin invested in was the recapitalization of the Russian nuclear forces. And the way Putin talks about Russian nuclear weapons and nuclear strategy indicates that he has a quite sophisticated understanding of nuclear strategy. And of course, you know, a lot of it is speculation because thank God they've only been used once or twice. But it says to me, this guy's credible and he has an idea of how to use him. You don't start by blowing up Washington DC. You start potentially with something like battlefield use, selective strikes against things like places in Europe or more peripheral targets, but it can go up there. And then you manipulate risk. And if weapons are used in that way, you can see millions of people. I mean, and we have almost no defense against that's why I think President Trump, for instance, like having a better shield would be great. But right now, we're pretty much denuded. I just don't understand, I mean, I guess it's kind of late in the game to whine about it, but we provided, you know, a missile defense shield to another country, but we don't have one. Like how did that happen? I don't know. I mean, I think I think that's something that we can work on. I mean, it's technically very difficult, but I think having something better than what we have now. We're always bragging about, you know, the use of the sophisticated use or defensive missile technology abroad. Like, did it occur to nobody that the purpose of the US military is to defend the United States? Well, it is. And by the way, up until the ABM treaty was signed on late 60s, you would go around American cities. And there would be Nike Ajax and Nike Hercules, nuclear tipped missile defense, interceptors and other kinds of NORAD and all these kinds of things. So I think having a stronger defense of the American homeland makes sense. And also like, you know, people talk about the American military being used, you know, in relation to Mexico. It's like, well, I think Mexico is like, you know, in the immigration issues very complicated and everything. But like, you know, the American military is to defend the United States, right? So like that should be, you know, so to me, the core missions of the American military that were needed to focus on is to advance the homeland preventing China from becoming the hegemonic power in Asia because I think we'll never reindustrialize. We'll never be autonomous and be what Americans needs to be of China, dominate Asia. But I hope and think we can do that without a war working with others that pull their own weight. And then, and then having an ability to make sure that we don't have a replication of 911. Some of that is like being smarter about how we use our military. But I think some of it is, you know, you got to keep taps out there. And then I think it's like about supporting out, you know, people say Trump is anti-ali. I think that's totally wrong. It's just a different model of allies that's obviously a is much closer to the cold war model. And B is common sense is like, Trump is anti-ali. So our, of course, most important now in Europe is Germany. Yes, which is totally. And we destroyed. And so, but by the way, yeah, we had a direct hand. This is not speculation. I'm willing to say it's fact in blowing up Nord Stream. So I know we're blaming the Ukrainians, but like we did that. I'm just going to say that. No, that's not true. It is true. So how exactly do we get to launch an act of industrial terrorism against our closest NATO ally? How is that ally ship? Well, the thing that's weird, and this gets, I think also into the context of like who benefits, you know, coupi bono, right? Yeah. Is like so since the Ukraine war broke out, the European economy and particularly the German economy has been like in free fall. So there's this kind of cute argument for a while that we had somehow like benefited from Europe sucking air after the UK people say that. And it's like, well, no, no, wait, hold on. Our point, if you go back to like, I know. And like, common sense is no, we want them to stand on our two feet. Like I don't get a rise out of lording it over the Europeans. This is sort of this mindset that like, well, this is still fundamentally a European country. This was a European colony. So Europe is basically lied with the United States on a very fundamental level or certainly has been for 250 years. So destroying Europe Wow, right. With some exceptions. But in general, you fight them with the people closest to you. Well, that's right. But I mean like, Christian Europe, right? It's basically our ally. And destroying Western Europe, which I think we've done, how does that help us? I don't understand. I don't think that it's I mean, the interesting thing about that is I mean, you know, obviously we're you know, settled, you know, originally by Europeans. Now we have people coming from all over the world, et cetera. But the thing is actually, if you look back at our early history, we stayed out of Europe. Well, I know we were actually more involved in the Western hemisphere, particularly the Caribbean and Asia actually. So people say, oh, you know, you never we were never going to get focused on Asia. I don't think that's true. Who opened the black, who opened the black ships opens Exactly. People were trading it a lot of the early American fortunes, you know, the Peabody Essex Museum, Salem. That was the China, right? People trading in Canton sometimes with opium, you know, and then like Samoa, Hawaii, et cetera. So I'm not saying like we have we have a strong interest in Europe. Philippines, the Philippines, of course. Thank you. In fact, my great grandfather, we were talking about our families like I he was an army officer in the inner war period. And he was stationed at the American. There was like a concession in China, not China's proudest period. But you know, that we were we were present. So what that what I think that means to me is a couple things. One, um, if you actually go back to American history at our best and really kind of, you know, the first got really until 1989, we did pretty well with the exception. I think things like Vietnam and stuff like that. But it was pretty hard. No, like you go back to Washington's fair well address, Hamilton, et cetera. It's like we're looking after number one. So this idea that America first is somehow inconsistent. It's like, by the way, a republic is supposed to be in the interest of everybody, right? Like that's the definition. So when people say Trump is transactional or whatever, I'm like, good, right? We need to we he's like the, you know, the CEO of America and the board is saying, Hey, look after our interests, right? That's actually what you want. And then on Europe, it's like we don't actually benefit. I mean, it's it's been a disaster. I think objectively, the policy over the last two and a half years in particular has been a total disaster. Germany is in real economic straits. View crannians are losing the war. They haven't built up their military. But you know, hey, Joe Biden got a medal from Olaf Schultz, who's probably going to be out of a job as well. I hope so. A few months. I hope for their sake, I mean, I don't believe in like in intervening apparently the Europeans, Schultz himself, it feel free to intervene in our politics, Schultz endorsed Biden. Do your job. I was at the Republican convention as you were a couple months ago. And I was getting lectured by a few members of the Bundestag, the German, yeah, Congress, equivalent conservatives, punitive conservatives. And they were like, why can't you do what Reagan did? And I said, you know what, there's some problems with that, etc. Like, great debt to GDP are military. It's like, how about you start out by spending as much on defense as the American people do? Like, why don't our, like that, that to me is like what President Trump and against the whole foreign policy establishment. Why? Because the foreign policy establishment likes the dependency model of course, but they like the welfare model in the United States. They want people in public housing. Right. And that's what I've said to the Europeans. And it's part of my message to the Europeans is like, hey, it's not just your fault. I'm not just castigating you as responsible. You are. It's also our fault, especially our establishment. But if you look at the message from the American people, it's we don't want more of that establishment. And that's again why it's so important to have the right policies and vision. Well, we've got the vision. The question now is implementation. So the problems for the president-elect are the same as they were in the first administration, I would say, how do you staff this thing with people who are aligned with you? And how do you keep the people who presently occupy every position of power, operate the levers power? How do you keep them from from wrecking the project secretly? Yeah. And the thing that's different is that the international situation that he's being left with is truly dire. And so there's no room for, you know, kind of like, you know, sort of delay or there's no, like, I'm sorry, I don't want to, I don't want to start attacking people, but I just know everybody as I know you do. Well, they have no, no, I mean, the people who want these jobs in the Trump, the second Trump administration. And there's no, they act like it's 1985. Like they have not updated their file sheets with the dumbest people. I think I've ever made on this. Yes. In the debate when he said depends on the secretary of state. I think the debate would be an amazing, amazing. I mean, he's there. He was out hustling for the president. You know, he's, he's, I mean, we all say, you know, what time it is, but he like delivered these memorable lines against Pence in the, in that debate. And then he debated John Bolton. I think at VMI. And it was just like, he was a very human point. I saw the segment where he's just like you grew up and that's being generous honestly to John Bolton, frankly, but which so admired for the fact on that point. But is, is said you grew up in the era of Apollo 11. You know, and I grew up in the era and he's younger than I am, the global financial crisis, Iraq, failed wars, you know, increasingly fractious society, etc, etc. And it's like, you know, nobody, there's a friend of mine who was interviewed in one of these stories about the new right and so forth. And he said nobody under the age of 30, I know, he's a conservative treats the new conservative idea with anything but derision and scorn, something like that. And it was just like, I'm confident where things are heading, but we don't have time because if ch, like, and I'm not a fanatic, I'm China, right? Like my view on China is, and I think the Chinese understand this. My view is we need to be strong, but we also need like in the Cold War, there's like a line and there's we don't cross it and we need to be able to decouple the thing, you know, get reindustrial as things, light highs are in the viral and set of are talking about, which is bring back industry, have more autonomy. But at the same time, you know, there's a line, but we're not going to go in regime change. They're people who served in the first Trump administration who were talking about regime change in China who were talking about privacy over China, like dominating China, like that is so dangerous. And often they're the same people who are supporting, you know, total support of Ukraine, which like makes zero cents, like zero cents, right? So my view is you got to do the things you're talking about, but you've also got to say we got to, and you know, Senator Vance has made the Vice President of the Elect Vance has made these points very well. Reindustrialization is critical, but it's going to take some time. And the meantime, given that the Biden team has used up so much of our weaponry and we got to husband what we have. And again, to me, that is with the purpose of not getting into wars. So every year when Apple releases the overpriced new iPhone, the big carriers play the same old game. Sign up now next two years, some big cellular contract. Get a free iPhone. Well, what do you give up in return? A lot. Don't fall for it this time. Choose pure talk with pure talk. You get great savings on the new iPhone 16, and you still get an affordable data plan that fits your needs on America's most dependable 5G network. Stop falling into the same trap and paying for unlimited data that you're probably not going to use. Pay for what you use. With pure talk for just 25 bucks a month, you get unlimited talk, taxed, and five gigs of data that's more than enough for most people. It's not enough for you can buy more, but it probably is. So why pay for something you're not going to use? The pure talk you don't have to. It's proudly veteran led, and its entire customer service team is right here in the United States, the country that you live in. So everyone can understand each other pretty well and their responses. No contract, no cancellation fees, 30 day money back guarantee pure talk is easy to switch to. The average family saves almost a thousand bucks a year when they switch. Try it. Go to pure talk dot com slash tucker, and you'll save an additional 50% off your very first month. That's pure talk dot com slash tucker, switch yourself service to a company, you can be proud to do business with. How could four stars, how could the leadership of the Pentagon support this? So my, you know, it's interesting. I think, again, maybe I'm up too optimistic, but like, you know, I deal with, you know, I dealt with a lot of four stars when I was there. When you worked the Pentagon, because the thing about my job, I was like a sort of my formal title was a little bit kind of middle, upper, middle tier, but basically I was running the strategy. So I had a lot of exposure. I was kind of operating above my, the sort of normal level. So I had, I got a lot of experience and I've stayed in touch with these people. I watch, I watch them. Here's the thing. And, you know, there's a good, Kissinger, I don't think was that great of a statesman, but I think he was a brilliant writer and sort of observer. He said something like big strategic shifts don't take place just by acts of virtuosity that they reflect underlying trends. And I think you talk to people in the military, and I keep in touch with a lot of them. They know, they know, what I'm saying is like common sense from military people. They know our readiness is down. They know our defense industrial basis and trouble. They know that Chinese are moving like gangbusters. They know the Russians aren't a joke. They know we can't afford to get into another big Middle Eastern war. So if you show at the top level clarity and courage as President Trump has in charting the direction and he has people under him who are genuinely trying to put that into place. I think if you build it, they will come. And here's the other thing, bear in mind, that since 2008, the Democrats have been in control almost the whole time. And under before that, it was the Iraq war group. So a lot of the people who've made it to the top of a very flat pyramid, they know they know how to, like here's the thing about the military. And you look at people like John Kelly being out there, you know, moralizing and calling President Trump a fascist, which is like absurd and appropriate and terrible on its face. But it's also like the military, we should respect military service. I certainly do, especially in people in combat and so forth. But you know, the military, there's careerism, there's promotion, people looking after their own interests, etc. The people at the top of the pyramid often are people who have satisfied the criteria for promotion and selection. That's fine. You know, people respond to incentives, but it is the most ruthless selection process. And bear in mind, talked about the Republic, the army, the Navy, and the Marine Corps predate the Constitution. So these are very deeply embedded institutions, people live their entire adult lives and then if they get to be a four star. So you just got, again, going to like a new left thing, you look at it sociologically, you're like, this is going to have some pathologies. Obviously it's a really important institution, but you got to like, but I think at the end of the day, this is going to have some pathologies. Nicely, but there are people in there who want to do the right thing, you know, or they can be motivated to do the right thing. Fantastic people on the military. And if they're rewarded for it, they will go, they will get, because a lot of the guys who would have wanted to do that, they cash out as a colonel or a Navy captain or a one star, you know. But if we put the President Trump and his team, I should say, they put the right incentives. I think it'll get bad. I must say it's just having spent my life in DC and just running into the water, living near them. It was always so noticeable. I met so many bright energetic, wise, I would say, kernels. Yeah. But far, you know, I can think of one Marine, just two starry new Marine general who I thought was so impressive. I'll even say his name, Penny Collins, a wonderful man. But, you know, didn't meet a lot of other flag officers that I thought were anything other than politicians. I think I'm sure they exist. I mean, I think I think real, I'll put it this way. Most of the real, there's some brilliant defense guys. I'll mention a Democrat. I have a lot of respect for Bob Wark, who served in the Pentagon, he's a great guy. He was a Marine colonel retired, Andrew Crapinevich, who was another brilliant guy and army guy, retired colonel, often the guys who are really the highest horsepower, real strategic thinkers. They cash out at that level because that's what the selection is for. It's not to say that other people aren't smart, but like the people that, you know, there's like so noticeable. And there's a mismatch between how people think like, oh, you know, he has four stars, Ergo, he's like a strategic genius. No, no, that's not how the selection process works. You know what I mean? Like they they're promoted for like running a large core, an army core, you know, or fleet. That's different than that's fine. But let's let's understand what we're dealing with. But shouldn't the process is in the point of promotion to, you know, winnow out the the less capable and it depends on what you're selecting for? Well, I think I think that's it. But I think, hey, how about selecting for winning? You know, like I think that has opposed to like, you know, kind of like playing the game and saying the right things. And you know, we don't know this. The other thing about like, you know, I love the meme of Mark Millie and Eisenhower and their chests. Like I just think it's so comfortable. You know, it's just it's just you could speak for 10 hours and not watch. Totally in that famous now famous hearing talking about weight rage. I thought this is a guy who doesn't have any idea what he's talking about. He's saying words, he thinks he's supposed to say doesn't seem terribly bright. He seems weak above all. He seems like the product of a bureaucracy to me, which probably shouldn't surprise me. And I think there's, and again, to this pathology point, you know, like if you read McMaster's memoirs, for instance, he's almost kind of lecturing the American people about their need to like double defense spending and stay in Afghanistan until the second coming. And it's like, it's that touchgrass kind of thing where like you don't have political accountability like direct, I mean, for instance, is they're not only they're not elected, but people who are civilian appointees go through political vetting. So they have a kind of indirect political accountability, you know, where they elect, you have to demonstrate loyalty and kind of, you know, you're on the team, etc. You have to be aware of that. The military, they they really don't have that ostensibly, although I wonder about the left and kind of through the back door, importing some of those things. But so that so you get to this point where you think that you're like, well, I'm speaking in front of a large group of people because I'm a four star general. And it's like, actually, you really have no standing to talk about that issue at all. You know, because that's a, that's a, that's a domestic issue that you like don't have any political finger feel for. And you're supposed to be much more careful and modest about that. And they have no moral authority, right to speak about anything like that, because they have no authority apart from that granted them by the president. Yeah, exactly. Because we have civilian control in the presence of authority comes from voters. Right. And by the way, and if somebody has authority, it's like the Audie Murphy guy, the guy, the guy, the guy who you talking to who are like out there in the field, the loser, whatever, they have authority. You know, but I'm always like, you know, another guy, Frank McKenzie, who's out there a lot, who's constantly hammering, you know, these points. And I was like, well, he was the CENTCOM commander when the Afghanistan withdrawal happened. And he didn't put his stars on the, you know, if he thought there was a better way, why didn't he put his stars on the table? So like why are you know, like, okay, I mean, I personally supported the, Afghanistan withdrawal, I believe the president Trump still does, but it said that it's done terribly, not which I think is clear, but it's like, you know, you could, you could say, join Eisenhower had a kind of moral authority. But the other thing about Dwight Eisenhower, I mean, he was actually a smart guy. But if you look at like his guildhall speech, I don't know if you remember this, but like the unlike MacArthur, for instance, he had a real feel for the American people, civilian army, you know, like they were, are they offering the the award of the city of London. He said, I can't accept this, I accept this only on behalf of the great human forces. He said, you know, which is like, yeah, it's like regular guys, you know, and that's, to me, that's I try to have that mindset about like, I don't want people to get torn limb from limb in a war with China that we could avoid, let alone another like or or or if this or vapor vaporized in a nuclear explosion with Russia. Of course, that means you don't just like do whatever they want, duh, but you've got to like calibrate that balance, always thinking about, as President Trump has said, going back to like what's in the concrete and should the American people? You've referred repeatedly to a potential war with China. I assume that'd be over Taiwan. I think yes, I think Taiwan would be the focal point, but what I think is very scary about the Chinese and I don't think the Chinese are behaving in it. Frankly, if you apply the way, I'm like, you were in Washington from the period after the collapse of the Soviet and right or a little bit after it, right? But like, no, I was there, I was there that day. You're there, did it. Okay. Oh, right. Exactly. I know you've talked about this. If you apply the same kind of behavior that we exhibited over the 25, I would say 20 years after that, and you apply that model to a China that is not constrained, that's very scary. Right. Like, so we just have to apply the same model to them because again, to me, it's like a conservative and I don't think so. So I know exactly what you're saying, but maybe that's too subtle. Yeah. We explain precisely what you're saying. We went from being in the 1980s, you had the Weinberger Doctrine or President Reagan and Reagan almost getting impeached because he was trying to help just a proxy group with the contrast because people were so afraid of getting in another Vietnam. And the biggest thing that he would do would have meetings with the Soviet Premier on nuclear weapons because people were like, this could happen, and I really don't want it to happen. Right. Fast forward 15 years and we're invading Iraq. And as you recall, the people who were biggest fans of invading Iraq, the plan was also to go after probably Syria and Iran and so forth, informally or not. I worked for those people at the time. So you know, so I mean, that was not, that was just the starting point. Oh, I'm aware. Yeah. So, and that was the new American century. The way I interpret that is you're going to have people like that because we're human beings. And that's how we socialize or whatever. And if there's no constraint, no, you would have been like sent to the Looney bin in 1982. If you're like, oh, it's in Vanarock, 2003, if you said we shouldn't in Vanarock, you were like, even if your Brent Skowcroft, you were castigated. Oh, right. So, and never rehabilitated, by the way, interesting. Well, I have, I mean, I don't agree with them on everything, but I, I mean, that's sort of my great, but I'm just saying it. Exactly. Yeah. It wasn't like, you know, Brent Skowcroft got rich or, yeah, more specked. I mean, he said those things, you know, to his own detriment. Yeah. And I just on the China thing, what I would say is they care a lot about Taiwan, but I think it's very clear they're building a military to go beyond Taiwan. They're building a basing architecture to go well beyond Taiwan. I think that's in a sense almost indisputable. And I think they have interests to go beyond Taiwan. This is what worries me is I actually fear ironically that China is living out the Leninist theory of imperialism, which is they need captive export markets for their overproduction. And of course, they need natural resources and other things to import. And so they have a rational incentive to what the Japanese created the greater East Asia Co-pros for every empire, formal or informal is not everyone, but like, a lot of them start out as basically commercial zones. Of course. And that's what I worry about. And again, I, the good news is I think we can negotiate with China about that. That's why I think President Trump's, again, it's a lot of criticism, his willingness to be open to negotiating a deal with president. She is good because we don't, we don't have an implacable hostility or rivalry. We don't have to change. I hate communism, but like that's up to them. And we, the last thing I want is Americans dying, trying to impose our form of government on them. Hopefully that's pretty you know, I'm got your virtual. But I think, I think if we just, you know, Taiwan's a tough issue, because the point I've been making, and I've gotten some plaque from again, good quarters from Walter Journal, last couple of months is like, I've been saying we should focus on defending Taiwan, and they need to step up. They haven't done it, and we haven't prioritized. So I think Taiwan is on the knife said right now. Now I think we want to avoid a war with that if we pass the Senate. President Trump has said a war attack on Taiwan isn't going to happen under my watch. So I think it is absolutely incumbent upon whoever is working for him to make sure that doesn't happen, combining a strong shield with a rational defensive policy and kind of political message to China that convinces them that look you're better off with peace. The Wall Street Journal attacked you. Yeah. So they, how long will the Wall Street Journal kind of be considered the preeminent place where, quote, conservative intellectuals explain their views? I think they're in, I think they're actually in trouble, honestly. I, you know, I read them, but they are so far out of whack. I mean, so on my, on the International Security Forum policy issues, they are total premises that they, at this, in the same breath, often they'll say our military is in terrible shape, but we need to have aggressive policies in like four different theaters. It makes no sense. It's incoherent, right? On, you know, their way out of step on the conservative Republican views on like trade where like Lidheiser and Navarro and the president are. They, they can't stand, you know, they've been repeatedly criticized people like you like vice president advanced. So I feel like I'm an honor to be in this company. Um, so it's sort of like, you know, obviously they reflect a certain part of the, you know, American population, which is sort of, you know, wealthier professionals who are probably more socially liberal, the Asala court or New York, et cetera. But I think a lot of people read them because they matter, right? But at some point you get so far out of whack that you actually become a liability. You know, and they were big backers of Nikki Haley and so forth. So, you know, I think we need, but then with the rise of new media, I mean, you're, you've been a pioneer in this, but others, you know, and, and Elon and what he's done with X and, um, you know, in David Sachs and these kind of people, I think there's hope that like not only does it not going to matter as much, but it may become less and less relevant. It seems like the judge report to me, you know, you have in your mind that this, no, I mean, judge went from judges, of course, sold to left wingers. They've never been at that, but I believe that's true. Um, but the also journal in some sense has been also, I mean, they don't, I don't know. People who imagine the Wall Street Journal is conservative or sort of like having been paying attention. It's like the socially liberal fiscal conservative. Yeah, they were, they were like mocking President Trump in the interview. I thought that was pretty lame. And kind of it's a really dishonest newspaper. And I'm rooting for it's demise. I just want to say that. Um, I mean, I hope it could get reformed. But, you know, I'm, I'm right. You're totally right. We've seen enough institutions destroyed. I just, I do think it's really a garbage newspaper. And, um, and I wish more people realized that. It's all myself. All right, out of control. Um, so when do you think it'll be clear like who's administering Trump's foreign policy? I mean, I just, I honestly don't know. I mean, it's up, obviously up to him. Um, but, you know, what, what I would say is I hope he makes, you know, picks people who will implement the vision that that he ran on and that, you know, you, uh, and others have supported him so ably about. I, I, as just as sincerely as an American. I mean, even if I'm not part of it or I'm dog catcher or whatever. I mean, that I think if honestly, if, if the prime assist types who could get us into multiple wars get in there, you're going to have to get to a more realistic foreign policy eventually. They'll destroy Trump. They could, they could, they could destroy some people like Pompeo, who might know personally hate Trump, they hate Trump. And, you know, I don't care what he says or Lindsey Graham says, oh, he's so great. You know, they suck up to him on Fox News, but they hate him and they're working to undermine him and they did throughout his four years person office and the four years that followed, they undermined him because they hate him. So, I, I just hope that there's a new generation in the Republican party of people who maybe aren't even ideological, but just put a mirror on his sense. Yeah. America's interests, America's is the whole point of our government. I think there is a new generation people in their 20s and 30s. I'm very hopeful. I mean, I talked to a lot of them. What I'm worried about is I don't think there's any, I mean, you maybe like in and Trump is like an exception, but you know, you look at guy like Vice President Vance. He's only, I think 40. Yes. You know, a lot of the best senators, you know, are much younger. Yeah. You look like Eric Schmidt, Eric Schmidt, Jim, Jim Banks, you know, younger guys like, you know, and the problem is people just naturally like, well, we need somebody to 65 or whatever. And it's sort of like, but I think it's even worse than than what you're suggesting because like, you know, let's say we get in a big Middle Eastern war. And you have people who are talking about an independent Taiwan or regime change in China or regime change in Russia. And we get bogged down. Why wouldn't the Chinese attack? Like just, I mean, thinking about, think apply how we behave the project for New American century style thinking and just think that those people will be in the ascendancy and Beijing. The way I think about the sucker is like, we're like a heavyweight boxer. And China's another heavyweight boxer. Russia's like a middleweight and maybe North Korea and Iran or like, you know, welter weights or feather weights or whatever. Those guys can, they can tear you out and China can call us to a match at any time at any time. And if we're not ready, that is like terrible, you know. And so at that point, we would have to put a more realistic form policy. But I my view, and this is I think a real point to the kind of people read the Wall Street Journal on that page, the point that I would make to them is if we go down this path of aggressive policies and three or four different theaters of the world without the backing, we will end up bloody and bruised. We will have catastrophic defeat. Lots of Americans will be killed and the American people. season three or four different theaters of the world without the backing. We will end up bloody and bruised. We will have catastrophic defeat. Lots of Americans will be killed and the American people may very well say, I'm done. I'm done. This is, you know, all the rules based in our short order. This is what it led to. Forget about it. And that if you want to save it, if you want to save something like I think I think mine is like the, the reform rather than the radical upheaval. Mine is like, hey, no, I believe in the post war. I just don't believe in the post 1989 absurd hubris going around. The people, yeah, we can hold war that and I keep going back to it. But it's just like I just trade because like you know, Senator McConnell will talk about Eisenhower all the time. And I'm like, dude, Senator, Senator, I think I was in our thought that if there are US troops in Europe at the end of the 1950s, it was a failure, he's the one who came up with the uncle suckered line, not president Trump. So you want to talk about the Cold War legacy. We were pretty ruthless. You know, the Germans attacked us. They're excuse me, the Senate, John, the, the Japanese attacked us in 1941. And we let the Soviets do the bulk of the fighting. And we put Germany first, one, because, and I'm glad as a descendant of people who were in the European theater operations, I'm glad that the Soviets, but George Schultz, when he went and dealt with his counterpart, he went, he visited. He wrote about this very movingly. He went to the cemetery in Leningrad and he offered a somber salute. And I had the honor to meet the Schultz a couple times. And this was not a, you know, he's, he has strong views and so forth. But I think you can respect that, you know, and understand that we can be hard-nosed and look at your opponents and say, we don't want to war. We've told you before about how low it is a great app that I am proud to say I use my whole family use is it's for daily prayer and Christian meditation and it's transformative. So with everything happening in the world right now, it is essential to ground yourself. This is not some quack cure. This is the oldest and most reliable cure in history. It's prayer ground yourself in prayer and scripture every single day. That is a prerequisite for staying sane and healthy and maybe for doing better eternally. So if you're busy on the road, headed to kids sports, there's always time to pray and reflect alone or as a family, but it's hard to be organized about it. Building a foundation of prayer is going to be absolutely critical as we head into November, praying that God's will is done in this country and that peace and healing come to us here in the United States and around the world. Christianity obviously is attacked under attack everywhere. That's not an accident. Why is Christianity the most peaceful of all religions under attack globally? Do you see the opening of the parasol Olympics? There's a reason because the battle is not temporal. It's taking place in the unseen world. It's a spiritual battle, obviously. So try Hallo. Get three months completely free at Hallo. That's hallo.com slash Tucker. If there's ever a time to get spiritually in tuning ground yourself in prayer, it's now Hallo will help personally and strongly and totally sincerely recommended. Hallo.com slash Tucker. What happened to all the Bush people? You were here for that. Not just the President Bushman's family, a pretty clear word for Kamala Harris, but all the people who staff that administration, to all of them still buy those ideas, those 20 year old ideas or have any come around to your position. It's a great question because I know a lot of them is like you, I like a lot of them. You know, some of them know, I admire some. I don't admire others and people are going, you know, a lot of them put flags in the ground with the foolish and inappropriate never Trump letters in 2016 and they're kind of so their hands are a bit tied. So I don't know how they would behave in a vacuum. I think you see sort of various stages of grief. I mean, various people kind of adapting in different ways or not adapting. Some people are kind of like un reconstructed. Some are kind of like resigned to where things are going. You know, it's funny about the Bush, I mean, I don't, I mean, you remember this better than I do, but I remember like Bush ran on a more humble foreign policy. I know. You know, I mean, actually what Trump's saying is not that radically different from the kind of bush vibe, which was against the crusading progressivism of Bill Clinton. Now he ended up totally abandoning that unfortunately. It is eternal discredit. And in a sense he was a progressive. He was he was armed for progressives and Bill Crystal is let's, let's fight the end of history, you know, basically, which is like that's not in any way. And I mean, conservative, I'm not like Angela, dancing on the head of a pin. It's not common sense, right? But I think, I think a lot of those people, it's probably, it's going to be hard to incorporate them. You know, there's sort of two and a lot, you know, sociologically again, it's they're invested in the old model. And so I think we're going to need that the trouble is that all the credentialing's been on that side. And so all of it, almost all of it. I mean, I'm not to make it any myself, but like I'm a rare and I was I was teetering on the maybe passing over to the edge of respectability or whatever the mainstream is, you know, for years. And you know, I think what I find though encouraging Tucker is I, and this is where I mean, wait, can I say that? You went to Grotton and Harvard, right? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Well, so are you the only person in the world you went to Grotton and Harvard you voted for Donald Trump? You know, I don't think so. Actually, back right in Harvard, roommate was at the kid. I think there are a few others. I mean, I, you know, but I mean, okay, so you got me. I, you know, people say to some time, I think they say to about you too. It's like, oh, you're from the lead background. How can you not support the elite? And I'm always like, the elite is supposed to work for the public interest. And by the way, that was the model. Teddy Roosevelt was behind the founding of Grotton School, which I went there. I had very fun memories. A lot of people who are associated with that hate, Donald Trump and everything. I proudly support him. But I think the whole point that is to serve, you know, his service is perfect freedom. The idea is public service is putting the interest of the public ahead. And so I, to be honest, I find the current establishment. I look at morning Joe or something. And I'm like, this is not what America deserves. Okay. So I have the same perspective. And I would say more the identical perspective. And I would say that nobody reforms the system who doesn't understand this. And you're always going to have a Teddy Roosevelt saved capital in the United States by restraint. He was hated by his peers by restraining them an opel. Exactly. And the only reason he was able to do that was because he was pushing back against his own classic understood them. Right. Right. So no, I'm not attacking you for going to Grotton Harvard. I'm, I'm rather saying, I think it's essential that you understand. JD Vance hated Trump. Once he had law school started going up to the Aspen Institute to speak in the summer, found the people there. So repulsive. It's like, oh, he was telling me he has become their nightmare. Exactly. Because he knows who they are. Right. He didn't know what David Brooks many times. Exactly. So anyway, totally. Totally. And I think like, and I think like that's, you know, I love this, this clip of Maggie Goodlander getting called out by this, you know, we should be challenged if you're like anybody should be subject to challenge. And that's what's so great about like X and podcast. Did Maggie Goodlander win? I'm embarrassed. I think so. I'm not sure. And I'm like, not picking on her particularly, but like, you know, there's a fair point. But I mean, my view is, and it's apropos because the other woman I think was in, I think she's her family is from China. But you know, even under Mao, I mean, the ultimate egalitarian system, there is an establishment. There is an elite. Right. And of course, Xi Jinping is a product of that elite. Dogs create higher of course, you're always going to have a higher experience. So the question is not do you have a ruling class? Is it getting a ruling class? Is it good? Is it good? Would you have a good ruling class? Or do you have Jake Sullivan and Tony Blinken? That's the best one. You know, and I don't want to cry too much of a river here. But like they are the establishment and they act in like a sociologically conservative way. They're all going to leave office and they're all going to get great jobs on Wall Street. And they're all going to go to law firms and whatever. And it's the people who are taking on the establishment are and are taking the slings and arrows and hopefully metaphorically alone. But to me, that's the point. That's what that's what you're supposed to do. If you, if, you know, as the Bible says to whom much is given up, much is expected, I strongly agree with that. And I think you're a model of that honestly. And I'm not just saying that. Well, no, I know, I believe in that. And I'm just I'm just so offended by I'm so offended by the mediocrity and social equality. Stupidity of a ruling class that I just can't. And I don't care if they kill me. I will never stop thinking away. And that's your word. We're saying courageous. Um, bridge Colby, I'm rooting for you fervently. I just wanted to make sure everyone knows who you are and what you think this process is taking place privately as it has to. But I also think that people who voted for Trump because they want a common world. They don't want the United States or him to be destroyed in wars. I think they should know what's going on. So I hope this provides a little sunlight. Thank you very much. My friend bless you. Thank you. Thank you. to channel. We hope you'll subscribe to it. And by the way, you can hit the little bell on there and get notifications every time we produce a video. We hope you'll do that also.