[Music] Pravin Mohan, thank you, man, for coming on the show. I appreciate it. It's great to meet you. Thanks for having me. Glad to be here. How long uh how long have you been in the States now? You mean? Yeah, just on this trip. Uh 25 days, I think. 25 days. That's a good trip, man. And you were just explaining to us off camera how you almost lost your drone filming some some crazy Naza type lines in California. Yeah. What were you what were you shooting over there? Um, so we have a particular um set of ruins called the Bllythe Inaglios. Uhhuh. Uh, this is in a small town called Bllythe in California. Um, I'm sure your uh viewers know about Nazca lines, right, in Peru. Do you know about NASCAR lines? Yes. Yes. Okay. But it's very interesting to me, right, that they made all these lines in the desert. And when you when I went there because I've also seen I've also visited Nazca lines in Peru. Oh, really? Yeah, I have. Yeah. There's no way to do it in Maybe now there is, but uh 10 years ago when I went to uh Peru, you can only you have to get on this plane and they'll take you on top of the Nazca lines. Back then, fly over top of it. Yeah. Is it maybe in 2012 before drones? Before drones 2010, 2012. And then I I think I had my drone at that time. This was the very first I think it's called DJI Hero or something like that. Very old. Um and then they wouldn't let us take them. Really? Yep. At that time in Peru. So you have to go into this plane and they'll take it's like a nice little plane which can only take like maybe 10 people. Yeah. And they fly on top of the desert and the guide will show you. Okay. This is the ancient astronaut who's pointing to the sky. This is the the hummingbird. You've seen you've seen Oh, of course. What is the conventional theory for how those things were formed? What what do they say? It's actually easy to create the NASCAR lines. I'm not saying this is hard to create. It's not the how uh that's concerning. Okay? It's not the how. You can easily create you can go today to the Nazca desert or you can go to Bllythe. And some people have done this in California, right? They go to the desert and you can just scrape off the the top level of stones from the soil and you've created a permanent mark. So you can put your name. So I can put my name like Previn Moan in the desert, right? So I can write that. Yes. Yes. And then when you fly a drone or if you're flying on top of BL California, you'll see oh Pine Moan. Okay. So it's not the how that's uh that really concerns me. Is it because it's easy to create the the Nazca lines, right? Or the bllythe inaglios, but it's a why. How long do we know how long they've been there? Well, I mean, there's no way to date them, right? In BL in BL, they're saying that it's uh some are saying it's 400 years old and some are saying it's even 5,000 years old. Oh, wow. Because there's no way to date that. You can't radio date that, right? Anybody? And you know, believe it or not, you know, uh some people are saying that this is a tourist trap that was created just 25, 50 years ago to get some visitors come into this uh small town called Bl. They're saying that, you know, people did this 100 not not in not in Peru, right? Not in Peru. Yeah. What are they selling in this small town that's bringing so that that they're making so much money on? It's a great marketing tool. that that's what some people are saying. This is this is a tourist trap. I'm not buying this, right? What do you think it is? Um I I think they're ancient um ancient creations. You know, I I don't I don't doubt that uh this is new. I would imagine that they were created thousands of years ago um as signals to the gods. Signals to the gods because from the ground you can't really see anything, right? I I was just in BL right from the ground. You can't even see the whole thing. Like it doesn't make any sense. You would actually have to see it from like at least 500 ft above. Otherwise, it doesn't make any sense to you. Yeah. But how did they see like how did they do it if they didn't have like an overhead aerial perspective of what they were doing, you know? Yeah. Yeah. So, so the I don't know if you we used to have aerial uh uh signals uh even 100 years ago. I don't know if you know that because uh they would put large arrow marks before the invention of GPS and all these electronics. They would put these they would literally lay large arrow marks in all over the US for the planes. Really? Yeah. No way. Yes. There's still some remnants out there in the US. that the arrow marks were supposed to give like a be like what what was the purpose? It was just an indication for the pilots, right? If a pilot is traveling from Tampa to uh Orlando that Wow. like road signs for pilots. Exactly. That's insane. Yeah. So the that's the only uh thing that I can think of and I think that you know I I always imagined that um there were either humans were using very advanced technology like flying right they were they they were had flying machines and ancient texts talk about this ancient texts talk about uh flying machines like vimmanos all the time right so they would just jump up into jump into a an airplane essentially and they would start flying. Mhm. Right. Or they would jump into a spacecraft and they would go into another planet and this is what ancient uh texts talk about. So either they did that or um they you know they ancient humans did that. I'm saying ancient humans had this kind of technology uh thousands of years ago or they had some type of communication with gods. What texts specifically talk about that? Mahabharata talks about it. Ramayana talks about it. Both both are the big epics of ancient India. Okay. They both talk about flying machines. This is Sanskrit. It's in Sanskrit, right? More than 2,000 years old. Have you do you know how to read Sanskrit? Yeah. Really? Yeah. That Well, the text is similar to modern Hindi. That's it's called Dave Nagari. Wow. No. So, what are there are there images of these uh of these lines that you photographed in California online that we can look at? Yeah, if you just Google blide inaglios blide inio l y t h e. Okay. Uh inagios. It's called I t a gl iOS. Yep. Well, we can't see it though. Yeah, we don't have it yet. There we go. Yeah. Oh, wow. Look at that. I've never seen this before. Mhm. It should your immediate thought would be an alien. I thought Rick and Morty. That's bizarre, man. Yeah. Now, from the ground, it looks like it you won't even see it. No, you wouldn't. Yeah. From the ground just looks like nothing. And we know this has been here for how at least how long? Like this is this has been here. We don't know anything for sure. But it's saying like at least 400 years old. It it was discovered. And of course, you know, and and the funny part is people uh people laugh all the time when we say, "Well, you can only see it from the sky, so it was done for the gods, right?" People always think like, "Oh, that's like that's cute, but that's not true." Yeah. Do you know when who discovered quote unquote who discovered the blind in Taglio? Who? Guess who would have done it? Guess who would have what? Discovered it. Yeah. Guess guess who would have discovered the bl inaglios are sheep hers? Yeah, that's that's a good point. Who else? Archaeologists, historians, people exploring the deserts. Who who would have discovered the bllythe in taglios? You think Danny? Indians. No. Who? But who would have done it? No, it was a pilot who was flying. Yeah. Yeah. A pilot. Right. Right. Nobody knew about this. Right. People People were walking everywhere. a pilot I think in 1930s he was flying to California and he was the first one who said what the heck is that it's got a little wiener wow that's really that's really crazy there there are details like that that are really interesting for example you can see that animal Mhm. Um yeah there but you see underneath there's something else little find oh a serpent Mhm. There's a better image of that. I I guess this one that's Yeah, there was a different one. Yeah, that's a different one. Yeah, there you go. Yeah, man. That's wild. Yeah. So So, so people were here all the time and it's right next to the city, man. I mean, you can you can basically go to the Inaglia in like 15 minutes from the city, right? But nobody knew this existed for hundreds and you know probably thousands of years. Nobody knew because you can't see it from the ground. You you're not going to be like wow that's a figure. You can't make that out. And that's why only a pilot who was flying disco quote unquote discovered it um 100 years ago. That had to that that had to been such a crazy discovery for the first people that ever got in planes. Because now you're basically elevating yourself to a new dimension and now you can see some some that that's been here probably forever that we've never been aware of. Yeah. Yeah. The same thing with NASCAR lines. The Nazca lines then it's a desert, right? You know, I told you about the story. I lost a drone. Yes. Right. And my my drone like it's like low battery going home and I just went somewhere. Yeah. Right. And I'm running in the desert, right? trying to find the drone within like 10 15 minutes the dehydration level you know it's like 100 degrees in right in in yeah and in like 15 20 minutes like I thought like I was going to pass out okay so you're saying that the tribal people who lived in Nazca desert that's a big desert man desert it's a dry desert you're saying that people who lived in Nazca desert like thousands of years ago had nothing better to do rather than making figures that they can't even see. You would you make an art like nobody can see, right? Would you ever do it? No. Absolutely not. Yeah. So, who are they doing it for? And why did they go through the paint? They're doing it for the gods. That that that's the Yeah, that makes sense. That makes sense, man. I don't think there's is there anybody on earth who's explored more ancient sites and ancient temples in various parts of the world as you. And you you've been doing this forever too. Yeah. Probably a decade. How how long? Well, I mean I was I was born in, you know, in the kind of like the temple premises. I used to like kind of live inside the temple. So I have good exposure to that. Um, but yeah, I've I've documented more than a hundred temples and we we do intense work, right? So, we just don't do like, okay, let's go on a day trip to a temple. So, we take like half a dozen people and we document all the carvings in a temple and this takes a long time. We spend sometimes weeks in the temples. Um, and we only focus on ancient structures, meaning that they have to be at least 600 years old, you know, we don't focus on the new ones. How did you get started in all this? Um, what really happened was I I like I said, you know, I grew up in like the temple complex, which which is very um kind of you don't know what gets into your head, right? You're playing hide-and-seek in a temple, right? So, you're just going and hiding behind like these giant statues and you're just hiding there for like 10 minutes looking at all these structures or you're climbing the temple tower and you're like hiding in there or you're playing, right? Um you tend to put in a lot of u thought into it, right? Why did they create these carvings? You know why why did people create such structures at all? It doesn't even today it's a mystery. Mhm. Right. Even today the ancient temples are a mystery. Okay. You you it's very hard to compare them with a modern temple or or a church or or a mosque. It's very hard to compare them. Okay. For example, you will find erotic carvings in ancient temples. Right. Why is a place of worship carved with those details? Right. Right. So you'll find sund dials which tell you time accurately, right? You will find carvings of dancing. You'll find people fighting. You'll find people wrestling. You'll find animal in and the animal um and the details of animals. I I don't know if you were there for the the cosmic summit presentation. I think it left the day before. Um it was packed. uh when I gave the speech a lot of people especially a lot of doctors came from um far far away states like they came from Massachusetts some some of them came from California and uh the carvings I was showing them the the details are really crazy okay for example like you'll see um elephants an elephant uh giving birth to a baby elephant And there are like three other elephants helping the mother push the baby out. Right. You I I've shown the carvings in the presentation. I can send it to you. Yeah. And um uh when I first saw that carving in a temple, it's literally like the the baby elephant is coming out of the mother elephant. And there are other elephants. There's like one elephant literally using its trunk and squeezing the belly like a modern like what that's what humans do, right? Okay. push, push, push the baby out. Right? So, there were three elephants helping the mother elephant. And when I first saw that carving, and it's funny because a lot of people didn't know because it just looks like a group of elephants fighting. You find that carving in a remote corner, right, in a temple that nobody cares about. The temples have hundreds of carvings. So, people just thought these are elephants fighting. But when I really u I put it on my computer and when we decoded this. Yo, Steve, have you sold any of those new plasma and unification thunderstorm generator machines yet? Yes. That's why we're sponsored by Shopify. That's right. It doesn't matter how small you are or what you sell. Shopify helps you sell it everywhere. Of course, they have the internet's best converting checkout, 30% better than other commerce platforms. And their new AI powered Shopify magic makes everything a one-click wonder. As you probably already know, we use Shopify for the podcast website because it's super easy to set up. Super customizable. There's millions of themes and plugins you can use. Payment processing made easy. It's so easy a toddler could do it. Shopify powers literally millions of entrepreneurs of every size and 175 countries. If you guys don't already have your own e-commerce store, their award-winning help supports your success in every step of the way. I mean, look at their YouTube channel. They got tons of tutorials. They really care about their customer experience and making sure they get what they want. They walk you through a ton of processes with their tutorials, making sure that you get everything that you need and you're not left in the dark. So, if you guys enjoy the podcast and want to help support it right now, they are offering a $1 per month trial period at shopify.com/dannyjones. It's all lowercase. Shopify.com/dny jes. to grow your business no matter what stage you're at. Again, that's shopify.comdanjes for a $1 per month trial period. The links below. Back to the show. I thought, "Wow, that's amazing." You look at the imagination of a sculptor who lived a thousand years ago and he thinks that elephants are like humans. The the the other elephants are helping a mother elephant to deliver the baby. That's a great imagination. I was blown away by that. But then that's not it. When I searched the elephants actually do that still today. Yes. The the actual elephants do that when an when a mother elephant is delivering a baby. The other elephants get together. We have videos on YouTube. I was saying I had no idea. Yeah. And so it's not it's not an imagination. Mhm. The sculptor must have observed how elephants were giving birth. That's like today you don't be like for example like reptiles like a snake. It's not a social event. It just goes somewhere. It lays eggs or it gives birth to babies, right? It's not a social event. But but humans imagine a woman giving birth alone. That almost be like wild, right? Yeah. Sometimes it happens but but it's not natural, right? Because we're real social animals. Yes. Same thing with elephants. You you you may have never heard of that. I did not know that until I saw the carving, right? So, ancient builders recorded all these weird like the the stuff that's trending today, right? You'll see something like a a dog uh riding a cow, right? That'd be trending today on TikTok, right? Oh, the dog is riding like he's just on like standing on top of the cow, right? Like almost like a like a human doing it, riding a horse, but that's carved thousands of years ago. They've observed these animals and they carved that in the temples, you know, and then that's what they did. So the uh so what I guess going back to your question, what got me started onto these temples is that the mystery of why did they create these temples, right? It's not just a place of worship that doesn't belong in a place of worship. An elephant giving birth, humans giving birth, that's carved in temples, too. M yeah humans humans delivering babies that's carb in temples too animals and it's very interesting because I'll tell you and this is when I when I I I I put this information out there maybe 8 years ago if you're a child right let's say you're like 6 years old right you're like this high right like we're probably what 2 feet whatever and if you go to a temple you will only look at this level, right? You'll only see like a 6 foot, like maybe four, right? Two to three feet height. All the carvings will be about animals. It's and you I don't like if you if you have a child that's like 3 years old or 5 years old, all day he watches either cartoons or Animal Planet. He's very fascinated by by that. Mhm. right? He's just going to love all the animals. And that's how ancient builders created the temples. So if you are, let's say, 6 years old, all you're going to see is animals. That's your animal ch animal planet. Yeah. Yeah. Also, when you're young, I feel like when you go to when you have new experiences or when you're in places like temples of places of worship that um that older people are used to and they understand it's built into the culture and it's sort of just like the norm. Uh you know, children, they're not hardwired yet. They're their their structural cultural hardwiring hasn't solidified itself yet. You know, everything is so new and their imaginations are so much run wild so much more than adults do. So, um, do you think that maybe had part of it? Maybe like you being so young and and you were still developing, your imagination was still running wild, you were still learning about the world, yet you were in these incredible ancient structures with these crazy details carved into them. Yes. I I think this is why um I got interested in temples very early, right? And of course I moved to the US and I thought that that's fine, right? I'll just make a lot of money and then live a good life in the US. Yeah. Um but I came I came out of India but the India didn't come out of me. Why why did you move to the US? Just I I went to college here. Okay. So I thought I just get a good job. This is back in uh uh uh damn 2001. And you were like you were around roughly 20 years old, something like that you said. Yeah, roughly 20. And then you stayed here for in the US for how long? 15. 15 years. Yep. What's the biggest difference between US and India? One thing I I I still do, right? I I still love about the U US is that everything is perfectly organized. Perfectly organized. Yep. There's like a stop sign. You don't have to do a thing, right? If you see a stop sign, you stop. If it's If it's red, you stop. If it's green, you go. You don't have to look left or right. That's what I love about the US. They take all the thinking out of it. Yeah. Exactly. So then that they put a lot of thought into it. So you don't have to worry about all the little details. Right. In India, we still don't have that. You whether you have a stop sign or not, you have to look you you just have to stay alive. You're right. So you have to worry about the little things, right? You have to make sure that you know you drive carefully, for example. Mhm. Right. So, and of course you have to pay attention to that all the time. So, that gives you less time to think about all the big things. You know what I'm saying? Yeah. So, they've taken care of all the stuff for you so you don't have to think while driving to the podcast, right? If if you had to be thinking about all that stuff, you probably don't know like what to ask me because you've already wasted that 30 minutes thinking about how to survive, right? That's interesting. Yeah. And and and that's the beauty of us. So the the beauty of us is it's it's everything is really well organized. You know the for example I can like I can have a heart attack and you trust the government enough to call 911 and you know they'll be here in 5 minutes right or 10 whatever let's hope so right that's because of the organization they've organized everything so the so the ambulance driver was not going to you know it's not that good in India no not yet not yet yeah but although the development is like massive, right? So, uh people who are born in India and people who are teenagers in India, they no longer want to come to the US really. Yep. Because the growth is rapid. You know, the growth is like we've not seen this kind of growth ever. How big is India compared to the US? One third. A third of the US. Mhm. And you were saying earlier, you said you could have stayed here and got rich or just gone back to India. What do you mean by that? I mean, it's easier to get rich here, get make money here. Well, the culture here is all about money, right? Everyone's focused on on money and the economy here. That's that's that's probably like the one of the fundamental moral value or common values of an American. Yeah. Different in in India, you're saying? Yeah. It Well, I mean, the thing is it it is easy uh to get rich in India too uh now, but not 15 years ago, right? But in the US it's it's it's very capitalistic country. You know you believe in capitalism all the way. Yes. Right. So you can make money. It's it's good. And of course the lifestyle right. So so for example I what what happened when I when I went to college right in 6 months I had a car right I bought a car. I I you know lived in I had all the stuff because there's no minimum wage in India. Hm. So there's going to be a lot of differences, you know, right? Yeah. So, so the US is really good at surface level. Um, all if all you want to do is just make money and have a good life. US is a great country to have, right? It's it's a good country to live in. Right. So, what did you want? Why what made you that that's what I that's what I thought I want. Right. Right. When I was 20 years old, I'm thinking like uh what I'm like what 19. So I'm thinking like oh I just I all I need is like good money you know like may I have a fancy car I make me happy but well it didn't right. So what happens when after you have like a fancy car like what are you going to do with it? Right. Like right? Right. What happens after a year? Right. Having that fancy car like a nice what are you going to do with that nice house? Like you can't do much about it. And then the dream is almost better than the reality of it. Right? So once you achieve it really quickly and then you realize that it's kind of like an empty shell. It's like it's not going to satisfy you. That's not the I mean it's kind of cliche but um the money is not going to really make you happy, right? It's a it's a source of powers. There's no doubt. It's like health. Yes, you need money. I'm not saying you don't need money. You need money like health. But that itself is not going to give you fulfillment, right? It's not going to make you content. It's not going to make you sleep peacefully at night. You, you know. Yeah. Well, money and materialism are two different things, right? Like you could have a lot of money and not be materialistic and want to buy stupid Yeah. Um but so you eventually went back to India. Mhm. Yeah. And what was the was that because you wanted you wanted to explore the temples? you wanted the temples or that was the main reason. Yeah, at at some point I I realized that um okay, so the in 2010 um I started to go back to India and of course I started to like I said, you know, I started to make make tons of money, six figures um at that time. Was that when you started your YouTube channel or No. Oh, okay. I was I was um I was working. So I started to make six figures income and then I didn't know what to do with that money. So I I would go to Mexico, I'd go to Peru, you know, I'd go to all these different places and just and initially when we go to Mexico, we're doing stuff like, okay, let's go like uh bar hopping, right? You're just going like Cancun crawling and you know, and that type of stuff. But then you um I got bored of that and then I started to look at ancient sites in Mexico. Then I started to look at ancient sites in Peru. Um at that time um I didn't even like YouTube it was not even um monetized at that time. Yep. Yep. When I when I joined Y when I joined YouTube it was not for money man. Yeah. I not like I'll just choose YouTube as a career. Yeah. There was nobody who at that time nobody on YouTube was monetized when I joined at that time. So I remember I remember that very very vividly. Yes. You do? Yeah. I remember that time. Yeah. No, I was making videos right when YouTube came out too. Oh, really? Yeah. Just little little short films and stuff and uploading them. Yeah. Yeah. That's a time right when we made stuff just to make the videos. That was the fun part. Right. Now you're thinking like, "Oh, when if I upload this video, how much money will I will I make?" It kind of took the fun out of it. No, it really changed, right? People think about YouTube, they want to reverse engineer a a business out of it. That's the only that's the lens people look through YouTube at now is is and and another weird thing about it too is like, isn't it funny how when people go to YouTube videos, the the two things they care about most are the view count and the comments. Yeah. Yeah. It's not even the video anymore. What's called the social proof, right? This is uh this is how humans function, right? You you know you know about them. Danny, I love your fancy underwear. Oh, my me undies. They're anti- odor, moisture wicking, quick dry, breathable loveliness sponsored this podcast, Stephen, cuz when that summer heat gets nasty, your man junk stays lovely. Their ball caddy avoids the batwing, aka the ball stick, and their microotal fabric is breathable and so soft to the face. I I guess you could put them on your face. Me undies is quite literally the holy grail of undies companies. You can customize your undies, whether you want traditional tidy whitey style, boxer briefs, boxers, and they're customizable, meaning you can get like cosmic planetary undies, mushroom undies, inflatable balloon animal undies, you name it. Me undies supports your butt so well. I mean, it looks really good on you, Danny. What? They take care of their workers, too. And they'll cover the cost if you don't like them. And summer is running hot right now, folks. So, if you guys want to be prepared with MeUndies and help support the podcast today, you can get 20% off your first order, plus free shipping at meundies.com/dannyjones. That's meundies.com/dny jes for 20% off plus free shipping. Meundies. Comfort from the outside in. The link is below. Now, back to the show. It's called the social proof, right? So, for example, you you walk into an elevator, right? And there are like five people in the elevator, but they're all facing the other side showing their backs to you. You will stand the same way. You just turn because you want to be aligned with them. This is called a social proof, right? This is called the social proof, right? You you want to be a part of a of your society. Yeah. Yeah. You want to fit in with society. You don't want to be the outcast. Yeah. So so and that's what people do when when people are not watching your video. People want to first know if other people if others are watching that video and they want to make sure the comments approve. Right. Right. First like we want let's read the comments. Let's make sure that my opinion is correct about this video. I want to make sure I have the correct opinion. And two, I'm not going to watch this video unless I saw that millions of other people are watching it because it's a waste of my time. That's so weird, dude. It's so weird. That's how the society works. And and look, I mean, the thing is it it's weird because it's going to make a ton of bad YouTubers, right? Because they know they'd catch a trend and they'd be like, "Oh, if I support this person, we'll get millions of views." Mhm. Right. That Yeah. That's just like podcasting, man. I was talking about this all the time. There's people that make podcasts and they literally they they create a a podcast business plan, right? They're like, "We need to get Jordan Peterson, uh, Graham Hancock, whatever, all these people that are going to blow up our podcast, then we're going to make this much money, then we're going to sell this merch, and then we're going to be superstars." Yeah. It's the the the way the way people think about these things after like they first come on the scene, you know, like when someone innovates something new, it's usually never the way that it ends up down the road. People end up usually doing it reverse engineering it and trying to figure out how to get there from a different angle. Yeah. It's and and people see people like Warren Buffett, right, they've understood the concept of social proof and they made what billions out of this, right? when when everybody's like a sheep and everybody's buying, they're selling. When everybody Yeah. Because they understand, they know that social proof is a bias and they know how to make the money. And and of course, some YouTubers do it the opposite way. Like, okay, if I if I post this, we can get millions of views, right? You could we you know, people do that. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. It's hard not to. Yeah. Look, man. I mean, I would I would imagine, right, what uh Trump and Biden, they just had a uh a debate debate, if you could call it that. I don't watch it. So, there are channels dedicated to like I will support only Trump and there are channels dedicated to like I will only support Biden. And they both have millions of views, right? They probably make millions of dollars. But I would not be surprised if there's one guy sitting in Russia owning both the channels. Right. Exactly. Yeah. It's that famous uh Bill Hicks joke about the the politicians like I think I like the guy on the right. He seems to fit my moral values. And their guys I like the guy on the left. He seems to support my worldview better. Oh wait, what's that? It's the same guy holding both guys. The same puppet under the puppet master under the table. Yeah. No, that's true. And that's uh it's weird too because when it comes to politics, there's there's people who have entire personas and YouTube channels that are dedicated to basically talking about the person on the other side of the aisle. And in the same way vice versa. Yeah. And and you know um uh I think um in the previous election they found out that some uh guys in Russia uh created Facebook pages Yeah. for and against the same cause. Yes. For example, they'd be like, "Okay, so this uh this church is spreading hate. Let's go and uh have a protest in front of this church." And then the same guy created another page saying that we have to protect this church. And so there's going to there some people are going to cause a riot and then we have to protect our church. So it was the same guy. Yep. Doing both the stuff and and I'm sure you know in chaos. Yeah. And and AI is going to pick up on this and and there you know you know what's going to happen. AI is if you if you want to weaponize AI, that's how it would do it. The enemy of the US, let's say it's some country, right? So they're going to create this kind of politics, right? You just have AI do all these pages and all these YouTube channels for and against the same cause. Right. That's how I would do it. Right. So, so let's say I want to destroy Tampa. Right. Right. I would be like, "Okay, guys, like I'm against LGBTQ. We're we're going to have a protest right here. This is destroying our culture." I would have a page like that and have I could easily get thousands of followers for that. And then I would create another page saying that no LGBTQ rocks, right? We need our rights. And then and I'll say let's have the protest at the same time right across the street and I I can easily create a riot. I could do it actually. Right. And this is this is how AI is going to is going to do. I don't know if you saw it, but this was this was like maybe a month ago. There was like a brawl in the streets where the LGBT pride the pride parade clashed with the free Palestine parade. Oh. And they were literally like curb stomping each other. It was like a fullon war on the streets. I think it was in Philly. Okay. In Philadelphia. Yeah. Can you find that? Israel Hamas war protests have have disrupted pride marches. Like what? Just a day ago. people people don't don't really they don't like to think like you were talking about with with the the stop signs and the traffic signals and all that pe it's the same thing with media they just want to be told what to think yeah if if you start to compete with uh with somebody for example right so let's say you start to compete with a podcaster who does videos every day then you no longer worry about the right information you start about like the all the news media only about like who gets a news first. They don't care if the news is right or wrong. Right. Right. Right. They have to give it first. But and people follow that too. And and this is and this is a situation because if you're late and if you're just waiting for the right news to come, right, that if let's say somebody's like serious, right? Somebody's in the hospital. Mh. Some news channel is going to say, "Oh, this guy's dead." and he's going to get all the views even though he's still right. Yeah. So, all the news channels are like, "What do we do?" He's just like purposely deceitful just to get views and clicks and advertising dollars. Yeah. Yeah. Man, it's a rough world out there. The media landscape is uh getting more and more treacherous to navigate every day. Do you know any media in the US that's not considered propaganda? Any media in the US that's not considered propaganda? This podcast is not propaganda. This is probably the only one. No, I'm just kidding. No, I mean, what what about like a news channel, right? There's a difference between propaganda that's that's purposely misinforming or just like purposely being biased for for a political, religious, monetary reasons, right? Or just people getting stuff wrong, you know, on accident. So, do you can you think of any because we know what do you think about SN? You mean you mean any like television news and stuff? No, I think it's all propaganda. Yeah, I think it's all propaganda. I think the way of the world is going to be independent journalism, independent people that like what we're doing here or like, you know, there's there's millions of other examples of great podcasts and people that report on different things, which is why I love listening to your watching your videos because there's not there I have no other choice. There's no one else that's exploring these crazy ancient temples looking at this stuff like you are. Yeah, typically you know you don't really see a lot about some of these ancient Hindu temples in places like uh in India, Indonesia, China. In your experience, what has been like the most mindbending temple structure that you visited in your home country? There are lots. Um there's one temple called the Kyasa Temple which is a very uh famous temple. It's built out of one rock. That's It's a large temple. You It has mult Oh, that's the one that's carved out of the mountain. Y Yeah, I would have to agree with you. That is probably one of the most insane things I've ever seen. So, explain to people what like So, so there's a a giant stone. What is it? Is it granite? Is like a granite mountain? Yeah, it's made of ignous rocks. Yep. Similar to granite. And people basically it's like a negative relief temple. Like people just carved out the negative space out of this temple. And there's something like 200,000 tons of stone that was removed. Yeah, originally uh when I first and this is um I think I visited this temple in 2013. I was still in the US at that time. I would go back uh to India for a month. Um I was looking at all the temples. I would come back, right? Um when I first saw this temple, I said there's no way that a temple could be built this way. This is just weird, right? Uh so I started to study the temple more and more. Uh, and I realized how crazy it is. It's it's not like it's not humanly possible to build a structure like that, right? They should have used advanced technology. Uh, because it's it is carved out of a single hill. Like it's just a giant it's it's not a real I wouldn't say it's a mountain. What's the how do you pronounce the uh Kyasa? Can you pull that up, Steve? Oh, there you go. Yeah. Yeah. That is nuts. See here. Yeah. So, if if you see um you know the the way you carve it, it's not like you have to carve the You had it. That was it, Steve. Yeah. I'm going to get more images. Oh, we go. Yeah. So, you had to carve You have to scoop out the rocks. Like for example, you see that kind of like they call it the pillar, but it should remind you of an obelisk. Mhm. Right. So you don't carve an obelisk. Right. Normally if I if I tell you let's make an obelisk like they they have an obelisk in what? Washington DC. They put rocks on the they put bricks or rocks from the ground level. They keep going up. Right. This is the normal construction technique. Right. But to create an obelisk like this, you have to carve everything around it. Okay. That's I wonder why uh anybody ever wondered why they made an obelisk in Washington DC? Uh you know, I don't know the answer to that. But why did they make it? Do you know? Yeah. I don't know. Well, you'll see a lot of um Egyptian ancient Egyptian u details in Washington DC. This is really Yep. Yep. Lots. So all of this basically was this was all one rock and they carved out all of the negative space to create this. There's nothing else like this on the earth, is there? At least this the size. There are not this size. Yes. So So I think this was the prototype. Mhm. And that that create there are structures like this in India but I think this was the first one that was created with this kind of negative like topdown approach. I I don't think um Wow. Yep. And then there are temples smaller temples um modeled after this right? You know you know what I mean? There are smaller temples modeled after this. So when so so so conventional archaeologists when you ask them about this what is the understanding of how long it took them to build it when they think it was built or carved out and and what were the tools that they say were used to create this? If you talk to mainstream historians or archaeologists, they're going to say uh well, the the dates vary um but they will say it's about 1,200 to,400 years old. Okay. And they were carved using chisels, hammers, pickaxes, simple metal tools. Would that have been possible? You we don't know. I don't think so. Well, you you could do it, right? You like for example, you could make the entire studio with just using simple tools. But the question is, did you Yeah. Would it be practical? Yeah. And how long would it take? Right. So, this is a this is a thing that that people people fail to question, right? Just because I can, right? Just because you can make this table with simple tools. Did you? Mhm. No, you probably used like you know all all sorts of like cutting power tools etc. Right. We don't know. The question is is it possible to build it with chisels and hammers and maybe millions of people and then like a century? Yeah, it's possible. But how do we know if that's how they did it? You know, that's the question. How long do they do they say that it took to build this? We don't know that for sure. Some people if there was an official plaque on site they keep changing that because when I made the video it became and this is one of the first videos which kind of became viral um from my channel at that time when I posted it and I think I posted I was the first one who who documented this temple and it was in 2013 or 14 and it at that time it got like 25,000 30,000 views in like a you know a week or something. It was like big at that time. You remember those times when if you get like 10,000 views? That's like a miracle. Um, so at that time and in my video I actually show a screenshot. Luckily for me, right, I scroll I show a screenshot from Wikipedia that says um 400,000 tons of rock were removed or 800,000 tons of rocks were removed. Wow. to to create the Kyaza temple and since then people have modified that Wikipedia page so many times because I I mean I got lucky I guess I posted a screenshot because it says that time and and everything from Wikipedia right but since then um now they're saying that you know oh no only 200,000 tons were removed but remember these are all like estimations Right. Right. So, so they kind of now they're like, "Oh, this is a big controversy. So, so how do we minimize this to prove that it was easy to create with primitive tools, right? Like rather than really looking at it, I mean, I'm I'm sure in another country they'd be like, "Wow, this is amazing. Let's let's announce it as a world wonder, right?" M but in India they're like oh let's kind of minimize that. Um so it's it seems simpler to create. It's it's kind of weird isn't it? Yeah. So who so so who in India is in charge of declaring when they were made, who made them and how they are made. Is it similar to Egypt? how like the department of antiquities with zahi hwas and all this stuff they're controlling this narrative that clearly everyone is against how does that work in India well we we have an uh archaeological survey of India this is the archaeological department of India um and probably there's some head there and then we have a historical department and all that stuff um they're now looking at it it's not as bad as Egypt you know really yep it's not as bad as bad as Egypt and we got to give them credit um for trying. But the um but I have to say that it's impossible to date a megalithic structure. Right. Right. It's just impossible. There's no way to date that. So, um how do we actually date a temple like this? What would you do? Right? If you're an archaeologist, how would you start? I mean, you'd have to find the the any kind of organic material or remains inside it and try to use that. Yep. Maybe take carving like like if there were hieroglyphs in there or something like that that depicted any sort of kings or gods maybe. Yeah. So, so what happened was um in a typical temple, right, they would find some organic material. They'd find some like burnt bones or something like that, right? Then they would date that and they'd be like, "Oh, this is like, oh, this was built 500 years ago, right?" But we don't know if somebody was cooking something 500 years ago, right? Inside the temple. Same thing with the pyramids, right? Oh, no. Look at this crazy big structure. I'm going to put my my dead grandma in there. Yeah. Same. Look. And and the paintings, right? So So sometimes in India, they're like, "Oh, look. We are able to look at the ve paintings are made of vegetables in India. They take all like different kind of vegetables, put them together and create paint and they paint on the carvings, right? So we can date that organic material. So they look at the the the paint the vegetable stuff and be like, "Oh, this is like 600 years old, but painted after." Yeah. Like I I'll paint my house now. Yeah. It's been painted 100,000 times. Yeah. So, it's very hard to to find the dates on them, right? And and and fortunately, like I said before, most of the temples don't have inscriptions that say, "I built it. This is when I built it, right? This is why I built it." They don't say that. And this is the hard part of this, right? It almost It's like me, right? you don't know anything about me mostly right mostly you don't know anything about me right and and they kind of bring that I of course I I tried to learn that from them because they didn't they never told they never talked about themselves instead they let their work like you're looking at the Kaaza temple like wow the kyaza temple is amazing how you don't you don't think once about the guy who built it right Mhm. Right. Because now your attention is all on the on his creation, right? Yeah. So, how big is that whole cavity in the side of that mountain? Roughly. I know. Can't tell you the numbers. Yeah. I've been there a few times. We Wow. Look at with the people there, man. Yeah. Now you can see the size and and you see this is the hard part, right? So, so you see people on the on the first floor. Mhm. And you can see people on the second floor. Yep. Of course, in India it' be like ground floor and first floor, whatever. Now, but remember this and you can literally walk up and to the left, if you go to the left, you can see a bridge. This is a bridge that goes to the balcony out in the front, right? You had to plan everything before you even started carving anything. Even before you started carving a little bit, you had to plan everything. You can't be like, "Okay, now we have created this. Now let me put a bridge between these structures." You can't do that, right? Because it's not nothing is added to it, right? No. Yeah. When you start, you have to under you have to have the final plans just like the final blueprints before you even start. Yeah. Holy smokes. I cannot My brain cannot even fathom how to even think about going about something like this. Yeah. And and and you know what? If you if you zoom in to the carvings on the right, there are like weird animals on the right. There's like weird animals and stuff like that. Yeah. There you can see a lot of destruction. You can see a lot of like damage. Mhm. Those damages were were done by kings who came from the Middle East and they tried to destroy the temple. They'd be like, "Oh, this is like infidel stuff, right? Going right. Islam." Yeah. So, they try to destroy it. And how do you how do you destroy a temple like this, you know? You can't. Radical religion, man. Wow. Yeah. But they can't like you can't Is there any of it they did? They were able to destroy some temples. Yeah. temples were destroyed. But a temple like this, how do you even begin to destroy? You would have to kind of nuke it, you know? You'd have to you'd have to throw a bomb onto it because it's it's impossible to to destroy, right? It's it's made out of one rock. The entire structure is made out of one rock. And you had to build multiple floors. You had to build bridges. You had to build these pillars. And you had to do all this flawless work, right? And this is the macro stuff, man. But if you go there and if you go into the the second level floors, you can walk inside and you'll see micro carvings like like this one or two inch carvings there. So it's not only the size like the the macro, it's also the micro, you know. So they just did insane work on the temple. And conventionally you believe this is you said 1500 years ago roughly a thousand uh 1,200 to400 years that would be the estimate of this you typically be like oh this is a 7th century that's insane man even comparing this to some of like the cathedrals you know the Renaissance era cathedrals they're like those weren't created like this yeah there's one in Africa did you know about this there's a monolithic Church in Africa carved using very similar technique. You didn't know that? Really? No. I had no idea. What's it called? Church Africa, I think. There you go. From the top. Laia. La. Oh, wait. Is this it? Uhhuh. Oh, wow. It's carved out of a mountain. So, did we like have to dig these up? Is that how we found these? No, I think they've been there. Oh, they they weren't buried. No. Oh, okay. Okay. Wow. Yeah. But if you see the top view of that, that'll be kind of interesting for you. Um Oh my lord. Is this the same one? No. They've renovated this. You can see the Oh, we've gone into Yeah, we're lost now. Okay. If you see like a uh you probably have to put aerial view. That one has bricks. Yeah. Yeah, that's what I'm saying. Sheet metal. This is reconstruction, right? You can see the reconstruction work. Oh, right. This is reconstruction, but this is original. Mhm. Oh, wow. Look at that. Huh? Yeah. Yeah. I'll look for an aerial view. Yeah. It's kind of cute. Like you you'd love it. Images. There you go. On the Oh, this stuff. Yeah. Yeah. What? Wow. That's kind of cute. Where where in Africa is this? Uh I think it's in Ethiop Ethiopia, I think. Oh, in Ethiopia. Okay. I think so. Huh. I I hope to see it somewhere. How many structures are like this? How many megalithic buildings and temples are there that exist? Um roughly. Do you know in Well, we almost all the ancient structures in India are megalithic. But you're talking about a monoithic. I mean monolithic out of one rock. Um probably a dozen or two in India. We have some. We have this is called insitu um architecture. This is a this is what we use in um archaeology. It's called institu meaning that we we did not remove the existing stuff. Nothing was added or right. Right. So it's already there. Yes. Um and this is this is the structure. I I I know only about this one in uh in Christianity. I don't even think I don't know how old this is. probably like 500 years old I think or something like that. Um, but it's very counterintuitive like you you don't want to if I had to start a project like even this this is simpler, right? The church is simpler than the Kyasa temple. Um, but I would I would not be able to do it. And why would you want to do it? Yeah, there's no reason to. There's no reason to, right? Why do all the hard stuff, right? Why do why go through all the pains? It's so it's so much harder. It seems like a way more difficult way to do it. Yeah. It and it's below like it's down like if there's a flood, you're The hole is just going to fill with water and everyone's going to drown, right? Yeah. Well, in in Kyaza Temple, they have like complex drainage systems. Oh, really? Yeah. The water is not going to stagnate there. Below it. Below Yeah. at the ground level. They've carved the the the drain and then they even built like water tanks outside to collect the rain water. No way, man. Yeah, that is that is incredible. Yeah, I don't think they have it. I Yeah, there this guy. Yeah, this is also carved out of the same thing. It's just And what is the So, what type of rock is this thing made of? Um I It's some type of volcanic rock. I don't think this is uh this is granite. I forgot the name of it. Um basalt maybe. No. No. Yeah. Type in Kylo. Maybe a volcanic basalt. That's a good point. Kyasa temple uh stone type. Maybe you'll find it. What type of rock is it? Is which is pretty soft, right? Mhm. But still, that's a lot of damn work for some for some hammers and some chisels. Yeah. Am I the first Hindu that you've had? I You might be the first Hindu. Yeah. You didn't know that, huh? Or no. Um No, actually you're not. We had a um a couple months ago, we had a guy who's practices Hindu. He's actually from Texas, though. He's a white Texan. Wow. But but he's a biblical scholar. Wow. He But he's a Hindu. He he practices I think he practices Hindu but he's uh he knows he's been studying religion his whole life. Wow. Yeah. Um but other than that, no. Okay. So yeah, that's good. So you were raised Hindu though. Yeah, I was born a Hindu. I was raised a Hindu. Um yeah, it's really cool. Like we we do like strange things, man. We we uh we worship cows. You worship cows. The sacred cow. Mhm. Huh. And Hinduism kind of like branched off of Buddhism. Is that right? No. No. No. Hinduism is older. Oh, it's older than Buddha. Oh, Bu. Maybe it's the reverse. I have it. Yeah. Buddhism came from Hinduism. Um, you could say that. So, so if you look at Lord Buddha, he basically he got tired of uh a too many rituals in Hinduism. And Buddha says, "No, this is too much. We got to to to have an enlightened life. We want to kind of deviate from that. We want to have a simple lifestyle. And that's how Buddhism started, right? Yeah. Because there's lots of rituals in in Hinduism, you know. Yeah. Yeah. Lots. What kind of uh what kind of rituals? What kind of rituals did you practice when you were growing up? Was your life like very very religious? No, you guys didn't have like days and stuff where you'd go to the temples and I didn't go. You didn't go? Yeah, they did. They They still do. And I really Yeah, they still do. And I did just Yeah. I never took part in social. No. Yeah. I could do it. I just wanted to make sense of it. Yeah. You know, I wanted to make sense of why they did that, right? Why Why would you worship a cow? Right. It sounds kind of at face value. It sounds really You sure you ate my my god today for lunch? No. Yeah, not today. But last night I did for dinner. That's what I'm saying. Right. So So you're eating cows, but I'm I'm worshiping them. But but why how could like humans kind of think of cows as gods? Like what what is the relationship? Mhm. you know, and what is it? Um, it's very complex. It's probably wouldn't believe it if I told you. Try me. So, humans humans are here because of cows. That's kind of the theory behind it. Um, humans are here because of cows. Without the cows, h humans probably wouldn't exist, right? I'm tell and this was a very odd uh I know this doesn't make any sense, right? But I know you love crazy stories, so I'm telling you this. Yeah. Uh I went to um the northeast part of India and um there are apes in India. Okay. Apart from humans, right? Humans are also apes. But do you know what kind of apes are there in India? You know if there's like baboons, chimpanzees, gorillas, orangutans, they don't exist in India. Oh, really? Yep. There's only one kind of ape uh that lives in India that's called the gibbon. Gibbon ape. Yeah. Yeah. It's kind of a lesser ape. It's kind but it looks um um it's very cute. It's a it's a beautiful um Oh, it is cute. Look, it's adorable. Looks like it'll rip your face off, too, if it wanted to. No, they're very friendly. They kind of very Are they really? Yep. They're very friendly and um they don't look like this. They're friendly here. No, they don't. But they're actually quite friendly and you can only find them in the northeast part of India. Mhm. And if you And these gibbons um they're they're apes. They walk they don't they I've never seen them on all fours. They walk very much. They walk upright. Yep. All the time. Yep. All the time. I' I've I've not I've not seen him. Uh but it's been a while. It looks like a sloth kind of. Yeah. Um you know that one is having a baby there, right? He's got a baby like hanging on to him. Yeah. Wow. So, you know, they they live very much like a family. They uh a typical Gibbon family if you if you observe them and I spend a lot of time with them. Um very much like mom, dad, two kids. That that's their family. Really? Mom, dad, two kids. Yep. And um you don't typically have more than two kids. They don't. And they don't have like large families either. They're like a small nuclear family. Okay. And if the mother dies or if the father dies, they'll find a replacement and they'll keep that four Wow. member family intact. That's that's the only reason. For example, the the male never has like multiple females in the family, which is very common among other other primates. Yeah. Like like a gorilla. It's I would imagine that's or a chimp. It's common. Mhm. But the gibbons don't do that. They the gibbons are very much like um the humans in a in a way. One wife, one Yeah. Like a almost a modern monogous. Yeah. Monogamous society. But since I spent a lot of time with them, maybe that's why he's frowning. He's just unhappy, huh? But since I spent a lot of time with them, I realized how similar they are um to humans, right? Because we got the teenager gibbons, too, right? The and uh we got single bombs there too. So stuff like that. Those a little bit closer to you. Yeah. closer. Yeah, that's good right there. Yeah. So, so what they do u and the the gibbons, the teenager gibbons do something very odd. They wait for the um there are lots of cows in India. And when the cows poop, right, it's called a cow pie or a cow dong. It's found all over. You'll have mushrooms growing on them. When these cowpies dry, they have mushrooms growing on them. And these are magic mushrooms. And these gibbons, especially the teenagers, they've figured out that they can eat those mushrooms and they can expand their Really? Yep. This is something they do regularly. Yeah. Whoa. They're literally they're getting high and they're using the psychedelic mushrooms and they and and they come down from the tree. That's a stock image. Just go type in like gibbon uh the gibbon monkeys psychedelic mushrooms. The gibbon. Gibbon is the type of monkey, not the mushroom anywhere. Huh? I don't think you'll find this anywhere. There's nothing. I have not searched it. I'm I'm only telling you from my personal experience of watching Gibbons do that. Oh, there's a Gibbon mushroom. I see. It's funny. Yep. The So, I guess I I think I'm taking you like on a roller coaster here. So, I'm thinking that 50,000 years from now, the Gibbons or the the group of gibbons that are eating the mushrooms, they're going to be on another level than the other apes that are not eating the mushrooms. You understand that? Yeah. They're evolving. if they've I I think they have there are some gibbons that have figured this out. And I and I watched them because they only come down from the tree when they find a dried cowpie with mushrooms on them and they feed only on the mushrooms and they go back and they kind of like they just gone for a couple of days. You know what I'm saying? So they're basically kind of expanding their consciousness. Do you think that Gibbons are already more evolved than other primates? Like they seem I mean you said they walk on two on two legs. They walk upright, right? Mhm. So do you think it's possible they already are more along the line along the uh evolutionary scale than other primates? No, but similar to like a gorilla or or champ. So this is like the stone ape hypothesis happening in real time. Mhm. So So the gibbons do this and and I but look I mean is this what we did? Is this how we evolved? Right. Is this like what what was the the catalyst? Right. Right. That's the big question. Right. Yeah. That that propelled us. Was it the magic mushrooms that that grew on the cow pies? Is that, you know, is that the relationship between like humans and cows? Look, I mean, think about it, right? You see what what I'm getting at? How did religion how did you follow how did you create a religion like Hinduism? What what would happen if you took a magic mushroom? Would you see the gods? Yeah, I think so. So the mushrooms were the origin of Hinduism. Oh wow. And that would have started from the cow. If if I'm a gibbon, right? If I'm an ape, I would basically protect the cows because without the cows, I can't have the mushrooms. Do you think that drugs and psychedelics are responsible for some of these ancient myths? Certainly some. Right. So some look we still argue even people like Graham Hancock they're they're still arguing that you have to be able to take some um psychedelic stuff to expand your consciousness. It just expands the horizons in in some cultures like um in South American cultures like like when you take stuff like I Yeah. you're literally talking to the gods. Yeah. Seeing the universe. Yes. And it's not made in a lab. It's made from you know natural stuff like like mushrooms and plants right yeah no and it yeah it I mean it even goes back to that uh description in the Bavad Gita where Indra gives the the she opens up his eye what's his name again the guy that she's uh showing that she's having the conversation with he doesn't want to go to battle and kill his cousins and his uncle um Indra and I forget you mean Krishna and Arjuna Krishna that's I'm talking Krishna. Yeah. Krishna and Arjuna. Mhm. And she shows him the cosmos and she shows him everything and he starts having these vision and she it says that he she puts something in his eyes so his eyes are not are no longer mortal. Yes. And I was telling you about the um the meaning in ancient Greek for Christ for Christos. Creo is the is the root word in Greek for for applying a drug to your eyes. Mhm. And that's that's really telling that she did something to his eyes to make him see or have those visions. Yes. Some some argue. Yeah. Some look I mean some people argue that humans used to be more conscious, you know, before they they got their pineal gland calcified and all these like modern we the the stuff that we're eating today. Mhm. It's it's garbage. It's garbage. Yeah. So you can't have the same consciousness that they had 100 years ago. And some are saying that you know things like these mushrooms and these herbs and IA is the only way that you can get the that kind of consciousness back. So you think things like psychedelics and mushrooms and iawaska, these sort of uh these psychotropic drugs from nature were more ubiquitous back then and it was just used regularly and that's kind of what was enabling these civilizations to have to create some of these structures maybe well and to de to de develop these stories and have these ideas of gods. That's possible. That's possible. You I I always wonder if we believe in evolution, right? If we believe in creation, it's very simple. You don't need all these theories. But if we believe in evolution and if we say we we were just gibbons 200,000 years ago, that's what we're talking about. What made the Gibbons turn into like Danny and Pine 100,000 years later? Was it what they should have been something right? It must have been definitely their diet would have played a key role. Mhm. In evolution, right? Right. So, were they taking Yeah. But do you think it was a linear timeline? Do you think it was a linear timeline of evolution? You think they started out as gibbons 200,000 years ago and then were the pinnacle of of of uh of our species? No, I don't think so. What is this, Steve? The Indis script. What was the Indis Valley script? Indis Valley script. Was that something that was carved into into one of those temples we were looking at earlier? Kyasa temple. Was that in the Kyasa? Yeah, that that's a different script. Indis Valley script cannot be carved into Kyasa. But okay. When was the Indis Valley script carved? This is in uh Indis Valley. This is uh in Pakistan now. In Pakistan. Okay. This is much older. Indis Valley is uh much much older. We're talking about um at least 4,500 years old. You know, the Indis Valley is very mysterious finding, man. I I don't know many people. Um we know the temples have always been there, right? So, the the the ancient temples are there and stuff like that. But uh 100 years ago, right, they just tried to excavate a place and they thought it was a simple structure and they found a huge um civilization buried underneath that's called the Indis Valley. Uh there are two sides, Mojadoro and Harapa. We have other sites too like Lothal but there are two major sites. Harapa is one of them and the other one is Mohenjadoro. Now both of them are now in uh Pakistan but if you see like if you look at the pictures if you look at the second picture there Yeah. It's like a huge city, right? Y yeah. Wow. And this is supposed to be from 4,5,000 years ago. Yeah. At least 4,500 years. Um some say it's much much older. Um the dates vary a little bit. Yeah. But yeah, the the it's a very advanced civilization. You know, the the the main street main road in uh Mojadoro is 35 ft wide. Okay. 35 ft wide road. 35 ft wide. That's the main road in uh Mojadoro, right? M. So the question is what were they using? Right. You you don't need that kind of a road just for walking. Right. Right. Yeah. Giant machinery maybe. Mhm. You would have needed some I mean you need you don't if if you're a small village even if you're a big village you don't need a road. Oh moenjaro mohen. Yeah mo. Yeah. There you go. No. Go back. Go back. Ah, There. Yeah. Go. There. There we go. Okay. Yep. You see that? You see? Oh, look at that aerial view, man. Yeah. You see that structure and the streets, man? The streets were looked like a grid system, right? Going from um down below, Steve. Below that, north to south or east to west. Ve, very advanced. Right there on the right. Oh, wow. Okay. Oh, wow. That's enormous. Yeah. Yeah, man. It's such a fascinating thing. Like, we have all these crazy old cities and structures and monuments and and monoliths, but we have no tools. We have no there's no saw blades. There's no toasters in the desert. There's no no metals. It's just um just a giant mystery that we're drawn to. Yeah. Yeah. The Yeah. the Indis Valley civilization. You know the the funny part is this is a big site, right? You can see how complex it is. Yeah. They have no they had no historical evidence of that. There's no text. It was not mentioned in any books. It was Yep. It was it was found as an accident. They they found it by accident, right? They they were not searching for this. Nobody knew this existed, right? So they found it. They were there they thought the the you see that big structure over there on the top it looks like a dome they thought it was a Buddhist tupa and they so they they tried to excavate it and they realized it's it's a big city. No. So that's where that's where it started and they kept digging. They found all that. Mhm. Yeah. A Buddhist monk took a uh I think it was a British guy and they said look here's an old Buddhist tupa and then they found a flint scraper. Do you know what that is? Like a small little flint stone. Yeah. To scrape the skin of animals. It's called a flint scraper in archaeology. So he found a flint scraper and then he said, "Oh, wow. This must be a very ancient site." So he excavated this and then they found they don't even know the real name of that place. Okay. This is called There's no text to corroborate this place. Not from outside. We can we found the script inside inside. But if you had like how do we know like Rome was really great because everybody wrote about those right everybody wrote about Rome others wrote about Rome we have um uh Greeks talking about Egypt right but so when a great civilization like this existed others should have written about this but there's no evidence from outside so people were not searching for the Indis Valley and they found it the accident actually and and um um what was the funny story I was going and you know what and they don't know know the name of this place either right they don't know the original name of Mojadoro so so you know what Mojadoro means that's just a name given by the locals no what does it mean means the it means the mounds of the dead mounds of the dead huh wow Oh, yep. Because Yep. Why did the locals call it that? They thought it was tombs. No, they where they find dead bodies. Crazy story, man. This was uh too much of a conspiracy theory. Any uh It's a conspiracy theory. Oh god, now I need it. I need you to inject that into my veins. They They didn't find any organic material buried in there with all that stuff. They found skeletons. They found skeletons. Yep. From how? From the same age. From thousands of years. The the dating is very hard because uh now the Pakistani government has to date it. Yeah. Tell me that conspiracy about the dead. The the what would you call it? Mount of the dead. Mount of the dead. Yeah. So um I should tell you this, huh? You should tell me this. Okay. So, so according to ancient texts, um, uh, Rama, Lord Dama, this is, this is in a text called Ramayana. Okay, Lord Rama, um, kind of initiates a weapon. This is a uh, almost a nuclear weapon. Okay. and he's initiated this and then they uh they decide that you know they want to um they don't want it uh nuking a city right so they put it in a place called Dumatula right and the these places Mohenjadaro and Harapa are found in those places that's mentioned in ancient texts okay So what did they find in these sites in the in the Indis Valley civilization? They found very high levels of radiation. Really? Yep. They found very high levels of radiation. They also found that uh these the rocks were vitrified. They thought they found glass at first, but the rocks had turned into almost like glass. It's called vitrification of rock, right? Okay. And that only happens when you put it through extremely high temperatures at a very rapid pla uh pace. You have to you have to push it to very high temperature in a very quick time span. If you do that, then the rocks will turn into glass. Okay? It's called vitrification of of of stone. uh and they found skeletons uh in a weird um situation or something like that. So some are saying I think there was a there was one guy who wrote here yeah here in Indis Valley in Mojadaro specifically I've heard of this I actually thought I think I saw something about this recently. Yes. So they're saying that there was an ancient nuclear bomb that went off in Moadaru. Type in skeletons after Mojan Hadaro. Wow. Look at that pit of them. Yeah. And there's one laying there in the middle just by itself. So the theory is Oh my god, that's crazy. It looks like a parent with kids. Yeah. Yeah. There's Well, some um I think this book details that these are not burials, right? You're not going to bury three people like this. It was like a massacre. This happened. Yes. This happened instantly like when a bomb exploded in this place. Type in massacre instead of skeletons. There you go. Okay. There's a set of stairs with the skeletons just laying right on the stairs. Yeah. Yeah. So, the these clearly aren't bar burials. People that just happened to die here. Wow. So, something happened that incinerated the face of the earth right here. Mhm. Because they found the vitrified glass. Yeah. They they found so uh the the guy who wrote the book he talked about the skeletons and how you can see that these are not buried right these are just you don't bury people on stairs so it happened there and they found very high levels of uh radiation and they found vitrification of stone and you can also find those evidence in ancient Indian tax so they're saying that there was a an atom bomb that went off thousands of years ago in Mojaro and that's and and they're saying that explains why we never hear about the Indis Valley civilization, you know, why it was just not there. Couldn't it have been something else like a cosmic impact or something or or a solar flare or something that came and just like could be could be. I'm not saying this is exactly what happened, but I'm saying is it is this what it is? You know, something definitely happened. I mean, it's clear something happened. Yeah. But I mean, what are the chances of them having an atomic bomb? Yeah. What 4,000 years ago? Yeah. Five like in they're talking about 5,000 years ago in writings. There's no writings about ancient atom bombs. There is. There is. So, it's called it's called the brahastra. That's the most common uh weapon uh that most people in India know about. This called the brahastra. Brahra. Brahastra. Brahmathra. Yeah. Okay. So, so the so you typically deploy the Brahmastra, it just destroys destroys the entire city. It just completely destroys the whole city. There's a and and they explain how uh the devastation looks, right? They talk about how high the temperature goes, how it looked like a sun when the when the explosion happened, how all the vegetation was completely wiped off and there were no plants or trees growing for the next 12 to 25 years. They talked about how the people were all killed immediately. They talk about how the future generations had diseases. It's very similar. Oh my god. And then I just remembered that Oenheimer's quote came from the Bavagita, right? Destroyer I am the I am become death. Yes, he said that. So he knew about this. Well, some people say that but we don't. It would be quite a coincidence if Oenheim randomly quoted, right? Bhagavat Gita is a part of that text Mahabharat though, right? Yeah. Right. Out of all the sites that you've uh explored, have you found anything that is quite as precise as something like these uh granite vases that are perfectly symmetrical and that are made out of a stone that hard? Whether it be I don't know if it's an artifact or if it's a a stone or a pillar or anything like that that looks like it was created on a lathe. Yeah. So um uh in 2016 uh 16 I went to a temple called Hois Surat Temple. Um this is in India. Uh this temple is approximately 800 years old. Uh it could be much older. Um and you see the pillars there. These pillars weigh in tons. Okay. Easily 10 10 tons, 20 tons. And the pillars are definitely made using lathe machines. There's no way to create that. Uh if you type in holes for temple pillars. Yeah. If you Yeah. There is no way. Oh my god. You can create that pillar. No way. Yeah. And if you zoom in, you can see the turn marks, man. You can literally when you when you use a a lathe pill la and you have to see these little marks. You can see those circular marks on the face. Okay. Yeah. If you just punch in really far, you can see it. You can see the marks. And this this only happens if you use a lathe machine. You have to have a rotating mechanism to create these pillars. Okay. There's no way to do it. No other way to do it. No. Are are they all identical? They're to each other. No, they're all different. Some are identical, but a lot of different varieties are there. Some are going to look like complex gears. They're going to you and you know, this is the fun part about this. This is probably one of the only few instances where archaeologists agree that yes, we need a lathe machine really to create them. Yes. And they also agree that they are how old? More than 800 years old. More than 800 years old before we had the wheel, right? Yep. So they so they agree because they know that. See, look, it says do we have the wheel? We had the wheel 800 years ago, right? Yeah. So So now they've got these pillars which weigh in tons, right? M and they uh they have these pillars which weigh in tons but they also have to accept that these are la turned pillars. So now they have a complex system thinking that how is that even possible right? So how do we explain this using conventional history and archaeology. So they thinking that they had these huge like pottery wheels kind of stuff and they mounted the pillars and they had horses running around. That's what they think. Yeah. Because how else do we explain this, right? If you if you open that window saying that yes, we had machines. That's you know that's Pandora's box. You can't close that box after you open it. So what what do you think they could have used to carve that? Oh, they definitely use machines. They they would have used advanced machines. If you go to um if you go to holes for a pillar and if you type in um planetary gears planetary gears Oh, that my video. Okay. One below. One below. Yeah, right there. Yeah. Mhm. Yeah, you can see that's the type of device they were using. They were using planetary gears. If you if you Google planetary gears, you can have multiple gears, right? It's like a transmission. Yep. Without this technology, I mean, there you go. There's Yeah, it'll take a small. So, where where each one is has half the number of teeth that the that the bigger one has. that. Yeah, this is this is a very similar technology uh was used to create the coral castle in Florida. Have you been there? I have not, but I've always wanted to go there. Yeah. I wrote a book about this, man. I wrote a book about uh Coral Castle. Did you really? Mhm. It's it's it's very uh wellreceived. It's one of the uh best rated books about Coral Castle. Really? How long How long ago did you go there? Um maybe nine years ago. What's the book called? Coral Castle. Everything you know was wrong. Really? Okay. We got to go. We got to You brought it up. Now we got to go down this rabbit hole. Okay. Um but I want to I want to put a pin in this cuz I want to come back to this. Okay. So, um Coral Castle is in South Florida. And for my I'll just give you my rudimentary understanding of Coral Castle. It's giant megalithic coral, right? coral structures that some guy Edward Lee Scallan Edward Lee Lecan Le Scallan magically used some kind of technology to lift these pillars and stack them on top of each other and uh create this castle structure. Mhm. Um and what what what is the conventional understanding of how he did this? Does he explain how he did it? Well, he kept it a secret. He kept it a secret. Yeah. Did you ever meet him? No, he died. How long did he long time ago? Oh, really? Yeah, he he the the the important point about this is that he bolted just by himself. He took no help. That's what he says. Do we have Could he be full of No, I believe him. You believe him? He never allowed anybody to touch anything in the castle. He bolted by himself. Okay. Yep. Yeah. And what is your theory on how you can build it? You can build it by yourself if you understand um a little bit of mechanical engineering and and civil engineering. You can build it. It's it would be hard to do, right? But you can build it. But but there is if you Google Edward Lee Kalin uh chain chains, you'll find pictures of how he used these gear systems. This is called reduction gear. You can lift any any heavy weight using reduction gears. You can just you have to just keep putting these gears in, you know, and then and then you can Yeah, there you go. And and you can see the third picture there. He's literally Yeah. He's he used a structure like this to raise the stone blocks with chains. Yeah, will change. Oh, interesting. Yeah, there's a video on we we've brought it up before. There's a video um of some guy moving like giant granite stones by himself. He's using like uh balancing. I forget exactly how he's doing it. Yes. If if you understand falcrum, if you understand uh balancing, if you understand reduction gears, you can do you can do it. It's it again I'm not saying look I mean here's the thing that I'm saying I'm not saying that it's impossible to create even those pillars in Hois temple but that doesn't mean this is that's how they created it. You know what I'm saying? You still don't think that's how they did it? I don't know. Yeah. Look at this. That's crazy. Yeah. This isn't the video I was thinking of though. But this is this is also pretty cool. It's the guy. It's the same guy. It's the same guy. Look at that. This giant concrete block just rolls across this thing. Yeah. It's fantastic, isn't it? Yeah. He will uh take this this uh column and stuff it in the ground in one of the videos. He's got a whole bunch of them. Look at that, man. That's how they did it. I think that's how maybe that's how they built the pyramids. Yeah. If you really understand um all the and and the funny part is um things like Easter Island statues you have you seen the Easter statues walking walking you type in Easter Island statue walking okay noises yeah watch this [Laughter] it's one of the theories that look I mean it's not that hard to to to move, right? No. Yeah, you can figure it out, man. It's physics. Yeah, it's not hard to move a 510 statue. This is one of the things. But now look, I mean, here's the thing, right? Just because that's you can move a statue like this. We don't know if this is the technique they use, right? It's it's one thing to argue that that's possible, right? And this it's it's a classic case, right? So, it's a classic case that oh, you know, I I ran over this guy by accident. Could you you could run over this guy, right? Using a car. You could hit him with with a car by accident, but we want to make sure that that's what really happened, right? Right. We don't know that. It's just one of the techniques. Yes. We have to keep that in mind, right? So, because we're so we can jump to conclusions really easily, right? So when I put a theory saying that oh we can build a there was a complex machine like high-tech CNC computerized machine that's an opinion right was it built with horses and elephants and they were just running around creating these lake pillars that's also an opinion I think we have to understand that right but we don't exactly know how they did it unless Unless we find real evidence of that and then to to kind of walk on that tight rope is very hard, right? To to have an open mind about this, saying that we know something happened there, right? Mhm. But we don't know. But to me, um, look, how many pillars are there? A ton. Yeah. Dozens, right? Yeah. In in this is not the you you'll easily find a hundred pillars in that temple. And this is not the only temple that has these pillars either. There are lots of temples in that area which are all lathe machined pillars. Lots. We're talking about more than like a few thousand lathe turned pillars. Okay. So what does that tell you? That means must have been like mass manufacturing facility. Right. Right. It must have been like factories like megalithic factories where you people are just carrying stones put it in a lathe machine create a pillar out the door. Why why don't you think we have any evidence of any lathes though because reason would tell you that there would have to be a lathe somewhere right? Maybe we haven't found it. I think we um there are few uh theories. One is that look when when we when I talked about ancient technology just 10 years ago right in 2013 14 people were just like completely like they thought it was nonsense. Mhm. You know they wouldn't even consider that that there was such a thing called ancient technology in India. They just dismissed it. They like this is nonsense. But when I started to put out like okay this is a lathe machine puller. Um the other gear that I that I showed you again that is also from my videos the planetary gears sun dials which are accurate when when we start to I can't be the only guy who found all this stuff right that must have existed long time ago but we're not just not documenting these things right you know and I think these late machines would be there somewhere they they'd lie I I think I probably found one put Uh, late machine. Humpy. Humpy. Humpy. Yeah. H U M P Y. He's thinking of some other Humpy man. Humpty Dumpty. H A H A H A. Humpy. No, no, no. H A M P I H A M P I P I. Mhm. Okay, there you go. If you see that that thingy. Mhm. You can look at the pictures. This is the Tell me what you see. site of Humpy that has been abandoned for at least 500 years. That's me, by the way. That's you. Mhm. Oh, wow. Oh, in the bottom left. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. I see you now. Proves that Okay. Look at that. You see that? Yeah. It's a wheel. It's a wheel with a with a fitting in the middle of it for a rod or something. Something to turn it. Right. At a time when Oh, look at those lines. There was no such technology. It would be easy to just trace those lines and if they don't break, then you know it's a lathe. Yeah. And again, if you go back to that entire setup right on the left and right, you see those pillars. Yes. And you see the holes. Yep. And if you go to the almost the end of the video, you can No, not that that much. I kind of try to recreate that on maybe the one which has the the No, no. Go back. Uh where you can see that uh recreated model. Oh, is it this? Yeah, I tried to recreate this. Oh, wow. Look at that, man. This is a what do you call it? It's a vertical. It's like a It's It's a late machine. So, this is a Okay. This This would be how they would have done it. Yeah. place it on the vertical tool. So you just rotate the the block underneath and you put a thing on top and then you can create the same thing. Wow. So we do have some evidence, right? But look, I mean I I found this the entire setup, right? Just lying in the dirt. That is hilarious. Oh my gosh. late technology. So, this thing would have been like a like a It's like an ancient late setup. Yeah, it's like an ancient kind of late setup, right? It's still there. You can still go to Humpy and you can still see it. So, you when you're when you're asking like where's all the late machine? Yeah, there's there's some remnants of it, right? Right. Because the the metal would not have survived that long, right? The stone definitely would have. And they you it's that's incredible, man. from the rotating objects. Yeah, we so we we can see some of this, right? I'm showing you like what happened when I recreated this a long long time ago, but yeah, we do have evidences of of these, you know, we do have evidences of these uh late machines as well. It's not like the tools are like magically gone. Mhm. Right. They they you know, so we still have evidence of the late machine itself. Mhm. Yeah, that's the first time I've ever seen anything like that. I I didn't know that it existed. Is there anything else that exists like that anywhere else in the world that you're aware of or is that the only one? I can't Yeah, I can't think off the top of my head. Yeah. What do you make about um I don't know if you've heard there's some theories out there about using chemicals to soften stones and to to carve them better. I actually had a guy on here a couple weeks ago, guy Jeffrey Drum. Okay, he has a channel called Landed Chem and he has a theory on how the ancient pyramids were basically chemical manufacturing plants and they could have used acids and chemicals um for example to create some of those granite boxes and the sarapium and stuff and like use like use these acids to to be able to scoop out create scoop marks in stones. Yeah. What do you make of what do you make of that idea? Have you ever thought about the uses of chemicals and stuff? It's a popular theory in India. Right. Right. That's what I'm saying. I think it I think it translates very well to some of the things that you've discovered and some of the things you made videos about. In India, many people believe that um they used herbs to soften stones and sometimes they used sounds to soften stones. So sounds yep. So um one theory is that you know about this oxylic acid. It's it's an acid found in all plants. Okay. How do you say it? Oxylic. Oxylic acid. X a l i c oxylic acids found in all plants. And and you and a lot of times we think that yeah granite is very hard right that these rocks are very hard. These temples how do they cut these rocks? It's very tough. But you know what breaks these temples? A simple seed, man. A simple seed dropped by a bird and that seed will completely break a 10 ton stone block. How so? It just grows. Oh, if you So in in temples, I went to a temple called um uh top prom. Mhm. Uh this is a Hindu temple in Cambodia. And if you if you search that temple, that entire temple is destroyed by plants. No This then you got giant trees growing on top of these rocks, right? These these rocks are everywhere. Oh, wow. Look at that, man. Right. Yeah. Nature's just taking it over. Yeah. And and you you'll you'll be surprised. You people think that oh yeah like these rocks are indestructible right only humans humans try to destroy them but they can't but you know it's a simple like the plants completely take over. Mhm. Right. Yeah. Yeah. So why Right. Because there is a substance called oxylic acid in these plants in the in these trees that are growing. You're saying? Yep. And and and but what is the oxylic acid doing though? Like like the trees are growing and breaking it. But how does the acid Yeah. Well, so so you can see that the that the trees can destroy the the rocks, right? It's even the simple plants, a very small seed can go through and start to put the roots inside. Right? And this is the principle on which uh some beliefs exist in India saying that they used herbs from these plants to soften the stones. Okay. They they take the herbs and they make that into a paste and when they put the paste on top of the stone, the stone becomes very soft. Interesting. And that's how they cut a lot of these stones. Have they tried that? No. No. No. I don't I mean I would find that I I would think that uh pretty hard to do right. We don't know. Like the thing is maybe we'll magically discover what herb they're talking about. Mhm. Right. At this point, if they don't tell us the name of the plant, what they're doing, like what's the composition, we can't recreate that. We can't recreate that paste. Do you see any similar marks and stones in India like those scoop marks that you see on some of those obelisks in a in Egypt? Mhm. Yeah. Really? Yep. There's a place called uh this is in Sri Lanka. Uh there's a place called Sigria uh in Sri Lanka. It's if you ever go to Sri Lanka, don't miss that place because it's like a it's unexplainable. Cigar is an unexplainable. Yeah. Holy That is cool, man. What? Okay. You got to go again. Okay. How do you How do you explain this one? Holy smoke. How do you even get up there? You got to get in a helicopter. No, they they have stairs now. Okay. Or an elevator or something. You have stairs now, you know. But but we don't know how they did it back then. Was that your phone, Steve? Yeah. Put that on silent. But yeah, this is Yeah, this is the I I mean I was there in uh 2017 or 18. I I was researching the site and I found scoop marks there. It's really Yep. You have a whole video on this place. I have multiple videos about cigaria. Uh, and if if you put cigaria scoop mark, I'm sure probably somebody took a screenshot and posted on their website or some something from your video. Yeah, probably not. That's good. Type it on YouTube. We'll find his video. Yeah, I need to see the I need to see the footage of this. Well, does it say scoop mark in the in the video? Yeah. All right, cool. Scoop mark. Cigarious scoop bolt. No, second one. Yeah, that one. There we go. Yep. And if you see um probably the chapters would say scoop marks, it's got so many mysteries, man. There. Yeah, that one. Oh, man. You see that scoop mark, man? It's like somebody like this like an ice cream scoop, right? Ice cream scoop. So, wait. So, so so what is the conventional understanding of this place? Oh, they're saying that uh there was There you go. Look at you. So, they're saying that Oh, there was a king who wanted to he was put on exile and he wanted to create a safe fortress. Oh, it was like a prison for him. Yeah, he he built it. So, he wanted to protect himself and stuff like that. Um according to mythology and other Hindus, they say this was uh created by a demon king Ravena. Um you'll find lots I mean obviously the first look itself tells you that you know this place is insane right it's on top of a giant rock surrounded by a jungle right Mhm. and and you find uh a lot of evidence of very advanced tech. Like there's a lot of stone cutting technology. It's it's very good. Um and even today if if you're walking up, it's very hard to get there. Yeah. Even today with all the the modern stairs, all that stuff, it's very very uh it's a really uh inexplicable um stuff there. were made during I mean how what do they hang from ropes to carve that? This is nuts. Look, little ladders. So this so so so this big structure this was just natural. Well, some of them are saying it's natural but it maybe it was artificially created as like a landing pad or something like that or like a launching space or you know something like that of this whole place is very odd. Um, advanced technology. How do you think they were able to get up there? That's going up, but they're going vertically up. Technology. Technology. What' you say? Flying machines. Flying machines. Oh, you're full on. You You're full on buying the buying into it. You think that you think the aliens were Where are the stairs? That's my qu. How would you get up? Well, if there were stairs, like look at our stairs. Our stairs are metal. You know, the metal wouldn't survive thousands of years. Yeah. Um, maybe they had some sort of wooden stairs back then. Maybe. Um, yeah. But is there is is the whole side of this thing look like it looks look like it was worked or is does the side of it does the side of it look natural? It looks like this. Just like what you see. There are holes there. There like little ladders there like almost like for squirrels. Um, it looks like this. Okay. Okay. So, it doesn't Well, it looks like this. So, I show I I tried to show It looks natural. Yeah, it looks natural. Look, if if you're going to build a giant structure made of other stones and bricks on top. Mhm. Right. Might as well build stone stairs from the bottom, right? Why Why would you Yeah, totally. Yeah, you would build stone stairs because there's stone stairs on top of it, right? Yeah. And and and Cigaria, you know, this is a UNUSCO world heritage site is a fantastic site in Sri Lanka. I I didn't get um we only spent a few weeks in Sri Lanka because Sri Lanka is full of these amazing structures. Uh they combined natural things with artificial things like beautifully like is this natural or artificial? What do you think? will claim to be your natural but I don't know it looks it looks kind of like it was worked by humans. Yeah, keep playing. It gets confused but now that looks that looks like scoot marks. There you go. That's definitely scoop marks. Yeah. A lot of times you'll look at a structure in Sri Lanka and think it's natural but when you look hard you start to think that oh maybe they they worked on it. It's very interesting. The stone marks are very uh interesting at the details because you can see cuts there. Yep. Yep. Look at those scoot marks, man. Wow. It's just like the in Egypt. Yeah. The same technology is being used here. Definitely. But why on the on the face of a on the face of a giant rock? Like why would they do that, right? Huh? But what were they doing? I mean, what is your theory, right? Like you're they're just hanging from ropes and kind of scooping the No. No. There's no way. There's no way they're doing that. No, absolutely not. It has to be something. So, I don't know if advanced is the right word. maybe advanced too, but it has to be something that was developed on a completely different timeline than we develop things, right? It has to be a completely maybe not advanced technology, but maybe a completely separate technology. Not something that we're used to involving electricity or combustion. Mhm. Yeah. Is that a giant claw, bird claw or something? Yeah. Whoa. That's a giant reptilian claw, maybe. A reptilian claw, I'd say. How does it look like to you? I mean, yeah, it looks like it does look like a lizard's claw. Looks like a Komodo dragon's foot. Yeah. But but the question is I mean I I agree with you. It has to be a completely different type of technology. But the question is why, right? Why make those Yeah. Why make those scoop marks like on the face of the giant rock? I mean, like what could be the purpose of it, you know? It is bizarre. What what what is the obsession with reptilians in India? There's a lot of there's a lot of a lot of people worshiping reptiles there. Huh. Yep. We worship gods like our our gods are uh snake like reptilian gods. We worship nagas. We worship nagas which are basically reptiles. You know there uh we have a lot of uh ancient texts talking about nagas u not only in India by the way the nagas are also called serpas they're called serpa where does nagas come from basically a word that denotes reptile like a snake like serpentine you understand what I'm saying like the the it's called a serpa in India it's called a sarafh In Israel, it's called a serpent. It's all coming from the same word from in the Bible. It's all coming from the same word, right? They're called, you know, the Sarpa Sarafh serpent. It's the same thing. And and the Naga is basically a a shape-shifting reptilian um set of gods. and and believe it or not, they they're considered the origin of human civilization um in countries like um Cambodia in in Cambodia. According to Cambodia, uh Cambodian history, this is not even Cambodian mythology. You can literally study this history in the history books of Cambodia. They're saying that their very first queen was Naga, a serpent woman. Yep. Really? Yes. And humans married with the nagas. And this is this is understood as like a mythical religion to them or Well, I mean, we believe that it's a reptilian species. They believe it was real. Yep. I believe it. Or you believe it was a ancient reptilian species? Yep. I believe it's I believe the Nagas are like an ancient reptilian species that coexisted with humans. Do we have any evidence that these people existed? Like other than like what what what is the evidence that we have other other than the fact that there's a there's these myths myths that are written about them and and and carvings and statues and stuff. No, I don't think we would have like archaeological evidence of that if that's what you I mean like Yeah. No archaeological evidence. No, you're right. I don't think we'll ever like maybe, but I don't think we'll find like skeletons of Nagas, right? If they found them, right? If they found how would you be able to tell, right? Would would that be revealed to the public? Like finding a giant skeleton, right? If you went 100 years ago in the US, do you know how many newspaper clippings are there that talk about giant skeletons found in the US? No. Oh, you don't know? Mm-m. How many? Oh my god. Thousands. Really? Yep. Newspaper clippings of giant skeletons found in the US. We got thousands. And why don't why it was you're saying that it was hidden? Yeah. Yeah. There are books written about those there. If you just if you just Google newspaper clippings, you you can still find I've I've posted a few. We we can find thousands. You you know Google used to have you just go to images. Probably go to images. You've probably found find a lot. Yeah, there you go. These are all real newspaper clippings. These are not doctor. These are real newspaper clippings. And there these so so giant humanlike skeletons were found up close as recent as 100 years ago when giants ro Okay. Yeah. The newspaper clippings are like a 100 years old. Oh okay. Okay. So you could if you typically look at like newspapers published a 100 years ago. They're always publishing. Oh, we found giant skeletons when they excavated this mound. Right all over. We're not talking about one state. We're not talking about one newspaper company. We're We're saying this is found. Yeah. Look Look at that. 1919 18 ft tall. Austin, Texas. You can you'll find 14th. Mhm. You'll find them in Florida. You'll find them in California. You'll find them everywhere. Right. But where are they now? Why Why are they not found? Right. Yeah. Why? Why do you think Why do you think it's not talked about now? What do you think will happen if they do talk about it now? Yeah, that's a good question. Why? Why? What? If if you're an archaeologist and you do find a giant skeleton, right, 10 ft tall, would you tell this to the world? Hell yeah, I would. You wouldn't you would be out of that uh archaeology degree and your position in a week if if you do if I came out and I made the world aware of a of a 16 foot tall skeleton. You would become the next Edward Snowden. You would have to run out. You'd become the next Julian Assange. At least you'd become the next Graham Hancock, right? They would ostracize you, man. If you come out like that, you if you find the evidence of a 10- foot tall giant and if you do tell the public, you are going to be kicked out of your archaeological job and your degree and you would be called a pseudocientist and a conspiracy theorist and you'd be ostracized. That's what's going to happen to you if you do that, right? Look, what do people say? Let's say you did spot a UFO, right? Right. And if you do, let's say you even took a video of this and if you come out and say, "I I spotted a UFO. This is the evidence." 50% of the people are going to call you a liar, right? But 50% are also going to believe. I think probably maybe a little bit more nowadays. Yes. But that's only because you're a regular guy. But what happens if you're a pilot flying an airplane? you would be kicked out of your job. But yeah, you think I would think even the pilots that came out and talked about the UFOs, they didn't get fired. Maybe. But see, there are they got definitely questioned. Yeah. Look, I mean, look, there are instances I I forgot the name of that guy who came out and he talked about giant skeletons and he was an archaeologist and that guy was called a liar and he was fired. H what year was that? I don't know. I got And when we're saying giant, that thing is not really giant. That one that we looked at, but like you're saying that one said there were 16footers. Like that picture right there, that's nuts. A lot of these that's photoshopped, right? No, no, this is a real photo. And 1761. Yeah, but that could easily be I mean Y that tall. That's giganism. But if you really want to know about the uh the giant skeletons, you have to search giant mound builders. H you got to see skeletons here. Oh, sorry. Giant mound motor. Look at that. That's fake, right? With with modern AI. You No, that Yeah, that that was there even before. This is this is that same photo that's in the medical museum, I think. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, I've never heard of this. I've definitely never heard of this. There there is an entire book written by uh Jim Vieiraa and Hugh Newman. They talk about giants of uh giant mounduilders of America. You know this uh Jim Vieiraa, he's in Boston, Massachusetts. He he talked about the giant mounduilders and he came on a TED talk man and that TED talk was banned. No way. Yeah, it was banned. You know that's why would they ban it? It seems like it's a fun thing to talk about. I don't understand. I don't understand how uh the deep state would be offended by giants or reptilians. Well, maybe reptilians cuz it's probably reptilians running the whole thing, right? Well, that that'd be a stretch, but I'm saying that, you know. Damn it. Um, yeah, the giants thing is weird. What? Like, why? Like, what? Look at that. That's That's really interesting. What is What? What? What is it? If if you go to Wikipedia, right, giant skeletons before in the US, right, are a combination of hoaxes, scams, fabrications, and the misidentifications of extinct mega fauna, right? But now if you go and if you say Pittsburgh, okay, Pittsburgh giant skeletons giant skeletons newspaper newspaper more than 10,000. Oh probably deleted even off of off of YouTube. If you go to im. Yeah, there you go. Images. Okay. Yep. All right, let's see what we got here. Relief. Relief parlay. Not yet fixed. Huh. Uh, not that one. That's the wrong one. Not that one. I'm science found. There we go. There's one. Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh, PA. Two petrified skeletons, one of a man of giant stature and other of a woman somewhat smaller, were found in a cavern blasted out. Click on that. Click on that. Two giant skeletons. That's probably me. Yeah, there you go. Click on that. That's See that? That result is even deleted from YouTube, man. That's me, by the way. And look at that. Of giant mound builders who lived centuries. Wow. 10,000 years ago. Look below. 49 skeletons found. And look at look at the text below. That's a real newspaper clipping that I took from Google newspapers. There's a, you know, there used to be Google used to archive all the newspapers. I think it's gone now, but that's a real newspaper clipping that says 49 skeletons found. And you know who did the excavation? It was done by an archaeologist called Really? Yep. That's a real newspaper, man. If you if if people say, "Oh, this is this is a hoax or it's fabricated," they can go because I mentioned the date. I mentioned the newspaper, they can go there and you can find this. Yeah. They sure are good at covering stuff up, man. Well, I mean, this is a theory, right? Unless you want to say, "Oh, is this video suppressed on YouTube?" I don't I don't think so. I mean, usually my videos won't come up if you unless you search for them. But you can see this is like 49 skeletons. That's a lot. That's a state archaeologist, right? I show this and I say, "Oh, this is this is GS Fisher." What is the con? What is the idea about the giant skeletons? What what how do they tie into all this stuff? I don't know. Do you think where do you think they came from? Like what what time do you think they came from? If they were if they're real, which according to these newspapers that they are. Just when do you think they live? Giants. They're just just a subspecies of humans, aren't they? Well, mentioned in the Bible is Nephilim. Nephilim. Yeah. and Raphaim and other you know those they're well the Nephilim and the Anunnaki I think they come from the Rafaim mentioned in um in the Bible I think and um and there's other um in in Hindu texts also they're mentioned and they're kind of um they're combination of uh humans and other species and they're giant and uh it was once believed you know this right this is The funny part, you know who spoke about the giants building the mounds of America? Abraham Lincoln. Google it. Really? Shut up. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Abraham Lincoln was a was a as big a conspiracy theory as I am. Man, there you go. The eyes of that species of extinct giants whose bones filled the mounds of America have gazed on Niagara as ours do now. Abraham Lincoln 1848. Okay. So Abraham Lincoln believed the giants were real. They were extinct species of subspecies of humans. Yep. They he believed that the giants built the mounds of America, right? No matter what Wikipedia tells you today, unless they want to say Abraham Lincoln was trying to spread a fake news, right? Conspiracy theorist. That's exact. That's a direct quote from Abraham Lincoln, right? The eyes of that species of extinct giants whose bones filled the mounds of America. It was common knowledge in the United States in the 1800s that there were burial mounds at numerous sites containing the bones of giant humans. Even Abraham Lincoln mentioned this in one of his speeches given at Niagara Falls. Whoa. Video deleted. Huh? Video deleted. YouTube said, "No, no, no. We're not going to be talking about Giants today." YouTube, remember this is coming out on Danny's podcast. It's not on my channel. Don't delete my channel. Does YouTube give you a lot of You've had multiple channels, haven't you? I do have multiple channels. I do have a lot of uh videos deleted. You had to start demonetized. Nah, not that bad. Okay. Yeah. Why? How bad is it? Is it pretty bad? Do you have to deal with it regularly? It just demonetizes. I've never had to deal with that with this topic with like ancient civilizations and I don't know why. Um but but you may have to cross like when I was under a million subscribers, uh things were okay. Um, but once I reached that like 1 million mark, YouTube started to kind of like, you know, at a million subs, you started getting stuff. Yeah, they did demonetize. They they removed a few videos. Um, I like to talk about everything, you know, like this. For example, if I if I made a video about the giant mound builders and Abraham Lincoln, that video could be deleted today. Deleted? Yeah, it could be deleted today. You'd be like, "Oh, this is fake news conspiracy theory." You've had videos deleted. Um, if I posted it today, it would be deleted. Like that video. Why? Why was it deleted? Right. He clicked on that video, right? Right. And that video is deleted. Why? Right. But we don't know that YouTube deleted it. I'm saying like have Oh, this video is private. Sorry. Yeah. Right. There you go. It's unavailable. But yeah, I' I've had my videos deleted sometimes. About what was the reason? One video was I made about co that got deleted. Okay. That's Yeah, a lot of that happened. Yeah. And then uh a lot of my videos were demonetized and um like what was the reason for that? One was about violence. Uh the carvings were too violent. You know, the carvings. It was about carving stone carvings. Yeah. There like a god cutting another demon's head. That was like Wow. And it was deleted. No, no, it was not um demonized. demonetized and then others were demonetized because of nudity because the carvings did not have serious. That's silly. Yeah, that's silly. We still do. We still have several carvings uh videos that YouTube said, "No, this these statues are they don't have clothes." Right. No. Yeah, I know. What am I going to do? I'm going to like What? I'm going to pixelate. Right. Just tell them no, no, it's they have clothes on. Those are grapes on the outside of their clothes. And and and it's weird, man, because you can go to um the Greek Museum at Athens. Mhm. None of the gods and none of the statues are wearing clothes, you know, and it's fine, right? You have lots of like hundreds of videos on YouTube about that. Like there's no like demonetization problems on them. But I think with Indian uh temples and Hindu temples um I think it's kind of a you know YouTube is is biased to be honest with you. YouTube YouTube like we don't want that. I think 99% of it is is also robots doing it scanning and demonetizing stuff too, right? Yeah. And I think that it's just so much it's just so much stuff for them to be able to regulate. And you have people that actually do have to look at it, you know, how much do they really care? Yeah. They probably they're probably like remote workers and they don't really sit at YouTube. They're probably just like, "Okay, here's my 100 videos I have to review for monetization today. Let's see." Like, do they really care that much? No. That's Yeah, that's that's happens to me, too. Happen. We We do have people working for us and they'll bring their own bias. Oh, really? Yep. They'll bring their own bias uh to the table. people who work for me, people who like they they look at the comments, they'll they get to reply as me. Oh, really? On YouTube. Yeah. On YouTube. Yeah. So, it's kind of Yeah. So, it's kind of So, I understand the bias. So, a lot of uh times I think it's not like YouTube YouTube. It's just the people who work for YouTube, you know, sometimes they look at it and if this guy has no exposure to this, he'd be like, "Oh, no. We can't allow this stuff." Right. On YouTube. Somebody who doesn't isn't aware of it, isn't educated on it, right? Yeah. Somebody who's who's in a completely different country or he's he has no exposure to Hindu religion, he's going to be like, "Oh, no. This is bad, right? We can't allow that." What the is that guy? Is that guy having with a donkey? Yes, he is. I think it's a horse, man. They really love their animals. It's not That's not the donkey, is it? I mean, it's small enough to be a donkey. A horse would be way bigger, right? Maybe. Yeah. And look at And look at the woman behind. She's like in shock. She's like, "No." Yeah. This This is in a temple called Kajira. Mhm. In uh Yep. And then this temple. Look at that guy. Wow. Yep. Yeah. He's sodomizing a donkey. And look at this. This is some sort of Bak orgy. Yeah, this like a modern day. This is like India's Caligula. Huh. What at what when were these created? Ancient times. Like uh like what? Like are we talking like 300 400? No. No. There we're probably talking about uh 800 to,200 years ago. M. Yep. Yep. Oh my goodness. That's pretty graphic. Wow. That's Yeah. Mhm. I think that's understandable. Yeah. Steve, now you're going to have to Now you're going to have to go and and censor all this out of the show so we don't get demonetized. Yeah. Never happened to you, right? Oh, yeah. It's happened to us a lot. Yeah. Yeah. We we've learned to No, we recently had to do a podcast with a guy I was telling you about. Uh the guy who was the uh the Greek the Greek guy. The guy who's a Greek classicist. Okay. And he wrote uh he wrote all about ancient drug use in um in the classical era and like with the Romans and the Greeks using drugs for everything from from you know cuz they had this they didn't die from they didn't die from old age or heart disease. They died from hand to hand combat plague and famine and they needed drugs to get through the day essentially and to deal with everything. It was all about drugs. And he was also, you know, he was talking about this stuff and he was talking about like all the human trafficking that was happening back then and um all that videos all the orgies. No, it's not gone as good. We had to censor the living out of it though because you know you know when the that was the nature of the episode was all about this stuff. So we had to literally make sure that they had no excuse to demonetize it. So we censored every bad word. We censored the word prostitution. We censored piss, damn, like all the every bad everything you could classify as bad. Even the medical descriptions like penis and prius. We we we censored we censored priapism. Yeah. Um just so they didn't have an excuse to demonetize. Sad, man. How do you There's got to be a way around this. You know, there I don't think there is, man. Unless you got Unless you got uh blackmail on somebody high up at YouTube. I don't think I don't think there's a way to get around it, man. Uh, it's difficult. It's difficult. You just got to be aware of it. You got to be smart and and uh because that's that shit's it's it's real history, man. The stuff that you're talking about and and the stuff that these other people are talking about, these like showing images of these things that were created hundreds and hundreds of years ago, that's real. Yeah. And um censoring it's not doing anybody any good. When you're demonetizing these videos, you're you're you're stifling their reach, right? They're they're not being seen by as many people anymore. Yeah. And so see our our idea is to basically like try to understand what's going on right in ancient times whether we talk about giants or whether we talk about erotica or whether we talk about like mushrooms or anything like that. We're just discussing trying to understand this. I mean there should be no censorship. We're not you know I totally agree. Yeah. It was like it's like a doctor looking at a patient's body. Mhm. you know, they're just trying to understand what's going on, right? Where it's not it can't be thought of as pornography, right? Right. It's just we're just trying to analyze the situation here, right? Their primary concern is their advertisers, right? Their primary concern is their at least what this is what they say is their is their advertisers not wanting to spend money on things that aren't brand friendly for them. Yeah. But it's also, you know, then you have the Twitter files, right, where you have evidence of the FBI and the CIA toiling in Twitter's uh regulation policies and their content moderation people sending them emails, having meetings weekly. So, if that's happening at Twitter, imagine what the hell is happening at YouTube. Oh, and some people, man, I mean, did you see what happened to Alex Jones with the the lawsuit? Yeah, he's he's uh declaring bankruptcy. is getting wiped out of everything. Oh yeah. Yeah, man. It's brutal. And and there there was um there what was it? There was a recording of an FBI agent, undercover recording of the FBI agent talking about Alex Jones and basically talking about how they took down Alex Jones. Oh, was he? Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. This person went in like a like it was a it was like a date. This guy I guess they were gay, but he went on a date with an FBI agent and he was uh recording or maybe it was just a meeting. Maybe I'm Maybe I'm wrong. Maybe I'm getting a little too crazy. But they had a secret camera and he was talking to him, the FBI agent, talking about basically how they handle people and they were talking he was talking about Alex Jones and and how um they're basically going to get rid of him with the lawsuit and they're helping with the case somehow. I forget the exact details, but dude, it's scary, man. Yeah, it's scary how much how much control and how much influence they have in the media. For sure. Yeah. and and and we tend to think that um YouTube, Facebook, um all these you know platforms they are kind of at war with each other with Twitter. Um but um what we see is Alex Jones. I think he was just removed from all the platforms on a particular day. It was just gone. Yep. And then uh you know this guy David Ike. Yeah, I know of him. Same thing. It was just like one day there's no David Ike on YouTube. You go to Facebook, he's not there. Go to Twitter, he's not there. He's just like wiped off of the internet. Yeah. Like it it has an effect where like when you do it, people just want to know why they did it. Mhm. So it's instead of letting the guy just keep his social media and talk about the crazy wild he talks about reptiles running the world. Like if you have half of a brain, you can make you can make some sort of an understanding of what this guy's talking about and if he's crazy or not, right? It's not going to be harmful to you. You should you should be able to have a rational mind and understand here's a guy talking about some crazy wacky Have fun with it. What was it that wacky though? I I mean I haven't really really gone that deep on David Ike. You you didn't go through that. You didn't go into that rabbit hole. I never went down the reptilian rabbit hole with David Ike. I I kind of like What about Alex Jones? The rabbit hole of Alex Jones. I've listened to a lot of what Alex Jones says. He's definitely he's definitely crazy. He's definitely done a lot of like I don't think what he did with I think what he said about the the shooting the school shooting was wrong. Um but I think he's been right about a lot of crazy Right. Did you did you hear about the what Carl Tucker said about Alex Jones? He he played a video of Alex Jones talking about 911. Yeah. Yeah. He predicted 911. Yeah. Yeah. How is that even possible? He's a prophet. So he's not that crazy. You You know what? I think I think I think there's a very blurry line between people who are very very smart and very very crazy. I think both can exist, right? The guy clearly is highly in he's very intelligent. He knows a lot. He's obsessed and passionate about this stuff. Yeah. And at the same time, he's crazy. He's still crazy. Doesn't mean he's wrong. Just because he's crazy doesn't mean he's wrong. He's definitely right about a lot of There's been a a there's a I mean, there's a a a everlasting meme on the internet that's been going for the last 10 years about Alex Jones about like the I think the the term what's the difference between a conspiracy theory and the truth? It's like 6 months or something that came from Alex Jones because there's been so many things that he said that we thought were conspiracies that ended up being true. Don't you agree? Yeah, I totally agree. Absolutely. And do I also think that Alex is also a little bit unhinged? Yeah, I think he's a little bit crazy. I think I think when you find out some of this stuff too, that kind of drives you crazy too. What would be your rational explanation as to why Alex Jones could actually say they're going to take some planes and put it on the Twin Towers? What would how how do you think he predicted that? I think I I do I think he's tapped in to the cosmic ether? I don't think so. Um but the guy's he knows a lot of I think he talks to a lot of smart people. He talks to a lot of people probably in intelligence. He probably did back and then I know that his family's in intelligence. Mhm. Um I don't know. I think he just knows a lot more than a lot of people do and he probably was able to connect some dots. So if the 9/11 never happened, right? If if the Twin Towers are still there. Mhm. Would you think of would you watch the same video and think Alex Jones is just nuts? No. No one will remember that. If you if you did if I played you that video Yeah. Right. Would you think he's just nuts? It's just a conspiracy theory. You' probably think No, I wouldn't think it was. No, I wouldn't think he was nuts. I probably think the same way I think about it now. I mean, he just said Alex Jones crazy, man. Yeah, he's definitely crazy. Everyone's a little bit crazy. He just I mean, he's self- admittedly crazy. Yeah. Right. So, what would you be surprised if I told you David Ike predicted the Russia Russian Ukraine war? He did. Yeah, he did long time ago. What What did he say specifically? He's he's basically explaining the whole war like how Russia and Ukraine are going to go to war and how the west is going to play its hand in it. Talking about it NATO trying to NATO expanding that many years ago. Mhm. David Ike explains that. Mhm. So, so we think these people are just really crazy. But you can also see some elements of truth which I would have never predicted that. I would have never thought of the twin towers like Alex Jones. How could he come up with something like that? Right. It's just crazy. And how could David Ike How do you think he came up with that? Well, I mean, I'm thinking that they have inside information. They're able to collect information from the inside of various organizations and governments, right? That's how they they get it, right? They've analyzed the situation. They look at all the evidences and they can put the pieces together, right? It's not that they're crazy. I think it's it's it's very easy to dismiss and you know I mean when I say I don't I don't mean crazy as a pjorative right I look if when we talk about these some a person who's uninitiated looking at this podcast this episode he's going to be like oh these these guys are just nuts these guys are probably on shrooms or something right that's what they're going to think right right so look I mean in my experience in my experience the craziest theories. Okay, the craziest theories when when I um there are really crazy theories. So, I went to um uh an ancient aliens uh filming, right? And I met this guy. This guy is an Emmy award winner, man. I can't say his name, but this guy's a producer uh director, producer, whatever. And this guy had a piece of uh tape stuck on the camera of his phone, right? And I'm like, why why why are you covering the camera of your phone? It's like, no, they're they're spying on us using the camera of my phone. I don't want that. So, I thought this is nuts. And this guy very highly, you know, it's it's a very intelligent, reputed guy. And I thought this guy's just nuts. Mhm. That's just like I was actually afraid to to be in the same room with him by myself because I'm thinking this guy is crazy. Right. Right. But then, you know, I saw him like one or two years later I watched a video of Mark Zuckerberg and he had a tape on his phone covering the camera. Right. So, it's not that that guy was crazy. It just it was so advanced that I couldn't understand it. Imagine going to a homeless guy, right, and and telling him, "Look, I I'll make you if Bill Gates walked up to a homeless guy and tells him, I'll make you a billionaire." That guy, the homeless guy is not going to be able to understand that. The homeless guy will think Bill Gates is just nuts, right? All the theories that Yeah. Look at that. Oh, yeah. Look at that picture of Mark Zuckerberg. You got to look tape. If if I had it, right? If I I I still don't have it, right? I must be really dumb. If he's got it, we should probably have it. That guy that guy probably knows what's going on. Yeah, that's that's what I'm saying. So, the the the theories that I've heard about, right, the theor like the first time when somebody talked about giants being mound builders. Mhm. Okay. You know who told me this? David. No, I never spoke to him. Um although I'd like to, but I went to a mound called Serpent Mound in Ohio. Yes. Y I'm familiar with it. Yeah. And I went there, this is probably in 2014. I was there by myself. I was just, you know, analyzing the serpent mound as like a a a Native American guy walks up to me and he and he starts talking to me and he tells me, "You know who built these mounds?" I'm like, "Who?" Because I'm thinking that he's going to talk about, you know, how the Native Americans built it and all that stuff. He said, "Giants," you know, and I my immediate reaction is like, "This guy's crazy, right?" Yeah. But I'd never heard of it. I'd never heard uh probably 2012, 2013, I'd never heard somebody talk about giants being mounduilders before that guy told me. And my first reaction is that this is stupid. you know, this is just a weird giant 10 10ft tall builders building it. Just weird, right? But when I started to eventually Google it and I I got a few books about the the Serpent Mound and other mounds, that subject will come up all the time. Hm. They will at least mention it somewhere saying that you know people once thought that giants built it or something like that. So that keeps coming up again and again and again. So you eventually know that there's should be some element of truth to it can be completely crazy. M so when a theory like this comes up um whether it's Alex Jones or David Ike and and you know all these guys end up in the same situation you know they could be just who knows right eventually you know how many times was uh Joe Rogan called a conspiracy theorist many times now. No, but the problem is it has a reverse effect. If they're trying to censor the guy, people like Alex Jones and David Ike, it has a reverse effect because when they do it, it just draws more people to them and it gets more people to follow them and get it's like just like Trump with this whole election that he just went through when they tried to, you know, put him on display and and have this election with this corrupt DA. And it what it did was solidified his base and it made people that were on the fence who weren't sure about him go to his side because they saw look all this link they're going through to take this guy out and they supported him. So I think it's the same thing with social media when they when they try to censor these people. It it's uh it's not smart. I don't think it's not they don't think it through all the way. But um but why would you though? Why why would you kind of delete David Ike? Like what could be so crazy about like a reptilian theory? You think that's Well, what's so I mean I like not even crazy, right? What's so what's dangerous about it? Why why is that is that considered so dangerous? You have to remove from the internet. Yeah. Why why would you think and and we tend to think oh Google is like in in competition with Facebook. Facebook is competing with Elon Musk about Twitter, but they all talk together and they delete David Icon one single day. And then here's the thing too, like what if David Ike, I don't know why he was banned from Twitter. I'm assuming like maybe there were some policies when he was on there. He was saying some stuff that was considered from on one like YouTube deletes conspiracy theorist David Ike. Like who knows why they deleted him, right? But now they deleted him and then people see, oh, he talks about reptiles. YouTube deleted him. Must mean reptiles are running YouTube. There's people like that. That's good. like you know like a lot of people a lot of people think that way. Yeah. Not saying it's wrong. Maybe reptiles are running YouTube, but it's going to make a lot of people think that and it's going to it's going to uh it's going to bolster those conspiracy theories even more is what I'm trying to say. Mhm. It it would have the reverse effect until a certain point, right? It would it would support it would have supported Alex Jones until a point, right? But if they can really push hard, Alex Jones is going to be completely bankrupt, maybe ends up in jail, you know, like if sometimes you have to run out of the country, right? Something like that. Yeah. What is the um like the birth rate in India? Is there are there any issues with birth rate? Because I think the birth rate is declining in the US. I know like in the past I don't know if you know this or not but like in the past since the ' 50s I think the sperm count in American men is like 50% of what it was in the ' 50s today it's 50% of what it was in the ' 50s do you know have any idea which has declined our birth rate quite a bit do you know what is going on in India in regards to the birth the birth rate is declining in India too it is it's declining all over the world so you guys are dealing with the same kind of we're We have enough population we don't have to worry about this now but eventually in 50 years they start worrying about this but for now we like I said you know it's one of the you know thickly populated but that's yeah India's declining fertility rate 2.03 03 births per women. Mhm. Holy crap. Look at that. Go back to 1960. See what it is. 1960. Almost six. Six births per woman. Wow. Mhm. Yep. And it was only 3.5 in the US. What is it now in the US? Now it's one one and a half. Yeah. Yeah. Wow. What a change. Yeah. That that decline is uh almost in all countries. I'd be very surprised. It's pretty pretty Yep. Yeah. Yeah. No, I was just curious cuz I know like a lot of that has to do with um well, I mean the birth rate really, but the sperm count has to do with like the pesticides and the uh the glyphosates and the pestic the pesticides are spraying on the food and the microplastics. Everything's in plastic and I mean again with other stuff like porn Mhm. you know it's going to if you Yeah. It's going to change the way you think about like having a family, the need for a girlfriend or a wife. It's it's you're no longer going to technology too, right? Like technology and and people being able to meet people online and have relationships online and eventually we're going to have dolls. AI dolls. Very soon, right? Very. If it's not already there, I'd be very surprised in 5 years. Yeah. I mean, not far off. Yeah. Yeah. And and it's it's so easy, right, to to have a robot because it's not going to give you trouble, right? It's not it's not going to want to go out and have it's not going to be nagging. Yeah. It's not going to be nagging, right? It's not going to be calling you 10 times and be like, "Hey, Danny, where are you? Why are you not paying?" So, it's it's very easy. And even without the without the robots with online porn, you can you can you know your drive is going to be very very low, right? You no longer and people have become selfish too, right? They don't they start to think of family as a as a burden, you know? And it kind of is. That's what I said because you couldn't think of it, right? because he didn't think of it as a burden. Yeah. Well, I mean, yeah, especially if you haven't done it yet and you think about like, look, you 50 years ago, nobody thought of thought of it that way. Right. 100 years ago, they would they would think of family as like very essential. Yes. Right. Right. Right. Now, people are like, "Oh, it's a burden, you know?" Well, I don't really think of it as a burden, but I mean, like, if you want to compare it to life before you had a family, it's like it's it's uncomparable, right? Cuz I'm sure you have a family, right? Like you you can't imagine what it was like before. You have kids? No. No, you don't have kids. I thought you had kids. Before like before we had before I had kids, I like freedom. I can do whatever I want whenever I want. Yeah, I have two kids. Oh, nice. And after you do after you have kids, it's like at least in my case, you forget what life was like before that. Like life was I have friends that don't have kids still and I talk to them and they can do whatever they want. They just they're single, they'll be available. They sleep as long as they want. They go wherever they want at whatever time of the day they want. They can play video games all night if they want. And and not to say it's bad to have all the responsibilities of children because I don't think it's bad. It's definitely a good thing, but it's just so different. I think it definitely definitely makes you a better version of yourself. I think makes you more disciplined. You know, there's a lot of there's a lot of benefits to it. And I don't think depopulation is a good bet. I don't think that's good. I don't think I don't think um you know I mean there's definitely a case to be made that there's too going to be too many humans on the planet in the future especially no I don't think that especially if AI is able to make us live longer if AI is somehow able to figure out figure out medicine and figure out how to cure diseases in the human genome and make us live hundreds of years even you know by the sing if the singularity happens in 2030 20 240 and that extends our lifespan and by more than double, there's going to be way too many people on this planet, man. This planet, I don't think, can handle 20 billion people or a trillion people. Um, that's going to be a problem. Okay. Yeah. And a trillion poor people because the AI can take away a lot of jobs, too. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. I don't I think it's kind of like over overpopulation. Um, probably will never get there. I would think that, right? Um, I I doubt if we'll ever overpop populate the earth. It's going to be the opposite way. I think it's going to we're going to be we're going to have lesser and lesser people from now on. Yeah. I think I heard once I heard somewhere that you could take every single human being on the entire earth and you can fit them inside the city boundaries of Los Angeles. Yeah. That's which is insane, right? Yeah. But that's all there is. I mean, we tend to think, oh, there's too many people. Mhm. Yeah. We don't have that many people. I think it's in my opinion. I think from now on, like in the last maybe 50 years and then in the next 50 years, the population decline is going to be drastic. Yeah, I think so. It's going to be drastic. It's going to you're going to unless um people like Jeff Bezos, you know, Jeff Jeff Bezos is working on immortality, right? He's trying to find a way uh to stop people like you won't have he doesn't want to die. Mhm. Yeah. There's a lot of people working on immortality, man. A lot of people. Ray Kerszswhile. I just had a guy in here the other day who wrote a whole book on it and the people that are involved, these billionaires that are involved in these AI companies. They're trying to figure out they're really doing a lot of work trying to figure out the human genome and the DNA and because they don't know why we age. There's some animals that don't age. Mhm. There's a whale called the uh what's that whale called the something head whale was like doesn't age. It was like a curved head whale or something. It doesn't age. Um a naked mole rat doesn't age. How does it die then? from like like fighting like like fighting other other rats or or getting suffocated in a dirt hole that it goes into or um but yeah, they they the average lifespan of them is like 35 years and I think they only die from like trauma or from like suffocation or from starvation or whatever it is or from getting run over really. Um and then there's also a a Greenland shark that doesn't age. I think those things are like there's Greenland sharks that are like over 500 years old or something. But if that's the case, wouldn't the ocean be full of those sharks because they never die, right? They just keep Yeah. Well, the thing is making babies, there's not that many of them and they're not reproduce. Um, how so? That's a good question, though. Why aren't there more of them? You would think if they don't age. I mean, that's your theory, right? If you're saying that we don't die, we just overpop populate the earth. But if those mole rats don't die, like, why aren't they why are they not like That's a good question. That's a good question. I don't know the answer to that. Um, but that's what that's the case that that he was making that there's some there's a few animals on Earth that don't die and that the AI the people that are involved in these AI companies, these billionaires are trying to study those kind of animals, figure out their genome and then and their DNA and figure out how we can reverse engineer it and apply it to ourselves so we don't age anymore. Yeah. Yeah. People like Jeff Bezos could probably do. If if anyone can do it, probably him or if Elon Musk is working on it, he could do it. Yeah, he's into um Neuralink was that there was some news about Neuralink that came out. The first guy, you know, you know what Elon Musk is working on? Yeah. Well, I know Joe Rogan had the guy on his podcast. The first guy to Elon Musk. No, the Neuralink. Oh, the very first guy. The first guy who got Neuralink. Yeah. Yeah. He was on there recently. Yeah. But Elon Musk, he's trying to make people go to go to Mars, right? He's trying to figure out how to make our species interplanetary. Yeah. But we haven't even been to the moon since the 70s. Since 1969. Yeah. No, the the uh probably um um Blue Origin will put a man on the moon very quick. Very soon, I think. You think? Jeff Bezos. Yep. Jeff Bezos is going to put the next man on the moon. If if it's not done by any other government, you know, the countries can do it, but if it's not the country, it's going to be Jeff Bezos. B, you know, you know why he um he stepped down from Amazon as a CEO. Mm. Because he wanted to focus on the on the space race. Really? Oh, good for him. Yep. Good for him. What a great guy. Yeah. The first building on the moon is going to be an Amazon distribution center. That's a good one, Steve. My god, that's funny. Yeah, Bezos. It would be funny, huh? What a guy. You don't like Bezos, huh? No, I got nothing I got nothing wrong with Bezos. I got I got no problem against him. I just think it's f I think um nobody gave him enough credit like you guys, you order something in the morning, he gives it to you in the evening. Oh, it's great. It's amazing what he does. It's magic. It's magical. is he's the thing is nobody recognized him but I think he's the greatest inventor invented this kind of delivery is amazing and not just in the US in India too you can order in the morning and you can get it at night it's insane it's the same thing in in India huh now in India yeah you could do that and then he invented oneclick shopping that's insane now you see did you see dude perfect he went to the space Did he really? Yeah. On uh on Jeff Bezos rocket. He's doing it commercially like Jeff Bezos. Like I was just in Costa Rica a couple weeks ago and they had Amazon there too. Yeah. These Amazon Prime Yeah. these guys just went uh I mean imagine you can just pay like $100,000 or $200,000 and you can actually go to the space. I mean Yeah. I just love I love Jeff Bezos's evolution as a human. Ever since the ever since the company blew up, he all of a sudden got like jacked, you know, this is going to be the future. So, it's like uh it's like me taking a plane from Arizona to here. You could just pay and you know this is Amazon, right? He probably if you if you had Amazon Prime, he could put you on space for like few thousand. See, this is my problem. How come we're so worried about going to space? But we can't make airplanes any better. We're still using the same airplanes we used in the 60s. Yeah. Can you believe that? The same thing. We're using the same airplanes. They just put new seats in them, a new fresh coat of paint. Yeah. But like, but we're going to go to the moon and we're going to go to Mars. Yeah. But you you know what? All the all the airlines, they're losing money. I saw that cuz the Boeing right? They had to ground a bunch of the Boeing planes. Mhm. But there's there's been no um airline company that's made money. Nobody invests. I mean, you it's so competitive. Yeah. They're just fighting with one another. You you know how many It's such a It's such a It's such a shady the way they operate, too. Like, it's used to be so shitty how bad how bad they'd treat you and how hard it would be to get a refund or like they would just take your money. But I think actually one of the good things the Biden administration just did was they actually just implemented some sort of law recently that I saw to where the airline companies actually have to start giving you refunds when you ask for it. Yeah. And it's been working too. It just happened to me where I had to cancel a flight like the day of and they're like, "Oh, sure. Here's your refund. Give me a full refund." Really? Yeah. Oh, never happened to me before. Wow. And you find that find the actual the headline for that. What the Biden? Really? That's amazing, man. Biden administration that in India now Yeah. Right. It was the Biden administration uh on airline refunds or something like that. There you go. There you go. There you go. April Bet Harris administration announces final rule requiring automatic refunds of airline tickets and ancillary service fees. There you go. That's Now they can't run up the freaking tab on you. Yeah, passengers deserve to get their money when an airline owes them without headaches or haggling, said the US transportation secretary, Pete Buddhy Judge. Wow, good job, Pet. Our new rule set new stand Our new rule sets a new standard to require analysts to promptly provide cash refunds to their passengers. I love that. Promptly, too. That's great. Is that cool? Yeah, I love that. That's super cool. Yeah. So, when is the next election, man? Who's winning? Um, probably Trump. Really? I think probably Trump. Yeah, there's no way Biden's going to win. There's He's definitely going to I think he might drop out even. I think the fact that they they led him into that slaughter, they let him walk into that yesterday or two days ago was very telling cuz why would they do that unless they really, you know, were going to actually let him sink. Yeah, that's so weird. I mean, I wonder what happened. Like my money's on Trump. I think he's got I think there's no way Trump doesn't win. Really? Yeah. I don't see how who's gonna beat Trump. You think you What do you think? Why did he lose the last time though? Like I I believe that Trump is a more effective candidate if that's what you're asking me. I would think that Trump would win. But how did Biden beat him the last time? I didn't understand that. I'm not I don't like I don't buy into I understand there's election fraud and there's probably election fraud in every election. Mhm. Um, there was the Hunter Biden laptop story that got suppressed on Twitter. That's Everybody knows about that. Y um, and I also think at the same time I think they deleted Trump's account on Twitter. Oh yeah, they with him hard. But I also think a lot of people didn't vote for Biden. They voted against Trump by voting for Biden. A lot of people really didn't like Trump. Why though? What? Why? Why? Because they didn't want Trump in office. Okay. I think a lot of people just really didn't want Trump anymore. And um I think there was a lot of in the election fraud. You know, there was the laptop story that got suppressed and there was a lot of other Um you know, I'm not really an expert on the elections or whatever, but yeah, I believe there was fraud. I don't know what's going on. I don't think you you think that's not going to happen this time. I don't think it's possible. I don't I don't know how I don't know how look if they do it again and somehow Trump doesn't win. It's just like it's going to be so obvious this is not a real democracy to everybody. I think it's just like how do you even lie to us anymore after that? Like you at least just come out and tell us that the votes don't matter anymore, right? And I think it's been on the verge of that for a while. You would accept it. Like really, who knows? If Biden wins, would I accept it? Yeah. I mean, what am I going to do? That's what I'm saying. Right. So, you you don't have a choice. You'd be like, "Yeah, I really don't have a choice, right? I really don't. I mean, I don't think I don't I don't know really what's going on, but I like if you really asked me if I think do do the votes actually matter that much? I I wouldn't I wouldn't bet on it. I don't know. I think there's too much going on behind the scenes. There's too much. We could start a movement. We can just deny that he's actually our president. It's already there. Yeah. It's called Trump is not my president. It's already there, man. Yeah. Yeah. I don't see how I don't I I really don't see how I don't see how he how he could lose. And if And if Biden does drop out, I wonder who replaces him. Yeah. That's kind of crazy because as an outsider, I've never been a um US citizen or anything like that, but I always thought that you guys very solid. You you guys always gave two terms to Republican, two terms Democrat is almost never screwed with that, right? You never mess with that, right? That's I think the only time was when somebody resigned. Uh the Watergate stuff. Who was that guy? Nixon. Well, Bush Bush Senior only got one term. Oh, really? Yeah. Some guys only get one term. Yeah. A lot of some guys get two terms. Okay. But like it's it's a weird amnesia thing that we have. Yeah. Whenever we have a president, we always think that it needs to go back to the other side. Like when we have a Republican for too long, it's like, "Oh, god damn it. Why can't we get down to back to some reasonable Democratic people in this place and and figure this stuff out and get back to normal and then we get the Democrat in?" And then it's the same thing over again. It's like, "Wow, it's the same thing. It's the same thing. Why can't we get back to uh some a Republican president to get straight and figure out why, you know, these never- ending wars and all this stuff? And it just seems to it's just this pendulum that swings and it never really changes. It's just we forget. You know what I mean? We get so we get four years, eight years in and uh we think the grass is going to be greener on the other side and it never really is. Nothing really ever gets solved. No, nothing ever re ever permanently changes. It's just this it's just this cycle this loop that never ends. But but if this happens the first time, man, I I think the first time if if Trump really wins, which I doubt he will. You doubt it? I don't I don't doubt Trump's efficiency or his popularity. I don't doubt that. But I think they they're going to do something that makes him lose like the last time. Yeah. I don't think they could they could kill him. I guess they could whack him, right? Yeah. I don't I don't think Trump really lost the last time, but they did a lot of uh a lot of little tricks and you know, like the Twitter Twitter played a major part. Major role. Yeah, it's crazy. They they changed the outcome of an election. But now Elon owns it, sir. And Trump is back on Twitter, right? Trump is back on Twitter, although I don't think he's using it. I think he gave him his Twitter back and he's like, "Fuck you." Oh, really? Yeah. Oh, okay. Yeah, he's got his own truth social. Yeah. How's that going? They they tried to do something with it. Okay. I don't know. I I don't really pay that much attention to it, but I mean, Trump's like so popular, dude. If you watch any If you watch um like UFC matches, he they march him into the UFC. He's like shaking hands with with uh Elon Musk, Theo Vaughn, Joe Rogan. Everyone's giving him like they give him like a 10-minute standing ovation when he walks in there. Really? Oh, yeah. He is beloved. I love Trump. He's beloved, man. Yeah. Trump Trump is very, you know, very um he's a very efficient human being. I think that's a word. whether he's a businessman or whether he's a politician, he's very efficient. He knows he knows what to do. Yeah. I just, you know, I don't know. I think I think the um the the type of democracy we have now needs like a fundamental reset. And I don't think that the way it's going right now, I don't think it's going to end up well. the way it the way that it's set up, right? The way it's legally set up for lobbyists to to affect our laws and the way our country works and you know, it's all based on on economics, right? Mhm. And corruption and greed. And I think there's got to be a better way to do it. I don't know how that's going to happen. You're going to have to it's going to have to be a hard reset, right? to have some sort of like some sort of version of of of the democracy that Plato talks about where you have like a round table of of philosophers and just geniuses that can solve the problems and you got juries of of hundreds of people from the town that are to decide what happens to criminals. And you know, I think that was probably the pinnacle of human intellect. and we've just strayed so far from there, man. Now it's just a circus. But um I wanted to actually talk about one more thing before we wrap this up. Sure. I wanted to talk about the Taj Mahal stuff. Okay. Sure. Um there's some going on underneath the Taj Mahal. Yeah. In your video, you showed like there's some crazy underground layer or some there's some passages that are hidden and they're blocked off. People can't get through. Mhm. And um it seems like what do you think's going on underneath the Taj Mahal? Um there was a there was a book um I think that book is called Bad Sha Nama. Mhm. Uh this was written um about how uh Taj Mahal was built. Uh this is an old book like a few centuries old and that book was written um at the time of Taj Mahal. And they basically say the Taj Mahal was um before the Taj Mahal was erected, there was a structure there, right? And they demolished it and they built Taj Mahal on top of it. Right. Taj Mahal is in a very nice spot. He it's on the river bank of Yamina. So it's like it it makes it so much better. Mh. Um so um Shajahan he's a he's a um he's a Muslim king who built uh Taj Mahal. Yeah. He buys that piece of land and on which there was a structure and then he demolishes that structure and he builds Taj Mahal on top of it. Okay. So that's that's a river. Right. Right. Now underneath there are several structures. Okay. And some of it has been open now. At at that time um this was probably 201617 most of these structures were closed completely closed off. Yep. Yep. After this video came out and of course it spawned a lot of other videos too right because it becomes very controversial. We're like okay what's underneath the Taj Mahal? And then I think uh the archaeological department has opened some parts of it now. Oh really? Yep. Okay. Yep. Because of your videos. Some Yep. Some Wow, man. Yeah. So, so was it just to keep people safe or was it just to like because they didn't want people going down there because it would be too too costly to like renovate all that or what do you think the reason was? India, it's all um uh combined together in India. Uh history, politics, religion, they're all intertwined. Okay? It gets very intensely political. Um because people don't just see see this as history. They would combine that with religion like I I view that uh Shajahan built it on top of a Hindu temple. That's how I think of it. Okay. Okay. So Shajahan buys a piece of land and he realizes this is how I would do it. Right. So I'm I'm I want to build a great structure. Right. So I find a perfect spot for this. This is on the bank of river Yamina. Mhm. But there's already a temple there. So I demolish the temple and I build it on top of the temple. Right. Right. But the remnants are still there and we can find some of the remnants there. Um if you keep going cuz the base of it red sandstone, right? And then the top of it's all white marble. You Yeah. There there's some discrepancy there. If you go to Yeah. There you go. Yeah. Oh Look at that, man. That's wild. You see that? You see that uh doorway there? Yep. Yep. What is that doorway? The the existing structure there. Oh, that was what's there. What was there before? Yeah. What was there before? So, we we there's one guy I think his name he there were two two or three more guys uh who wrote about this. I I took this picture from an old textbook who talks about how they they could go into the doorway at at a certain point and then they started to put doors and they they now I think they've completely sealed it off. Mhm. But I think um I mean I it's it should just be common knowledge that you know this structure was probably built on top of an existing temple or a mansion or a palace which is basically a Hindu structure. Look at that. Look just sealed off. Oh, they bricked it out. Yep. Just sealed off. Right. So this should become Yeah. I mean I mean look I mean the thing is like if you go there if if I tell you Danny you're this office is built on top of a land which was originally owned by Native Americans it'd be normal fact it's just a fact right yeah so I understand that so that's the point of me putting a making a video and saying look underneath originally there used to be a Hindu structure right but it's become very controversial because the it's also intensely political in India, right? Okay, that makes sense. They're still thinking like the history is happening today. What an what an amazing structure that is. Taj Mahal. Yeah. Good lord. Mhm. Yeah. I made another video saying uh Taj Mahal employs a lot of uh optical illusions. There's like Yeah, if you there's another video about Taj Mahal. If you go to my channel, it's not it's not going to be on this video. Um, Tajal uses a lot of optical illusions and just confuses you. Um, which is what makes you kind of like fall in love with that. Changes color according to really Yep. It changes color uh according to the light, you know, according to the time of the day and and the moonlight and all that stuff. Yeah. Yeah. That's if you see um maybe Yeah, there one. That one. You see that? How many how many corners do you see? Two. How many? Really? Wow. Oh, wait. On the corners. How many How many sides of that? How many facets sides? One, two, three, four, five, six. Okay, keep playing. Right. Okay. Yeah. Keep playing six, right? Yep. Oh, it's flat. Oh my lord. Oh, that's cool, man. So, he just Yeah, that's the thing. So, just then this is bold by Oh, it's three. I see. Yeah. So, it's kind of like Yeah. It just it's going to look it's going to appear like it has a lot of uh that's amazing. So, uh we don't give that much credit to um you know the the guy who built it. He actually did an amazing job and it's even when you see this it's very hard for you to understand this you know because you still think it still has six sides. Mhm. I use a lot of psychological tricks like this and that's why Taj Mahal um it's probably I don't think there's anybody in the world who has not heard of Taj Mahal. It's No, I don't think there's anybody who's heard of it. I mean I bet you there's people who know like the name Taj Mahal but can't put the picture and can't like tell you where it is. Yes. But like there's even like there's like sayings if you see a fancy house whatever like godamn you got the Taj Mahal here. Yeah. It's used as an adjective, right? Yep. Yeah. It's a It's an incredible structure. And this is what So, there's mirrors in the bathroom in the ceiling. So, when they lit candles, it would look like like the cosmos. This is Yeah, this is the these are the little mirrors put on the on the bathroom of the queen um of Shajahan, the guy who built it. So when the queen went into the bathroom, Shajahan could look at a thousand images of the queen right in the bathtub. A thousand images of her bathing. Yeah, that's beautiful, man. It's incredible. Yeah. Yeah. There lots of mysteries in uh in India, I think. Um and there's a there's a tunnel supposedly under here that that links to another many many I think. Many tunnels. Really? Yes. Yes. Many tunnels. I don't know. Yeah. Tajimal is a very beautiful monument. Imagine building you know you know what they did when uh when India uh went to war with Pakistan. You know what they did? They had to cover up the Taj Mahal because Pakistan said they would bomb. Really? If you I got to find this. What did they cover it with? What do they cover? Taj Mahal covered Pakistan war. Something like that. Pakistan in 1942. Oh yeah. This is not the Pakistan. I'm sorry. I I I I got Yeah. I'm sorry guys. It's not the Pakistan. It's the probably the war with Germany. Oh, World War II. World War II. Yeah. I'm sorry guys. Oh yeah. Cuz India they had to cover this up. What is around it? Is it scaffolding? Yeah, it just looks like renovations. Looks like renovations. Probably find another Well, that was the link back there. So, it's amid fear of potential air raids, British army used bamboo to cover the Taj Mahal's dome, attempting to make the onion shaped design resemble something. Oh, 90 war with Pakistan. Yeah, that one. I think that's resembled nothing more than a pile of vegetation. Oh. Oh, okay. So, that wasn't scaffolding. That was actually bamboo they used to make it look different from the air. Yeah, I saw another picture, man. That was a Yeah, look at the No, the next one. I don't know. Oh, this thing. Yep. That Oh, well that does look more like camo, doesn't it? During World War II, they they kind of like see what they got. Yeah. Okay. Thanks, guys. It's just a never ending. I hate it when that happens. Wild, man. Yeah, I saw other pictures where they put a lot of like uh stuff on top. I can't find it now. Do they use those uh is it all marble inside the Taj Mahal or are there multiple different stones? Do they use any of those like different stones? They use those floating rocks too or no? No, no, no. That's only temples. No floating rocks. Yeah, that that's only in certain temples. Okay. Um, in Taj Mahal, it appears as though there it's full of white marble, but it's not. It's very cleverly done. So, you only see the white marbles, but inside there are several structures. What is that? Underneath foundation. Fierce. This is underneath it. Oh my goodness. So, there's a brick structure. What does that say? It says well foundation. Well foundation. The Taj is built on gigantic wooden slabs at top a well foundation to stabilize the river bank sand. Rows of columns and archways keep it from sliding into the river. So that's to this thing right there, the brick section. And there's a there's an I there's a is it a theory or is it real that there's actually tombs under there with the king? Well, of the of the queen. Yep. Um they say it's still there. They've open Yeah, they've opened it up now. I haven't checked, but they've opened up. There is an underground chamber. Uh when I went there, they said no, you nobody's allowed. Okay. But now it's become quite controversial, I think. So, they had to open it. Um, it's weird because um the queen's um chamber. Yeah, that's the one underground. Yeah. Underground. Yep. Is it Is it this this thing? Yeah. Oh, that's it. Okay. You can see there. And you can see a bunch of people there. That's how you'd see it today. But this is not underground. This is at the ground level. Right. Right. And they say there is an underground thing. It's a replica. Oh, really? Oh, this is a replica. Yeah, this is a replica. Oh, what's underneath? Okay. Is there any place you haven't been that you want to go? Lots. Really? Yep. Lots. I haven't got like Look, man. I mean, the here's the problem, right? So, we probably got like more than like I would say 10,000 temples in India. Mhm. Not going to be a lifetime. It's not going to fit into my lifetime. There are lots of temples. Yeah. in and it's not even in India today. You think India is just India, right? Hinduism is just spread in India. But thousand 2,000 years ago, Hinduism was spread India, Pakistan on this side, Sri Lanka, all of Southeast Asia. We're talking about Thailand, Indonesia, Vietnam, Cambodia, all those countries, right? It was like it's full of temples. It's not like I can't fit all those temples into my lifetime even if I do it every day. Have you pl Have you plotted out the ones you can fit in your lifetime that you want to go to? Not no not completely. So because every time like for example this time and you know how like how much I travel now. You know a little bit right because you know you you booked my ticket from uh Yeah. You went from North Carolina to Arizona to California to Florida, back to North Carolina. Right. And now I got to go back to India day after and then I have to again go for like a government thing and then on 20th I'm going to Bali, Indonesia. Oh, really? So that's how much I travel. So we we keep really busy. But everywhere I go in India or Southeast Asia, the temples are like everywhere. Okay. Even like Indonesia is what 2,500 miles from India. Uh Indonesia is a is a is made of 17,000 islands. And we keep driving in Indonesia and you find temples after temples. It's just everywhere. These guys something is wrong. Something was is very odd about the the Hindu culture that they built temples everywhere. Everywhere you see the the people in Indonesia um they dig their ground to build a water well or like a foundation for their house and they keep digging up these lings. They're everywhere. The lings. Yeah. The lings and the t the idols and the statues. They're everywhere. Everywhere you go in Southeast Asia, we find these these temples buried, you know. So they're all over the place. So I can't Yeah. To to put it to to put it in a nutshell, I can't see all the temples in my lifetime. They're going to be every Plus we we we're not going there on a day trip, you know. How long are you going to be in uh Bali? We're going to be there 9 days. 20 to the 29th. Where and what are you going to what are you going to uh explore? Um temples. We have a list of temples there. List of temples. Wow. We have maybe like four temples. Um there are some temples. There are some carvings on a river bank and we're going to explore that. Wow. Y there like the they specifically made these carvings in places which are hard to reach and hard to find. Okay. In in Cambodia you have lings underwater. Wow. Yeah. You seen that? I think so. Yeah. I mean, yeah. That's another thing though. How many of these temples are submerged now? I wonder. Yeah. Yeah. There there's an entire Yeah. There you go. The second Yeah. Underneath these are all lings, man. Yeah. That's I think that's uh probably what is the theory on what is the idea? What What do the lings mean again? Well, the reason for um the Cambodian lings and yeah, this is in a remote uh temple, right? You go to the temple and you see it's just water flowing but underneath you'll see hund thousands actually and this is called Sahasinga and they say that when uh Indians moved to Cambodia, when the Hindus moved to Cambodia, um it was jungle, right? So they had to clear the jungle. They made that into a farm and they tried to um cultivate rice and no matter what they what they tried um rice was not growing. Mhm. Right. So and they they tilled the the land. They made sure the water came from the mountains but the rice was just not growing there. The plants were not growing there. So what they did was they needed a specific they needed a magic spell, right? They needed a magic potion um for the crops to grow, for the rice to grow. So they carved the lings in the mountain all over so the water could flow through the lings, right? It's just the same water. Mhm. But when the water flowed through the lings, they became fertile enough. Yep. Oh, interesting. Yep. So they So that was the magic element that the lingum was a fertility thing, right? Okay. Wild man. Well, we've just done like three and a half hours, so uh you got a flight to catch. Rick, we don't want to keep you here forever. I appreciate you uh coming through, brother. And um where can people find your I'll link it all below, but your YouTube channel is called Prav Mohan. Yep. You can go to YouTube, Pravin Mohan. You can go to Facebook. You can go to Instagram. You can just search my name. I'm not I'm not on Twitter. Uh I am on Twitter, but I don't use it. Right. You know, I only post I'm not political. I I only post my findings like once or twice a month. Right. Right. Right. Instagram, all that stuff. Yeah, I posted mostly everywhere. Cool. Um, but it'll be mostly new findings. It won't be commercial. I won't be posting every day or something like that. But if I find something new, I'll post it. How often do you post videos on YouTube? Do you have a schedule or notice? No. I like I didn't post for the last 25 days. Oh, right. I only posted yesterday and somebody in India was posting it. Okay. You notice. So, um, yeah, we we're trying to do we try to find new stuff on ancient songs. Hasn't been talked about before. Yeah. We I don't want to post I won't be like, "Oh, this is interesting. Let me make my own video about this." I won't do that. Like, I'll if I find anything interesting, I'll do it, you know. Um, so mostly if you're looking for ancient sites and like good info, you'll find it. Beautiful, man. Thanks again for your time. And for everybody still watching, we did a Patreon Q&A that we recorded before the podcast. So if you want to check it out, it's linked below. And uh, that's it. Good night, folks. Good night. Thanks Denny.