All right, gentlemen. Thank you both for being here. Mr. Charlie Duke. It's a pleasure to meet you. Thank you very much. Bart Cibrell. Thanks again for traveling halfway across the world to come here and hang out with me and Charlie Duke. To start this thing off, I want to basically introduce both you guys. Charlie, you are an Apollo astronaut. One of the last four surviving Apollo astronauts, the 10th man to walk on the moon on the Apollo 16 moon landing mission. And Bart, you are the world's leaning proponent in the moon landing hoax hypothesis. I'll call it. And you've made you spent this has been your life's work basically proving that we're trying to make the case that the Apollo moon landing program was a American propaganda campaign during the Cold War and it was all filmed on a set and they never actually went to the moon. Does that sum it up pretty well? Pretty much after my life anyway. The first half I believe they went to the moon. So obviously like last time you and I talked, we thought it would be a great idea to have you debate somebody on this. I don't know. Have you ever done a debate on this with anybody? No. To me, that would be like debating if the sky is blue. It's blue and they did fake the moon landing. I bet my life on it. A little bit pull up, pull your mic a little closer. So the people normally they proposed to debate me are victims of the deception, which I have no interest in beating up, you know, someone who's a victim. I said find somebody who's a perpetrator, either one of the astronauts or a NASA administrator. And you did. Here he is. Here I am. So Charlie Duke, could you please give us a little background in your history and how you got involved in the Apollo program in the beginning? I was a fighter pilot, an Air Force. Went to MIT, got a master's degree and graduated 64. I went to test pilot school and graduated 65, summer 65. And I'd met some astronauts that did come to MIT. They had to contract to build a Apollo guidance and navigation system. I was working on that system. And all going to go guys. And so I decided to take their advice, go to test pilot school and maybe have a chance at space program. Couple of months after I graduated from test pilot school in the summer of 65, NASA had another call for astronauts. And four of us at Edwards applied and we all got accepted. And it would be mayor. So of 1966, we went to Houston and started working on Apollo. So during this conversation, I want to do some, I want to take some time to do some back and forth on some of the cases Bart has made in his documentaries. And but before we do that, I want to spend some time going through your personal story and your firsthand account on the Apollo missions. Does that sound good to you? OK. So what eight, how old were you when you first learned about the US government gearing up to go into space and this is the whole space race and all this stuff? Well I remember the first human beings that went in this by Yuri Gagarin in 61 and Alan Shepard followed him. And right after that, I found out now that the Russians were beaten us in space. And so Kennedy put out a desire of what, how can we beat him? And one of our bronze said we can beat him to the moon. And I've got a copy of the letter that he sent the president Kennedy and he said, OK, we'll go to the moon. We committed to the Apollo program and that was never how old you were. Well I was sick. It was in 60, 61 or two. So I was born in 35. So I was 30 less than 30 years old. And I remember seeing specifically there were interviews with, I think this might have been a Von Braun interview from your documentary where they were asking Von Braun about the space race with Russia. And he was explaining it in an analogy to where he said, Russia is already in a full sprint. We haven't even started walking yet. Like we have to gear up. We have a long time to gear up and to speed up before we're even running at the same pace they are before we have to do all that before we can even think about closing the gap between us and Russia. Well that might be true. I don't remember that level of detail. But I do have a copy of the letter that he sent to President Kennedy. I believe it was. It said the only way we can beat him is beat him to the moon. And so they committed to the moon. And by the end of the decade which I thought was crazy. I mean, in 15 minutes in space and we going to land on the moon in the next eight and and a half years, it turns out I sit in Mission Control in July 1969, eight years and two months later. And I'm talking to Neil Armstrong on the moon. Let's go to the point where you first decided like how did the process work for you to be chosen to be selected for this program? I had graduated from the test pilot school at Edwards Air Force Base in the summer of 1985 and in September of that year I saw an ad in a paper that's not just looking for my astronauts, please apply. So I had a house in the Air Force. I had to go through official channels. So they told me what to do and I submitted my application along with Stu Rusa and Alan War Al Wharton. Hank Hart's field, we were all in the same test pilot school class. And Joango was out there. He's he applied and there was a lot of people applied and they were looking for test pilots and my age and height and everything like that. When you say test pilot, you mean test pilot for the space program? No, test pilot for the Air Force. The Air Force. We were all at Edwards Air Force Base, the ones I'm speaking about. We had other selected that came from the Naval test pilot school, which was in Potuxet, Maryland. And then how did that evolve into the idea of going to the moon working on the moon missions? I'm not sure the moon missions were had been determined. That's what we were working on. And if we applied, we would have a chance to work on the Apollo program. Was there a moment for you where you thought like, I want to be one of the guys to go to the moon or I want to be a part of that program to put man on the moon? That was that call by NASA is to you. If you got selected as astronaut, you'd be a part of the Apollo program. So you didn't know guarantee you're going to fly to the moon and no guarantee that it was even going to be completed. But I wanted to be an astronaut. It was the best job you could have as a test pilot. And then what was that training like to become an astronaut? And how long did it take? Well, it depends on what you've called training. Our group, it was 19 of us. We reported to Houston in first, like the first of May 1966. And we started learning NASA ease. You know, how does NASA work and who's got responsibility? Is that the other? And they decided also if we're going to go to the moon, we all don't know what kind of rocks to pick up. And so we started big extensive training in geology. And we not only had classroom work, but we also had field trips once a month, generally. And that was two or three days somewhere in the US, somewhere in sometimes in Hawaii, sometimes in Canada, but mostly in the US. We did a geology trip, got into the field, and learn how to pick up the right kind of rocks. And what were you, what was going through your mind when I mean your young guy and you're, this is the 66, three years before Apollo 11, you're trying to become an astronaut learning about geology. What was going through your mind at that point? What was your, like, were you optimistic that this was going to happen? Were you skeptical? Were you fearful? I was optimistic that Apollo was going to happen. I wasn't so optimistic that I'd get a chance to go. We were the junior guys. And so it turned out that some of the senior guys left John Glenn, Wally Shirah, I've got Apollo 7 retired. So a lot of the older guys started retiring. So we sort of bubbled up into the mix. And Dick Slaton, who was the, an Alan Shepherd, who was the two top astronauts, they started picking people to train. And so they were trying to balance the crew and give us younger guys some experience. So most of the crews that were selected had a senior guy that had flown in space, he was the commander. And then a lot of the crews had two rookies that came from our group mostly. And how did you come to meet von Braun? One of my first jobs is he, as an astronaut, was to monitor the development of the Saturn life, Stu Ruseb, myself. And so the best way to do that was to go up and meet Braun Braun and sit in on his staff meetings to see how the Saturn 5 was progressing and was this thing going to really fly. And so every month we'd go up and sit in on his staff meeting. And he became a, I wouldn't say a friend, but he recognized us every time we walked in. It says, welcome Charlie, welcome Stu. And we'd sit in listen to his meetings, briefings on his staff meeting. And then we'd go back and report to the astronaut office on Monday morning, every Monday morning, we'd have a couple hour meeting. And what was going on in the program and Stu and I'd give a brief in every time we got back. So you would explain to the other astronauts what the progress was on the Saturn 5 rocket. That's correct. Depending on like what? Do you have any like personal conversations with Vaughn Braun about this or? Well, mostly just he recognized us and he accepted us. And I can't say he became a real good friend, but he certainly knew we were and we respected him highly. And they were doing a good job turning out the Saturn 5 never had a failure, not one. That's pretty astonishing. And all of the flights of followed, they lost one engine. And I think it was on Apollo 13, but one engine goes out. It's you can still make it in orbit. Wow. In fact, it was such a good machine. Stu, Rusen, I went to Ames Research Center and they wrote a program can astronauts literally fly the Saturn 5 in a space manually. And we proved we could not very efficiently. We could get it into orbit. But they decided not to use that program. And so we had never was implemented, but we spent a month or so out at Ames proven that you could fly the Saturn 5 in orbit. What made the Saturn 5 so superior even to rockets that we have today? I mean, obviously, I think it was ever usable. But I think it was just good technology and a simple, you know, there wasn't any things complicated about the Saturn 5 that engines were huge. And they were test fired and it was a nitrogen and no, not hydrogen and oxygen. I don't remember what to feel was, but anyway, they were very reliable and engines. They were huge, 1.5 million pounds thrust each on the first stage. And so that was a seven and a half million pounds of thrust, lifting six and a half million pounds. And you were up on the top and the only thing I remember of a lift off was the vibration. You didn't have any noise from the engines. That was all going sideways. And the thing shook, it was like being on a 360 long limber fishing pole and you're up at the top and somebody shaking it down here, which was the engines and was vibrating from side to side, not a pogo, but a vibrate from side like swaying back and forth. Really high, high, high, high frequency though. And amplitude was maybe that four. This way. One really talks about it, but most men's testosterone levels start to decline at about 30 years of age, about 1% per year ever noticed like you're losing energy, sex drive, and starting to feel like you're just trudging through the day. It creeps up on you until one day you start to realize you don't feel like yourself anymore. The thing is your body can still be producing testosterone, but it starts to get locked up by a protein called SHBG. And that is why I tried Mars Men. Men is designed to help free up that testosterone. So your body can actually use it. No synthetics, no needles, just natural ingredients like Tonkat Ali, Sheila G, vitamin D, zinc, and boron. I started taking a handful of these after my breakfast in the morning and I've definitely noticed a huge boost and steady flow of energy throughout the day. I no longer crash after workouts or feel drained and I just feel overall more positive. I got their launch kit, which comes with the bottle, an organizer tin, and a free ticket to Mars. If we can get past the Van Allen belts. Mars Men is made in the USA. It's third party tested and comes with a 90 day money back guarantee. And for a limited time only our listeners are getting 60% off for life and three free gifts when you use code Danny at mengotomars.com. That's mengotomars.com and use the code DANNY at checkout. After you purchase, they're going to ask where you heard about them and please tell them we sent you to Mars. It's linked down below, now back to the show. And so during Apollo 11, the first on Neil Armstrong's mission to the moon, you were what was your role in that? I was at Capcom. I'd done the same thing on Apollo 10 and where they took the lunar module to the moon, but weren't going to land. And so that had gone well and Neil asked me, why don't you be Captain for us? I mean, you got the experience. Oh, he asked you. Yeah. And because I went on the crew of any way involved, but he said, would you do that? And I said, sure, it would be great honor. And so we practiced for two months and simulations and the crews in the simulator, we're in mission control. And we practiced four or five hours a day generally for the landing port. So what specifically do you do as the top-com guy? You're the voice of mission control. You don't, the only person that can actually talk to the crew, the crew's voice loop is heard in mission control in everybody's headsets, but the only person that can respond is Capcom and was an astronaut. You really told him what was you responded to their calls and you responded to what the mission control team was telling you to tell them to keep them in the loop. Like we started down and we had communication problems. And if I recall the, the, was a 30 second rule, if you lost communications for 30 because it was on the board. So we reoriented, changed and attitude, changed antennas. And then the computer was overloading. And that really got everybody's attention. And so, but Steve Bales and Jack Gorman in the back room said, we're go fly, they knew what the computer was doing. And it was not, it was overloading because it had 75 milliseconds of compute and then it flip back to the job number one. And it was always flying a spacecraft, but it was dropping off these insignificant jobs. And so we were, we were go. And then we had a trajectory problem and Neil couldn't, we had him targeted into the wrong place. We didn't really understand lunar gravity then. And with the mascons and all that stuff. So we, he had to level off and fly horizontally. I don't know, four or five miles. And I used up all the reserve fuel. And so now we're minimum fuel. And we called, they, they have two separate fuel reserves, one for the descent and one for the asset when they leave the. The asset engine is never you was never used on the asset. I mean descent. Okay. You never would do that. Well you'd have to stage the vehicle to get the asset engine light, they wouldn't light unless you staged and separated. So anyway, we called 60 seconds, he had 60 seconds to the land. And then I remember 30 seconds, I called 30 seconds. And he was, it was close, but not on the ground. And we were, according to my watch, we were 15 seconds or so before calling on a board when, uh, those all were in said contact engine stop, they're on the moon. Wow. Ditchin was through the roof, admission control. Well, what was that like for you when they landed on the moon and you were sitting in that and that's a great sigh relief. Everybody, you know, it was, it was tense. You can imagine and are we going to make it or are we going to make it? And I'm convinced now that, uh, had I called a board time up, you know, and called on a board, which was based on the fuel reserve in the decent engine. Uh, Neil would have said say again, Houston, he's not going to a board. He's going to land at 20 feet off the moon and he's minimum fuel. And we hit that point. He's not going to a board. He had to final say so he's going to land. Now, uh, were you, were you there on the communication with then the moment they landed? Yes. And how long were you there? Were you there the whole time? Even when they were coming back? No. Okay. That was another, uh, we had, I think four four flight teams, uh, working Apollo 11. And, uh, I was on Gene Krantz's team and we had responsibility for landing. And, uh, and then we stayed around for another hour or so while they safe the space craft and got everything. Um, and how long was it until once he got back to Earth? Do you remember your first conversation with him? How long, how long was it before you talked to him? Well, they had to go into quarantine and, uh, because of moon bugs, you know, we weren't sure about whether we're going to bring back something is going to wipe out the whole civil civilization civilization. So they went into quarantine and, uh, we could talk to him through the window. And, uh, but, uh, there were no moon bugs and everything was fine. And so they were, I think three weeks or something like that and then it got out and we started having debriefings. But we were debriefing during the time they were in quarantine. And what was that like? Well, what was his, well, what was his attitude? Was he saying anything ring a bell to you like, or did it, does anything really stick out for you as far as like conversations you have with him afterwards? Neil Armstrong was Mr. Coolstone. Yeah. I mean, he wasn't, he was unflappable. And, uh, you know, we landed. And he was following the rules. But, uh, we had, uh, we hit minimum fuel on the descent because he had, we had him targeted into the wrong way and he had to fly horizontally about four or five miles and then set down and find a place to land. And I remember calling Apollo 11, uh, 30 seconds. I mean, you see, at 30 seconds, the land on the moon. And on the next call was going to be a board. Right. Right. Yep. We just talked about that. Yeah. Um, so, okay, let's fast forward to your, to your mission Apollo 16. Um, can you describe like what was it like being sitting in the tip of that rocket before it launched off to the moon? Uh, keep counting. Keep counting. I'm ready to go. You ready to go? Yeah. Two years. And we trained. Was there any, was there no fear? Like you had children in life at the back home and no fear, no fear at all? Yes. We had, because we had so many, we had a escape rocket. Uh, we had to practice a board and then, uh, now if the thing blew up on the pad, you were still able to get off with the, with Apollo launch vehicle escape system. Oh, wow. And, uh, so, uh, we had practiced all of that stuff and we just ready to go. And, um, so we were laying there ready to keep counting, keep counting and, and, and can you walk me through what that was like for you? Like that, that first, that lift off and then getting into orbit and then, and then doing the, I want to say I've been waiting to say this word for, for weeks, the trans lunar injection. Sounds so cool. We parts over there parts over there steaming. Well, I'm just waiting for me to earn. You'll get it. I'm entertained. Yeah. You'll get it, Barb. This is, uh, I think it's really important to this. Uh, so we were laying there and we're listening to the cow. And when the engine started, they was moving down there to maintain a trajectory and that vibration, translated up and you 360 feet above it and it's yuck from side to side. But we're on our way. You feel the G's lift off and mission control. So you go and we were going and, uh, and, uh, it was, uh, really exciting to, uh, to feel the acceleration of this big vehicle and the vibration from side to side and we didn't have any pogo, but it was a vibration from side to side. And so we're on our way and just riding it out. And, um, it was really, I mean, one of the best rides I've ever had, how long did it take to get to the moon? Get to the, get into orbit was 12 minutes or so, I think. And that was, you ended up on the third stage, which was the rocket that pushed you out of Earth orbit and onto the trajectory to the moon. And, uh, that happened, uh, I don't know about it. We were, uh, we were over Australia and, uh, and we ignited the third stage automatically and pushed us out of orbit, uh, into a certain cis lunar orbit that took us to the moon and then we, when we got there, we had to slow down to get into orbit. We used the service module engine for that. And what was your, did you have a specific task on that trip to the moon? Were you, were you in charge of monitoring anything's part in particular or communication or? Well, it would, uh, I was the lunar module pilot, which was on the right side. And as you look at, uh, at the estimate panel, I was on the right side. Finally, was in a center seat and John, and John Young was the commander on the left seat. So if we had emergencies, we all had things to do. We practiced, uh, you know, uh, a boards and we practiced, uh, radio out and every kind of thing, it feels so far, we just practiced in practice and practice. So we were ready to go. And, uh, and towards that off light was sort of the, one of the most nominal flights that we had to get into orbit on the Saturn 5. It was a very reliable rocket. Hmm. Explain what it was like actually landing on the moon. Well, it was a very dynamic situation. We pitched over, uh, at 7000 feet. And that's the first time you saw the lunar surface where you were going to land. And I, 12,000 feet. And I looked out and looked to the right to, uh, see if I could see the North Ray crater up there. And we were right on target. And John began to maneuver, uh, the spacecraft manually, uh, to, to, to, he picked out a landing spot. He had, uh, on his windshields, he had, uh, ladders. And if you land it, land it up, it like at 35, that meant, and the computer would tell you at 35, that's where you're going to land. If you don't do anything. And, uh, so, uh, we, he read dancing native a couple of times and we were going into some craters and see him maneuvering. It, uh, and I was just talking him down. I was not looking out the window much, because it was so busy. You know, you were reading instruments or something? We were, uh, uh, we had a profile that said at 500 feet down at 22, uh, and no lateral velocity or whatever. And, uh, so I was reading that profile out to him. Oh, I see. And, um, and he was flying at man, by this time he's flying at manually. And, uh, he's controlling the whole thing. Decent right left, forward back. And, uh, and we had a profile and we were right on the profile. So, uh, uh, uh, when we hit the ground, uh, there was a probe underneath the landing gear, said contact. And when that light came on, you shut the engine down. Uh, and we were coming down like two, three feet per second, I think, if I remember right. And, uh, when the light came on, I said contact and he shut it down and we dropped in on the moon, almost dead level. So we were excited to say the least. I could imagine we were late landing. We dropped in on the moon. Almost dead level. So we were excited to say the least. I could imagine. We were late landing. We had a problem in the command module before we started down. And it almost costs an abort of the whole mission, but mission control came to the rescue and figured it out. So we continued our mission, but we were late landing. I used nicotine for focus, and I usually keep one of those little cans around just to help me stay focused and energized during the day. They're fine, but they dry out your mouth. They're probably not that great for your gums and they taste very chemically. And that's why I've started to use Zippick's toothpicks lately. These little things are a game changer. This is the cleanest, most low key way for me to get my nicotine without vape, without smoke, and without a nicotine pouch shoved in my gums. It's just a toothpick, but with a kick. And you can use them literally anywhere. Flights, restaurants, sporting events. Basically all the places where someone would yell at you or judge you for vaping, smoking, or throwing an upper decky in. I think Zippick's actually taste better too. They've got six long lasting flavors all made right here in the USA and 100% natural nicotine, not that synthetic stuff. I've been keeping a few of these in my backpack lately, and I've noticed I've been using them a lot more than the pouches because they taste better, and I think they're more convenient. And if nicotine isn't your thing, they make caffeine and be 12 toothpicks for a smooth energy boost. Ditch the pouches, cigarettes, and Vapes, and try Zippick's toothpicks. Only sold online at zippickstouthpicks.com. And you can get 10% off your first order by using the code Danyit Checkout. Must be 21 or older to order, warning. Nicotine is an addictive chemical. Go to zippickstouthpicks.com and use the code DANNY at checkout for 10% off your first order. Zipp more and smoke less with Zippickstouthpicks. So what was your mission? What was the objective of politics? To explore the lunar highlands, the mountains of the moon, the geology was supposed to be different than the Maury, where Neil landed. And it was, we had different rocks, different kind of compositions, and we had a car that we unloaded and drove it first day we drove west for a mile and a half and sampled plum crater. And then next day we drove south up Stone Mountain. And that was about an eight or nine mile round trip. And then the last day we had, we headed north to, uh, to, uh, well, it was called, uh, I can't remember the name of the crater now. It was a big crater, no one's a rakerator. No one's a rakerator. It was. What? Do you remember the moment you took your first step onto the moon? Yeah. What, what was, what did that feel like? I'm on a moon. I'm on the moon. It's exciting. It's just, it's just elated with excitement. Yeah. We, we were delayed getting out because we were late landing due to the problem we had in the other space craft. How old were you again? When you first landed on the, when you, when you walked on the moon, 36, you were 36 years old. One of the youngest guys, I, I can't, I would imagine it would be overwhelming. The amount of emotions would be. It was exciting. And we were, you know, just bounding with enthusiasm and what we were late landing. So we did, we were supposed to, the original plan called us to land and suit up and go outside. But mission control cancel, as I said, you go, it's going to be up too late. You might make a mistake too long not to wake up too, too late, but you're going to be awake for 20 something hours if we can do this. Ephy. So they made you guys go to sleep. Yeah. It took how far suits and what does sleep? What were you, is there anything that sort of like blue, blue, you're previously held conceptions of the moon out of the water when you got there. Like when you've actually walked out and stepped on the moon, was it exactly what you expected it to be? Or what about that experience really stood out to you? Well, we were the fifth landing. So we had, we'd heard D. Breathe four, four previous crews tell us what was it like? Okay. So we, we had a lot of familiarity with it. You know, we knew, we had a flight plan. We knew what we were going to do. And so we just got to work and it was really exciting being there. And I'm on the moon. I'm on the moon. And you're thinking those things privately, you're not broadcasting it out. But we, like what did it feel like to walk on, to walk on the moon? You remember like, what, I'm talking about like that. What did the ground feel like? What, you don't have any feel, you got a moon boot on and you got a suit boot on. Right. So you just feel the pressure and it, it was easy to lose your balance, if you will, one sixth gravity. And could you immediately see the earth? No, it was right overhead. So when you look up in Apollo, you're looking at the top of your helmet. So we never saw the earth. You're up to me, like, well, yeah, you could hold on to the spacecraft and lean back. There it was. It was a half earth up in the sky. And you could, we had a TV. So we had an antenna that we, like a periscope and we could point that at the earth. And when we got it pointed at the earth, we flipped on the TV and we had TV that we said down. And how big, like you were standing on the edge of a crater. How big was that crater? The biggest one we visited was North Ray Crater was about, I'm, I can, that's been a long time ago. So I'll guess it may be 300 feet wide and maybe a couple hundred feet deep. And that was our last EVA. That was our third EVA. The lunar rover that we had was, we were the, let's see, second, yeah, second with the lunar rover. And it revolutionized lunar exploration because you've brought it that year, everybody was walking. It was pretty tough walking up there in the collecting rocks. So riding the rover was really revolutionary. How long were you guys outside? The longest was, if I remember right, it was over eight hours, you were walking around on your feet for eight hours. No, no, we were riding a car. Okay. And then ride to place and we jump out and we had a flight plan, do this, do this, find this rock, do that. And so we were collecting samples, we were drilling holes, we were digging, shoveling trenches and everything like that. Was there anything that you did that was a part of your, a part of the job that you had to do that surprised you? Like in any of your digs or any of your findings that you see anything that was like shocking or like unexpected. I don't think in the physical work was anything different, but the experience of being on the moon and the one sixth gravity, it had to learn how to walk and get your senior gravity over your feet. Yeah. And you couldn't straighten up. I tried straighten up, jumping one time and straighten up and I fell over backwards, it was really scary. But that was the end of our stay. And do you remember if you could see stars? You can't see any stars. Not in a daylight. You can. And you guys were in the daylight, the entire mission, right? No, only on the moon. That's what I made when you guys were like the entire entirety of your time spent on the moon was in the daylight because day days there are like 14 days long here on earth. That's right. So what happened when you guys had to come home? What was that like? Well, we were approaching a time going to choose and we tried to talk in mission control and they'll let us stay another two hours, but whatever it was. And they said get inside guys, it's time to come home. So we got inside and we got ready to lift off. But the first thing we had to do was pitch out all the backpacks. So we pressurized, open the deep pressurized, open the door throughout the backpacks, two bags of trash. And you littered on the moon? Yeah, we've big litter. Yeah. I'm really hopeful. Sorry about that. But we were up there. Yeah. And then we lifted off and run it. And when you got back to earth, you had to go through the same process that Neil went through the, you know, we did not have quarantine. You didn't. You did not have corn. No. Not on the return. What did you have to go through on the return? Was there any specific protocol you had to follow? Well, I don't remember exactly, but we had physicals and, you know, blood and stuff, blood work and stuff like that. Was there any like, were there any psychological evaluations or anything like that or like talking to somebody that, that your experience? Oh, we had debriefings, but everybody, geologists, other astronauts, mission control. We talked to everybody and we got back management. Yeah. Um, okay. Bart. So your basic story was when you were a kid, you were obsessed with the moon missions. You, you, you were asleep when they first landed on the moon, but you were a huge fan of NASA and a big believer in the moon landing. And, um, at one point, something happened and you did a 180 out of out of everything. And I know you cover a lot of ground with, um, your theories and in your documentaries, you, you do a very thorough job laying out every single point. But like to you, what is the, what are like the top two or three reasons that you believe that the moon landing was a hoax? Well, we can get into that and I have evidence to show on all of those. The first we have an eyewitness who saw them film Apollo 11 at Canon Air Force Base. He confessed to it as he was dying. And he also confessed to a humble side. This is why the headphones help because you sometimes you're not talking into the microphone. Well, just make sure you keep it like this far away from your mouth. It's far okay. Get it nice and close. So we have an eyewitness and who was fearing the judgment of God as he was dying and he confessed to a homicide. And if you want, you can bring up that image. It's a image D one. His gentleman's name is Cyrus Eugene Acres. He was the chief of security at Canon Air Force Base, which is these special operations or intelligence headquarters for the Air Force. And as he was dying in the presence of his son, there's a picture of him. General, if you want to look at it. Okay. This is Cyrus Eugene Acres. That's right. How did you discover this guy? His son contacted me. Okay. After his father confessed. And the first thing he confessed to was a homicide that he felt like he needed to confess that he had murdered somebody in the past. And his son found out that he murdered a fellow employee at Canon Air Force Base. And the military police came in and investigated the homicide. And when they asked him, why did you kill him? He said it was to cover up the moon landing fraud, which they both had eyewitnessed. And he felt his friend who thought it was morally wrong was going to go public with it. And so he murdered him to keep it a secret. If you go to D two, we can watch a three minute video of the son and see his testimony about it. Okay. So this is a deathbed confession that the son told you about. And there was a police investigation in three minutes. A military police. A military. Okay. Is there any hard evidence of this investigation and what was the outcome of it? Well, after his father's confession, which was videotaped. Oh, it was on video. That's correct. When they went out one day, their house burned down. They believe it was said intentionally for somebody who knew about the confession after all they had told the Air Force. Military police that the moon landing was fake. They reported that their superiors. They found out there was a videotape of the confession. And so they burned their house down. And in fact, the. Who burned their house down? Whoever it was arson. I presume the CIA or whoever. And how many how long after this confession was the house burned down? Within, I think a couple of weeks because they had video of the confession and they had some documentation. In fact, the gentleman's Air Force file has been completely deleted. We used a free of him information act request. They said there's no Cyrus U.G. Nakers. There's never was in the Air Force. And yet I went to the military graveyard, which isn't too far from here, about 50 miles from here. And there he is. His tombstone United States Air Force from here. Yeah, it's about 50 miles from here. Wow. And he's in the military cemetery. And it says United States Air Force, Cyrus U.G. Nakers and that he served in Vietnam and Korea. And his son lived right across from the base. He said he was chief of security there. And so if you play video D2, we can have a video of the son and put it in his own words. And then Johnson in 1968. Okay. And canan Air Force base in 1968, he said by that time, by the time he got there, that there was already two large hangers that were connected. There was hundreds of dump trucks that came in and dumped sand and stone. cement powder was powdered over at the top of all that to make it look like a lunar landscape. They had men that fashioned that into a lunar landscape. He said, okay, I've never known my dad the lie. So this all took me by surprise. You know, what's that all about? So anyway, he said that in front of the airplane hangers was a pool framing with large canvas tents that was concealing the inside of the staging area. Inside the staging area, on flat bed trucks, was on paraded. The lunar lander that was assembled, reassembled back inside the hangers. All of the walls were painted flat black in the ceilings as well. He was sworn to secrecy by the NSA and they would put him in prison for breaking that oath. When dad saw the moon landing on TV, he cried. He said he knew that what he had witnessed on TV was exactly what they recorded in that hanger. There was no reason for them to go flying around and everything. They had detailed high definition photos of the landing area. There was no reason for them to go flying around to a different landing area that almost exhausted their fuel except for drama because everything had gone so smoothly. Nothing, you know, so it had to be something. Anyway, dad was one of three guards. They guarded the inside of the front entrance. There was a list of 15 people who could enter. No one else was allowed by order of President Johnson. Here is that list. I gave it to Bart, so I brought it as well. He checked out a lot of these names and he says he can verify a lot of these people and what they do. I come across the couple myself. Anyway, President Johnson, Neil Armstrong, Edwin Alden, Verner von Braun, Robert Emanager, Jean Krantz, James Webb, Joe Kerwin, Dr. Thomas Paine, Glenn Looney, Dr. for Christopher Krav, Dr. James Van Allen, General Trudeau, Trudeau, Lieutenant Colonel Donald Simon and Grant Norrey. My dad erased me by the book. I know he didn't lie to me. And as I started seeing more and more of what he was telling me was true. I realized my dad wasn't lying. All right. So this is the, you would say this is the top piece of evidence that you know. It's the most compelling to people because we have a testimony of it. Now if I may ask, it is a testimony, but it's not actual hardcore. No, I understand. We've got three and a half hours. He's got 40 minutes ahead of head start on me. Yes. And so I can present my evidence. And I have a couple of questions. If I climbed Mount Everest and was known for climbing Mount Everest and got an award or a medal and everyone, I was hired at companies as their CEO for having climbed Mount Everest. And somebody came along and started saying, you didn't do it. It was filmed in a TV studio. I certainly wouldn't fly and make an airport change and stay overnight in a hotel and go to podcast to podcast to defend that I had climbed Mount Everest. I went and waste my time. So why are you here? Me? Yeah. If it's on the moon and it's so obvious that you walked on the moon, I wouldn't fly anywhere to debate somebody whether or not I walked them out ever. So if I did. So why are you here? I'm here to tell my story. He asked me to come and share my story that I walk on the moon. And I did walk on the moon to evidence of a whoming that we landed on the moon. And so I've told my story for the last 50 something years almost or whatever it is. We planted in 72. So I have been asked to share my experience by reputable people. And so I do that. And I'm not lying. I landed on a moon. And the evidence is overwhelming. Well, actually, the opposite is true. People can say anything. The evidence is not overwhelming. What is the evidence? Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. Hold on. You retired in general, right? OK. What was your security clearance? Top secret. OK. So when you when you have a top secret, you're not allowed to tell your wife or your children, right? What whatever the secrets are, whatever secrets you have as a top secret clearance. If you told your wife or your children, you would be violating your oath. Is that right? In the military, that's true. OK. We were NASA did not have us swear and oath that we are lying, not lying. I understand. But the point is you have top secret clearance and telling your wife or your children would be violating that oath. So your oath to the corrupt United States federal government includes lying to your wife and to your children. Now there are 100,000 trials every year in America. 90% of the people are guilty and yet 100,000 people raise their hand and swear that they're telling the truth. So does every Nazi war criminal. They look like benevolent grandfathers and yet they go smiling through life and deny to the very end that they committed these crimes, which they did. Now if you're willing to lie to your wife and to your children, why should we believe you? Believe me about what? Well you just said you're willing to lie to your wife and children to keep your oath to the corrupt federal government. So if you're willing to lie, no, I'm not lying to them. I'm not lying to anybody. I tell them they're truth. I landed on the moon just because somebody has, I don't think it's fair to say just because he has a top secret clearance and he's under an oath to protect government secrets. That doesn't mean that he is inherently a liar. I understand that. And he also said the shows that he is willing to lie to his wife and children and if he's willing to do that, he's willing to lie to the rest of the world. So that's my point. No, no Nazi war criminal has ever come forward and turned himself in and when arrested and interrogating not a single one confessed even though they were guilty. I'm just mentioning that. So either the gentleman we saw is lying or you're lying. One of the two. So with a general with top secret clearance, be more likely to lie or we're sergeant on his deathbed who confess to a homicide, be more willing to tell the truth. I think there's crazy people out there. There's lots of crazy lunatics out there who are willing to, who will say anything and make up stories. And the same thing is true with that. And what are the city and across for me? Well, I don't think so. I don't necessarily think that. I think that anybody who is in a high level military position that has to protect government secrets is going to protect their oath. It doesn't mean they're a liar. That means that they're protecting national secret something they swore to do and delirate their career to. And if they divulge those secrets, they will go to prison for it. And there's been many cases where people have done that have been sent to prison by the federal government for blowing the whistle on things and following whistleblower protocol. So I don't think we're going to get anywhere by calling people liars. First of all, I'm not what I'm saying is either the gentleman we saw who was lying as he's dying or you're lying. One only one of them is the true. Right. Either that guy's line while he was dying confessing to a I'm sure what your point. Well, I'll just bring in that to the audience's attention. Okay. Okay. Now I had a little side note. Who do you think killed JFK? I was no idea. Okay. I believe well, I know what this what's your personal opinion? I don't my personal opinion is a it I don't as well or whatever his name is. I don't remember the name. Lee Harvey Oswald Lee Harvey. The government's position was that he acted alone and he was the sole shooter for a JFK. Yeah. That's what you believe. Yeah. Well, 75% of Americans disagree. The gentleman's relatives disagree. Bobby Kennedy Jr. says he's 100% certain that he was murdered by the CIA because he was going to abolish them. And then a few years later, Robert McNamara, before he died, he was the fence secretary during the Vietnam War. He confessed that the whole reason that the war was started, which 90% of the public was against was they fabricated an attack by the North Vietnamese on an American ship in the Gulf of Tonkin, even Wikipedia, says it was falsified. Now Congress passed a law called the Gulf of Tonkin resolution, which led to the deaths of 3 million people, including 58,220 of their own citizens. So if they're willing to kill their own president, willing to kill 58,220 of their own citizens, I don't think they're going to have a problem faking a video image of the moon. In fact, NASA has never kept a schedule and its entire existence, except the most complicated one of all time. Somehow they were ahead of schedule. You see that? So here's some names on here. And I wondered if you knew those names. He was very specific. He kept this list as a souvenir. So do you know who President Johnson is? You know Neil Armstrong, Edward Aldrin, Vernevron Braun, who's Robert Emanaker? I don't know. Are you familiar with canon Air Force Base? Not really. I've been to Canada, landed there and refuel, but I've never been stationed there. So what a special ops meme in the Air Force is just what you're saying, special ops? Secret stuff. Generally. Yeah. Okay. What about Joseph Kerwin? Joe Kerwin was an astronaut, doctor, medical doctor. That's the Joe Kerwin. I know. What about Thomas Payne? Thomas Payne was head of NASA. Okay. Christopher Kraft. He was head of Johnson Space Center, but he's also head of Mission Control. What about Arthur Trudeau? I don't know him. I don't remember. General of Army Intelligence. What about Donald Simon? I don't remember him. Grant Nori. Who? Yeah. Those people we couldn't track down. Well, there's the last point when you said Grant Nori. Yeah. What do you think? In a say or CIA, we couldn't track him down. So I guess the point here is that and I can attest to this. Oh, wait, wait. I've lost my trip. Right. Let me sum it up for you. One of the main reasons for me and I think I'm speaking for a lot of other folks when I say this is that when it comes to the Apollo missions, the Apollo missions happened in the middle of the Cold War during the peak of government distrust. That's when we know according to all the declassified documents by the CIA and the FBI is that the government was lying and deceiving the public more than ever. I mean, I don't know how much they're doing now, but as far as all the documents that we have, that was the peak. That was when the president of the United States was murdered. That's when we did the Gulf of Tonkin, got into the Vietnam War. The government started doing a secret mind control program with using LSD and other drugs and that there was the Manson family murders and all of this stuff, right? So when people look at this stuff and they're learning the history of the Cold War and they see that the most astonishing feat of mankind ever happened right in the middle of all of that stuff, people just, I think they get taken back by it. So the government was lying about all this other stuff, but the one thing they didn't lie about was the most amazing feat of mankind. Does that make sense to you? Does that sort of logic, does that make sense? Why people would question that question at Apollo? Yes, just based on all of the other strategic deception that was happening within the government, like MK Ultra, mind control experiments that were going on, the Vietnam War, the assassination of President Kennedy, the Gulf of Tonkin, all of that stuff. It was right in the middle of all of that, all of that, the Bay of Pigs, right? There was Operation North Woods that got the classified where the Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted to... All of that stuff. It was right in the middle of all of that, all of that, the Bay of Pigs, right? There was Operation North Woods that got the classified where the Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted to fly up airplane with nobody in it as a drone and blow it up as a pretext to invade Cuba. Here in Americans, they were willing to kill Americans to fake an attack. This is on Cuba. This is real declasiveness. It's a huge stuff that's come out in the federal government with the Warren Commission and all of this stuff. The same people who would later approve the file of program. So that's that's that we never let it on a moment? Well, no, what the question is, you didn't know that before you got here. Charlie Charlie. I probably didn't know that. Did you ever win the Academy Award for Best Actor? No, I know. I really wish you to know that you believe that we lied on six missions that landed on the moon. Charlie, does it make such a huge lie? That's arrogant the federal government. Now, if I may have my 40 minutes to answer your question, hold on one second. I want to make sure this lands with him. Does it make sense why people would question that based on all of the other bullshit and lying that was going on that we know was actually all the other stuff that we know for a fact was deception. I know, to me, Apollo was real to you, but I'm sorry. No, wait a minute. In the United States, there were 400,000 people working on Apollo. Well, let me, yes, I'm in it. Let me finish. You had 40 minutes already. I've only had 10. I'm sorry. Go ahead. Okay. That's that's one of the, you know, must be real because of 400,000. Of course, every year that number increases. There are 400,000 tellers at Bank of America. But do you really think what the teller knows and what the CEO knows about corruption in the bank or identical? I interviewed Eugene Krantz. He told me that someone in the command center at the console can tell no difference whatsoever between a simulation and an actual flight. Do we really think the CIA is so stupid to tell the guy making the glove or the door or the boot? Hey, we're really not going to the man. Be sure not to tell anybody. And that's why they had you astronauts at the command center to cover the mistakes about faking it. Once the rocket went up, there's only three eyewitnesses to the mission and no independent press coverage. So if you add people who delivered food and made paper clips and did the printing and the contractors and all their secretaries and food vendors, you could probably pad 400,000. But the atomic bomb involved 129,500 people and only eight people knew what they were building. So as someone in the command center cannot tell the difference between a real flight and a simulated flight, how can the public watching it from their living room or people years later? So that argument is flat. It doesn't go anywhere. And neither does the argument that the Russians would have spilled the beans because I know somebody who works in the command center of the Chinese space agency. He said everybody there knows that the moon missions are fake and they're black mailing NASA because Congress passed the law forbidding space technology to be sold to China and they're receiving it anyway by blackmail. If I had a picture of a world leader with a prostitute, I could upload it to the internet and now it's worth nothing or I could blackmail them year after year after year. And that's what the Soviet Union is doing. Putin knows he wasn't surprised to find out that the moon missions are fake and neither is China. So that doesn't fly either. We're being blackmail, which is another reason for the truth to come out. Now I also interviewed Betty Grissom, the widow of the man who was going to be the first man to walk on the moon, who was a whistleblower at NASA to such a degree that he received secret service protection the weeks up to his death. I interviewed her for four hours. I interviewed her son for three hours who's a 747 pilot. They say with 100% certainty that the man who was going to be the first man to walk on the moon was murdered by the CIA. And if you go to D3, it's a short clip. You can see Scott Grissom say that out of his own mouth. So why is the CIA killing Apollo astronauts who were whistleblowers? What a coincidence, right? Go ahead and play that clip. It's D3. I think it was intentionally sabotaged by someone that's been a question in my mind what was found in the accident investigation and how was that handled? Was the CIA involved or whoever? But it was done intentionally. So this is the story of, you know, the story of God, I'm sure he'd, you know, the story of the Gus Gus Grissom was Apollo one, right? That's right. Yeah. And according to his son and widow, he was murdered by the CIA. She told me that on January 26, 1967, he telefung her from NASA and said, huh? For some strange reason, the CIA is all over the launch pad today. I've never seen him here before. For some reason, they showed up today. Did you ever see the next day? He's dead by a quote accident. One of his last words were, if we can't talk between two buildings, how are we going to go to the moon? They couldn't get a wired intercom to work between two buildings. And Neil Armstrong, supposed to pick up the first moonrock. He rehearsed it six weeks beforehand in the stick to pick up the rock falls apart and the lunar lander crashed weeks beforehand. If they can't get a stick with a bag on the end of it to stay together, if they can't get an intercom to work between two buildings, how are they going to go to the moon? The Soviet slants, the first satellite, the first animal, the first man, the first woman, the first spacewalk, the first crew of three, the first of two spacecrafts all together. They spent five time, man hours in space, and they never went to the moon. China, the most industrialized nation on earth, says with 50 years better technology, it's going to take at least 15 years to go to the moon. And yet somehow, they did it in eight years with 1960s technology. Now, if you play clip four, this is when my film, astronauts gone wild, the link will be in the description every video, the surrelt sub rel dot com. We interviewed, uh, Ed Mitchell and showed him the footage, which is one of the proofs that we'll look at footage we uncovered that says, do not show to the public at the beginning of the reel and they're faking being halfway to the moon. They can't believe or ignore a bit. And when he was shown that he turned beat red, he started cursing. He literally kicked me from behind. And in the commotion, we left a wireless microphone on him. And then the commotion like cameraman forgot to record. And you can play back that clip. It's about five seconds long. They're talking about calling this CIA. They have me killed. Let's see who killed him. Now my source, the son of Cyrus Eugene acres, after he spoke to me, he went out and he had a security system with a password and everything. That was hot. And his house was broken into and everything about his dad was taken. And then a couple of days later, which is about three and a half years ago, the CIA shows up and threatens to kill him and his family if he ever talks to me again. So the after dead astronaut son says the CIA is involved and he got whistleblower protection up until the day that he died. The CIA is threatening to kill me. Right? And why would this source of mine who was also threatened by the CIA, he received whistleblower protection by the FBI. Now if they went to the moon, why is he receiving a few years ago, whistleblower protection for being the son of the man who confessed that the moon missions were fake. And then if you play clip five, which is about a minute long, from the documentary conspiracy theory, did we go out of the moon? There are other deaths. There are a total of 15% of the Apollo astronauts died in accidents within a two year period. These are the astronauts who would not cooperate with the fraud. Go ahead and play the clip. But Grisent wasn't the only Apollo critic to meet with a suspicious and untimely death. Thomas Ronald Barron was a safety inspector during Apollo one's construction. After the fire, Barron testified before Congress that the Apollo program was in such disarray that the United States would never make it to the moon. Then exactly one week after he testified, Barron's car was struck by a train for the Apollo program continued and so did the string of untimely deaths. Between 1964 and 1967, a total of 10 astronauts lost their lives in freak accidents. These deaths accounted for an astonishing 15% of NASA's astronaut corps. To keep something that's alive wrapped up and covered over, you've got to eliminate all the people that can talk about. So we have an eyewitness. That's proof. Right? As here's acres. That's right. Well, and again, it's one person's testimony. There's no problem. So either he's telling the truth, there is a line. I'll assume any guy who confesses to a murder. You know, probably telling the truth. You didn't talk to the guy himself. It was allegedly a video tape that never any never saw that's right. But it's only to a son who according to a son. He was there at the time. And you just judge is that guy of the video we just saw telling the truth or not? The thing is, I think it's pretty honest, pretty obvious that he's telling the truth. So people can make their do that. That's one reason. Now another moment telling the truth about what about his father's deathbed confession of murdering a coworker to cover up the moon landing fraud at canon air force base. So to me, that guy's telling the truth, which means if he is, then his father did participate in the moon landing fraud. He went into great deep down about the lunar module and the fake lunar set in an airplane anger filmed a year beforehand. President Johnson showed up. He kept a list of 15 people. Some and their memoirs say they were at canon air force base. Can an air force base used to have on their website? President Johnson visited us in 1968. They removed it once I started investigating it. And the main reason for many people is that today with five decades better rockets and technology, the farthest that NASA can send an astronaut into space is one thousandth the distance to the moon. So what their claiming for the first time in the history of the world, technology was greater in the past and in the future because during the Apollo program, all the computers combined had one million to computing power of a cell phone. So that would be like Lindbergh flying across the Atlantic 3000 miles in 1927 and 56 or seven years later in 1982. No airplane on earth can fly over the Atlantic and the best one can only fly 3000 miles. It's impossible to have better technology in the past and then in the future. How is it? I mean, is there any machine technological machine you can think of cell phone, Microsoft microwave, anything that worked better in 1969 than its counterpart today? What about supersonic jets? What about them? The sound barrier is broken 200 times a day all around the world in military aircraft. We stopped using them because they were ineffective and they weren't cost effective. They were inefficient and they were way more airplane. You're breaking the sound barrier at a rate of 200 a day. We're using the same airplanes we've been using since the 50s and we stopped using the supersonic jets. So that would be one example. No, they're still using jets that break the sound barrier every day. Not commercial ones though. Well, they decided that people aren't going to pay 20 times more to get their twice as exactly. Right. That's my point. Right. Well, that they could use it, but they're just not. Correct. Right. So, so let's listen to this clip. The six of an Apollo astronaut saying something very bizarre that NASA intentionally destroyed all the technology. Now you still have in the air force. You may know more specifically, but the B52 bomber was designed 70 years ago. It's simple. It's reliable. The same words used about the Saturn 5 rocket and there's still 200 of them in service today. So why would they spend a modern equivalent of $250 billion to make this rocket that flies to the moon on the very first attempt and then destroy it. Listen to NASA saying they destroyed the technology. I'd go to the moon in a nanosecond. The problem is we don't have the technology to do that anymore. We used to, but we destroyed that technology and it's a painful process to build it back again. So, General, why was that technology destroyed? What do you? Why was it destroyed? Why do you know why or have any idea why the technology was destroyed by NASA? I don't know that the technology was destroyed. We built. So, now, let us land. Okay. Okay. Let me let him finish his thought. Yeah. We flew to the moon. Okay. The program was successful. We did six landings on the moon. Okay. We used technology that was designed by Marshall Space Flight Center called the Saturn 5 rocket. Was the biggest rocket so far ever launched to get us to the moon. Okay. So, we went to the moon. It took three days to get there. We orbited a moon for a day to get everything correct. Generally, they went that way for all of the six landings on the moon. And so, we got to the moon. We manned the spacecraft. We had it in our flight. We had a delay because of the command module had a problem with the main engine. And mission control had to verify that they could get it fixed or work around it. So, anyway, we were late landing on Apollo 16 because of this problem. And we landed. And in the place we was supposed to land at Descartes Highlands, we spent 72 hours on the moon. We brought back 200 by remember 200 pounds of moon rocks or their bowels. Maybe not that much. I forgot exactly. But the question about the technology being destroyed. You're not aware of the technology being destroyed or gone missing from all the Apollo programs. Okay. So, that NASA astronaut is lying that the technology was destroyed. He said he wasn't aware of it. Okay. Well, according to NASA, a modern day astronaut, he said that a couple of years ago, all the Apollo technology was destroyed. I interviewed Eugene Crambs. He told me all the telemetry data was destroyed. All the original video tapes were destroyed. Right before they were to be transferred to HD. But we still have the original film. No, that was the millimeter film is still in Houston at the Johnson Space Center. Oh, that I don't know. The video tape is what they intentionally video tape of the projection that was given. You're talking about the camera mounted lunar module that took one picture. All of the film, all of the film that was shot on all the emissions on all of the missions is still in its original format in the film reels in that. But the majority of the video images is video tape. Right. And that was intentionally destroyed. But those were just copies of the film. Right. No, these are the originals. I talked to Eugene Crambs. He said the original video tapes were accidentally recorded over. And the only machine on earth that could play it back was intentionally disassembled. Okay. I'm kidding. Even if they're found, they couldn't be played. I'm going to telemetry data where the rocket really was. So the fact of the destroy once again, the classic question. Well, either this guy is lying. Right. Why would a NASA astronaut lie? Has there ever been a time and that this is another proof? Has there ever been a time in the history of the world that someone developed a new technology, broke the sound barrier, split the atom, and then destroyed the technology afterwards. It's never happened. It's never happened. They destroyed it to cover their tracks because I went scuba diving. And to have an hour's worth of air, it takes two tanks this big and that big around. That would be 16 tanks of air. You would have to have on your back on the moon and then to allegedly get the lunar module down to 72 degrees on inside for three days against 250 degrees outside on a bank of essentially car batteries. It can't be done. That's why they destroyed all the technology because it could be proved later that the rocket didn't have enough fuel to leave her a orbit, which we have proof of as well. I have von Braun's own quote, which will read that says one rocket will never go to the moon without multiple fueling and we'll show that from von Braun as well. So question. Yeah. What does that got to do without us? Well, he asked what proof do we have that they didn't go to the moon and there's a lot of proof. Okay. I didn't go to the moon. I have about how about the proof that is that we did go to them. Well, we already heard all of that 400,000 people that's been refuted. The Russians would have blabbed that's been refuted. The moon rocks has been refuted. It's one of my clips that Neil Armstrong, chain of custody, allegedly picked up a rock, personally put it in his pocket and then later personally gave it to the prime minister of the Netherlands, which was immediately sealed in a container and a museum was opened up a few years ago and it's petrified wood. It's a fake. The moon rocks are fake and Antarctica. von Braun went to Antarctica to pick up pounds and pounds of lunar meteorites. Yes. The rocks are either duplicates of meteorites picked up on earth made in a ceramics lab or just fake. All right. And then you had no comment. What do you have to save for yourself for for a rock that had chain of custody from the moon. Then Neil Armstrong came to this museum and said, being a fake, NASA says no comment. All right. You're peppering us with with fact after fact and it's just too much. We need to stick to one thing. Okay. What what's one thing? Let's let's stick on one topic so we can go back and forth and we can get Charlie's depending on it. We can get Europe and I can evaluate what's going on. Let's talk about the film. Okay. So one of the biggest questions people have about this is why why was the why is all the original footage and the telemetry data gone from the Apollo missions. But I want to clarify something first. All of the footage that we have from the moon was that shot on film specifically on film cameras 16 millimeter film. We have we had a 16 millimeter camera. We had a Hossleblaz which took right photographs and we had a TV that sent back television from the Loner rover to earth. Like us, a specific type of camera for television. Yeah. Was a television camera that we mounted on the front of the rover. Okay. But this this this that those don't use film. I'm not a camera expert. They don't use film. No, it's a TV picture. Okay. So just broadcast straight doesn't record anything on it. It's just live broadcast. It was recorded down here in Mission Control. Okay. Got it. Got it. Okay. I understand. But we didn't have a recorder. Well, we had I'm not sure. But I don't think we had a recorder on board. Okay. So the TV cameras were recorded down at Mission Control and those would have been recorded on tapes. I'm guessing. Right. And those would be the tapes that have been erased. Correct. Okay. So that was the incompetence of NASA allegedly or intentional just like the or intention. Right. Destroy the technology. They intentionally erased the tape. So they know what they were those days. You just was to make room for other projects. So Steve, if you ask a chat, GPT, let's ask chat, GPT. What happened to the original tapes from the NASA missions? And let's see what the answer it gives is. Well, that would be this right here. Oh, you already have it. Yeah. All right. So the original tapes were later erased and reused. NASA routinely used magnetic tapes in the 60s and through the 80s due to storage, cost, and shortages. So that's that's crazy that we that the tapes from the lunar missions were recorded over. They're saying that the yeah, and they were recorded over. Right. Locally recorded stuff was was this slow scan stuff film. Right. Yeah. I know I think it was tape. It's actual tape like, okay, you know, like tape recorders. Okay. They use that technology instead of film. And then that stuff was recorded over, but the stuff that they sent through broadcast survived. Well, that's the wrong Howard, whose grandfather warned him that the moon missions were fake. Didn't listen. Wanted to make an iMacs movie. And he requested all the original video tapes to be broadcast projected on a iMac screen about a hundred feet by 120 feet. Right. Bigger than they've ever been done before. He wanted to use the originals. And it was between that request and a couple of days later that everything got erased. He had to go to Blockbuster and rent VHS tapes and reduced them to this tiny portion of the screen. Otherwise, the image quality would be so bad. You can see the VHS tracking line is not a fact that movie is is reenactments. Is that a fact that what year was this when Ron Howard requested the tape? It was around 1999 something like that. So around Steve, hopefully you can look this up. Ron Howard was working on an iMacs film in around 1999 requested the original tapes from NASA. And we you're saying it is an absolute fact that we can look up that NASA erased those tapes. You did. Yeah. Right after Ron Howard requested them. Well, that was my research at the time. I did my film at sobrell.com for seven years to produce. I was given a million dollars by someone who builds rockets for NASA who knows the the movements are fake. Who thought it was his patriotic duty to expose it. Now not only is it the first time in history that technology is greater in the past and in the future. Not only is it the only time in history that all of the documentation, all the technology according to NASA astronaut was intentionally destroyed. It's also the first time in history that nobody could repeat the event 50 years later. Imagine them splitting the atom in 1945, the first atomic bomb. And 50 years later, no one can split the atom when in fact just 10 years later, atomic bombs were 1000 times more powerful. So if they could go to the moon on the first attempt, ahead of schedule with one millionth of computing power cell phone, we would have been on Mars 10 years later, we'd be in another solar system by now. And there'd be bases all over the moon taking people back and forth to play basketball and one zero or one sixth gravity. The best NASA can do today is send mannequins to orbit the moon. When somehow we could play golf and drive cars on the moon with 1960s technology on the first attempt. There have been six presidents who have said a total of nine times, they're going to return to the moon and five years. You had Ronald Reagan said it, then Clinton said it, then Bush senior said it, then Bush junior said it twice, and Obama said it twice and Trump said it one time and they can't do it with 50 years better technology. They can't return to the moon and 50 years. But somehow they could do it with 1960s technology on the first attempt. Why, why, why don't you think we've been able to go back to the moon since 72 because they spent money on other programs? Well, the government spends every month 70% more money than they take. I'm not going to argue with you about this. We went to the moon. Six times we landed on the moon. You like the American public six times, which has the arrogance of the American. Well, then you don't believe we landed on the moon. You didn't know that before you got here. How did we get 600 pounds of moon rocks? Well, like I said, let's put up in there. Now, let's talk about the moon rocks. Okay. What, why, what evidence do you have? I know you have some that proves that the moon rocks were not actually moon rocks, right? Yeah. If you could find, let me find the clip here. Our organization is, uh, bars position, and then there's another lens fake, fake moon rock. Let's go to clip these seven real quick. This is a recent article about the French government. And they did, they committed a crime in 1945 that they're still lying about today. And what happened was their soldiers returned from World War II and wanting their back pay. and they refused to give it to them because they were black. And when they kept protesting, they machine gunned 300 of them in a single base and buried them. That just came out, that happened in 1945 and played the clip and let's read this news article. It says, one of the things that they did was they fabricated. What is that through the moon rocks? Because it shows governments. It says they fabricated and destroyed evidence. So we're going to look at the fabrication. I'm just trying to find the clip here. It's out of sequence. All right. That's not how that's about the moon rocks. Or you could look it up. Look up fake moon rock and Amsterdam. Yeah. Well, yeah. So are the moon rocks something that is available for the public to see? D29. Yeah. I mean, the moon rocks on display all over the world. And also they're, they still do experiments on the moon rock. NASA's the lunar planetary and student, who it is, is controlling those and sending those out people submit experiment requests still today about to do experiments on the moon rocks. So they're still moon rocks available. And do they let outside researchers do analyst analysis on them and the university? Universities do. Yeah. Okay. I mean, they do have universities have some. I'm not involved in that at all. Right. Sure. And you know, I've been to a NASA for a long time, but the moon rocks are unique. And radioactive, whatever, and not radioactive evidence, but they're the way they are have been collected. They were collected on every mission. They were isolated when they got back and put in the lunar receiving lab. And now they're still being given out samples of people still requesting samples of moon rocks. And NASA evaluate seas experiments that they're request. And apparently they're still giving some of it out. I have been with NASA in a long, long time. So I don't know how it works today. So Bart, how do you explain us having actual moon rocks here on Earth? Well, like I said, von Braun went to Antarctica. There's a picture of him in Antarctica where he collected hundreds of pounds of lunar meteorites, which they use for fake moon rocks. NASA also has the most advanced ceramics lab in the world where they could take a a ride, a rock and falsify my... to lunar meteorites, which they use for fake moon rocks. NASA also has the most advanced ceramics lab in the world where they could take a rock and falsify micro meteorite sediment and then go to clip 29. This is about moon rocks. It says they opened one up and it proved to be fake. You do realize a few years ago a 70 year old woman was arrested by the FBI and thrown in a cell not allowed to go to the bathroom she had to pee on herself because she had a paperweight with one spec of an alleged moon rock in the very center of it and she couldn't pay her electric bill or mortgage. It was given to her by her husband who got it from someone at NASA and the FBI surrounded her to get that so that it couldn't be opened and examined independently. This is just the tiny spec of a moon rock. Who was this woman's name? I don't know but you could look it up 70 year old woman arrested for having a moon rock or trying to sell a moon rock. So you find it. And play clip 29. You said what's the proof of the fake moon rocks? Yes. D 29 there Steve. Let's see it. Look at D 29. It's a spill of the article. Okay from the telegraph given to Holland by Neil Armstrong is a fake. This is one that had complete chain of custody from the surface of the moon. To Neil Armstrong's hand to his pocket to the prime minister of the Netherlands her medically sealed opened a few years ago after someone watched my film at a curiosity and it ends up being this out of world looking piece of petrified what now unless trees are going on the moon the moon rock is fake and yet no reporter has discouraged to ask if the moon rocks are fake. What about the moon missions? I had a reporter from the Washington Post that broke the Watergate story. I showed him the footage which we're going to show them faking being halfway to the moon that says don't show to the public at the beginning of the point. The point is he agreed that it proved they never left earth or a bit but he was forbidden to publish it. Okay. We got to stick to one top. Let's go back to the this piece of petrified wood that you were showing that was given to the prime minister of Holland or right or right. I thought it's a Dutch prime minister. The same thing that's in Holland. I thought it was like the Netherlands. Correct. Okay. I've heard this story before. I heard you I first heard it from you. I also heard a pushback on this that it was not Buzz Aldrin or Neil Armstrong who gave it to the prime minister of the Netherlands. However, it was the US ambassador to the Netherlands. They gave him this thing. Well, my understanding it went so it was not directly from Neil Armstrong. It was on a visit of him. He visited the Netherlands and gave it to the prime minister. Okay. We should find claimed he claimed he picked it up and put it in his pocket. Let's find this who gave the prime minister of the Netherlands the fake moon rock. Who actually gave it to him. So for 40 years, everyone thought it was a moon rock. It was billed as a moon rock, picked up off the lunar surface by Apollo 11. They did a little tour around the world afterwards. He gave moon rocks the various people. He gave one to the prime minister of the Netherlands. It was sealed. It was opened up a few years ago. Okay. Right here. Right here. It says prime minister. Okay. The rock. The rock was not given to the Dutch prime minister by astronauts, but instead given to the former prime minister, William Dries, by the then US ambassador, William Midendorf in 1969 during a good will, a good will tour by the Apollo 11 astronauts. Okay. So the rock was later found to be fair and actually an actually was a piece of petrified wood. Okay. So up Neil Armstrong was there at the visit. That's when the rock was given. He claimed he picked it up. The prime minister of the Netherlands didn't pick it up. Neil Armstrong was there. There he is. Apollo 11 astronauts during the winter. How do we know we don't know that? Okay. It was says it was during the tour. Okay. So what is your point? So it's well because it seems to be your net full on the moon rock that the headphones on or you can't just keep talking over everybody. Well, it's like it's too much. It's too much. He's his point is that this piece of moon rock that was given to the prime minister of the Netherlands during the Apollo 11 Goodwill tour by with Neil and Buzz was later an analyzed and found to be petrified wood and not a moon rock. That's his evidence that the moon rocks aren't real. Well, I brought back a couple of underpounds maybe moon rocks. I don't remember exactly. And they're very unique. They got a radiation history that is unique. They look anything like that. No, no. They look like, look like charcoal and they don't look like that. Okay. They look like more gray charcoal. What was the biggest moon rock that you brought back? I think 25 pounds. Whoa. Like roughly roughly how big I had to roll it up my leg. It was so big. First EVA at Plum Crater. And is that a moon rock right? Is that a real moon rock? We didn't collect anything like that. The one on the right. No. No. What what zoom out, Steve, see if you can find see if we can find something that Charlie would think that looks like a one of the moon rocks that he grabbed. Does any of this look like one of the rocks that you had? No. No. What if we googled Charlie Duke moon rock? Maybe Apollo 16 moon rock. Oh, yeah, or Apollo 16 moon rock. Yeah. A big mule I picked up. Go left. Is that big mule? The one on the left. One out of that one. A big, big mule. No, the other one to the left. That one. Yeah. That's a that's a real moon rock. I picked it up. Yeah. That was a 25 pounder. I don't remember how no it didn't weigh that much. But no. But I don't remember. We picked a total collection for Apollo 16 was probably a couple hundred pounds. And when you got him into the module, when you got the rocks in there, did you have him in any kind of specific bag or anything? We had him in vacuum, vacuum boxes. A lot of them. Right. And a lot of them were just in a in it. I don't remember exactly in none of them. Whether we had had them brought back, I just didn't have room for in these rock boxes we call them. But most of them will put in rock boxes outside. And so never saw atmosphere inside. Right. So once you took your suit off, you weren't able to interact with them at all. You couldn't touch him. You could smell them. I don't remember doing any of that. No. No. What about once you got back to earth? Did you touch him at all or hold him at all when you got back to earth? We went into the lunar receiving lab where they were and we were able to put on gloves or whatever it was and sterilize that thing and just look at them. But I don't remember being picking them up and tossing them around or anything like that. Were there any smells that you remembered? Like usually smells are good at triggering memories. Like was there any specific smell that was strange to you about the moon? When you even when you got back in the, well, we were pretty stinky. I can say that. A lot of B.O. A lot of B.O. But nothing else. No other interesting smells. No. Well, I mean, some of the food smelled. You could, you know, smell well, tuna salad or something like dust or something like dust from the moon on your suit or on your boots or something like that. No. I don't remember any smell from the, but sometimes that smell, that was a gunpowder smell sometimes. And what was that from? I don't know. That's probably moon dust, but I'm not sure. But it was there's no organic material in it's like like gunpowder. So, okay. Okay. So these, this moon rock debate is difficult because we don't have any moon rocks and we haven't done any analysis on any. We picked up that one big really. Okay. Yeah. It looks absolutely nothing like the petrified wood on the left. No. Um, so it was given to this guy. So I guess the story is, the story is true. I mean, if we've corroborated it with other with AI and with Bart's, with Bart's article that that gift was given, but it wasn't, it was given by the US ambassador to the prime minister of the Netherlands. The one on the left, the one on the left. Yeah. And that was, uh, he was to do it. It looked like any of the moon rocks we collected right. Right. Well, you said they were different in different landied sites earlier that the rock, well, at your site in Apollo 11 were different. Were the rocks different in a different landing sites? Do they look different? Not that article, not that different. They not that much different. Right. Okay. Okay. Um, the number one proof is when we have next seeing, I'm answering your question about what proof there is. Now, I gave NASA about what specifically about how they didn't go to the moon. They can't leave Earth orbit. They still can't leave Earth orbit. Are we talking about radiation belts now? No. Talk about the footage of them faking being halfway to the man. The foot. Okay. The footage. If you show I do after this, I would like to talk about the radiation belts. That's okay. That's next. Staff to perfect. Right. And, and so first let's look at the slide, the eight. This is at the beginning of the real. I asked NASA for every video, every film from Apollo 11, figuring if they faked it. They're more likely to have made a mistake. The first time they faked it. Now, keep in mind, I went from being the biggest fan. God, God workshopping the Apollo 11 project with pictures on my wall everywhere I went like a shrine to having an open mind that maybe they faked it to looking into it being given a million dollars by somebody who builds rockets for NASA to investigate it who said that they were fake. And then stumbling upon this evidence, which is what convinced me that they were fake. In fact, this footage was shown to two NBC news directors. They both agreed. It proved that Apollo 11 never left or Thorbit. And they were threatened by the federal government, not to broadcast it or to have their license pulled. So the first part you'll see in D eight is the slide that says not for public distribution. There we go. Okay. So that shows that this is not for public distribution. Now, the next clip is at the very, let's read it. It says this film of the Apollo 11 mission was produced as a report film by the manned spacecraft center and is not for general public distribution. Yeah. I asked NASA for unedited footage and everything I got was pre-edited with a voice over and it's the same footage over and over again on 10 different reals exact same footage. Most reporters are satisfied with that. I'm investigating the possibility that they faked it and I asked for everything specifically on edited footage. I got this and one of the real that was unedited. Now at the very beginning of the real clip nine, which you're about to play, you'll hear NASA say the TV picture looks great. Then there is exactly four seconds of dead air. You'll hear a third party that's not NASA, not the astronauts, presumably the CIA. And after four seconds go by, they tell Neil Armstrong in a private earpiece talk. And then he starts speaking because he's claiming that he is halfway to the moon at this point in the mission, the timestamp indicates according to the script that they're supposed to be halfway to the moon. In fact, they never left or Thorbit. They can't leave or Thorbit now. And there's a number of reasons for that. So Charlie, have you ever seen this footage before? No, it's crazy. Okay. Yeah, it's crazy. How corrupt the federal government is. Well, so I mean, you're calling me a liar. I never went to the moon. Well, obviously, what's surprised you knew who you're going to be here. I'm going to go with you here before you got here. Well, but like it's a surprise. I am actually surprised. I didn't realize that you thought it was all a fight. You knew that. You provided me of our phone conversation 20 years ago when you walked in the door that I said, we had, I had caught you reported me. I showed you, I showed you as well. That I had proof that we didn't go to the moon. You knew when he invited you, this is no surprise. And yet you're acting like you're surprised. This is why you should get the Academy Award. Now, the reason is if he's halfway to the moon, there would be an estimated two second radio time there and two seconds back. So they're faking. Sure. A radio delay. Okay. You'll hear NASA. You'll hear four seconds go by. You'll hear a third party that's not NASA, not the astronauts. Propped near Armstrong with talk. And that way they can fake the four second radio day. Go ahead and play clip nine. Okay. So there's how it was. It was it. Where did you get your get this stuff from again? From NASA. NASA sent you this building. And one second, one second, one second. They sent it to you by mistake. Either that or someone, one of my sources that NASA who said the missions were fake. Thanks. So with so blower, send it to me. Okay. And so, hold on. Charlie, what do you make of that? I don't understand what he's talking about here, but the missions were not fake. No, okay. They sent me to the moon. And we understand that. The video and the six, the four on part, the footage that we just watched was from Apollo 11. Could you hear it? Can you hear it in your headphones? It's it's Houston communicating with the astronauts on the radio. And then you hear a four second delay. And then you can hear the audio of someone going talk. And then you hear Neil Armstrong responding to Houston. Let's watch it one more time. Let's show Charlie. Yeah. Yeah. Let's show him one more time. Just read the text. Two, three, four. Is that, does that make sense? They can't even throw a bit today. And they can't leave Earth orbit in 1969. So the footage is, is footage of the moon. And you, you could hear Neil talking to Houston, right? In that video. Yeah. Yeah. You could hear them talking. And there's a little voice that pops up after four seconds that says talk to Neil. Why would there be a voice telling me to talk? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Okay. On the moon or they there have a way, right? There's supposed to be halfway. So this is when they were halfway to the moon communicating with Houston. And after Houston said something on the radio, there was four seconds. And then somebody on the radio saying talk to Neil instructing Neil to respond to Houston after four seconds. Why do you think that would be? I don't know. Okay. I've, in my recollection, I was in Mission Control for Apollo 10. I was Capcom. I was in Mission Control for Apollo 11. It's Capcom. And nothing like this ever happened in Mission Control. No, there would never be anybody saying talk to anybody. It would just be as soon as you hear it, you would respond. Generally, that was true. Yeah. Okay. What were the exceptions? I can't think of any right now, but I mean, say again, Houston or say you, a lot of reasons that you, mission control had not mission control, but we had problem of scratchy communication. So if you couldn't understand. Yeah. Okay. So say again, whatever. Yeah. Except the quality, the EQ of the audio of talk is completely different. It's not obviously NASA understood who just spoke, right. And it's not Neil Armstrong who responded. They're faking a four second radio delay to pretend that they're beyond or ortho. So this is him. So, Bart's position is that video with them sit with the voice coming in and saying talk is them trying to fake a four second delay. That's part of his argument. So what I mean, I don't, I don't know that's one of his arguments is there because you hear the voice come in and say talk, the talk comes in four seconds after Houston finishes their statement. Right. So the presumption from Bart is there's no delay, but the astronauts were instructed to wait for four seconds until someone else came in and said, talk, that way it would look like there was a four second delay. And it would look like they were already halfway to the moon. Right. Because if you play clip 11, Neil Armstrong for the TV audience, the part that was shown to the public says he's calling in from about 130,000 miles out right halfway to the moon. Go ahead and play clip 11. Okay. So that's him lying. He's not 130,000 miles out. He's still on earth orbit. That's why they fake the four second radio delay. Now play clip 10. Is this the photo of them faking the window? Almost. Okay. Okay. Let's try to, let's try to go through this. We have a lot to cover and we're almost two hours on one window. Okay. So go back to clip 11, the 130,000 miles out. Don't play the audio, but just bring up the image and you can hit pause so we can see the image. So according to Neil Armstrong, there's only one window that has a view of the earth and it's filled up with the TV camera because if you're talking to the mic. Oh yeah. So if you were really halfway to the moon, looking back at the earth like this appears to demonstrate, even though it's a fake shot, you would have to have the lens of the camera to the window in order to shoot the earth far away floating in space. He says he's a line 130,000 miles out and he says that the camera is completely filling up the window. That's a lie too. The camera is really at the back of the spacecraft. There's about 15 feet between the camera and the window. They've turned out all the lights, which they talk about because they thought these conversations would be edited out. And that's actually the circular window of the spacecraft outside of which it's filled with the earth and lower orbit. One photographer, cinematographer, believes they took a transparency, a positive slide of the earth photograph from a satellite and placed it over the window that was backlit by earth shine. Now if you place the final clip. Oh, the, the D11, play it all the way through to revealing. So play 11 one more time. There were two clips on 11. So this is, those might into the mic. No, just let it play at normal speed. This is supposed to be the earth, but that's fine. This is supposed to be the earth floating in space. This is the outtake. That's why it said do not show to the public. There's Buzz Aldrin removing part of the effect in front of the window. That's a work light. The camera has been at the back of the spacecraft the entire time. The iris is opened and you can see the real location and the very bright earth out the window. They just fate being halfway to the moon. My critics agree. That is them faking being halfway to the moon to NBC News directors agree. That is them faking being halfway to the moon. And they were told by the federal government if they broadcast it, they would have their license pulled. So go to subrell.com. All of these clips can be seen there for free. This is what convinced me. I gave NASA the benefit of the doubt for as long as possible. And when I saw this, they are faking half way to the moon. So if you could really go to the moon, why would you be faking any of it? And if you're faking being halfway to the moon, it's because you can't go halfway to the moon. And what a surprise. 56 years later, they still cannot leave earth or have been only mannequin scan and we'll go on to why next, which is the Van Allen radiation. All right, hold on. Let's put a pause there. So Charlie on your trip on Apollo 16. Did you guys ever turn around and take film or footed or any photos of the moon? Or I'm sorry, of the earth when you were about halfway? I'm sure that we did. I don't remember specifically, but if you were to take a video or a film of the earth on your way to the moon, how would you do it? Well, you turn a window to the earth and there was this eye to window right up here, which was a triangle. I had a window right over here and in zero gravity, you had to hold a camera up to the window towards the window. And the object you had out there. So you could do it from any window. It dispenses on how you orient it to spacecraft. So you would be able to orient the spacecraft while you're traveling to the moon to line up a window with the earth. So roughly how big is that spacecraft? How big is the interior? Lesson to breathe. If I'm in my couch, I can reach out and touch in my suit and I could reach out and touch the side of the spacecraft. Okay. John Young, on liftoff, it was manually. He was touching my shoulder and on the other side, he was touching John's shoulder and John was reaching out and touching the side of the spacecraft. But the so command module, the command module. Yeah, the command and service module were coupled together. So there's actually more depth than that. Okay. And not in the spacecraft, it wasn't. They were, they were, the service module was hooked to the command module was sat on top of the service module and we received a lot of stuff from the service module. But the command module was a separate entity and didn't have connection. There were electrical connections and service connections, but they weren't any pathway. You couldn't go there. You couldn't go there. Got it. Okay. And so you're saying it was roughly about maybe the site, the length of this table, maybe a little bigger. Probably, this table probably water than Apollo spacecraft was. Okay. And so, so, so when you were, let's just say hypothetically, you're on your way to the moon on Apollo 16. You would look back, you want to take a shot of the earth at halfway, right? Your halfway to the moon. How would you position the camera inside the spacecraft to shoot the earth? The first, all of you have to get a window looking at the earth, right? Okay. And you could get the window, you face there. It was a triangular window here and a window here for me. How about, what was this shape of the other window for you? I think it was the sort of triangular shape. Triangulate shape. Okay. Anyway, you could get up there with a camera and you're looking out. And if the spacecraft was not rotating, the held position, then you could just reach out and just they start taking pictures. Will you toss a blood or the 16 millimeter camera? We had, we didn't waste film though. And you would put it basically right smack dab up to the window? No. No. Sometimes you would. Okay. Okay. Depends on what you were trying to, what you were trying to look at if the earth was out there and you wanted to get right closer. You could see the whole of the earth. You could get back and you could see, you could still see the earth out there. But it was like you were looking through a four foot air and a spacecraft. So you'd want to get up right next to it to get a next window. Right. And how fast was the craft moving at that point halfway? It buried it roughly. It took 72 hours to get to the moon. It's 200 something thousand miles. So on average it at 3,000 miles a mile or 3,000 or okay. Okay. So this footage is as Bart described from Apollo 11 and they have the camera. Steve, do you have a rendering of the spacecraft? Yeah. Give me a second. So we downloaded a 3D render of the interior of the spacecraft. And I want to see if it's accurate. First of all, this is it. So this was created by the Smithsonian. And it's supposed to be a perfect 3D render. Does that look right? That's the hatch right there. That would be the hatch. And there was a window on the right side. I had a window on this side. Wait a minute. I think we are in the I was I would be on the other side. So he was on the left. What should Apollo mission is this? Rendering enough. Do they have different ones for every Apollo? No, I saw the sign. They're all the same. Which is the number one window. This is specifically Apollo 11. This is specifically Apollo 11. Okay. So this would have been the same craft they were shooting from in that video that you provided. Okay. So um, which window Bart, were they filming from based on this? The number one window. So and it appeared to be circular on camera. And like I said, another cinematographer thinks they put a device over the window. Okay. So photograph of the earth. I don't see any circle windows at all in this. Was there a circular window in there general? That's kind of like a square. It's a rounded. And there might be a circular window in the hatch. I don't remember. So the hatch is missing here. So maybe that's what they were filming out of the hatch. Well, well, the hatch would be open. And sometimes you could if you got right up close, you could see the hatch being yeah, I think you're right. The circular window will find a find a photo of the hatch for the lunar module and see if there was the command module. I'm sorry. Well, we already have them claiming that the camera's up against the window. And in fact, it's at the back of the spacecraft. Okay. So there's the hatch that is a circle. The circle window breaking down. I mean, you look at it where he says he's 130,000 miles out. And the other the second half of it, where they start fiddling with their hands in front of the window, it's this same shot. They claim it's 130,000 miles out. And then the moment later, you see it's the window being made up to look like the earth floating in space. Go back a couple of seconds. So you feel okay, so pause it right there. Pause it right there. So Charlie, move the guy out of the way of the window so we can still see the interior of the spacecraft. So that window straight ahead, that's got like light glaring through it. That's circular, right? So that would be the hatch, right? That's the hatch. Okay. So the camera is basically as far back as it can possibly be inside the command module. That's in the lower equipment, they would be the lower equipment, bang. Okay, cool. Now play it so we can get a better idea of their, their, the cameras are staying there and they're adjusting the exposure. And the lower equipment they would be. The lower equipment back. Okay, cool. Now play it so we can get a better idea of their, their, the cameras is staying there and they're adjusting the exposure. Yeah, right there. So there you can see a moment ago, they claimed that was 130,000 miles out. The earth floating in space, but it's not the earth floating in space. It's the window being made to look like the earth floating in space. So they're faking being halfway to the moon. So why would they fake being halfway to the moon if they really went halfway to the moon? Well, let's, you don't even have to go that far. Okay. Let's, let's say why are they shooting it from so far back? Why wouldn't they put the camera up to the window? We did at times, but sometimes you just want to look at the inside and what, and what the guys doing. But right, but if you go back on the side of the spacecraft, understood. But if you go back, they're showing it with the entire interior blacked out. Steve, if you remind it, yeah, that's so that he can get exposure of the, the, if you go, if you got the outside, if you got the windows, oh, not open, but uncovered, you're going to get light reflected from the earth and light from the sun into the spacecraft. Right. So go, go to the beginning, go, go forward a little bit more. So it just shows you. So see, they're, they're filming it. They claim that was the earth floating in space. It looks like they're trying, do you understand why barpe thinks they're trying to pull some sort of camera trick? They're trying to, it looks like right now, if you paused it right here and you showed that to me or any other dumb, dumb like me, you would think that the black is just space, right? And that's just the earth floating in space. That's what it looks like to me. So hit play. Now, and he's saying while they're filming it that they're 130,000 miles out, which is not true. So there's the earth. So it's like, wow, look how small the earth is way floating away in outer space. It's pretty incredible. And then this is the same, you know, this is not cut. This is same, same, same footage and the camera sort of wobbling. There's something weird in the top left corner, maybe a light. It's a work light that they diffused. So went and throw light on the spacecraft walls. Now it's like now there's something moving in between the camera lens and the window. So it's not space. It's just the interior of the spacecraft. That's right. The window of the spacecraft being made to look like the earth floating in space. Right. So if they are trying to pull a camera trick here, Bart, now, look, you see the windows totally blown out. That's what it would look like. Right. Okay. They had the iris, the head, the hatch, the hatch window. And then there's another triangular window. Yep. And there was one on my side, there was another, I forgot exactly what the space was, but there was windows right here and I could look out that window. And there was a, on the other side, there was a docking window. You looked out when you had the dock and there was a try, I forgot exactly the shape, maybe a long brick tango or something like that. And then there was a round hatch window. And then there was a window on the left, I could look out my, I was on the right side. I could look out a window, it was right there. And John Young had a window on the other side. And there was a hatch window above us. And it was two windows up in beyond the, the lower equipment bay. So Steve, go back to where it's exposed for the interior. So right there, that's the hatch window. Yeah. The round. Okay, move the hand. Okay, is that would it be that bright? Yeah. 130,000 miles away. If that window was facing the earth at 130,000 miles out, is that how bright it would be? It's facing more to the side than the earth. Well, the video is claiming according to the video, Neil is saying that that's the earth. That wouldn't be the earth wouldn't, that would not be the earth. That picture is not the earth. No, it is the earth. That's the reflection off of the earth. That's, that's earth. Well, this is, this is kind of incredible because he's saying it's not the earth. Well, it is. And clearly that they just faked being halfway to the moon. Well, the video is saying. Because they're in her Thorbit, that's the earth. Out the window, it's filling the entire window. Right. But listen, Charlie just said at 130,000 miles out, that is not what it would look like. Okay. This video clearly is Neil Armstrong saying there are 130,000 miles out. Mm hmm. Yeah, I understand. It's a fake shot. So that's why Bart believes that there's, there's something we're going on. So if they were in earth orbit, wouldn't you see the earth moving by super fast? Like clouds moving by. You would see land moving. They would be flot if you look at foot from David Percy, a cinematographer award-winning BBC cinematographer said they took a photograph from an unmanned satellite. And they had like a positive or kind of like an x-ray, but a color print that was translucent. And they put it over the window. That's what they were removing when that you see the yellow circle around the window. So they're removing the photograph. So it's a photograph that's being backlit by earth shot of the earth with a terminator line. They're shoving it in a little crease of material into the window. I see where you're saying. The fake the terminator one of them is biting night and day. I don't understand the purpose of this conversation. So, so this video that we're watching right now where that you just watched, this is a video of Apollo 11. And Neil says in the beginning of the video that they are 130, 130,000 miles away from the moon. So he said, he said that he just said their halfway. Yeah. And you just said there's no way their halfway. I didn't say that judging by the map, looking at how bright that window is, you said if that's the earth, it wouldn't be that bright. I just say that. I didn't say that. I said that could be the sunshine in there. No, no, but I'm saying if that was, if that window was facing the earth at 130,000 miles, you said it wouldn't be that bright if that was facing the earth. You would see the earth. You wouldn't see the earth. This is the sunshine in here. Okay. But okay, hypothetically, if that window was facing the earth at 130,000 miles, you said it wouldn't be that bright a minute ago, right? The earth was never that bright. Okay. Okay. Okay. You look out the window and you, you, you'd look out the window and you'd see the earth. You just hung up there. Right. It wouldn't be blasting through the window like that. What about from earth orbit? Would it be that bright from earth orbit? Uh, depends on where you are. So it might be that bright from earth orbit. Okay. Okay. Interesting. I don't understand the purpose of this discussion. It's what they're thinking being. It's the way it is because he thinks this is a fake shot. He thinks that the, he thinks that this craft right here is in low earth orbit. And they're trying to fake it by moving the camera back and exposing for the window to make it look like earth is really far away. And the surrounding inner spacecraft that's under exposed is just space. He thinks they're trying to make some sort of a camera trick to fake that they're halfway to the moon when they're really in low earth orbit. That's what Bart's claim is. When you're in low earth orbit, you look out and you, and you're, when does a face at the earth, you look down and you just see nothing but earth. Right. And if it was in by, right, you see that you can go over Australia, you can go over the Pacific. You look, it depends on where you are. And you're in a low earth orbit. You look out the window. It might, it might look something like that filling the windows with light. You're, no, no, it would not. Okay. Well, that kind of only, if the windows are pointed towards the sun. Right. Okay. So you said it might look like that from a earth shining earth orbit. It depends on the old one. The ocean. Yeah. The earth shining. Yeah. Okay. Steve, what were you going to say? It looks like this is not the, it looks like so, because I am also a cinematographer. And I would say that that window, that that's probably the color of the window and the sun is, can you see this mouse? Yeah. The sun is probably somewhere over here poking through. You can see these rays shooting them right there. It's kind of hard to tell because he's got light bounce on his shoulder and he's got light bounce on this elbow. It's likely hitting some part inside of the spacecraft and bouncing back and it's filling in his face over there. It's likely kissing the shoulders here. But you can always tell sunlight because you can just look for the brightest thing. Okay. And that's, that would be that ray shooting through. So it's probably just veiling the glass and the glass is, you can see there's color right there. Yep. There's a similar color right here. So this one is getting a little bit of color too. It is a blue. I think it's a tent. And what you're seeing there is even when you back up over here, this is just a bokeball. A bokeball showing whatever the lens is seeing and this texture is probably the cabling that you see later on or it could just be like imperfections in the glass. But that's that looks like your urge to me. That looks like the urge to me too. But it's out of focus. Obviously it's not. It's window. It's got a perfect terminator line too. Go to the part where they're fiddling with it in front of the window. Go back another 15 seconds and play. It's misformed because it's so Steve, you don't think they're trying to film the earth here. I don't think so. Well, I mean, they're looking at the window and they're definitely trying to film the earth. That's where they claim it's 130,000 miles out. It's a duplicate of us. This is later on in the tape. It's very confusing. It's supposed to be halfway to the moon and now you see them breaking down the effect removing the transparency of the photograph of the earth in front of the window. The camera was never up against the glass. It was at the back of the spacecraft. They closed the iris down so that the walls became black and here they are removing part of the effect in front of the window. All right. This is what convinced me and to NBC News Director and an award winning cinematographer and my critics agree. It is Apollo 11 faking being halfway to the moon. So why would they fake being halfway to the moon if they really went to the moon? And if they're faking being halfway, it's because they cannot go halfway. Understood. They cannot leave earth orbit and we'll go into why, which is the radiation belt that's around. Which we're going to do. We're two hours in. We have an hour left, but coffee is here and I need to go to the bathroom. So we're going to take a quick break. Coffee break, bathroom break. We'll come back. Talk about the radiation belts. Be right back. Okay. Now we're back. We're talking about the radiation belts, the van Allen belts. What is your position on the van Allen radiation belts? Well, my position is what von Braun's original findings were, which is that it's 250 times a lethal dose. We have a quote from him in print that he says that if you do the math. And if you first show slide D12, okay, before you get to D12, for people that don't know that are listening to our image of the belt. So yeah, the van Allen radiation belts are basically large, toroidal, donut shaped pockets of radiation that exist about what is a thousand miles out from the earth and extend about 30,000 miles. Exened about 30,000 miles in every single space shuttle launch. Basically every astronaut and every space shuttle launch, every moon walk that's ever, I'm sorry, not moon walk space walk has ever been done has been done below that in low earth orbit, the only astronauts, the only manned mission has ever been outside of the van Allen radiation belts is the Apollo mission. Yeah, go through them. If you look at D12, you can show the audience what they look like and how every manned space mission, Mercury, Gemini, Skylab the space shuttle is well below it. And this field of radiation starts at a thousand miles and extends about 30,000 miles. If you go to D13, this is a press release from the Apollo mission that was given to the press. They launch from Florida to be near the equator and they go right out through the middle. You see that right at the equator. They go through the van Allen radiation. Well, now if the spacecraft like General said is going 3,000 miles an hour and they're 30,000 miles thick, that would be 10 hours in the radiation to the moon and 10 hours back. I believe maybe the spacecraft was going a little bit faster, but in any case, it was at least two hours in the radiation to the moon up to 10 hours and another two to 10 hours back. Now the Orion mission sent up Geiger counters into the radiation belts in 2014 unmanned and they registered the radiation. I called the NASA. I sent them a journalist. This is a non-military taxpayer funded scientific mission. Can I please have the Geiger counter readings? They told me that was classified. They weren't able to tell me. Now when NASA sent probes to the Sun to find out the temperature of the Sun, the temperature wasn't classified and when they sent probes to Jupiter, they measured the amount of helium in Jupiter's atmosphere. The amount wasn't classified. So why would the amount of radiation inside the radiation belts and a spacecraft intending to one day send people to the moon? Why would that radiation be a classified secret? Charlie, do you know why that would be classified? I didn't realize it was. So I would imagine that if it was classified, we would classify it because we wouldn't want the Soviets or the Chinese to know the actual level of radiation. Why would the point of discussion? What is the point that we're discussing now is Bart's position that the Van Allen radiation belts are too dangerous for human beings to pass through and survive. And he's building his case to why that is right now. Well, you have to accelerate the 25,000 miles an hour to get out of Earth orbit. OK. I thought you said it was 3,000 miles an hour. You said it was at 3,000 when they were halfway. Sorry. Or a slow on you down. OK. So the total distance of the moon is about 3,000 miles an hour. Seven times 70. That's 210,000 miles. OK. So when you go through the Van Allen belts, you're going so fast. It's just you're through. How fast are you traveling when you guys are going through the Van Allen belts? You know, escape velocity is about. Let's see. I don't remember exactly 36,000 feet per second or something like that. That should have told me it was 17,000 miles an hour. No, that's Earth orbit. That's Earth orbit. Yeah. OK. Then you have to escape Earth orbit. So if you accelerate, I don't remember exactly what it was, but it was over 20,000 miles an hour to get out of Earth orbit. And so the S4B, the third stage of the side of the rocket, you stay attached to and that engine lit and pushed you out of Earth orbit on the trajectory to the moon through the Van Allen belts. Then after that, you've separated. you turned around and retrieved the lunar module from the third stage. It was riding underneath the command module and service module. So you you separated and you turned around and you came back in and you docked. And then you when you got all the electrical connections made, you flipped a switch and it released all the bolts and you could back it out from the third stage of the Saturn rocket. OK. When you guys were traveling through the Van Allen belts, did you where you guys paying close attention to like where in the Van Allen belts you were? And also before you before you like when you were preparing, you guys did an unbelievably amount, unbelievable amount of prep and training for this, right? What were the comp for the whole mission, right? What were the conversations like during training with anybody, including von Braun about astronaut safety when it comes to radiation and the Van Allen belts? What were those conversations like? What the what and very much conversation about it? What any danger you're going through so fast, you're just you're exposed to so much radiation, but it's just a boom you threw, you know, and the bells are high radiation, but they aren't the very thick so you just go right straight through them and you don't get much radiation. I don't remember our dosimeters. We had dosimeters several of them on our body and some in a spacecraft. I don't remember. And that measures the level of radiation that we're receiving. Yeah. According to NASA, the radiation belts are 30,000 miles thick. Right. And if you were going 20,000 miles an hour, that would be an hour and a half and the radiation to the moon would be an hour and a half to be a little over 30,000 miles would be if a 30,000 miles thick and you're going 20,000 miles an hour and say 25, well, he said 20. No. Well, and if you're you start out at 25,000 miles an hour, but you slow down earth gravity. So at the time you're traveling through the Van Allen belts through the outer part, the thick part of the Van Allen belts, how fast would it be going? I don't remember exactly over 20. Yeah. 20,000. Well, then that would put you in there for an hour. Roughly. You'd be in and out of the corner. I think of it. I don't remember how thick they are. Well, according, that math would suggest that that's about an hour in there. Right. Maybe a little bit more. Yeah. About an hour and a half to the moon, hour and a half back at 20,000 miles an hour, but then there's a contradiction. If you're going 20,000 miles an hour with inertia, you'd be at the moon and a little over 10 hours rather than three days. The clip is slowed down, right? Don't they slow down? Once they allegedly, once they got to the moon, obviously, they were going to the slow down to land on the moon. Now, may I say something? Yes. Okay. So you leave Earth orbit. You're in Earth orbit. You got to accelerate the leave Earth orbit. I don't remember exactly the figure, but you accelerate to Earth. Then Earth starts slowing you down. At what point does it start slowing you down? As soon as you shut the engine off. Okay. Once you're out beyond the end, you had enough velocity to get out of Earth orbit and go straight to the moon or you got shot out in front. It's like being a shotgun shooter. Here's your aim in this way, but here's the target. By the time you get there, in orbit. I mean, you get there so you can get into orbit. I lost my train of thought now, but what so it was never a problem with us about being in the Van Allen Bells. You go through so fast, you don't get that much radiation. You guys never had a conversation about what trajectory to take through the Van Allen Bells because they can be thinner at the top and they're wider at the equator. You guys never decided we got to go through it at this angle or that angle. Never, crew had no say. Got it. Mission control major trajectory. You weren't aware of it at all either. Oh, yeah. We have a new one when we were going through the Van Allen Bells. You did know when you were going through the Van Allen Bells. Okay. I don't remember exactly, but we had decimeters and a spacecraft and they must have read something, but I don't remember the details. We have a clip 14 of Kelly Smith of the Orion Project, which they said the radiation ratings were classified. Here's a video of a new generation of NASA astronauts. We saw one saying they intentionally destroyed a technology for the first time in world history. And here we have the young guy in his twenties saying that the belts are dangerous radiation and the technology to go through them has not been invented yet. And this is from 2004. This video is about to play from 2014 during the buildup to the Orion missions, right? Mm hmm. D14. We are headed 3600 miles above Earth. 15 times higher from the planet than the International Space Station. As we get further away from Earth, we'll pass through the Van Allen Bells in area of dangerous radiation. Naturally, we have to pass through this danger zone twice, once up, and once back. We must solve these challenges before we send people through this region of space. We must solve these challenges before we send people through this region of space. We must solve these challenges before we send people through this region of space. Okay. So he said we must solve these challenges before we send people through this region of space. So the radiation protection is a challenge that has yet to be resolved. We must solve these challenges in the future before we send people through this region of space. So the challenges of the radiation have not been resolved and they must do it before they send people through this region of space. So that right there. That's where I never went through the moon. Well, what do you make of that though? What do you make of this astronaut in 2014 saying that we're not going to be able to say that we have to solve the challenges of radiation before we send people to the vanilla belts? What is your reaction to that? Through the vanilla and belts? Is that what he's saying? Does he say through? Yeah. No, he said into this region. I believe he said, I wouldn't want to orbit it. He said through this region. Can you play it again? Can you say it? Can you play exactly what he says again? Do you say through or through? We must solve these challenges before we send people through this region of space. Is what he said. Yeah. On to the moon. The project is Orion, which intends to send people to the moon through this region of space. Was Orion, was that the objective of Orion? The send people to the moon? That's right. It was the precursor to armatists. So it's all about Google. Google is the objective of the Orion missions. The objective of NASA's Orion mission was to transport human crews on deep space missions, starting with a return, starting with a return to the moon under the Artemis program and eventually extending to Mars. Orion is designed to provide long duration crew support, protect astronauts from deep space radiation, and handle high speed re-entry into Earth's atmosphere. Mars makes more sense because you're going to be out there for way longer. Well, look at article, well, he's talking about just through this region of space, which is the Van Allen radiation belt. Yes. We must solve the radiation challenges, which means they're not solved. And then he says before, we send people through this region of space. So if they haven't been resolved yet, then the Apollo astronauts didn't go through them. Well, it's just so right there. Definitely mouth. It's definitely, I'm not saying that the astronauts never went to the moon. I'm not in the middle here. But it is very weird that a guy in 2014 would say we have to solve the problem of the Van Allen belt's radiation before we go through. it's odd, right? Sounds like to me as odd, but we did it. Right. Okay. Well, that's why I'm saying you did not. Obviously. Where did two hundred pounds of moon rocks come from? Did you show you? A von Braun picked him up from Antarctica. There's a picture of that on the web picking up lunar meteorites before he went to the moon for the first time. Seems like a weird use of this time. It's proven to be fake and according to a contractor that I spoke to at length, he says NASA has ceramics lags, which can mimic moon rocks. Now go to link 15 as we stay on the radiation. This is an article from Reuters that says radiation prevents travel to the moon. That's slide number 15. Well, I walked on the moon. I don't know if anybody else, but I'm John. That we know that we have been staying it for 56 years and you're not going to make your guilt. Nobody who has, you know, brought the trial for just trying to. We're just trying to make it through each piece of evidence and trying to rationally analyze what it means and let the audience decide. And a lot of this I realized you haven't even seen yet. Like obviously you hadn't seen that video that guy in 2014 saying we have to solve these issues, but it's weird. And that's the case he's making. This is some of these videos that we're playing are some of the reasons that people are questioning it. Go ahead, play it. Do you know how fast you're going when you leave Earth orbit? How fast? Guess. 25,000 miles per 3,000 miles. You said 20,000 miles. He said no, Bart. He said no, Bart. He did not. He said that they were going 25. I think 25 or something like that are 30 when they were leaving Earth orbit and then they slow down and there's different speeds along the pathway along the the journey. Okay. Well, let's read this article and heading and what's your way. You leave Earth orbit. I think it was 25,000 miles an hour. You accelerate the 25,000 miles an hour. You leave Earth orbit and then from there on you start slowing down. Right. Okay. And then when you get to the moon you accelerate because lunar gravity takes over and you accelerate. And so you're going too fast when you get there with your round and bring you home. So you put the engine hit the front and you point in direction you've come from and you burn the engine six minutes or so to slow down to get into lunar orbit. Okay. So at 25,000 miles an hour and side something 30,000 miles thick is over an hour. Oh, no. Our 15 year. You're not going that fast when you get to the moon. Okay. But you said you went through the Van Allen radiation belt at 25,000 miles an hour. But then you slow down. Okay. But that's not the issue. The issue is you were inside the belt because they're 30,000 miles thick for over an hour. An hour and 15 minutes going through the moon and an hour and 15 minutes coming back would anyone survive getting an X-ray for an hour and 15 minutes. Charlie survived. Well, if that's one of the reasons why he didn't read this article. What's keeping us from Mars space radiation says expert. You want to read that because you're blocking me? What does it say? I can't see because of the play thing. Go ahead. Take it from the top and hit play. It says Washington Reuters by Maggie Fox Health and Science editor. Cosmic. Okay. Cosmic rays are so dangerous and so poorly understood that people are unlikely to get to Mars or even back to the moon until better ways are found to protect astronauts expert set on Monday. So if the radiation is too severe to travel to the moon today with superior equipment, how did you go 50 years ago with inferior equipment? We did it. Well, we know that. You've been saying that for six years. What are you aware of? What are you? Which proves proof you didn't go through the radiation. Charlie, what sort of what went to the moon? We picked up moon rocks. Was there any sort of special shielding or materials used on the exterior shell? Or the hull of the spacecraft to protect from radiation? Nothing. Okay. Now, do you remember? These 16 is a quote from Van Allen who discovered the belts about the magnitude of the radiation. Play D16. Here's the guy who discovered the belts. They're named after him and read what he says about the radiation. Okay. This is from Dr. James Van Allen. He said this in 1959. Our measurements show, can you hear me, Charlie? He said our measurements show that the maximum radiation levels as of 1958 is equivalent to between 10 and 100 uh, ranked gains per hour depending on the still undetermined proportions of protons and electrons. Since a human being exposed for two days to even 10 rotens would have only an even chance of survival. The radiation belts obviously present an obstacle to space flight. And then read the bottom part. But two, this has two days exposed for two days to even 10. They were only in there for an hour, a little over an hour each way. We'll reach about underneath it. So, okay, 10 to 100 rotens per hour averages to about. for an hour, a little over an hour each way. So, it reads about underneath it. So, okay, 10 to 100 roadkins per hour averages to about 10 to 100 roadkins per hour, averages to 50 per hour. Okay. At the claimed speed of the Apollo craft, this is not James Van Allen saying this. This is somebody who else who's saying this? Well, this is the person who wrote the article. Okay. So, this person who wrote the article said that, at the claimed speed of the Apollo craft, this would be two hours in the radiation to the moon and two hours in the radiation back from the moon or 200 roadkins. Since 10 roadkins, over two days will kill you, which is 0.2 roadkins per hour, the radiation belts are 250 times a lethal dose. So, that's one reason. Okay. And your website, where do we find this? What's the purpose of this discussion? This is saying, this is Bart is claiming that James Van Allen himself said that the amount of radiation that you would get traveling through the belts would kill you. He said this in 1959. How fast would be? He's saying how fast is he say we're going? It just says the amount of time. He's talking about the amount of time. He's saying two hours. Radiation is built based on strength and time of exposure. So, he's saying the Apollo astronauts. I think of the belts? 30,000 miles. The Van Allen belt is 30,000 miles thick? Yes. Google it. Let's Google it. How thick are the Van Allen radiation belts, Steve? It may be more than that. They keep claiming they discovered extra layers of it that actually add to the thickness. So I'm supposed to be dead. Allegedly we went through the belt. But let's check his pulse. So we didn't go through the Van Allen belt. Let's see. According to Kelly Smith, you did not. This says all these challenges before you go through the thickness of the Van Allen belt varies. The inner belt is from, okay, don't tell me all this. Okay, this says the outer belt is for 8,000 to 37,000 miles. So they fluctuate. But at the maximum 37,000 miles thick. That means you guys would have had over two hours of exposure to the belts. Did James, did the Van Allen belt, did he say that the radiation belt would go? Well, this is Google AI. It's going to be biased. Yeah. I mean, how does it know Lincoln was the 16th president. It was programmed to say that. Right. It's reading. It's reading from other articles. Now the next issue, yes. This is anecdotal stuff. We have to acknowledge that the vast majority of anyone writing about the Apollo missions or any government agency is going to say that James Van Allen didn't say this and Google AI is pulling from this overwhelming amount of stuff that's written online. So that's that's one reason why they can't leave Earth orbit. And another reason is they don't have enough fuel. And my book, Moon Man, on page 149, here's a von Braun saying it himself. There's not enough fuel to leave Earth orbit. Let's hear. Let's hear that. Let's hear that. Let's see. Let's see. But to do this, we would require a vehicle of such gigantic proportions that it would prove an economic impossibility. Calculations have been carefully worked out on the type of vehicle we would need for the nonstop flight from Earth to the moon and return. The figures speak for themselves mathematically. Three rockets would be necessary. And each ship would be taller than the Empire State Building, 100 stories. The polar rocket was about 30 stories and weigh about 10 times the tonnage of the Queen Mary or 800,000 times, times three. The Saturn five way 2,500 tons. That's a difference of 30,000 percent times three. Now go to clip 18 and you'll see that Elon Musk just said Bart, Bart, pause. Where did you get that quote from? It's from his book. A voyage to the moon written by von Braun. Is there a way we can find that quote on the internet? Probably. I mean, we got Bob on old copy of his book. And it was written by him and quoted by him. So if it's on that nasty. It's not the purpose of this discussion. You don't know. The purpose of this discussion is that we didn't go to the moon. Hey, you're allegedly. That's what I mean. If you're acting like you don't know, just prove that you're acting during the interview. So he's not the only one who said you need multiple fuel trips to go to the moon. So von Braun, he's saying von Braun himself was quoted saying that the Apollo emissions would need multiple fuel three rockets each one 30,000 percent heavier than the Saturn five rocket. And then Elon Musk said about six months ago, if you go to clip 18, he said the Starship, which is three stories taller than the Apollo rocket. And with the boosters on the side carries twice the fuel as the Apollo rocket, he says it will take 15 launches or the equivalent of 30 Saturn five rockets in order to leave or Thorbit. We even have a video clip of von Braun saying everything, the best rocket he can build can only leave or Thorbit. Let's play that clip. Let's play the clip of von Braun from the horse's mouth. Let's get what he's saying. What clip number is that? Let's see if you can find it. That one I didn't include, but how can we just go to chabrell.com. I don't understand this. I don't understand this conversation. Well, reason you get it. I understand. I understand that's your position that you did it and you went and you walked in the moon and you brought back the moon rocks. But why would von Braun say that it was impossible to get to the moon without multiple fuel trips? I don't know. I don't. I don't know what clip it is. But in the meantime, while you're doing that, wait, wait, wait. You're getting too far ahead of yourself. We're here. Now where do we go? Scroll down. Keep scrolling. Keep going. Keep going. Keep going. It's fine. Maybe you can find them there too. Maybe you can find it on YouTube or something. Yeah. Deciding not to bring it, but von Braun says the largest rocket that we can build into a Disney film can only achieve earth orbit. He says it word for word and a quote from my book. And now we have Elon Musk. If you go to the clip of a beast 18, he's saying the very same thing. Look at D 18. Read this headline and read the highlighted part. Okay. This is a headline from spacepolicyonline.com. Okay. At least 15 Starship launches needed to execute the Artemis 3 lunar landing. SpaceX will need to launch at least 15 Starships to execute the Artemis 3 lunar landing. NASA said today. So NASA said, so SpaceX will need 15 Starships to execute it says NASA. Starship cannot waste the fuel. It cannot fly directly to the moon, but must refuel in earth orbit before setting out for deep space. Yeah. That's what the clip of on Braun says that I didn't include it that you can go to the moon if you do multiple trips of fuel and ferry the fuel first. And now you're going to love this next clip. Go to clip 19. This was said less than a year ago by a rocket scientist who works with NASA. And he says it's going to take possibly more than 15 trips of fuel in order to leave earth orbit and go to the moon. So we did do it. It's what you're saying. I don't know why you're going back. You're just proving you're acting. You know, you came in here and reminded me of a phone call we had 20 years ago when I said, I approved we didn't go to the moon when I found the footage. So who's this guy? In how people communicate about it. Like there's some architecture problems that people are unwilling to talk about these days because of how they got there politically. And I was like, you know what? I just want to go say the thing that nobody's saying. So that's what I decided to do. Now, a lot of people I respect when I was doing my research and asking these questions, they said, be careful, Dustin. If you say certain things, this might change your relationship with NASA forever. And I thought about it. And I decided, you know what? This is the truth. And this is what needs to be said. I did not understand until this week when I really thought I was going to embarrass myself in front of you guys and then decided to further embarrass myself in front of you guys. I didn't realize that in order to get the human lander to the moon, we have to launch a bunch of additional rockets to tank up in low earth orbit. I didn't know that. And I'm like, well, how many rockets do we have to do that with? And they're like, pause six. And then I start because who is this? I need to rocket scientist building rockets for NASA. What's his name? I don't know. That's the purpose would be important. That guy, he's a YouTuber, he has a channel called Smarter Every Day. Smarter Every Day on YouTube. Okay. So he's saying it's going to take multiple. Let's finish playing the video. I know people, I start calling people. I was like, dude, really? How many rockets is it? They're like, well, boy, law often. Okay. So I was like, some people were like, well, it's looking like eight. I was like, eight rockets. We have to fire eight rockets to fire one rocket to the moon. And then they're like, I mean, that's what they're saying, but it's probably more like 12. Really. And then I was like, you know, I'm an engineer. I know how to do this stuff. So I started to account for like nominal schedule slip and boil off. And this is how many rockets it's going to take to fuel up that thing to get it to the moon. I've done the math if you have any questions. I found the von Braun clip. It's D 17 there, Steve. Okay. Von Braun says the biggest rocket you can build can only achieve earth orbit. You need multiple fuel trips to go to the moon. Okay. Says it on camera as well as in print. All right. This will be good for Charlie to see. Charlie walks this one here to reveal a plan for a trip around the moon is a chief of the guided missile development at the United States Army's Redstone arsenal, Dr. Werner von Braun. A voyage around the moon must be made in two phases. A rocket ship taking off from the Earth's surface will use almost all the fuel it can carry just to attain a speed great enough to balance the pull of gravity. Unpowered, it will then keep circling the Earth in an orbit outside of the atmosphere. This is the first phase. However, if we can refuel the ship in this orbit with fuel brought up by cargo rocket ships, it can set out on the second phase. The trip around the moon and back. So three people just said, von Braun said it twice that you have to make varied fuel trips to have enough fuel to leave earth orbit. You had him say it on camera. You had Elon Musk say it and you had a rocket scientist building rockets for NASA saying it. I just discovered this because he is taking the Apollo launches on faith. My bank web page says that my money is backed by the faith in the United States government that kills their own presidents, kills their own soldiers and fakes moon land teams. So Charlie, what do you make of that video of von Braun saying that that you would need to refuel in earth orbit to get all the way to the moon? Because it would take a, he said it would take all the fuel in the rocket to get that orbit around the earth and then you would need to refuel again before going to the moon. I've never heard that before. Actually, they built a Saturn five. And a Saturn five lifted, lifted off. And the third stage that you state attached to the third stage and you were on the front end with that with the command model service module lunar module. You fired out of earth orbit and you started with the moon. So that's the end of the Saturn five. I'm the right S4B. Okay. It opened up. Pedals opened up and exposed the lunar module. You separated the command service module and then beneath it, these flowers opened up and they and exposed the top of the lunar module. So you made a 180 degree turn and you came back in and you joined up with the top of the lunar module. That was the docking ring. And you you docked. You latched all the latches made sure you were connected correctly. You hit a switch, you hit a switch and you of some sort and it released the lunar module. And then you just backed it out with your reaction control system in the command service module. And then so that was the condition you went to the moon in a barbecue, sometimes in a barbecue with the lunar module attached. And we went into it to check it out, make sure there was no leaks and any other. And but then we closed it back up again and then we didn't go in again until we got into lunar orbit. We got into lunar orbit and John and I I was the first one in and I put on my space suit, except for helmets and gloves and took those with me and then we went into the lunar module and I started powering up. And that I forgot exactly how long that took, but it was several revolutions and John came in and when we got ready, we put on our helmets and gloves and pressurized to make sure these everything was pressurized the suits to make sure everything was okay. And when everything passed, we just I forgot whether manually hit the button or we hit it was manually. And he just released us and we just backed off. Well, von Braun, in my book Moon Man, he said that these numbers are mathematically irrefutable. The numbers speak for themselves. Things become more fuel efficient over time. So it's taking a tremendous amount of more fuel to go to the moon now than in 1969. Von Braun said it's impossible twice once in writing, once on camera, Elon Musk with a rocket that carries twice the fuel of the Apollo rocket says that you cannot go unless you make 15 fuel trips first, which is an equivalent of 30 Saturn 5 rockets. And we just heard a rocket scientist say he may get in trouble with NASA for saying this, but it's going to take 15, 20 up to, you know, 28. I counted all of them in the graphic. Yeah. 28 clips to go to the ships to go to the moon. The next three clips I have are people like Kelly Smith and Don Pettit modern day astronauts. And they say the farthest they can go is earth orbit. This is clip D 20. And they hope to eventually go to the moon play D 20. It's real part when it comes to the what's the point of this discussion? We did not go to the moon. You're just digging your whole deep for every time you say that general. So Bart when it comes to wait, wait, wait. So Apollo was all faked. According to Bart, yes, it was all faked. It was a big prop of propaganda campaign during the Cold War. And so we had 260 something pounds of moon rocks that were brought back there all fake. I guess Bart hasn't seen them, hasn't analyzed them. Yeah. You remembered word for word to telephone conversation. We had 20 years ago. And at the beginning, not recorded. And somehow you can't remember what we said a half an hour ago that the moon rocks are fake. We showed an article. Von Braun picked up hundreds of pounds and at the article right before the Apollo mission and according to a contractor, they can manufacture them. Go to clip D 20. Yeah. Let me make it. Yeah. I was in delusion for two weeks. I was on the moon for three days. Well, you say you have top secret. Just a minute. And I picked up 200. I think we picked up a couple of hundred pounds of moon rocks. And we brought them back. They've been analyzed their moon rocks. And so I don't understand the purpose of this discussion. What are we going back and saying Apollo was a fake? Why doesn't Apollo astronaut have top secret clearance? I didn't have top secret clearance. Oh, okay. I thought you said that. Clip B. I mean, we had nothing in Apollo that was classified. I did have a clearance from a military of time when I was before NASA. And I did have a top secret clearance then. Okay. Clip D 20 is a modern day shuttle astronaut saying the farther staking goes, earth orbit and they hope to eventually go to the moon. D 20. Let me look at it. So when it comes to the evolution of rockets and technology, it's not necessarily that the Saturn rocket would be impossible to make. Like it wouldn't be physically impossible. But an argument would be that it's logistically impossible because today in 2025, we don't have the same machines. We don't have the same talents. We don't have the same trades that we had that were available in the 1960s. Because they worldwide it. The world has evolved. The economy has evolved. We do things differently now. Objectives have changed. Now we're focusing on building reusable rockets. So the Saturn was not a reusable rocket, right? So now we're trying to save money developing a new style of rocket. So that would be a compelling argument to why we haven't gone back to the moon is because we build rockets differently because the objectives have changed. Well, all I know is what Elon Musk says for a rocket that can carry twice the fuel of the Saturn 5 Apollo rocket is going to take 15 launches to a fuel station first in order to have enough fuel to leave earth orbit to go to the moon. He said it. The rocket scientist just said it. Ron said it on camera. Ron said it in writing and we're about to look at a shuttle astronaut who says the farthest they can go with the technology we have is earth orbit and they hope to eventually go to the moon. That's clip D21. It's real short. So that's smarter every day. That's that YouTuber that's murder every day YouTuber. He was at a context. It sounds the way it does, but he was here. I'll pop it up here. So he was his name is Destin and he was talking about how poorly planned the current moon mission is that they and he was pointing out that this particular Starship HLS, which is the return rocket. This thing right here. It is so heavy that their their plan isn't going to work out. So he did to math with the current weight and and he's and that's why he said it's not going to work out. You need all these rockets. So here's the weight of this thing that they want to build. This is a different a different rocket. This is the one that they haven't built yet, but they want to. It's 100 tons. Okay. And then the original Apollo lander was 30,000. No, no, no, the moon lander. Oh, the moon lander was 35,000 33,000 pounds. The rocket to leave us. Let's talk about the lander. This is the lander. So to have a sad rocket carry just 35,000 pounds is nothing. That rocket cannot carry 100 tons. So what is this? The dry empty weight of the Starship human landing system is approximately 100 tons. So they're saying that this rocket would need to carry something. That's 100 tons compared to the Apollo lander, which was 33,000 pounds. Yeah, that's the that's the that's an important important context. Well, Von Braun, I don't know anyone who knows more about it than Von Braun. Well, I was talking about 33,000 pound lander. That with this astronaut that you just showed us talking about talking about all the refuelling, you have to understand the context that the lander that they're talking about shooting off into the moon was 100 tons according to this. So that would be something we need to the moon and 57 years. I would go just as efficiently as humanly possible. And for the first time in history, technology was destroyed to lunar modules, schematics, the original video. Right. We've talked about this and how the destroyed right again, you don't do that unless you're covering your tracks. And we have Elon Musk saying it's going to take 15 chips. See how that guy saying it's going to take up to 28. I had Von Braun say, okay, Von Braun was the designer of the center, try rocket. He says it's going to take multiple fuel trips to go to the moon. If that's what it takes today, then that's what it would take then despite the design because Von Braun was talking about the lunar module. He's the one who ended up designing all of that stuff. And he says that equipment is going to take multiple fuel trips to leave or Thorbit. Right. Again, this thing weighs up to 100 tons. They're trying to bring to the moon. So back then when Charlie went to the moon, allegedly, the goal was to beat Russia. Right. All they cared about was getting man on the moon to show the world that America was the number was the world leader in technology and science and was more superior to Russia. Right. And you could make the argument that the primary goal of the Apollo missions was to just show the world that we're better and just show that we can actually physically put a human being on the moon. Right. Now, right. Right. Doesn't mean it would have to have been fake. What it could mean is that we just wanted to get people on the moon no matter what we could do it with the most efficient light equipment possible. Now if we wanted to go back today in 2025, we would have a different objective. We would want to get more done. It wouldn't just be about putting a person on the moon and broadcasting that to the world. It would be about something far greater, like populating the moon or something like this. So it would require different technology. It would require bringing different things to the moon. And it would also require maybe not taking such a risk. Right. Like they obviously that was a big risk going there in 69 and bringing human beings there. Today, you could argue that we wouldn't want to make that level of a risk. Okay. So in writing and on camera, von Braun talking about the future Apollo rocket, the first rocket to go to the moon. That's the one he was designing. That's the one he said it would take three rockets weighing 30,000 percent more than the center five rocket. That's what he said on camera. The first rocket to the moon, which is the one they claim they used. It can only go into Earth orbit. And then it would take multiple fuel trips in order to go to the moon. That's the first one, not the current one. Right. Then we have also Elon Musk saying multiple fuel trips. We have that guy saying multiple fuel trips. That's for, you know, whatever spacecraft just to get there and land, it's going to take all of that fuel multiple fuel trips. They said it back and before the Apollo rocket and they're saying it to quote, return to the moon. Okay. The Earth orbit is their limit. That's why they're faking being halfway to the moon. And that clip we showed. Okay. Radiation. We must solve these challenges before we go through that region of space. Here's an astronaut and clip 20 saying the farthest they can go with current technology. Is Earth orbit and they hope to eventually go to the moon. Okay. Let's watch it. 30 seconds. We only can fly an Earth orbit. That's the farthest that we can go. And this new system that we're building is going to allow us to go beyond and hopefully take humans into the solar system to explore. So the moon Mars, asteroids, the moon Mars, asteroids, the moon Mars, asteroids, there's a lot of destinations that we could go to and we're building these building block components in order to allow us to do that eventually, eventually, eventually. Right. Yeah. He says, eventually go to the moon. Sure. And it's not the only one. There's two other short clips. I mean, if he's speaking, then we have three people miss speaking. The next one says, this is the beginning of humans leaving Earth orbit. That's clip D21, the beginning of Earth of humans leaving Earth orbit is what this astronaut says, clip 21. Okay. But we're also really pushing the boundaries in terms of where we're going forward with exploration. I think humans are naturally driven to do this. And this is really the beginning, the beginning, I think of human beings leaving low Earth orbit. And the next clip is from about, I think about four months ago. And astronaut for the Artemis program saying this is going to be the first time we send humans to the moon even says before it, you've got to pay attention. You may not like this or words to the effect that the other guy said. Okay. So we're going to see two. The last clip we're going to play on this topic that we're going to move to the next one. Sure. That's how I have it. Okay. This is going to be an odd answer. It might land wrong, but I'm going to try anyway. This is the first time we're going to send humans to the moon. This is the first time we're going to send humans to the moon. This is the first time we're going to send humans to the moon. Even what do you say after that? You cut it out. What did you say after that? Well, we went on talking and they passed the microphone back and forth. Yeah, but how do you know about the three hours? How do you know he didn't how do the viewers know that he didn't say in 53 years or something like that? Like you just know he didn't. You can find it. Take your word for it. I guess. Yeah, I mean, I got to do it. They passed the microphone around. He even said something to the words of the effect. This may rock the boat of the audience or whatever or something like that. Okay. All right. I want to talk about the micro meteorites. What was the threat level of like the micro meteorites when you were on the moon? The letter from what I understand is there are there's a high risk of being hit by micro meteorites right when you're on the surface of the moon. We had if they if they saw a solar flare, the only thing I remember if we had a solar flare, we would have to get back into the lunar module and lift off and then join up and point the heat shield towards the solar flare. I don't remember anything about micro meteorites. No, there was no discussion or no warnings about trying to mitigate. No, mitigate my friends. And Von Brum's book, the one that has the quote, which is called Voyage to the Moon. He says that micro meteorites would cause a catastrophic or fatal error, 50% chance every 24 hours. Thousands of them hit the moon every second. He says you'd have to immediately go into a lead shelter or a cave on the moon. He said it would cause death 50% of the time every 24 hours. There's so many of them. We made it a lot longer than that and nobody did that. Somehow 16 tanks of oxygen in that little backpack in order to be out there for eight hours at a time. To me, this is one of the most striking examples of why the moon landing is fake. If you look at the 23, this is the shadows. Okay. I'm a filmmaker. Oh, the shadows. My job is a filmmakers to make fake scenes look real. Yeah. I'm used lighting to mimic the sun all the time. Fooled out their filmmakers. They thought it was the sunset, but it was really a light. You can prove that the moon landing's are fake with this one picture because the sun being about a thousand times bigger and diameter than the earth cast shadows in the same direction over the entire earth or moon. picture because the sun being about a thousand times bigger and diameter than the earth cast shadows in the same direction over the entire earth or moon. They're always parallel. It's mathematically and scientifically impossible for shadows to intersect in sunlight as you can tell in the photograph on the left. The photograph on the right is allegedly from the last mission to the moon where an astronaut shadow goes at 12 o'clock and a rock about five feet away goes at that's a 90 degree difference from objects five feet apart indicating that at least two electrical lights are being used. You can even see a hot spot around the top. So if you want to prove the moon landing is fake, you can prove it at one photograph. The photograph on the right cannot be duplicated in sunlight. It's supposed to be 20 times brighter with no atmosphere. There's no need for electrical lighting, but obviously the one on the right was lit with electrical lighting. The shadow should be parallel. They're intersecting at 90 degrees from objects five feet apart. That would prove it in a court of law as well as the footage we have of them being faking being halfway to the moon that they didn't go to the moon. That's all the proof you need. It's right there. People can deny it. I talk to a college professor who teaches aerospace at one of the university's most famous one he says, if Neil Armstrong confessed on national TV that the moon missions were fake, he'd still think he walked on the moon anyway. People deny the evidence over and over again. They made a god out of it. You can change the hat on who shot JFK and why you can change the hat on who did 911 and why. It's still a tragedy. This is a positive lie. And people do not want to give it up. I got an email from Carl Sagan's associate who told me privately that he believed the moon landings were fake, but he was afraid to say it publicly because of it being politically incorrect. And Carl Sagan said this, one of the saddest lessons of history is this. If we've been bamboozled or lied to long enough, we tend to reject any evidence of the bamboozle or no longer interested in finding out the truth. The bamboozle has captured us. It's simply too painful to acknowledge even to ourselves that we've been taken. Once you give a charlatan like the federal government power over you, you almost never get it back. And Mark Twain said it's easier to fool people than to convince them that they have been fooled. The problem this is a positive lie. This is giving candy to a child and trying to take it away. And people keep defending the people who are ripping them off because our tax dollars went into paying the salaries of the CIA agents that killed the Apollo 1 crew on the shadows. You can get shadows to angle toward each other in sunlight. Well, it's a fact you can do it depending on your focal length of the lens and how far away you are from the objects with one single light source. You can very easily make it appear as if shadows are aiming to kill light source. It's the sun. The sun. You can do that with the sun. I'd like to see it. We can go outside or whatever. But again, right about the lens. This is a 50 millimeter lens. Okay. Let's watch this. This is by the everyday astronaut. He made it. He made it with the people who believe we went to the world. Well, you're the people who believe we didn't go to the moon. Right. So this is a fair shake. Yeah, but shot. Oh, yeah. Let me let me say this. Okay. If they went to the moon, even though it can't be repeated 50 years later by no nation on earth, and they can only go 1,000th of far now. All right. We're talking about shot. I understand this. But here's to overall point. I understand. I understand. If if they went to the moon, then the amount of evidence I have is zero. And yet if you look up moon fraud, you get 1,001 YouTube videos by people who were deceived who have made a God out of the moon landing who if they if I went around saying Mickey Mouse was the first president of the United States, you think there'd be 1,000 videos to disprove me. The reason why there are is because there's so much emerging proof that the moon missions are fake and they're scrambling to somehow justify all the condemning evidence like a jade's defense attorney. No matter what evidence is presented, they have some excuse for it. Sure. Okay. We're going to watch this video of the everyday astronaut discussing the lunar shadows. It's full screen this because I think this is very compelling and this is a good. What seems like inconsistent shadows is a common thing for people to point to as suspect of a hoax for this. Let's take a look at this photograph that some people question saying it was shot in a studio and his proof the Apollo landings were fake. It's from Apollo 17 magazine 136 frame 2744 shot on one of the iconic hostile blood 500 EL six by six medium format cameras with a Zeiss 60 millimeter f 5.6 lens by Harrison Jack Schmidt at Mission elapsed time of 122 hours, 32 minutes and 50 seconds in a tourist literal valley. The claim here is that these shadows appear to be coming together, proving there to be multiple sources of light or perhaps a light that's far too close, certainly not the sun that's millions of kilometers away. This is one of the easiest things to demonstrate on your own. All we have to do is go out when the sun is fairly low in the sky about 15 degrees above the horizon to match the lighting conditions in the photo. Then we need a lens that would be 35 millimeters on a full frame camera or a 35 millimeter equivalent lens since the 60 millimeter lens on a medium format camera is equal to about 38 millimeters. So to get the same perspective and angle of view, we'll want to aim for 35 mill or 40 millimeters. Then we just need our camera to be placed roughly mid chest to match where the hustle blads will amount. Little play, little play. Did on the A7 LB spacesuits. It's pretty obvious that all shadows appear to point inwards towards the center of the photo. The further left or right an object is, the more this is exaggerated. And honestly, this is perhaps one of the most elementary of all things. They appear this way because of perspective, the exact same way parallel train tracks or roads appear to converge. And to prove these shadows are indeed parallel, let's just fly up and look down to confirm that they're indeed straight and parallel. Now, ironically, conspiracy theorists claim something exactly backwards. They say shadows appear to converge because it's a close studio spotlight that is roughly 10 feet behind the subject. But the closer a light source is to the camera, the more the shadows appear to line up with the camera's field of view. So the shadows actually become less and less visible to the vantage point of the camera. The dinosaurs. The light source is. Again, this is kind of photography 101 stuff here. Now, it's often claimed that there are multiple sources of light. And that's why the shadows appear to be in different directions. But the reality is that multiple sources of light will produce multiple shadows on a single subject. And actually, the lighting on the surface of the moon would be virtually impossible to replicate in a studio, even with limitless funds and the most advanced solutions in the world. Because notice that in all the images, the entire surface of the moon is equally lit. Since we don't see multiple shadows, you couldn't use multiple sources of light to try and evenly light the scenes, let alone mountains that are several kilometers away from the camera. And light follows the inverse square law. If you move an object twice as far away from the light source, it'll receive one quarter the amount of light. So imagine trying to light a scene where everything is evenly lit and you don't see multiple shadows. Your light source would have to be several kilometers away, maybe hundreds or millions of kilometers away and there have to be unbelievably bright or perhaps, you know, it could just be the sun. And what we're talking about shadows go back toward the beginning of the video where he's trying to mimic the picture that I showed, where there's that little L bracket that's painted white, which is supposed to represent the rock. Okay, go there. Okay, make that full frame. Okay, the the shadow of the little L bracket or whatever it is is not intersecting at 90 degrees. It's not pointing at nine o'clock. And the and the picture that the claim was on the moon, it is put them side by side. Plus he's using a wide angle lens, which is the type of lens they use in a drone. Well, it top of the rock is like right here. The top of the rock goes up like that. And it's projecting that way. It just looks wider because the rock is wider right there, like poking out right there. It's a look like it's. Well, I mean, compare it with the one, move this over to the left and put it side by side. Yes, the same exact thing. They're not, they're not, the shadows are not going the same direction. Okay. He's trying to mimic the all the same direction, Mark. This is sunlight. And they are not intersecting in the same way in the picture that they claim on the moon. It's not. He's making excuses. But if you look at him side by side, the object that's representing the rock, the shadow is going to completely different direction. Play that, play that YouTube video again. Play it from where it is. Pause it right there. Go back where it shows the. Okay. It looks like those two shadows are pointing in towards each other. It does not look like they are going in the same direction as his shadow. It looks like they're pointing in towards him. Well, the point is they're trying to mimic the picture that he just showed. He showed the picture that I showed right before this. The big shadow in the middle is supposed to be the astronaut and the little white L bracket is supposed to be the rock. But the shadow is not going all the way to the left at nine o'clock. The same is in the picture. But why are they converging? Why are the shadows from the from the bracket and that helmet or whatever it is? Why are they converging in and is not intersecting? If you follow the trajectory, it would absolutely intersect with the shadow. If you kept, if you kept, well, again, it's a wide angle lens that makes the picture curved, not a 50 millimeter lens, which is completely different. Look at my picture again. Parallel shadows. That's how it should look. Okay. The one on the left taken with the 50 millimeter lens. They don't converge. I understand what you're saying about the rocket looks like it looks like those shadows intersect in a few feet. You're according to that wide angle lens. They would converge or get together at some point in the great distance. That rock on the top right, the shadow is not projecting to the left. The shadow is projecting behind it. But the bottom, the base of the rock touching the ground is more narrow than the top of the rock. It gets wider as it goes out, which from our perspective makes it look like the shadows going that way. When in fact, the shadow is just wider because the light is shooting that the shadows projecting that way. But the shadow is wider than the base of the rock, which makes it look like it's going that way. But it's not. It's like an optical illusion. Well, that person has said there's no evidence that it can ever be presented that will make him deny the authenticity of the moon. So let's look at the exact opposite. No, I proved that I that I can change my mind because I went from being the greatest fan to the greatest skeptic. If you look at clip 27, let me ask me this. Let me ask you this. Let me ask you this. We're talking about the pictures. Okay. This is the smartest AI in the world that has a deep fake detector program that has never been wrong. Not available to the public. Clip 27. It can tell whether a video of Biden or Trump is a deep fake in one second. It's never been wrong. It can analyze pixels in the foreground and see whether the background is fake if the picture is lineup. The smartest AI in the world. Yes. Just said all the Apollo pictures were fake. Okay. I agree. We'll look at that. But can you concede that what we're looking at? It's not a duplicate. It's not. I mean, can you concede that that's wrong completely different? The one on the left from Apollo 17, they intersect in about two feet. The one on the right, they would eventually come to a point somewhere down the path and that's simply because it shot with the wide angle lens. The one on the left of sunlight all the way to the left is not a wide angle lens. And so you see they don't seem to converge in a point because they actually don't. Right. But if you had a light source that was closer than the sun and smaller than the sun, that would not make the shadows intersect. Do you understand that? Well, Steve, last time I was here, duplicated the Apollo 17 picture to electrical light. Do you understand that? That's how it was taken with two electrical light. Do you understand that if you have, and Steve, tell me if I'm, if I'm full of shift, I'm wrong here. If you have two objects and one light source, close to the objects versus compared to a light source that's thousands of miles away with the closer light source, make the shadows go out or make it go in. It would make them go out out. Correct. So it's not possible that it was a closer light source because of closer light source would not make the shadows converge. Well, I've been a, I've won best cinematography and I say that the picture on the, that they claim is on the moon was taken with an electrical light. And Steve, who believes we went to the moon, last time duplicated the shadows with two electrical lights. That's how it was taken. And that's how Steve duplicated. Okay. Now let's, let's forget our opinion. I think the shadow of the smart eye in the world. I think this is the worst piece of evidence because I think this is easily blown out of the water. Wow. I disagree. Let's, let's look at what the smartest AI in the world thinks about the shadows. Well, about the pictures. He said every Apollo picture, the AI, I'm assuming it's a, said that they had fake backdrops play the, D 27, where Putin was at this conference, the AI conference of two years ago in Moscow, they were allowed to play with this, you know, AI that's not available to the public, 10 AI's scroned together. And it said the Apollo pictures were fake. So either Google's $1 billion, 10 year investment produced a stupid AI or the pictures of fake. Now can we use the AI ourselves and ask it and get the answer? That's not available to the public. It was available at this conference. How long ago was the conference? Okay. Let's watch the clip watch clip 27. Well, how, how long ago was the conference? Two years ago, two years ago. So 2023 23 play it. So there will be no bias. It's surprising, but it does believe so. The neural network has analyzed a lot of data, including light and dark contracts, etc. And then I believe it's synthetic and it can vary interesting. It compared the photos to the Chinese landers that landed in 2018. And it was fed pictures of them of the lunar surface. It said they were real. Okay. Where did I get this video? I don't remember where it came from, but it got it off the internet about two years ago. Look, I, what you're saying is compelling to me, but when you're bringing the hardcore evidence like this to prove something so incredible, you have to have a little bit more than just a video with no source. Well, actually, you got it inverted. He's the one who claims on a, on a, on the moon, we're only people with top secret clearance are there where there's no independent press coverage. And we have to trust the federal government. What happened on the moon? That's, that's the preposterous claim. I understand that needs to be made. Correct. Yes. I would agree with you there as well. But what I, what I'm trying to say is in order for me to believe you, I can't just watch clips that you don't have the source for and that we also can't corroborate ourselves. That was Putin. You didn't recognize Putin there. But we don't know what he was looking at. We couldn't see the screen. And we don't know. We have no access to it. This is you in your movie taking a clip and putting captions on it and saying that it was him looking at a neural AI. I don't, I can't understand Russian. I don't even know if those captions are real. Right. So like there has to be a little bit, uh, more source evidence to corroborate what you're saying. Right. And come on, it's video speaks for itself. Look at you're going to like this. And this is pretty much the last clip, except for one at the very end clip, 28 is Dan Rather describing and you'll see the relevance, the Kennedy assassination. Mm hmm. They refuse to show the Zabruder film. They said, trust us, we'll describe it for you. So you're going to hear Dan Rather's description where he says the third and fatal shot. Kennedy's head goes violently forward that way Oswald could do it because he was supposed to be behind them. And at the, and that exact moment has had actually goes backwards indicating the bullet traveling at 2000 miles an hour, which causes the force of the head to move was actually in the front. My point is the most important event before the moon landing was the Kennedy assassination. Now we're going to show an example where the evening news said the exact opposite of the truth. Go ahead and play it. Yes. In the next instant, with this time, Mrs Kennedy apparently looking on a second shot, the third total shot hit the president's head. He can't show him to come on. Finally forward, violently forward, violently forward. So Dan Rather just making note, making note to make sure we cut that out because we can't show that on the ball. Or you could possibly show it on the white shot if you show it on a screen. Yeah, basically. So basically, I have it on my channel without a problem. They just monetize that segment or whatever. But there you go. Dan Rather, we know that we know the media in the government. Like they exact opposite of the truth. So the point is if they're willing to kill the wrong president, they're not going to have a problem faking a video image on the moon where there's no nobody there and no reporters there. I am 100% agree with you on that. Okay. Well, let's talk about I'm curious about the post flight press conference. It seems like in that first press conference after Apollo 11 with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, they seem very cold. They seem in a their demeanor seems very grim. Not what I would imagine astronauts that just walked on the moon for the first time in the history of the world. What do you make of that, Charles? I don't know which one you're talking about, but they they broke. They launched press conference. Well, they landed. I don't know whether they were still in quarantine or not. Are you talking about quarantine? It was after the quarantine when they went in front of the in front of the media. Do you remember the date of that press conference? I think it was in August, like August 23rd, 1969, something around there. Yeah, everybody is astonished. To me, the window shot just won't proves they didn't go to the moon, but other people are convinced by their expressions that they look like they're at their mother's funeral instead of the winning locker room of the Super Bowl because they're lying and don't want to lie. You also see they have two teleprompters kind of hidden in their desk to prompt them what it was like to walk on the moon for the first time, even though they're the only ones in the world who should know that. What sort of like what sort of psychological is there is there any sort of psychological effect that you could use to describe why they why their demeanor would be like this, why they wouldn't be more elated or more exuberant to describe what they just went through because a lot of people, this is one of the main reasons people who question the moon landing. This is one of the main pieces of evidence they use it. They say that these guys look like they just got brain washed or something or that they were just told to lie about something. Is there any sort of like because people, the astronauts have described particularly this effect of coming back to Earth from outer space and seeing the Earth, there's this overview effect that happens where it kind of like crosses some wires psychologically where when you get back to Earth, it's almost like nothing will ever meet the level of intensity and excitement as walking on the moon and maybe that could explain some of the reasons why all the astronauts, their lives just went into a downward spiral when they got home. They became alcoholics, they divorced their wives. What do you make of that? I think it's hard to say, they've had different reasons for leaving their wives, they're going in the buzz was sort of an alcoholic. When he left the space program, he went into a downward spiral. He'd been at the top of the list for importance and then he got out then he went to ended up as a commander of the Tuspawlet school as a colonel. He was still on active duty and then he was very upset. I don't think, I think, because he never did make general until recently he was made general and I think Air Force finally rewarded him for that. If I'm saying this correctly. Anyway, some people had different remotions of my flight though I was number 10 on the moon. Oh, sorry. It's okay. My wife. I was really exuberant. Even when we got back, I was at number 10 on the moon and it was the most incredible experience to see the moon and to drive the rover, but ride the rover and picking up rocks and seeing the beauty of the moon. It was thrilling and exciting. We didn't want to come back. We were having so much fun. They said, get back in. You guys, it's time to come home. We got back inside. Do you recall any similar feelings? What was your state? What kind of were you in a different state of mind when you got back to Earth for a while? Were there any sort of lingering psychological effects that may have affected you at all? I think it was just excitement. I'm on the moon. I'm on the moon. When you got back, when I got back, I did the same feelings that I've been to the moon. It was a thrilling experience. I'd love to talk about it. I still do. It was not life changing, but it was a tremendous experience of being selected. It was an honor to be a moonwalker. We just threw ourselves into it for two years, John and I trained. We were back up on 13 and then we helped them return. After that, we went prom crew and it was two years later that we finally flew. It was a long time to get focused on that. This is going to happen sooner or later. Two or later, we landed on a moon. It was a exhilarating experience. Awesome. We didn't want to come back. It was one of the... Look at that rock over there, John. Look at it over here. It was just excitement the whole time we were on the moon. Yet a job to do, so you had to follow the flight plan, if you will. Finally, you got outside and not outside, but your time to come back in, you didn't want to come back in. I'll give me two more minutes guys or something like that. Mission control was very adamant. You got this level of oxygen and water remaining. Get back inside. We got back inside. The objectives and the tasks that you guys had to accomplish when you were outside of the moon was over-powered. You didn't really get any moment to reflect and internalize what was happening right then and there and sit back and just take in the awe of being 200,000 miles away from that. Later on, looking back at it, it was a tremendous experience. We wanted to stay longer. We wanted another two hours on the moon or whatever it was. They said, get back inside guys, time to come home. We were late landing because of a problem with the command module. Why was it that Neil only ever did one? He did two talks in his entire life. It was one of the shy skies I've ever met and it was never, it was never look at me. I'm the big Neil Armstrong. He was shy and reserved and never really never took credit. One of the last things he said about traveling to the moon was perhaps some day. The children of the world would be able to remove one of true protective layers. The people I interviewed about him said he was the opposite of shy and tell he returned from the moon is personality changed dramatically. He was the life of the party. He played the piano. He was the center of attention at all parties before the moon mission. Then afterwards something in him changed. He refused to give interviews unless a president asked him to. And the last time one did Clinton, it's a clip in my movie at subrell.com on the homepage. He says perhaps someday to the children touring the White House, you'll be able to remove one of truth's protective layers. And that's what we're trying to do today. Did you notice that at all his personality changing before and after? Nothing. He got shy or I think. I always took it. He didn't want to want to take any credit for this. He happened to be first on the moon, but anybody could have been first on the moon. Basically. He was just scheduled to be on Apollo 11. So they that could put him first on the moon. Buzz Aldrin wanted to swap places with him. So Buzz was the first on the moon. Oh really? Yeah. But he didn't do it. The hatch near was on the left side. And the hatch was underneath the computer, the instrument panel in the center. And the hatch opened towards the little module pilot. So the guy on that left side had to get out first. That was it. That was it. Just the way the hatch one opened. Wow. Yeah. You would just think being the first man to walk on the moon. You would almost be pushed more into the public spotlight. You know, because he was shot. He really was after he returned to became shy. Right. After what after he returned to the people I interviewed said he was the opposite before the gory. He really was. After he returned to became shy, right? After what after he returned to the people I interviewed said he was opposite before the glorious person, life of the party, people, he played the piano everyone surrounded him at all parties. I never remembered him like that. No. Did you spend a lot of time with him beforehand? He was, uh, forgot what I was involved in. Apollo eight, uh, Apollo nine, no, not nine, eight, 10, 11. Okay. So I, uh, those crews and then I was back up on 13 and then flew on 16. Mm hmm. So I was, uh, I got to know him and, um, and, uh, buzz was a different, walked a different drum. I felt Neil was very shy, but very competent. He had a tremendous background in test pilot, uh, experience, uh, when he was at it was air force base. And he was just really short. And, uh, but he was an all-shuck scotter guy. Do you think it's possible that the federal government or NASA would have in preparation to going to the moon? In case something went wrong with like the cameras or the film or something like that, or maybe even like a catastrophic failure and you guys weren't able to make it. Do you think there's any possibility that they would have shot some sort of footage on Earth to basically show the public to boost public confidence and to, to prove, to show the world that we did go to the moon? Even though we did go and we didn't have the actual evidence to show, maybe it might be better to have a backup plan as far as the footage goes. Because maybe the film wouldn't survive going through the radiation or there would be some sort of problem with the cameras or something like that. That was never, never any discussion like that. That, that the astronaut office was part of. Sure. It's my part of the astronaut office. But like, but it's deep outside of your personal experience being an astronaut with the astronauts. Obviously, the astronauts weren't. Their number one objective was not media and documentation. But do you, outside of that, do you think there's any shred of possibility that there would have been a backup plan as far as getting some footage on Earth? No. We, and that never entered anybody's mind. No. That I know of. I was involved in Apollo 10 to support crew backup on Apollo 13 and flew on 16. And it was never any discussion of, well, let's fake this. If, if, if, you know, whatever happened, we're going to fake the landing. That discussion was never had. Let me ask you a question about that. Let's just say, use your great mind and imagination for a moment. If I'm right, let's just say, we're in a different world where the federal government did fake the moon landing for military reasons or whatever. What do you think those reasons would have been? I can't imagine doing that except for prestige. They say face. Let me put it that way because Kennedy said they'd go before the end of the decade. Yeah. And we made it with all the evidence that with all the stuff that Bart's presented to us today with the footage and the interviews of on Braun and all all the other stuff, can you put yourself in somebody's shoes? Can you could you put yourself in barch shoes or a dumb, dumb like me, my shoes, who wasn't there? I'm not an astronaut. I have no experience flying any kind type of aircraft. Being presented with some of the stuff that Bart's showing and say, oh, there, maybe this was, maybe this was faked. Maybe this was because it was done in the Cold War. The government was constantly lying during the Cold War, faking pretext to get into wars, doing mind control experiments. Like, yeah, there might be a possibility that that this was faked if you're not yourself, if you're, if you're me or if you're bar. I mean, you believe it. Thank you. I want. If you think it was faked, you think it was faked, that you can show the evidence of one faked. Well, about that, there's an interesting scripture in Joshua. God told Israel not to make a peace treaty with any of the nations surrounding Israel. And the one that nevered them knew that. It says, when they have anance of gimme and heard that Joshua, what he had done to Jericho and AI, they worked craftfully and went and pretended to be ambassadors from a faraway land. They took old sacks on their donkeys, the fake evidence, fake moon rocks, old wine skins that were torn and mended and old patched sandals on their feet. They even brought bread that was deliberately moldy. Yeah. That's smart. Yeah. So they provided fake evidence, didn't they? Yeah. Nothing's new under the sun. Jesus also said that there are people who claim to be Christians or not. They come in sheep's clothing, but inwardly, they are wolves. Yeah. And so just because someone claims to be a Christian doesn't mean that there are. Yeah. Jesus was said to have been sent to the lost people of Israel. So everything he said was to the church at the time and to those people, he said, why does the gate to the believers to the church? And why does it to destruction and most believers don't make it the way to life is narrow and only a few find it. And I know that when I was baptized, I was baptized based on Ash chapter two, which says repent and be baptized. Right. One of the people who was killed that was not shown was James Irwin. James Irwin contacted the leading investigator Bill Casey. He was before me tracked him down after Bill Casey went on Oprah. I said the moonlannies are fake. James Irwin, Apollo 15 astronaut contacted him and he said he had become a born again Christian and they needed to talk about the book he wrote about not going to the moon. He said, I'm concerned for my safety. Please call me at this number three days from now. And on that day, James Irwin had a fatal heart attack. So to be truly converted, you have to confess your sin. If you've been lying your whole life about the moonlanting, you have to tell the truth about it. It says and and Titus about false Christians. They claim to be of God, but indeed they don't show it. I understand. Yeah. So, you know, that's, that's, you know, the issue here really, it's a spiritual issue that mankind's greatest accomplishment is named after Lucifer. It's interestingly, it's in Revelation 911. It says that one of the names for Lucifer and Greek is Apollo, the great liar. And what how ironic of a fallen world that the most powerful nation on earth that claims to be the most righteous that kills their presidents, fake wars, killed their soldiers, right? Fakes moon landing. The greatest accomplishment of man is a lie. My film starts out with the tower of Babel. Jesus said to start a tower and to not finish it. You're calling yourself a fool. It was done to boast to say, faced. We will build it to show off is what they say in Genesis 6. Never finished. Then we show the Titanic with the headline that they put in print, the ship that got himself cannot sink. And we know what happened there. And then Richard Nixon, when you had the president of Japan and the president of Germany and France, they're at the long side. President Nixon doesn't show up because he's afraid to lie will unravel. He showed up for the next launch once they got away with it. And he said, putting a man on the moon is second and greatness only to God making the universe. You see, faking the moon landing is a blasphemous thing. And in law, there's a law that says if you're in a bank robbery where homicide is committed, even though it's by one of your partners, you can be a part of that. And people were murdered. We just saw 15% of the Apollo astronauts were murdered. James Irwin was murdered. The Apollo one crew was murdered. Cyrus Eugene Acres said he murdered somebody. So you're part of that too in some way. Had you come to the hospital? How many percent of the Apollo crews were murdered? Well, they had, they had, quote, fatal accidents all within a 24-month period. 15% of the Apollo crew and backup crews. And so if you had a McDonald crew, go through those incidents. Well, you could play the clip again or remind them. Do they show the pictures of the astronauts? Now, if I was, you know, a run over McDonald's and 15% of my employees had fatal accidents within 24 months, I think the homicide police would be all over the place. And then the leading critic, Baron, he wrote a report to give to Congress about how they were a decade or more away from going to the moon instead of two years. They report disappeared and he was found dead on a train crossing after he had received death threats. That was an old CIA trek for getting rid of forensic evidence before they had DNA testing. They kill them, put them on the train tracks on it, destroys all the evidence. So not only did they fake the moon landing, the federal government is using our salaries, a third of them to deceive us and to pay the salaries of CIA agents who were killing our brothers and sisters who were trying to expose the moon landing fraud. So all of the moon landing were faked? You said 20, when you walked in here, you remembered a conversation we had word for word, 20 years ago and you know that I'm the one who said we didn't go to the moon. And yet you've said at least 10 times since we've been here, you're surprised that that's what I'm saying. When Danny, I didn't remember that conversation. You call it a word for word. Well anyway, I don't remember quoting you that, that we did not land on the moon. You said that I called you up and said I have irrefutable proof that we didn't go to the moon. Danny called you up and said you're going to debate somebody who thinks we didn't go to the moon. And yet 10 times you've acted like you're surprised here, just acting. And I'm sorry, there's no Nazi war criminal whoever turned himself in. They act like a benevolent grandfather when they're guilty. None of them have confessed, none of them came forward and they're still guilty. And you're the same way. Buzz Aldrin said accidentally one too many times he didn't go to the moon. He was asked a few years ago, why have we not been back? He says because we didn't go. And if we didn't go, we need to know why. And now that he's tripping over his tongue, they bring you out instead. Since I did Joe Rogan, so many people are being converted to the truth. And you're here to put out fires because if I climbed Mount Everest and some guy wanted to debate me, I would not waste my time. You're here to put out all these fires. If all these people saying it'll take multiple fuel trips to reach it to the moon, multiple people saying the radiation belts are dangerous and the technology to go through them hasn't been invented yet. The truth is coming out. What would happen if the truth came out? It would be a big embarrassment for the United States government. And embarrassment for you. And all the other surviving Apollo astronauts who have built the reputations hired a CEO of companies for a lie. And that's the way that it is. We live in a fallen world. And people are expect to believe you on face value because he claimed to be a Christian when Jesus himself said the majority of people who claim they're Christian are not saved. So if you were truly converted, you would repent, but you're not. So, repent of what of your lie, your lifelong lie of your going to the moon? Obviously. So anyway, I have one last way to man. Wait a minute, you're saying that nobody landed on a moment. You know that. I don't know why you're at needs to. Okay. So wait at all the moon rocks. So I'm from four times. So we've already covered that. Okay, Bart, real quick, you said that a 15% of the astronauts die within 24 months. That's right. Of Apollo one. Well, prior to the Apollo program prior to the first launch to the mount, oh, they died prior to the first launch. Correct. People. How can my opinion who would not cooperate with the fraud like Gus Grissom? So how will we ask the internet? We can say how many Apollo astronauts died from died period before Apollo one. That was researched done by Fox News. And the program conspiracy theory did we land on the moon? You can only see it at subrell.com. It's one of the clips available within this says 24 months after Steve. You would have to type in how many of the Apollo era astronauts died in accidents. Well, I'm quoting Fox News. I understand that. But I want to I want to cooperate it with Chuck. You want to ask how many Apollo astronauts died in accidents before Apollo one three. Yeah, Fox News says there's more than that. They're including the backup cruise as well. Okay. Well, how how many Apollo astronauts and crew members or anybody involved in the Apollo program died before Apollo one? Again, that's Fox News. We have Betty Grissom. Right. But it's got Grissom. Chuck B. T's better than Fox News that she'd be able to pull up the evidence, right? Well, again, how does it know Lincoln was the 16th president. It was a program to say so it's not completely reliable. It's reliable. It's Betty Grissom and Scott Grissom who told me he was Gus Grissom. Their husband and father was going to be the first man on the moon. He was a whistleblower at NASA to such a degree that he got Secret Service Protection up until the day of his death. And they both say he was murdered by the CIA. So why is the CIA killing Apollo astronauts? Right. We were whistleblowers at NASA. That's not my opinion. That's the opinion of the dead man's relatives. Right. And then we have Cyrus Eugene Acres, who was there. I witnessed seeing the faking of the moon landing in 1968, who says he killed a coworker to cover it. Okay. So he was a security guy working at a nurse. The chief of security and you're including him in the 15%. No. I guess you'd have to add that to it. They're talking about Apollo astronauts and back up crews. Okay. We're so sure they know how to count. How can we find this Fox, this Fox thing online? On my website on Subreald. How can we find it off of your website? It's not available anymore. It's not available anywhere offside. You're an off your web. Okay. So again, I think Fox News knows how to count and divide on a computer. If they said it's 15%, I'm pretty sure it's 15%. So and I think you've said this before. If we did fake it, if we faked Apollo 11, why wouldn't they just say, okay, we went to the moon, wash our hands of it? Why would we fake it five more time? Because the government is greedy. My first military source who told me the missions were fake said it's all about the money. $250 billion in today's dollars to go to the moon when they only achieved Earth orbit. That means they can keep about 75% of that. Tins of billions of dollars. I guess what is, you know, 25% of $250 billion, that's what they spent and they kept 75% of it. For who knows what to go into Cambodia. Congress said you can't use funding to go into Cambodia. We know they did. Where did that money come from? The Apollo program. Just like now, they said you can't give technology to China, but they're doing it anyway. They're breaking their own laws according to someone who works in the command center of the Chinese space agency. So if you believe in God, pray for the truth to come out. I pray for you. I have no animosity toward you at all. I might have done the same thing under your circumstances. I regularly pray for the astronauts and I think it would be great if one of them came forward. The problem that the general is facing is there are more than one person alive associated with the Apollo program. If only one person claimed to have walked on the moon solo, they probably would have told the truth by now. But if he confesses, he's ruining the lives of other people. Why would I lie that I walked on the moon? For a number of reasons because he can't have made the boast and it couldn't be done in the safe face. Plus it embezzled a couple hundred billion dollars and the federal government already proved their arrogance. That's why, you know, it just dawned on me that went six times. They faked it six times. That's how arrogant the federal government is. They killed their own president according to the dead man's relatives. They faked the beginning of a war that killed 58,000 of their own people. And they're ruthless. But what about the lunar reconnaissance orbiter that corroborated the landing sites? Well, that's a NASA lunar record. You're asking the Fox to provide. And it's didn't steal the chicken. Steven, I sent you something about it about the lunar reconnaissance orbit. It was lunar LRO is a university of Arizona. It's not an understanding. Right. I was under the impression that it has nothing to do with NASA that it was corroborated by another agency out of Germany. Um, yeah, yeah, yeah. Play this. No, another every day shout out to every day astronaut. The lunar reconnaissance orbiter was launched in 2009 and began mapping the surface of the Moon as close as 35 kilometers from the surface. And guess what they found on the surface of the Moon. That's right. The Apollo lunar landing sites. Well, actually, as captured every human-made object, including Soviet lunar cottirobras and crash sites and all sorts of incredible images. And these images have so much detail. You can clearly see the lunar lander descent stage. You can see footprints and rover tracks. But what's really cool about these images from the lunar reconnaissance orbiter is you can compare these 21st century photos to video and images taking during liftoff from the Moon of these missions. And you can literally align them and confirm that they're identical. Let's take the liftoff of Apollo 16, for example. It has great contrast and it's easy to see lots of detail as it ascends. It's pitch over maneuver also shows the descent stage and some footprints as well. So we can overlay an image shot from the lunar reconnaissance orbiter and compare them. And look, they're identical. Nothing has changed since there's no wind or atmosphere to disrupt the lunar soil. I just absolutely love. How did they do that? Well, they fake the picture. Duh. I mean, they already have a full body picture of Neo-Armstrong or Buzz Aldrin, allegedly standing on the Moon that was filmed in Canada for a space. So what is it to fake a little, a little shadow or whatever and claim it went to the Moon? Most of these things, a pixel is 30 feet across, one pixel, 30 feet across in these pictures. So they have crystal clear pictures of a guy standing on the Moon. Again, we're asking for the fox to provide evidence to steal a chicken. Sure. What is the Charlie, is there anything else that you would like to say to people to my audience, to Bart's audience that are on the fence about this and that think that, you know, some of Bart's points could be compelling who aren't convinced we went to the Moon. What is your, I think the evidence is overwhelming. We went to the Moon. There's 600 pounds of moon rocks. They're totally different with the radiation history and things like that. There's pictures like LRO showing my rover, showing the decent stage on the Moon, the footprints. There is other evidence such as that. But there's a lot of things that prove that we went to the Moon. And I would, to me, the evidence is overwhelming that we really did go to the Moon. We landed six times. And I think the photographs prove it all. And if you're going to fake something, do it once and shut up, we kept going. I'm sorry to make money from the taxpayers in the air. We didn't make it. Nobody made any money. NASA would have a budget. That was $50 billion. This is a lot of money. And if you only do it or it's worth making a lot of that. Well, the CIA has a big budget. Everybody, state department has a big budget. And more. To scientific methodology, a preposterous claim like cold fusion has to be independently duplicated. No nation on earth, including the United States, is able to repeat the Moon landing. That's, I mean, that's like saying we did cold fusion. But for some reason, we can't do it 50 years later. We destroyed the technology. We did six, we did six landings. Well, you claimed who made six landings. Yeah. Okay. Money, money, money. Right? So I'm sorry. The rocks that we collected were different than the rocks at Neil Armstrong collected. Hmm. We should get those rocks in here and analyze them with an expert. Well, you get arrested by the FBI. Is there anything five year old woman thought, is there anything that would possibly convince you that we did go to the Moon? Why, you should believe it. I'm saying, no, no, no, I know you did. I know you used to believe it. But I'm saying, is there any new evidence anyone could hype at user imagination? Is there any evidence that anyone could bring here to convince you that we did go and that your life's work has been futile? Well, if you can put me on a rocket that they can't even build 50 years later. So even if you go to the and send me to the moon, we're building it, Artemis. Well, you post pond returning to the moon in 10 times. President said they're going to return to the moon in five years. 10 times. I've heard that. And they're, and yet they can't do it. Yes. And so since it leads to the rocket that can go to the moon, I'll pick the Apollo 11 landing site. You know, there is a probe from an independent company that was going to land there and verify and NASA forbid it. So send me to the moon. Send me to the Apollo 11 landing site. If I see the lunar lander there, I'll publicly say we didn't go to the moon. I've proved I've had an open mind. I went from being the biggest fan. Works should be in a shrine in my house of Apollo 11 pictures to being open minded and then gradually realizing they did indeed fake it. I mean, a guy who builds rockets from NASA told me they faked it. And so I didn't want to believe it. I found that footage of them faking being halfway to the moon and I had to admit it. They did fake it. That's why they can only go 1000th the distance today. That's why they can't go through the radiation belt. That's why they need the equivalent of 30, 7 or 5 rockets to have that fuel to leave Earth orbit. It all falls into place. What we have is no independent press coverage. The word of two people who have top secret clearance and photographs that have already been clearly faked. We have an eyewitness who saw them film it at Canon Air Force Base June 1st, 2nd, and 3rd of 1968, even confessing to killing somebody to cover it up. So they're willing to fake a full body picture, a little shadow of footprints in lunar module. I don't think they're going to have a problem with that. I tell you the truth looking at it as a professional cinematographer. It looks like that lunar module was based it on there. But that's just me. Well, I don't know whether you send everybody else for the meeting or the moon. I'll stand by that. I love it Charlie. Well, hey, man, thank you so much for doing this. This has been a fascinating discussion. I learned a lot. Bart, thank you for your time and for making this happen. I'm really looking forward to seeing how the public takes this and they will decide what they want to believe. But thank you guys. This has been a pleasure. Very fun. And Bart, Cybrell.com. People can find you there. Yeah, it'll be in the link in the description of this video. Oh, well. Well, you did last time. That's what you said. That's what you told me you would. And anyway, it has all the video clips there. They can look at them. I may upload separately all the clips that we've done here and just labeled them to bait clip one through 30. Okay. Let people decide for themselves. Okay. Charlie, is there any way people can get in touch with you if they want to Charlie do calm Charlie do calm. Okay. And subrell.com. And charlie do calm and subrell.com both linked down below for folks. Thank you guys again. That was very fun. It was pleasure. Thank you very much. Very interesting discussion. Very interesting. Good night everybody.