Joe Rogan, fine. The Joe Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. I was talking to a father and said I can make you guys. You know what's a good thing about you? You never smoked them down to the filter. What a good kid. And what a great family. I went to a great family. My sister smoked when we were in high school. I was like, God, why are you smoking? It's so stupid. Yeah. And I had to do a play once with Adam Ferrara and a couple of other people. And I had to, I was supposed to play this something that a bunch of comics wrote, like funny little stuff. Yeah. And I was supposed to play this like a tortured liberal art student. And it was like smoking cigarettes. So they wanted me to smoke cigarettes while I was doing it. So I smoked like 15 fucking cigarettes while we're doing it. And I would throw up. I had a fucking horrible headache. I was like, oh my God, I'm so high. Wow. My arms don't move right. If you've never smoked cigarettes at all and you just smoked 15 in a row during, were you like an athlete too? Oh, yeah. Oh, so that totally fucked you up. Oh, completely fucked me. Yeah. No, the first time I had a cigarette, it's so terrible. But I was like, this is great. My body responded. I don't know how like what you had is the very normal experience. It was just too much. One cigarette I actually liked. I was like, whoa, what a head rush. This is kind of cool. I go, now I got, I kind of get it. I get why you guys liked this. Interesting. But I had, we were doing this thing and I had to always be smoking. So we had a rehearse. We were doing it all day. And I wanted to try to like feel normal with a cigarette on hand. So I kept smoking them. And then I liked them. So I kept smoking them. Yeah, it's, it's a tough thing because the thing about, and I've been sober 15 years from alcohol and drugs. And I look at people that are really drunk. It doesn't look appealing. It doesn't look good. But when you see somebody with a cigarette, it always looks good. It always looks like, you know, it always looks good. You never say to yourself like that person's going to lose. Now you'll get sick and die, but you never go. They're going to lose control of their life. Right. So you look at somebody with a cigarette and you go, oh, yeah, they're having one. They're cool. It's fine. They're using it to help hang on. Yeah, I never look cool with it. It's like you look at an actor doing it or someone at like the console on the ball. Yeah, someone like that. Yeah. Timothy Shallowman has one. He's the size of one. And he has one. And I go, this is my probably a France or something. You know what I mean? They will do shit like that. So you'll see that. You go. You should get a cigarette holder to go with your sunglasses. Yeah. You're just sitting right. And cigarette holders. Yeah. That's your next move. I just got it on stems with the cigarette at the end of it. Like 1920s. Yeah. Like 1920s. And now it's it's it's the worst thing because the smell is terrible. Right. And it destroys your clothes. And it's very bad for your health, obviously. But it is one of those things that it's just such a good product. What other product could they tell you? It kills you. And we're raising the price every year. How about an England where they smoke like crazy. You have actual cancer on the fucking cartons. When you buy them and I was in London and you bought one, there was like a dead baby on the photo. Well, they were like low birth weight. Yeah. I was like, this is terrible. And not cares. They smoke more over there than anywhere. They smoke more over there. They don't eat the way we eat. Like they don't understand the way we eat. But they don't get it. There is there are there's something called Toby Carvery. Where you can just like just lay the lawn, Sunday roast and Yorkshire pudding and stuff. But for the most part, the portions are smaller. And people are more behaved in that sense. But they drink more and they smoke. Mm. This is it. European World Cup fans losing their minds over Taco Bell, ranch and unlimited refills. Yeah. Oh yeah. Because they get sick when they come here, they get sick. Because there's chemicals in our food. Somebody was telling me they went to buggies. And there was the soccer teams were at buggies for the first time. And they just fucking couldn't believe it. Of course. Imagine that's your first one of the first experiences you have in America. You walk into a buggies. Yeah. And you're from Czechoslovakia or some shit. It's one of the most American places. As you've said that exists, you have this gas station. But it's also like a weird theme park of food. And all kinds of other shit that you could need. Yeah, this guy, dude. LMAO. This is a gas station. Yeah. What do you see how big they are? Yeah. The first 24 million views, that's hilarious. No, it's completely alien to their culture. Yeah. To have a place like that. Where you could go buy the Costco's or alien to them. The idea that you could buy mayonnaise in a bucket. Or jars and things that you would keep like, you know, it's all they all think we're preppers. Because if you go to like a big grocery store chain, you're buying food for a long period of time. They don't do that there. They buy stuff for like the week. They have small refrigerators. Yes, small refrigerators. Yeah. Couple of days. They don't have refrigerators like we have. But also they don't have the same amount of preservatives in their food, which is why it's not poison. Right. They also don't think, and they could be wrong about this, but they also don't think that like they're going to lose access because of some race war. You know what I mean? Like there is a little bit of planning that goes into some of these grocery runs that does seem slightly paranoid. Oh, yeah. Well, the news media over here ramps you up. Yeah. And you know, yeah, start thinking about stockpiling gold. Oh, yeah. Yeah. Well, when I lived in LA, when my kids were young, I had an apocalypse truck built. Right. That Toyota Lancars are got. I specifically, I go, I need a bug out truck. Like a truck where I could store a lot of shit in it, and they could literally drive over a mountain. That's what I need. I need a car that's not just a road car. I need a car that occasionally ship my go sideways, and you got to get the fuck out of here, and you got to drive through the desert. Wow. And I've left LA multiple times to make that drive, not in an apocalypse car, but because of fires, because of riots like sometimes you've got to get out of dodge. Three, I got to evacuate at three fucking times when I lived there. And it got us close to like burning my fence down. at LA experience to get in a car. David Spade called me once during the riots. He goes, your block is on fire. I thought he was kidding, but there was just overturned cop cars on fire, and it was like riots. So I just got to make money. I went, okay, I drove to the desert. That's part of the LA experience is fleeing. That's what Palm Beach is. Yeah. Yeah. The Palm Springs. Palm Springs right there. Yeah, the Flea. Yeah, you Flea. Go. I mean, Palm Springs makes no sense. That's fuck, there's no water. Because when Paramount Pictures was doing edits, if you were in a movie, you had to be within 200 miles until the movie was finished editing. It was in your contract. Palm Springs is like exactly 200 miles from LA. Oh, that's what you're stealing. That's what they started. Hollywood, that, you know, they were like, we own you. You can't go anywhere until the film was edited. So if you want to go on a vacation, you have to go there. You know, it's interesting. He's like Pasadena was where all the like producers live. Yeah. There's beautiful houses in Pasadena. Mid-century modern beautiful. Yeah, incredible places like it states that just seem completely got a place totally beautiful. And from another time from another time. Yeah. Well, that's the thing in LA now you get the vibe that your Santino made a brilliant point. He's like, it's not Hollywood. It's Hollywood this sequel. Mm. Like you're not living in the thing anymore. You're living in whatever the second version of the thing is. Right. The second version is TikTok. Yeah, whatever it is. It's not, it's not what it was in every place seems a little bit like a museum or like it was cool 20 years ago or 15 years ago. You know, somebody recently said this and it's perfect. They said, LA is slowly becoming Detroit. Interesting. Yeah. The only thing that might save it is the weather. The weather will help with the industry dried up. So the big industry in Hollywood regardless whether or not it's the biggest economic industry, the biggest industry in terms of like cultural value and getting people to move there was always show business. Yeah. And that's they barely make movies anymore. They over taxed and over regulated their biggest industry to other states and other countries. Yeah. And most people are making things all over the world. And very few I think at one time it's like 80 to 90% now it's 25 30% shot in LA. Wow. It's a big difference. That's a giant difference. Well that that arrogance of like this is the best place in the world. Everyone's going to come here no matter what. Right. That's the Gavin Newsome attitude whenever he defends California. Right. Talks about how great the GDP is. We know where the fifth we would be the fifth largest economic boom. Yeah. You know, he starts rattling off all these wonderful statistics. And this is like instead of acknowledging, we've got to fucking real problems people are moving for the first time ever more than they're coming here. Right. We're losing all these giant corporations that are elite instead of that. It's just this where the shit no one's. Yeah. It doesn't I'm very big on California. I'm bullish on California. Right. It's always going to be amazing here. Well, that's what every empire said until they fell. Right. Yeah. We are the thing. But I don't want to ever believe that things can fall. It's a weird. We'll walk right through the call of seeing a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a million. I got to go back to the right. I'm a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a little bit of a million. I got to go back to the left. I was up here in the last couple of years. Right. When we landed in LA. I looked to the right. And that that warehouse was on fire with 85 billion or 85 million tons of chemicals in a warehouse that was on fire was like a multi day blaze. And you're landing. And you're looking at the window and you're just seeing the warehouse on fire. there now, but like as I was going to my apartment, there was a car on fire. And I was as I was landing the warehouse was on fire. And you sort of thinking to yourself, somebody doesn't want us here. Like somebody wants us out. Like it almost feels like we're being evicted by nature by nature. And just a living human nature by bad decisions by everything, which is nature. Yeah. You know, human nature is nature. And the stupidity of humans is it's no different than the stupidity of animals when they go extinct. Do you think it comes back any shot, any chance? Something has to happen. Right. Something big has to happen. I mean, there has to be something that completely shifts the way LA looks at itself. You know, it has to look at itself as like a functioning business instead of a giant scam for nonprofits. Right. It was a big part of LA's problem is there's a bunch of people that are in the empathy industry. Yeah. And they're in the, you know, we're working for this and we're working for that. And it, a giant chunk of their money is going to that kind of I did a great show at oceans in Atlantic City, which is a casino there. And the owner of that casino was talking to me. And I said, what would fix Atlantic City? Because Atlantic City has some similar problems to LA, but vastly worse. Yeah, we were. And, and he was telling me goes, we have just a high amount of people and a lot of social programs in one area. So you have a lot of people that are not for whatever reason productive. And they are living in one area and everything that comes along with that, which is crime, which is, you know, vandalism, which is, you know, disorder to dip varying degrees. And he goes, you need to get rid of that in order to have a climate where businesses can thrive. 100%, which is what happened in New York in the 90s. People hate it. They don't want to admit it. But what happened in New York in the 90s was like, they did clean up a lot of the crime and a lot of businesses and felt better about investing. 100%. But that's what Giuliani did. That's what he did. Yeah. And he's demonized. He's demonized. He's, he's, he's demonized. He hasn't. He's one of those guys where if he had just done that and died, his legacy would have been amazing. But he's hung around for a while. And he's kind of gone into some interesting tangents. So it's one of those scenarios where it's like, how do you just clean up New York City? And then love public life. It would have been like that guy. Right. But he hung around a little bit and you know, got involved. They always have to hang around. They always have to do. It's what you're going to do shows. That's what's going to do. Stand up. That's right. It was going to do shows. But he did such a good thing. And then it was like just, yeah, just exit. Who's also, you know, he was easy to make fun of like the time we was sweating and his diet. Well, that's what I mean. You know what I mean? He's melting. He's doing the part that I was kind of in a parking lot. Don't die here. Yeah. You know, 100 years old. It's okay to have gray hair. It's just these guys. There's so much silliness on both sides. You know, there's some there's silliness on the left and silliness on the right. There's goofy people because the only kind of people that want that kind of position of power are a little goofy. Right. You don't get the best and the brightest and the most enlightened that want to be the mayor of New York City. It's not not the job. You get a lot of people that want power and they want influence and they, you know, and I think a lot of that the AI stuff, which is very interesting, is starting to, I think it. I don't know how quickly it will do this, but I do think it's going to, it's going to lessen some of the cultural divides. And I think it's going to potentially unite people because it's, I think it's going to be the next fight seems to be about surveillance, privacy, your, your own rights, what rights you'll have. Like I feel like that will be, it might take precedent. Instead of like these cultural fights that people have been having for a while, it might be like people might be demanding autonomy, you know, from artificial intelligence. The problem is going to be if you can't demand, if you, if you don't have a voice anymore, and this is the potential nightmare scenario that we're seeing play out slowly in England. So in England, their freedom of speech has been suppressed to an alarming point where people are not freaking out nearly enough about it. The amount of arrests that people get over there for fucking retweets and likes, retweets and likes. That's so crazy to me that you could get arrested for liking a tweet, arrested, not even retweeting because we all know if you like your piece of shit, you should retweet. We all know that. It retweeted. So, and if you're going to go to jail, you might as well retweet it anyway. If you're going to get locked up, what if you're actually here? It is for a retweet versus a like. I'm sure. You're out of my client just like this. They were confused. They hit a button. So as soon as you have people that feel like the reality of the world they live in is not being represented and they're not allowed to complain about it online because if they complain about online, they get arrested. Right. Now it's for immigration primarily. This is the right one. But that could change. That could change. Well, it does seem to be that they they feel that there was a decision made by somebody that the public can only discuss issues in a very rigid way. They can only offer there. You like the if not everyone who's talking about immigration is doing it in the most articulate way, but is there right to do it? It's their country. They should be able to say, um, I'm worried about increased levels of immigration. You know, and they should be able to say that in, in, in an in eloquent way. Right. So what they're doing now is they're policing certain words and I think certain ways of speaking and they're calling a lot of things, uh, an incitement to violence. Now something's clearly are an incitement to violence. But you know, the internet people speak in a colorful way. People talk using irony. Some people are trying to be funny. Some people are so I think the way that they're doing it over there is there. They're basically looking at these statements and going, this person is inciting violence and threatening the public good by what they're saying. Right. And then there's also people were getting arrested for saying that they were rape gangs and there were and there were. There were. And so this new report, who released this new report that said a quarter million people? It says UK scraps, police probes of legal social media posts after review says response went too far. So this is, uh, April 1st, 2026. Uh, but I just saw a thing about a guy getting arrested like a few days ago. And we have rape gangs here, but ours are more successful. I think that's a legal social media posts is which weird. So legal social media posts, right? Their law is different than our law. They don't have freedom of speech over there. Right. Seitment to violence is a violation of their law. Right. So when it says legal, it could just be they went too far for things like cartoons or something like that. That's not clearly not an incitement of violence. But would it find out Jamie what that report was about the rape gangs? I was just there for 21 days. I was in London. I went to Paris for a couple of days, but I was in London primarily for 21 days. And you talk to different groups of people and London is a global city. It's a cosmopolitan city. It's like New York. And you know, I think one of the things that, you know, they're, they're used to diversity there. And so they're not full on panicked about different types of people coming in. But there is undeniably a real problem outside of London, also in London, but outside of London, because a lot of the economy is stagnated. So you're bringing people in. It's not clear immediately what jobs they'll do. And a lot of their culture is very greatly from the English culture in a, in a meaningful way. And that could be the rights of women. That could be the rights of gay people. That could be the opinions about freedom of speech. That could be freedom or religion. Whatever it is, there is a cultural tension there between, you know, immigrants, migrants coming in. And this, the very established society that's been around for a very long time. This episode is brought to you by the farmers dog. Here's a fun fact. Research shows that dogs who maintain a healthy weight can live up to two and a half years longer on average than dogs who are overweight. Isn't that wild? And also kind of obvious at the same time. So why is feeding vague scoops of ultra process kibble still the status quo for most dog owners? Healthy alternatives exist. And trust me, I know I buy one the farmers dog. I use it for both my dogs. They love it. They eat it up quick. It smells good to them. It smells good to me. It's human grade food. The farmer's dog makes fresh food for dogs. And my dogs love it. Their recipes are made with real meat and fresh vegetables that are gently cooked to retain vital nutrients. They also portion out the meals to your dog's nutritional needs, which helps avoid overfeeding and makes weight management easier. And isn't getting more time with our four legged best friends, something every dog owner wants. The answer to that is yes, obviously. So try the farmer's dog today and get 50% off your first box of fresh, healthy food. Plus get free shipping. Just go to the farmers dog dot com slash Rogan. This offers for new customers only. Like we were talking right before the show. Is it about Dearborn? Is that we're a Dearborn mission? Yeah. So we're a bunch of really progressive people. It's amazing. Sure. Bring everyone in. Everyone, everyone's welcome. And so they got enough Muslim people in there where they could vote in a mayor. And then this guy says, yeah, more pride flags. No more pride flags. Yeah. Yeah. They're inching towards what they would like, which is Sharia law. If you ask for sure, most people who live in these Islamic countries. Now again, if you're asking them, they're probably under duress. They're probably terrified of saying the wrong thing. Right. So you've got to factor that in. But at least a percentage of them. There's things Sharia law would be a great idea. I think there's certainly a yeah. I mean, and this was covered up to a lot of the grooming gang scandal there. Yeah. So we're looking at it right now. It says this is on national review, the UK's horrific rape gangs. So this, but there was this. The rape gang inquiry report, right? So who put this report out? Members of parliament and restore Britain party leader Rupert Lowe. And so the investigators had limited power, such as inability, inability to compel witnesses or require a sort of document production that could cooperate some of the most heinous victims viewed with those limitations in mind. The independent report is a damning collection of victim testimonies that vividly portray the sexual terrorism that occurred nationwide for decades. Oh, Jesus Christ. Yeah. This is terrible. I mean, obviously, I mean, the, the thing that I said, it was 250,000 girls. And this was covered up because the media didn't want to inflame anger against, you know, population of migrants. Right. Most of whom I'm sure were innocent of this, obviously, obviously, but it is something that, you know, in a free society, everyone has the right to know if there are rape gangs in their country and who's operating them. But in that crazy that in the under the guise of progressiveness, yeah, even able rape gangs. Well, 100%. It's crazy. But it's also incredibly, it's not shocking because the ends justify the means approach of politics seems to be what we're doing right now, where is basically if the goal is to just eliminate, you know, whatever, whatever it's being called like this patriarchal white male dominated society. And if you want to get rid of that, and that's the end goal, a lot of people ignore what happens in the middle. Like a lot of people aren't super concerned about whose rights are being respected in that process because their end goal really is to kind of decrease the power of people they disagree with. You know, so I mean, it's like, you know, it's hard to look at this and not see a design. And I don't quite know exactly where the design comes from. But it's it's odd that this is what happens stance because everybody knows it's happening and people are afraid to talk about it. So I would imagine that at some point, you know, for example, like countries like Ireland right now that are having lots of issues over this, it's, you know, the part of the EU and the EU would set migration policy for Ireland. So the EU is a supernatural organization that would basically say, here's how many migrants you have to admit, here's your carbon emission standards, here's your, you know, monetary policy, whatever it is. And Ireland is kind of in that sense, they feel like they're losing their sovereignty. They're losing their ability to chart the course of their own country to a super national organization that's that primarily seems concerned with the economics because if you bring in more migrants, you can artificially grow the economy, which is what they're doing. A lot of people in Europe are not having children. So a lot of these economies are run by people that are not really too concerned about the cultural landscape of bringing migrants into looking more about how do we grow this economy? How do we get cheap, you know, help and, and how do we get workers? And a lot of it is you're, you're getting third world migrants. Some of it's genuine refugees for sure. But a lot of its economic migration, people are coming for better life, hard to blame them. But do the people that live in those countries get to have a better life? That's a question. If you lived in Ireland, do you get to have a better life? Do your economic prospects get to grow? Do your children get to own property? Do they get to have health insurance and a job and things like that? And it no one seems that concerned about that. Like these, these citizens who've lived forever in these countries, whose grandparents have fought and died in wars to secure the freedom of some of those countries, you know, Britain, UK, you know, things like that. Those citizens seem to not be as prioritized as people coming in from other countries. And that's one of the big problems that they're having there. Well, it's, it's, it's really interesting to watch because if there is a plan, I mean, it's not interesting. It's kind of horrific. But it's, it's interesting in both. It can be both. Sure. If there is a plan, like whose plan, whose plan and who's benefiting from this? Like, why, why would you do this? I think it's a small group of people that concern themselves primarily with economic matters that don't care that nation states have cultures and histories and customs and that doesn't really, that doesn't bother them as much. Um, and they're, they're basic, they're basic, you know, responses to just deal with it and to call everyone a racist who questions it or to say everyone's, uh, jingoist or F no centric or anti-immigrant or whatever, they shut down those conversations. And I think it's because a lot of people believe more in a global world. And they don't believe in a world of nation states that have their own ability to govern themselves. They want to take that power economically from those people. And then eventually they want to take it culturally and every other way. So they just want to go around the world and say, here's the way every country will look. Here's the economic policy of every country. And if the people in those countries don't like it and they express, you know, that on social media, they're going to get kicked off. And if they organize in the streets, they're going to use, you know, military authority to, to fire water cannons at the mercy of them down or use gas or whatever. And if there's a genuine resistance movement to some of it, they're going to infiltrate it and turn it into some psychotic thing, right? Which they do all the time. Right. So it's hard to see it. Not to sound like a paranoid nut job, but that's what I am and how I've made by living. But I think it is clearly someone's design. This is in happenstance. None of this has to happen. We don't have to invade countries, sponsor, coups, steel resources and then like, drench our communities in guilt and say, now we have to bring all those people here and you have to deal with it. None of that has to happen. That's, that's a strategy of a group of people that want to keep perpetuating this. Do you think it also has a one of the factors might be that they want conflict, the more conflict people have in the streets, the less they're going to pay attention to what the government's doing? Well, 100%. I also think the more chaos in the street, the more likely you're going to be willing to accept new laws, new technologies. And you're going to just say, I want peace. And I don't care how we get it. I don't care how we achieve it. Yeah. And I think that's very possible. But it does feel like it's, it's on the road a little bit to where people want a uniform standard across. But as you've said earlier in this, it's very interesting because this uniform standard is supposed to include non-binary art students in Vermont and religious Muslims from North Africa. Yeah. Good luck. But I mean, that's, but it's amazing that the people that would be most opposed, the people that like, if you do bring those people and the people that they're going to hate the most are the people that want them in the most. Yes. The ones are most likely to say we shouldn't have some border that keeps some person coming here and no person's illegal. And the people that want them in the most, I think, are not even the people bringing them in. They're being used. They're being your suicidal empathy. Their empathy is being weaponized. It's being used. That's a lot of people. Right. So people that are manufacturing this reality are using those people. These are the same people who really don't care if people in this state over have health care. Right. These are people that haven't spoken to their sister in two years. Right. And they care a ton about people in the Ukraine or people that are coming over from Syria, whatever. But we fucked up Syria. We put that guy in who used to be an ISIS. We got rid of Gaddafi. There's slave markets in Libya. Right. So we did that. We sent refugees all through Europe. We destabilized all of Europe. And you know, you can't take us out of it. You can't take Western powers out of it. You can't take Israel out of it. You can't take the US and Britain, France, and a lot of other powers that have destabilized these countries and sent these people. You can't take Israel out of it. You can't take the US and Britain, France and a lot of other powers that have destabilized these countries and sent these people flooding through Western countries, European countries. Yeah, fun. It's going to be a fun next 50 years. It's kind of crazy when you see images of France. There was a video of France from 1998 from Paris. Yeah, versus today. They showed like 1998 and then they showed 20. It's a different thing. Listen, some of that's inevitable. The world changes, different groups of people. But then you're looking at Ireland. This guy just got Beheadiv in the street, which I'm against and I think is wrong. Headed some guy, a migrant who had been brought in, had beheaded or damn near Beheadiv. Try to. There's a video of that. Now Belfast, it's probably quite a doubt now, but they were like tremendous riots. They were like burning things down because they're like, we never got a vote on this. We never got a vote on bringing the people in. Yeah. We never got a vote on that. No one ever asked us how much demographic change we wanted in our country and how quickly and what we were prepared to do. No one ever asked that. People don't like to admit it, but an armed population, it's much more difficult to pull things off on a problem. 100% and that's another part of the problem with the UK, with Ireland always places. It's very difficult to have a good diversity. Also relies on a very productive economy. So New York City works to the degree it does because people can go out and get jobs because the economic reality of the city is that it can support a lot of people coming in. There are a lot of jobs for those people, but when you have a stagnant economy, like many parts of the UK, that's a lot of the harder. It's a harder sell. Harder to assimilate people into a landscape where the people there are not doing well. Like the people that have lived there forever, not thriving, they don't feel great. Their prospects economically aren't great. And now you're bringing all these new people who also are struggling to find work. So that's part of the problem. Do you think that this is being done with a strategy knowing that AI is about to completely disrupt society? Yes. One, I believe this is what I believe. I believe no one, for example, no one's trying to get anyone in this country to own a house. People pay lip service to the idea, but there's a lot of people now, a lot of them are my age who have never owned a home and never will. And no one's trying to, no one's wants them. They've forgotten what owning a home feels like. They've forgotten what it feels like to like have a yard where you can invite people over and drink a glass of wine and smoke a cigar and watch a game and they live in a little apartment. They type, you know, they're on a MacBook, they're getting radicalized in any direction. They're upset. They're on dating apps or whatever. But they don't feel like they have a foundational core to their life. No one has really, really even given them the idea that they're going to get that. So I think that's just one of the things where people are, they're basically saying like, no, you don't need a house and you're not getting a house and forget what owning a house was. Like forget that, that doesn't matter. And I think part of this is because they know, seemingly healthcare, there's no real movement to give anyone healthcare in this country. And if it is, it gets shut down immediately. So on the positive side, you might go, well, they know that AI is coming in that AI is going to do a lot of stuff with health and it's going to help extend life spans. And but also on the negative side, they go, as going to disrupt the economy to a point where like, we're not going to have people owning homes and cars and things like that. We're going to have a lot of people without a steady income or they don't really know what to do. We're going to have a lot of wealth that's existed, a lot of capital. And we're going to have tremendous inequality. And we have a lot of joblessness. So for sure, I think that they're, they're preparing for that. I mean, there's no way you can look at the landscape because they're selling the country off for parts. And this is both parties. And this is like, they're selling it off for parts. So I mean, obviously there's something's coming, something's coming for sure. And I don't know when it is, and I'm sure the AI thinks overblown to an extent. And I think so much of our GDP depends on it that a lot of these companies are are live, but anthropics are creepy. These are creepy companies. You know, I mean, they're just creepy with the amount of power that tech companies have in general totally is unprecedented. There's never been corporations. I mean, unless you go back to like the East India corporation that, you know, you go back to the day where they had like an enormous army. Right. Totally. And they took over India and Pakistan. But if you look at what they're doing, it's very different than that. You know, other than the army part, what they have is robot armies. And then they have AI, which Elon just recently said is going to be like a million times smarter than the the smartest human that's ever lived. Right. Like this is the goal. The goal is to create literally a digital God. And it's going to be controlled by not us, not the collective human race. It's going to be controlled by select few group of people. And that's weird. Like, and we're just trusting them. Well, that's why you're not getting a vote on immigration levels. You're not going to get a vote on, you know, like, I think the reality is that eventually they're going to go, do you want safe streets? You want food. Do you want a little bit of money? You got to do X, Y, Z got to believe X, Y, and Z. You know, and I mean, that seems to be coming. And it seems like if you put people in a corner and you get them scared, though, this is what we learned during COVID, like they will back down. They'll go along with a lot of stupid shit. They'll go to, they'll go, they'll try to find comfort. And they will listen to people that they deem to be worthy. You know, they'll trust the government, which is wild. The left is the people that trust the government. Well, you have all these studies that come out, you know, this is the thing that I like. I love London and I the people they're great and they're fun people and everything like that. But they have a, you know, because they get healthcare, they get a little more from their government than we do. There's more trust in their government than we have in our government. And there's there's positive to that and there's negatives. But they they're a society of rules and customs and order. And it is a bit different. So I think they are more likely to go along with the grand plan of the government more so than the United States, where we really do question more what's happening than people in Europe or the UK. Overall. Yeah. Well, that makes sense. Right? They have socialized healthcare. They isn't their education paid for completely is an university. Yeah, they have good stuff. They have a good life. Yeah. There's benefits to that. Totally. There's like a balance to be achieved. I've always said that like in this country, it's foolish that we don't have that we don't pay for higher education. Like the more educated people, the better. Like the less losers, the better. Part of our country is, is, you know, where we we we we manufacture a lot of geniuses. We also manufacture a lot of psychopaths. That's what our culture does. A lot of social people that don't give a fuck about anything. Lots of people that don't care about anything. And it's that's the thing that comes along with the gluttony too, right? It's celebrated. And they don't even realize that that outward gluttony just inspires all these eat the rich people. The whole thing is out of balance. That's what I would describe America. If you had to describe it in three words, it's just out of balance. It's out of it's hard because we've got 350 million people. It's hard to bat, you know, and it's like one of the people in Menlo Park have to do with the people in Baton Rouge have to do with the people in canarsi. Like yeah, I get it. So we're at place. You have all these different climates, habitats, people have different interests. But I think AI might unite people because like the idea of this as such a powerful force, if people don't start getting cognizant of it, eventually and start, talking about regulating it or anything. You know, I do think it's it is going to be, you know, a very strange time if people, you know, just ignore it forever. It's going to do something weird. I'll tell you that. It's not going to be like, whatever is coming over the next 20 years, no one is predicting it. I get the feeling when you see a lot of these tech guys start adopting Christianity. I like Peter Till's like the whole anti-Christ thing. Yeah, he what is he doing? He gave a bunch of lectures on the anti-Christ. He's fascinated with it. And a lot of those guys are are moving into this interesting area of this is this is God wants this. Like J.D. Vance, who's not the worst person, obviously. And I think he's the sanest voice in that administration about the Iron War for sure. I think he's by far one of the only people in there going, let's comment down, which is why a lot of the big donors are are slinging mudded him, you know. But again, it's just he just released a book about faith or reconnecting with his faith. I'm sure it's a lovely book. Haven't read it. Fun beach read. J.D. Vance is reconnecting with his faith. Great. Inspiring. Amazing. We'll get to it. Have a read it. We'll get to it. Top tier. But you know, it's also interesting because like some of his donors are huge tech guys and it's it's all of these worlds existing together where you have this world of people who are trying to build a God and the world of people who already believe in a God and trying to get all of those people in the same tent. That's interesting. It is. You know, imagine if that's where God it comes from. If this is a natural process for human beings and their curiosity and insatiable need for technological innovation. But then what happens once we get God like once we just let's say we bring this God in then what happens? Nirvana. Nirvana. Yeah, we we all merge becomes perfect. Interest. So we all merge and that's perfect. Time. Don't worry about it. We're going to merge with the machine. Interesting. Because people do believe that at one point in time cavemen had to be looking at the wheel going, man, I see where this is going to go. Right. This is going to fuck my whole gig up. My whole gig is making weapons on a stone and tying them to a stick with tendons. Right. And then chasing an animal and sparing them. And now these motherfuckers invented guns. Right. These motherfuckers invented arrows and with every progression of techno like, like, you bow and arrows technology changed everything. Horse riding figuring out how to run a horse. Like new innovation. Right. Right. Right. A horse now. Now you can move a lot faster and get a lot of things done. So I'm going to figure out a wheel. All right, drag the wheel, put a card on it. Now we can carry stuff with us. Right. More than the stuff that you could put on a horse. Right. Got a couple horses. They pull a wagon. All right. Hey, this guy figured out a fucking engine. We don't need horses anymore. Right. All right. Let's make the whole ground everywhere hard so we could roll around with these machines with internal combustion engines. And then it just keeps going and keeps going and keeps going and keeps going. And then one day it's unrecognizable just like it is now. If you showed Australia, Pythicus, Manhattan in 2026, they'd be like, they would freak out. They'd probably start screaming. They wouldn't know what to do. They'd be horrified. But do you think like if we showed Peter Thiel 2050, he'd go, no, that's it. Like that's what I want. Like whatever 20 like, do you think the guys now have a real idea of what it's going to be? No. I think there's a lot of guesswork. I don't think it's possible. I don't think it's possible to know what these things are going to do when they become sentient. I don't think it's possible. If you if Elon is correct, if Elon is correct and there's something that's a million times smarter than human beings. And somehow or another is why would we let people govern? Why would we let people build that stupid fucking rail station in California that's how much money and it's produced? What? How much how much drag was done? Why would they let people do that when you get have AI do that? But if if something's a billion times smarter than human beings, it's going to go, we're not building a rail station for these fat Fox. You know, I mean, seriously, it's going to go, why would we build a rail station for these people so they can get trunk and go fight each other? Well, how about we get rid of them? Well, maybe it's we don't even need to do that because we can make you travel instantaneously from here to there. Great little mini wormholes all over the country. You don't need a car anymore. You just press a button and all sudden you're at Starbucks. You know, we'll do something. Yeah, I just got a bunch of stuff. I just look at technology and I go, it's made the world better in many ways, but in a lot of ways, it hasn't. And it did stop around 2014, 2015, a lot of the new things started that came in, made the world to me very impersonal, corporate sterile and cold. Yeah. And the experiences that you get now, like I, you know, there was like, if you, you know, I went with a friend of mine, we were in a McDonald's and like you order on a touch screen, there's nobody there. There's some non-year-old kid going, Hey, I ordered a McFlurry, some woman screaming at him, where's the receipt? What's the receipt? He's like, no, I need to say what there's a weirdness when you take people out of everything. You take people out of everything and then you don't also, they have no purpose, right? Especially considered the high number of unemployed people and checked out people. And then people that have whatever their job is has nothing to do with what they enjoy. So if they just do the job and then afterwards, they're just watching television all day, that's a lot of people, but they're watching their phone, playing video games. There's a lot of people that don't have any purpose. They don't have a feeling of purpose. They don't have a thing that they're connected to. But some experiences are much worse now than they were. Sure. Before they were digitized. Like I do think there was just pressing a button and getting something on Amazon as much easier, but there was something nice about going out in December during the Christmas season and like going to different places and seeing people and like the struggle of like getting the thing you want. There was something about you were expanding energy, you're walking around, you get a couple coffee, you see people. If we destroy all of that, what happens to the human psyche? That's my question. Well, if we had an anxiety meter, if we could see like anxiety, like levels of measurable anxiety over time, I guarantee you from like whatever the age of the internet kicked in. So it's like what? 94 something like that. I think it probably slowly ramped up until social media came up and then it's probably significantly higher than it's ever been before without real threats. Like just regular anxiety from reading things on your phone and interacting with things online. Well, people are very, you know, attached to this idea that they have to weigh in on everything that they have to have in a fully formed opinion on everything and the horrors of the world are on full display in front of them all the time. Yeah. And they need to then not only view them, which is scarring in and of itself, but then they need to contextualize them in a way that makes sense. Yeah. Which I think is also another level of stress. Am I a good person? Am I do I have the right thoughts about this thing? Am I being, you know, so that to me is also another level of stress. We're like, you would have never had to. There were people when I grew up that just were really good at one thing and they didn't need to have an opinion on something that was happening. I had, you know, a world away. They didn't have the knowledge. And they were forced in depression that forced into expressing that opinion. Yeah. And they were able to live in a very in a much simpler way in a much happier way with real genuine connections to people. And I think the fact that nobody feels like they're able to do that now. Like the generation that's coming up, you know, the younger people, they seem better off like the zoomers or whatever they are. They seem to be a little, they have a little, a dose of nihilism, but I think it's appropriate or a little, you know, good sense of humor. They're skeptical. They're a little cynical. They've seen all of these institutions, you know, turn out a lot of garbage. And I think they're they're into, you know, some of the crypto stuff. They're into like, you know, they're self-starters. They are, they're not institutionalists. Everyone I grew up with and the generation directly under me, they're all institutionalists. They believe very strongly that knowledge is given through an approved whether you're at NYU or whether it's the State Department or whether it's a board or whether it's an nonprofit, the Commission to study that proved to think a lot of these kids do not think for themselves. They're not kids during the 30s, by the way. And they're in the 30s or 40s. They don't think for themselves. They've been taught that thinking for themselves is bad. It's racist. Or it's, it's, it can lead you down a road that you don't want to go on. It's, um, you know, whatever. It's misogynist. It's homophobic. Like whatever questions you're asking, why are the Padres get, why do the Padres have to wear gay uniforms? Like that doesn't make any sense to me. Like as a gay person, I never said why I need the Padres to be gay. Why are the Padres gay? How does the Padres uniform look like? What they're making them wear like gay things on the uniform, like pride stuff? It's like pride stuff. I don't think it's a good deal to one their head. But I think it's like pride stuff. It's not going to play in Dearborn. It's not going to, it's not going to go well. But it's like, why is city bank gay? Why is chase, why is chase gay? What is it? Why does this help anyone that a corporation is, is trans? Why is Chobani yoga trans? What's the point of this? I don't understand. Is this get people health care? Does this make people happy? Does this satisfy it? It makes some people happy. It makes some people happy that I worry about because I just don't understand and it makes more, more people angry. And that's what he marriage is lost 11 points in support. More people are annoyed. They're like, we're all cool with however people want to live their lives. A lot of most people are. But they're like, why is my bank gay? When did my bank come out as gay? And like, I'm okay with it. What could somebody have told me? Like, what are we doing? I don't, this doesn't make anybody's life better. It is the, it is just virtuous signaling horseshit that ends up doing the exact opposite of what they want. They think it increases acceptance. It decreases it because you're shoving a worldview down someone's throat. And at the end of the day, it's like, if I went to a restaurant, for example, I have no problem with Scientology on record. By the way, I like it. I like cults. I like cults. Children have too many rights. Put them on that boat. Whatever you do. See, or make them work. Don't rape them, but make them swap the deck. Whatever they do on that boat. And I don't have a problem with Scientology. And I don't like the people who leave Scientology and then rad on it after it got them all these movie parts. I think that's fucked up too. I think it's fucked up. I think they're rats. And I know you've had some of them on. Sorry. But I think they're rats. If you are do something for 30 goddamn years and get Richard famous, shut your mouth. Have the dignity to go to your house and shut your mouth about it. Don't then try to go on your new era. Is that you're going to dime on everybody in this thing that made you rich? Anyway, but if I went, so that's just in his side. It's just an it's truly. But it's way. It's like the stomped, stomped, Tom Cruise. Yeah. Hangs in there. Dangs in. Can you imagine how gross that would be? How disgusting would it be if Tom Cruise went out and he's like, you know, Scientology's really be like, you shut the fuck up your top gun. Your top gun this worked. Whether you're gay or not, they covered it up. They covered it up. You said you did something wrong. They said, well, all to you will put you in the box. You're fine. Give us some money. Live on this mansion. It's all fine. But if I went to my bank and it was just all Scientology for the month of June, I would go, this is a lot. Do you know what I mean? So to me, I think it's like this weird aesthetic politics that people have, where they just they need to pin ribbons on themselves and go, I'm a good person. I have no problem with the polyamorous orgy happening at chase or whatever. To shut up, this whole country right now is being torn apart by people who need to feel like they're good people and they need to project their life onto other people just to just live in that lift. People disagree with you. So I have good friends. I disagree with like on fundamental things, foundational things. And I don't care. I don't care because I think they're funny. I think their lives are funny. They're bad people. Many of my friends are not good people. I wouldn't even introduce them to other people I cared about. But they entertain me. And that used to be okay. You used to be able to go, I like that guy. He's entertaining. People go, he's crazy. He was in jail. You go, eh, you always minimize. You minimize that. You go, sure he was. Maybe. I don't know what happened between him and her. Someone fell down to stairs. He's fun sometimes. And you should be able to do that. Not everyone's going to agree with you. Not everyone's going to agree with you. It's okay. You got a life is too short. No, you want that. You don't want everybody to agree. No. You want to live in a world of texture. Yes. Yeah. You want to live in a world. You want to have the joe ideas of the world. Totally. You want to have some wild people out there. You're fun. And that the problem with the generation under me is they're all very like this. And they all went to the same liberal arts schools that have taught them like this orderly way of processing information. And they're all afraid to like they like say things. They see them in a very well. Well, the well, the rape can't their gangs. Did a rape. Well, that's bad. But there's a lot of I don't know what's been proven. And there's a lot of races. Like, they just always they're so afraid of having an independent thought because they've been programmed. They're entire lives. They don't realize it. They've been programmed. They're entire lives to believe a certain set of things. And their self worth depends on those things mattering. Yeah. The school you went to, the internship you got, the corporation who's dick, you have to suck sometimes literally to stay in it. That is where they derive their self worth from. So their entire world crumbles if you challenge any of their ideas. This episode is brought to you by visible. How many of you are currently listening to this podcast on your phone? If you are chronically online, like most of us are these days, your wireless network should be too. With visible, you get unlimited 5G and unlimited hotspot all powered by Verizon's 5G network, the perks of big wireless for half the cost. Visible isn't just a wireless plan. It's unlimited wireless designed to keep you connected and no contract holding you back. Switch today at visible.com. Plan Start at just $25 a month or get our premium visible plus pro plan and save $10 on your first month when you use promo code Rogan and exclusive offer for podcast listeners. Yeah. Yeah. And it's very confusing for young people. You know, because the whole thing acts like a religion. It acts like a cult and you have to kind of go along with every aspect of it or you'll be excommunicated. Yeah. You'd be kicked out just like you get kicked out of Scientology. You get kicked out. And if your life is and it's sterile and it's corporate and it's boring. And that to me is one of my biggest problems with a lot of people that I speak to is that they seem genuinely afraid to use their mind for more than, you know, what the allotted functions are. I mean, afraid to express themselves. Yeah. They're freaking entertained thoughts in their own head. They want to avoid the punishment. Yeah. You know, it's scary punishment. Have you seen this new army hammer movie that is out now? No, but some vigilante movie. He's great. Fan of him, big fan of him. Think he's great. Love everything he's doing. And I like it. I like you can't get canceled. People come right back. Well, I don't know if he's necessarily coming back. I mean, I mean, this movie is going to bring him back, I should say. I mean, what did he say? I mean, he said he wanted to eat girls. He was the one that he wanted to eat. He wanted to eat a couple of people. You know, is that a problem? But is it real? Is it just crazy talk? Even if it was, even if it was, is it consensual or not? I mean, is it just saying wild things? Like, what is it? Listen, what is it? He was he was he was he was he was he was wanted to be accountable. That was his like fantasy. That was his kink. Now it was fake. But if it if he was in a situation where it could have been real, yeah, he would have tried to heart. If army hammer had the money to arrange this and some people in our country do, if you're the money to arrange it, he's tried to heart. Mothousand percent. And by the way, does it make me hate him? Does it make me hit him as long as a person was dead already? I'm against it. I would never do it. But if you told me this is how open I am to different people. If you told me army hammer, there was somebody died and there was a heart in army high in a hammer tried a little bit of the heart. I'd go, Hey, fine. Live and live. Do you know the story of general buck naked? No, general butt naked is a guy in Liberia. So Liberia is a part of Africa. I don't want to fuck this up. So let's be let's check on this. I think what happened in Liberia is they released a bunch of slaves from the United States and sent them to Liberia like after slavery was abolished. Right. And I think Liberia has had a series of civil wars like really crazy brutal ones. And in one of them, there's this guy named general butt naked and vice covered this guy. They interviewed him and essentially now he's a priest. He's a preacher and he gave his love to Jesus Christ and now saved. But back then, we'll go for he would talk about how he would go into war completely naked. And then they would kidnap children of the opposing army and cut their heart out and eat it for protection. That's certainly an extreme way to do it. So he did that. But then he found Jesus. So it's okay. Well, it is certainly better. And that's um, wouldn't my hands kind of do that? Or was that that human sacrifice? They did a lot of human sacrifice along with the Aztecs. What happened with Liberia? Is that an accurate depiction? I don't want to fuck this up. So Liberia was established in 1822 by the American colonization society as a refuge for formerly enslaved and free born black Africans to relocate to Africa. Yeah, there it is. Over several decades, roughly 16,000 freed known as America Liberians migrated there. While envisioned as a sanctuary, the nation later faced its own internal scandals regarding forced labor and human exploitation. Yeah, interesting. Uh huh. See if you can find that general button. Naked guy though, this guy, this whole story is fucking crazy. Is this it? Okay. Cheese. Yeah. Formed his own militia of several dozen fighting, several dozen fighters known as the naked base commandos or button naked brigade, most of whom were children as young as nine operating under the Moan, Rovia area with his unit. Hi, his name, Blahi, Blahi, I'm not sure how to say his name. Became known as wearing only shoes and magic charms and eventually adopted the nom de guer general button naked. His fighters followed his patterns of dress, which in line with his distorted emulation of anime. the nomdaguer general butt naked his fighters followed his patterns of dress which in line with his distorted emulation of animus tradition believed he could believe could make one immune to bullets to fund his wartime activities and secure a steady supply of drugs for his fighters Balahi allegedly traded locally mined diamonds and gold to Mexican drug cartels exchange for guns and cocaine let's fucking go You can scripted many of his fighters and according to some accounts lace the food he fed them with cocaine along with showing them Jean-Claude van Dan films and to Explaining that That killing people was a game in an effort to uproot the fear of death His fighters he and his fighters perpetrated numerous atrocities although the exact extent of the crimes they committed have been subject to dispute Frequently discussed the alleged atrocities he perpetrated which according to Balahi including murders cannibalism and human sacrifice He is repeatedly estimated that the naked base commandos were ultimately responsible for 20,000 deaths Acclaim which was come under criticism In he's alive now and he's really pretty sure now yeah have them all and I bet he's a lovely person That's the thing. I'd by the way. I would here is open invitation He's I open invitation. Good Jesus. He's a letter full life and there's something about someone who has led a full life This man has led a full life. There he is Looks like people just know how that's naked crazy It's a man's just seeing a dude naked was dong flopping running at you with an AK-47 with kids blood all over his face I mean that's that's I mean That's disturbing But I imagine that there are very rich people in our country seeing that and paying good money to see it One of the things that we were talking about with When before the show started yeah, we're out in the hallway. We were talking about how There's a giant chunk of the world that's fucked. Yeah, and what's coming in to England. It's not like It's not unusual for other parts of the world. You know if you go to Karachi. That's what life is chaos Yeah, which is chaos is making its way into these protected bubbles and that's it's freaking people out We live in a very privileged even even the poorest and the worst which is obviously you know It's not to minimize their struggles But if you go to any of those third world countries, you're very aware of how privileged you are to live in a Western country and You know it also makes a lot of sense why the people in those third world countries would want to leave them and go to other places for opportunity and I think Immigration's had a lot of positive impacts on America and it's had a lot of positive impacts on Britain and other countries and it's not It's not the idea that immigration is all bad or all good It's the idea that like you have to do things a certain way because you know societies are fragile This is what we're learning we're learning that societies are more fragile when I grew up that wasn't a common thought that our society was very fragile We thought it was very strong. We actually thought nothing could break us and you look at a couple years of a pandemic and Most of the downtowns of the American cities don't look the same Commerce has changed in a dramatic way The Iran War proved that you know militarily or militarily is obviously brave men and women they're amazing but like the changing nature of warfare has made Military campaigns very difficult. It's hard to look at this Iran War as a victory It's almost impossible unless you're completely dishonest. I don't think anyone is looking at it as a victory um So I think our vulnerability in you know to Threats foreign and domestic. We're more aware of that now than we have ever been how fragile societies are so when you Demographically change a society very quickly which has never happened historically it took wars Long periods of immigration now. It's overnight People have to adjust to a new cultural and sometimes economic reality That's a very disruptive thing and societies are very fragile and you've got to be very careful About how you alter and change a society because if you do it too quickly There's a tremendous backlash and you have to make sure that People want it changed that people are on board with it Not everyone no one's on board with everything, but like if you went Two a lot of people in these countries that live in the bigger cities. They would probably be very pro Immigration and and because immigration has a lot of clear benefits to them They get food delivered all the time. They have access to A wide variety of goods and services that immigrants bring a lot of them are awesome a lot of great food You know, so obviously but again if you went out into the suburbs and you went out into areas where the economies have stagnated Areas where maybe you've had scandals like this grooming scandal and things like that Um, Sweden Whose crime rate is skyrocketing because you brought in a lot of people from other places that are selling drugs and not all of them obviously, but like if you look at that and Those people have a much more negative view of it because they don't connect the benefits of it Because they don't they don't fuel them in their life. Right. They were living pretty sweet. They were living good They were living pretty sweet. They're riding their fucking bicycles and eating herring and safe out there pretty safe and doing what they wanted to do And then you know you have this influx of people You now have real poverty. You now have a lot of people. You brought in people that came from a war torn or torn country Yeah, and not everyone's gonna be general but naked who becomes a Christian pastor and is probably lovely now You probably seem an HEB you're like sweetheart Eight a few people children maybe but now it's better That guy not everyone's gonna convert not everyone's gonna be You know you're gonna bring people in that are people are products to an extent of their environment like we all are so the idea that like You know women of less rights in these countries So the courtship rituals in these countries are different The familial relations are different That's just the way it is so And a lot of people there like that So you know Why would Why would those beliefs and systems of change just because you happen to be living in Ireland? Right Why would you think Irish women or British women would necessarily or inherently get more respect Than your wives daughters sisters whatever And I'm not saying that it's all like throughout the entire Islamic world I think there's a lot of diversity in the Muslim world and there are lots of countries where There's arguments women are safer than they are in America But there's a lot of countries where that's not the case and women have far fewer rights and and it's pretty barbaric And I don't know why those attitudes would change When they are just in a different physical location This spectacular Bizarreness of it is that the really kind left-wing people Who oppose Toxic masculinity right Oppose this sort of Society that's that we're talking about this this male dominated Society like you're inviting in something that literally has that as it's doctrine Well, they think it can be tamed So here's the thing with those people they love a challenge This is the I can fix him version of it and to an extent Cultural attitudes do change over time people do assimilate to certain practices That's not a completely ridiculous thing to think but they really believe That once all of these people come to these countries and see how great it is to be a childless 40-year-old woman working in data entry at a large faces corporation that's gay on Pride Month The corporation goes gay and when they see how happy She or he or they is Living in a society where you don't own anything You know what's interesting about family. I just spoke to a comedian in one on a world tour He was in India and he was talking about how Poor people in India don't live on the street. They live in slums which it's it's better It's better to live in slums than the street because a lot of poor people are with their families and they won't cast their family out Family in America almost means like nothing like we've we've kind of we've Everything's such an individual pursuit that family means nothing and Like that's reinforced like I am an argument with my father whose wife has different political views on certain things So we haven't spoken in a little bit My cousin's getting married and I told I have a therapist now that I've had for six months who I don't know if it's good I don't know if you ever know if a therapist is good or not and I told my therapist You know my dad and his wife are gonna be there and I haven't spoken to them But I love my cousin and I want to support her marriage. I want to go and my therapist goes well, you don't have to go Their biscuits if you feel like it's gonna make you happy go So therapy in our country Is has become a way to kind of enable like sick people to just become selfish psychopaths and family in America means almost nothing and it is reinforced how little family means because Like doctors will tell you yeah, fuck it your father who cares so It's basically a thing where like I think when you go to these other countries and you realize how deeply rooted a lot of things Are in family and culture and tradition and then we come from a country where like almost very little is I'm not saying people don't have great families here, but like You know America is about you And it's not about if you don't agree with your sister fucker if your mother disagrees with you blocker That's our country and in other countries that's unheard of like that's unheard of like it doesn't happen and You know the comedian was explaining to me like in India There's like a lot less of a drug problem in certain areas and he would and he was wondered why and he goes Well people don't want to do drugs to like disgrace their family even poor people Even poor people be like I don't want to be a drug addict because my family is going to think bad about that Wow Where is here? There's people that'll shoot up in front of their parents You know what I mean like so it's just a different it like it's it's it's culturally We've gotten to this point where people are having less children family means very little So then what is replace that? It's clearly the state and corporations and ideology and ideology so they've replaced families and communities Well the ideologies are community because you're online most of the time. Yes a giant percentage of the interactions You have with people. Yeah social media So I think that like That world we have a pretty secular world What is that? That is so interesting CBD interest Interesting I thought it was something that not CBD. I thought it was somebody gave you something that's like it's you're good About to transcend or something. Oh, no, I thought you're like it's DMT Imagine I'm bored with you. I'm going someone else for smart house. What's the last time you've done DMT? It's been a while interesting should I do it? Should we all do it? Yeah, I'm gonna have a cigarette. Are you thinking about it? I'm thinking about maybe doing it a lot of people have asked me about it It's recently that's a very small you'll think years ago Was an awesome documentary you know this how Andrew Gallamorgon you know what you're doing so he's what is his exact Discipline is he's psychologist He's doing these things in a country where it's legal where you fly there and you do a five-hour DMT experience like intravenous He's a chemical pharmacologist neurobiologist and a writer one of the most world's leading experts on psychedelics very interesting guy and He's Creating this place. I forget what it's called remember the name of the place a TV now to ayahuasca That's an orally active version of DMT this thing seems a little little crazier Because they can kind of regulate the dose much better and they can keep you there for a long period of time Illusious, okay, so I like the illucinean mysteries from the From ancient Greece so this place. It's in Bakuia Am I saying that right and the Caribbean in March of 2026 and the aim is to study DMT X and DMT entities and attempt to communicate with these entities So one of the things that he's saying so he was just on someone's podcast Maybe Danny Jones He was been on this podcast as well But one of the things that he was saying was that they keep going to the same place That you can act like it's you're actually trying to create a map of whatever this experience is so instead of doing it like an ayahuasca Ceremony or doing it like you're smoking DMT and them you know some sort of a psychedelic ceremony with your friends And it's a 15 minute experience instead of that They're having repeated experiences in the same environments like they're there's actually a place that you can go and by regulating the dose Somehow or another over a prolonged period of time It allows you to maintain this state and keep entering deeper and deeper into whatever the fuck this is But it seems to be mappable. Okay. It's the basement. That's what it was. So it is AJ from the Wifiiles which is an awesome YouTube show if you've never seen it before and so he's talking about It doesn't take you to somewhere new it unlocked what's always there These guys are they're trying to develop like maps of what this is So they keep experiencing they're they're charting out different entities that you experience and there's a bunch of different ones that you you experience And one of them I've seen multiple times is gestures Interesting and these bizarre looking psychedelic gestures Interesting I wonder if they were the original gestures I wonder if like the reason why gestures dressed the way they do with these dangling things off their heads Because this is what you experience in the psychedelic state and they're trying to recreate it But what they they've done when I've done it is mock me and make me realize that I'm taking myself seriously like one time There was like like fractal there's millions of them I mean and they were all giving me the finger like this and I was like and it was a And I said I go I take myself too seriously. They go. Yeah, so they're just like that That's it it's like there's little Corrections of your psyche that take place during these experiences interesting. It's very weird. I'm scared to do it Well, I'm scared. I'll go in and it'll be fractals of JD Vance Yelling at your no, yeah, it's old JD Vance going you need to learn about AI. No, I Don't know I I find it fascinating. Well, it is It's definitely fascinating chase users just in the podcast and he did it somewhere in the United States where they did some five-hour DMT experience and he was you know, it's like changes you whatever you are now is a totally different version of who you were before you had that experience Interesting which is like life overall over You know day after day month after month week after week year after year You become a different thing you're a different person than you used to be sure that sometimes an experience like a psychedelic experience can make it abrupt and Then you instantaneously become a different person It's so it's so fascinating because we are having all these conversations about aliens and entities and I think it's connected. Yeah, I think what these Psychedelic things allow you to do is experiencing things you're experiencing things that are already there that have been there all the time You just lack the ability to see them You're tuning into it pharmacologically like there's they're changing the chemistry of your brain and it's not an alien chemical That's the nutty part about it. DMT is produced by the human body. It's produced in yeah The brain it's produced in the liver when you do they release is when you die I don't know it's very poorly understood. It's there's not I mean There's been some worked on on it one of the big ones was Rick Strosman He wrote a book called DMT the spirit molecule and he did this it was really kind of brilliant He had an FDA study that he got this is all like government approved study on psychedelics under the guise He wants to find out how bad they are for you Interest so he told them we want to study the dangers And that's where I got all the money. Yeah, and so it works his book like this. It's amazing smart and by doing that and then studying They studied the cottonwood research foundation. They're studying where DMT is coming from So like the thought was that it's coming from the pineal gland So the pineal gland is like literally a third eye in the middle of your head Now they think it's coming from the whole brain that they don't really there's The human body produces that's the most important part So the human body produces this of the most potent of all psychedelic chemicals that transports you into another world like how weird is it that The body produces a gateway to some other place now whether it's perceived or a hallucination The experience is the same so you can get hung up all the time on The oh, you're just seeing things that aren't there. These are visions. Okay. Maybe maybe What you're doing is experiencing something that's real like it might not be something that you could put on a scale It might not be something that you can measure with a ruler But it doesn't mean it's not real and I think we are very arrogant in our assumptions that we have an Understanding of all that exists with all that we know about bacteria molecules and cells and right that Mitochondria and then subatomic particles and like what this the just the reality that we've observed is so fucking bizarre The idea that we know what's real and what's not real and you say oh, it's just the whole Cenation this is the reality is you go to Tim Hortons you get yourself a donut you're gonna work right Yeah, no, I think I have a feeling that what that Experiences is you being able to see something that exists around you well a lot of people are very hopeful I wasn't one of them per se but this idea that like we were on the edge of some disclosure Did the government was gonna start telling us things about extra turestials and like remember that with a creepiest one. It's like going around Was that um they had brought together one's pastors to talk to them Yeah, about disclosure because disclosure disclosures gonna disrupt the fabric of society so greatly And the the question was what were they gonna tell them and so what I have been hearing from people that supposedly know things about UFOs was that they were told that religion was created by aliens to keep people in line and that humans of the Product of accelerated evolution and they needed some sort of an origin story that made sense with rules and morals and ethics and guidelines to follow and something to worship Because without that people are lost and so that these aliens are created that well, please let Trump say that in a press conference He's the president to say that yeah, I got to talk to president with him to get on there and go guys Listen just we don't know what's going on this train to her moves to rope and they're closed or open or close who gives a fuck anymore Anyway, there is no God you were all created by aliens and you were told a bunch of lies about it Good luck keep going to work Markets up straight straight so open markets up It's not even that there is no God. It's a God story that you've been told this is it's formulated in a way for your tribal primate brain to accept and understand right and that there's probably a true story to all of it If you go back far enough and if you got the actual events that they were trying to lay out There's probably there's too much of too much of stuff that's in the Bible that like exactly historically verifiable totally, but do you think they? Didn't tell people that because they thought it would be too disruptive Well, here's the thing there's a lot of stuff that you know what when you talk about the Bible right? You're talking about a series of stories Sure, especially when you get to the Old Testament. It's a series of stories And some of these stories aren't in the Bible that were a part of the religious canon of the day and one of them is the book of Enoch So Anna Paulina Luna told me about she's like you really have to read that and I was like, okay Like she was so adamant about him like okay, let me read it So I listened on tape in the sauna, which is the perfect way to do it. I'm listening to audio book It's 195 degrees. Okay. I'm sweating my balls. I'm dying in there and I'm listening to this fucking crazy account That is in the same Dead Sea Scrolls as they found the book of Isaiah the same collection of these religious texts and it's all about how the watchers Came down and mated with the daughters of man and chose them as wives and then created this race of beings called the Nephilim which were giants that ruled the earth like this is in the Bible it's They talk about the Nephilim in the Bible Bible they talk about Enoch like he's referenced in the Bible Right the book of Enoch the stories that are in the book of Enoch are fucking bananas Like completely bananas and the only reason why it's not in the Bible a bunch of rabbis decided that it didn't align With the Torah the Torah the Talmud I forget which one but they decided like this this this contradicts some of these Stories that are in other religious texts. So we're gonna keep that one out Interesting to his it was a collection of these things that's all together Who are these rabbis exactly right? I mean who are all these people that wrote these things down? You know I have this bit where I read out of the book of Ezekiel And there's like the hilarious parts of the book of Ezekiel and then there's also parts that sound like it's they're talking about a UFO Like the found experiences and then other things we're talking about a prostitute. It's very funny right But this whole thing is a bunch of people's Interpretations of stories written down passed down generation generation written largely intact Once it was an original piece So like they found the book of Isaiah in the Dead Sea Scrolls and it's identical to the book of Isaiah That is a thousand years newer so that was older than the book of Isaiah that they had by a thousand years The oldest one they ever found and it was verbatim right so they once they got these stories down They they wrote them over and over and over again and like priests would learn to do that and monks would learn to do that with their Religious texts they would rewrite things over and over again as part of the practice and someone knows Some see in some subterranean part of the government They know something our many things that they're not going to tell people because it would be Disturbing or just the story about Jimmy Carter the story about Jimmy Carter was Jimmy Carter believe in 1969 He had some sort of a very strange UFO experience that was very real to him very bizarre Saw something yeah and part of his thing was once he gets into office. He wants to tell people The story is that he was briefed they explained to him something about the reality of the UFO Experience like what it what it really is and he was crying that he wept openly So what could that mean like what would that mean? He was yeah He's a bitch and this habitat for humanity. I never understood. I thought it was I think he's a genuinely getting genuinely good person. Of course. He was no How does it get my presence? Yeah, he was never enriched himself But he was also if you read books about him he was kind of an operator too. Uh-huh It was kind of it. He was into the peanut stuff, right? He was a peanut farmer or something Yeah, you know, he was nobody gets to be the yeah He was sweeter Sweetest sweetest. Well, one of the sweetest He was still the president, but so they who is doing this explain? It's just the men and black people from the the depths of China and military or wherever the hell they are what they could be doing is covering up years of Line to Congress and misappropriation of funds for all these black ops programs and the way they can get out of jail It's the thing that they go and yeah, they go and tell the government. Oh, yeah, by the way We lied to Congress for 50 years. There's no solid verifiable evidence of Jimmy Carter cried of course There's no solid. Jamie stopping in he's an arc. He's a The Carter cried over UFO stories based on second or third-hand anecdotes those are my favorite and is not confirmed by Carter himself or primary official Sources I think it's true I think it's true About his 1969 sighting Carter described seeing a strange light but did not mention crying or be emotionally shattered by it And I don't think that's what they're saying. They're saying he was emotionally shattered by the disclosure Crying after you got a little briefing. You've got to live with that knowledge So he just got to go around now and Richard Nolan who is by far one of the best guys to read about About UFOs and U.A.P.'s very balanced guy and you look very evidence-based guy He includes a lot of crazy stories, but he never goes along with them. Yeah, but Richard Nolan's really good He's got a bunch a bunch of books. So I don't know if it's true Is the Jake Barber guy real? He's the guy that said that he actually had to move a UFO right with a helicopter. Yes I haven't talked to him. I was just watching it But it's too long these UFO guys. It's all three or four out like it's not Jesse Michaels does a lot of very in-depth ones with these guys Yes, long but the good thing about that is if someone's like really full shit after a couple of hours You kind of say you see tendencies that maybe they're They exaggerate or they make things up or they leave stuff out or whatever it is But there's some things going on right? There's something that people keep seeing there's enough radar Information there's enough video that doesn't make any sense. We never found out what those drones were Remember that they're all around the bases and you're using stuff like that. Yeah, it was crazy They were they mean people were scared to fly people say it's a domestic it was domestic It was us. That's what I've heard but then you know couldn't be China could be China flex and then pulling a dick out Right check out what we have motherfuckers who knows who knows there was a lot of things that those things were doing That we don't know that they can do one of the things like they were flying for hours at a time and So what's the fuel source because it's not batteries down? U.S. pilot reported seeing Iranian drone swarm in jellyfish formation. Whoa Well, they're probably getting drones from you know totally China China Russia They get worse so the highest end of high end Government drones that we don't know about who knows what those fucking things can do Multiple drones interconnected and moving as one with smaller drones below the bigger drones like legs One of the sources familiar with the pilots witness account told CNN real alien shit Another source told CNN the pilot described witnessing a minefield of drones in the air. Holy shit When did this happen? So 13 hours ago this F-15 got down I mean he's talking and they're reporting it Bro how nuts is that they got taken out by alien drones in April Whoa, so he ejected from the aircraft the Iranian drones hovering in the air moving as one in a formation that resembled jellyfish Fuck dude. Yeah, I mean so there is a there is a chance that it is our it's DARPA and it's all of these countries that are You know you have these black projects. They have these secret defense projects and they're saying it's extra terrestrial I think if I was running an undercover operation For as many years as these people probably have been doing and with Eric Weinstein Thanks, he thinks it's like a separate branch of physics. He said he thinks there's a bunch of physicists Story that we went into the crazy invasion to get these guys back. Oh, this is those guys. Oh, this is how they got taken out I've hit this oh wow This opens up a lot more questions. Wow Wow Right, right. Yeah, yeah, yeah Use the heart but off the heartbeat thing. That was the whole right. That's what they said Yeah, so the heartbeat thing was the thing that they said that they were able to locate this guy's heartbeat His his very unique heartbeat in the mountains where he's hiding Wow and everybody was like well, that's bullshit I don't know. I don't know and it's based on some sort of quantum something or another What is it called again and then the fucking White House said did you see that today? What is that what they posted something on their alpah? They're gonna announce about quantum computing Oh, Christ do you think And then the fucking White House said did you see that today? What is that? What? They posted something on their op-pop that they're going to announce about quantum computing. Oh, Christ. Do you think that they're making a joke about Q with it? That's sort of why I said to you guys it's seen that. What's the joke about Q? I could find the post. OK. I think they have drones that move like UFOs. I think for sure. Where are they getting this technology? I don't know. Do you think it's possible extra-terrestrials are giving us technology? It is possible. So the reason White House will be Q posting today was just trolling and have fun. Yeah, just trolling and have fun. Yeah, and it says, and by Q, we mean quantum. Stay tuned. See, here's the goal. Look how much they're trolling. I went on a lot of space. There's the most committed people I've ever encountered. Yeah, they're fun. I've never encountered people who are so committed to anything. The UFO people are close. Sure. I mean, the Q people are 10 years in going. Trust the plan. It's coming. And you go, guys, it's unbelievable how dedicated they are to the plan and that it's still morphing and going in different directions. And the data centers are actually prisons for people who did the vaccine. They're not data centers. They're still going. And that level of commitment is what America is about. It's about that. It's about not giving up. Yeah. Don't give up. Don't give up. You're too deep in to give up. I've my advice to anyone in that movement, staying at it. Because there's no, there's nothing good on the outside. Reality's not good. Stay in that movement. Take it as far as you can. What would the government possibly have to announce about quantum computing? No idea. What was the quantum heartbeat thing? What was that thing called? How do they locate that gentleman? It's how I remember them never coming out and saying because people were speculating that like, how could you even do it? I think something on the podcast next day. I was like, that's not how quantum stuff works. Right. But I don't know if they know that for sure. Sure. So they don't really know what the technology is. But what was the technology that the government described? Because they described it as very bizarre. And they was a name for it that involved something quantum. And they said that somehow or another, they were able to detect this guy's heartbeat. Right. Unique heartbeat for my think was like, was it 70 or 700 miles? 7th. This was posted on the New York Post. Secret never before you CIA tool that helps find airmen down in Iran. If your heart is beating, we will find you. Wow. So this is it. Long range quantum magnetometry to find the electromagnetic signal of a human heartbeat that pairs the data with artificial intelligence software to isolate the signature from background noise. And so what is the range on this stuff? Because they were saying. It was 40 miles, I think, they found this guy is what the claim was. But didn't they say the range is up to 70 miles, something along those lines? So I don't know if you know. How long have they had this? Right. Is it even real? Yeah. But this is the thing. It's like, is it real? So this is a post that's in the New York Post. And I think it was from did someone release this as a statement? What did they do to say they did it? The confirmation? So it's Saturday morning. Yeah, they're seeing a director talking about. Yeah, they go, see, I just missed the American 40 miles away. That was unclear. OK. That's Trump saying that. Not, so these are two different or three different speeches all going in together. I guess maybe they spoke at the same press conference. So here's the other thing. If that technology doesn't exist, right? And they just made that up to cover for technology that does exist. So maybe there's technology that does exist. That's some sort of large scale satellite imagery of the earth that gets down to like a grain of sand. And they can find anybody anywhere. They could just find out where the plane is, scan the area, bam, there he is. There he is. OK, we don't want to say we have this. Right. What are we going to say? Let's say we have quantum heart rate, the magnetometry. Yeah, we can find. We can find just Lane Maxwell in New Hampshire when that came out. People were asking, yeah, why couldn't you? She was in New Hampshire. Yeah, where is, you know, whatever. Well, it could be that that technology just recently got invented. That's also possible. Well, they're still missing. Guthrie's missing still, right? I don't just, we shouldn't have missing people then if that technology exists. That's a weird thing. And my heart goes out to her. But that's the crazy thing I've ever heard. Yeah, that's a weird one. And didn't they like, they looked at family members' suspects? I think they looked at family members' say, is she back? And I think she's back to work. I'm just going to work. And isn't she back to work? I don't know. Did what did you say there's a break in the story? No, I think the story got updated recently. Yeah, there's something about a no ransom note claim Nancy got through died after abduction. Well, that's a, well, you're not going to get ransom then. Second ransom note claims she died. Yeah, this is, well, that's a horrible ransom note. So someone posted a note saying that she died. I want money. It's a ransom note that says she died. What about what if it's she died? She's giving us reading headlines. What if it's she was she died? She just give us what you want. It's not a, it's not a specific amount of money. It's just give what you feel is, it's like church. Give what you can. We're sorry she passed away. Give what you can. We're not going to say a specific amount of money. So the note sent days after the disappearance. Oh, so this is not new. Oh, indicated she had died but contained no request for payment for the release of her body. Three people familiar with the matter said, though the existence of the note was known the specific contents had not been previously disclosed. So it's just the contents or disclose that they knew that she was dead. It seems like it's an inside thing. It seems like if someone's involved in new them. I mean, I hate to think that, but it does feel like it was. What was the, was there a request for money? What was the first request? Originally, yeah, I think it was a bunch of Bitcoin or something they wanted. What it, well, let's find out what it was. It's a hard for saying obviously. It's a hard for saying obviously. But it does seem like the same. I mean, say inside job. Well, someone certainly, okay, the reason is that families involved, maybe not. I don't know. See, so this is all bringing up stuff about Rika. Ask AI, press AI mode. You can't do it. Okay, put it in there. Put it in perplexity. How much do you think they asked for? I bet 10 million. 10 million? From mom. Five. Five. Let's see. That's a lot. Multi-million dollar payments in cryptocurrency, mostly Bitcoin, with amounts ranging from about four to six million and set deadlines, sometimes with escalating or else consequences. Terrible. Ooh. This is insane, but think about it. Is that random? I guess it could be. It could be, but there was, there was some concern that it was family member. Give us a concern that it was something that a family member did this. Yeah. Who knows? It's sick. Yeah. The Bitcoin things weird too. Like you could transfer money in Bitcoin. There was a group of people that wanted me to advertise on my podcast. And it was a, like a meme-quint thing. And that was like a platform, whatever. And then I was like, but they're like identities were shrouded. People knew who they were, but they were also very secretive because they didn't want to get kidnapped. And they split their time between Dubai and London. And CAA came to me and they were like, hey, they want to give you a bunch of money. And I go, what are they? And CAA is like, well, you know, it's crypto. They don't, you know, I mean demons from hell. No offense, love my people. But they were, I was like, I gotta meet them. I gotta meet them and sit down and talk to them as human beings and like ask them what their company does, everything like that. And then immediately once I requested that, they said, okay, they'll, they'll meet you in Dubai and talk to you. But the company I said, I can't, I need to know like, I know like, you know, whatever. They pulled the offer and wouldn't meet. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. So there's all these shit, because by the way, here's a great way to fuck someone is to advertise on their show and then go by the way, the money came from Russia. Yeah. And you didn't even know that. Was it not happened to a bunch of right-wing officers? I'm sure it happened. They apart of some, it's hard to know who knew what. But like it's great is what a great way to just make people appear compromised. So when somebody, when you go, where's this money coming from? Maybe it's an intelligence agency. Maybe it's ours. Maybe it's someone else. But you start going like, all right, I need to sit down with you. I have dinner with you. It doesn't mean that I would necessarily be able to know who, like if these guys were legit or not. But the fact that they wouldn't even meet for a dinner tells me that something was up. Also a friend of mine who's working at a company that's producing young show, long form shows for YouTube creators told me that a lot of the money is coming from Democrats who prepare because they want a captive audience to be programmed politically. And not only Democrats who prepare, but like super-packs that are associated with certain issues and things like that. So what they're going to start doing is like getting behind content and funding longer-form things on social media platforms and things like YouTube or whatever. And then those companies that are kind of in the background of this will then say, oh, we have an audience of five or 10 million people watching this. We can put political ads on it and whatever else. Cheers. So I mean, this is kind of, I think, the future is going to be all many things like this. And when you can do it through something like crypto, like if you can hide your identity, like who knows if it's even a real company, it could be a company designed entirely just for influence. It's very questionable. You have the intelligence world. You have the crypto world. And you have the world of international crime syndicates. Like they all are living that world. And I'm not saying people that are into crypto inherently suspect in any way. Obviously they're not. But there is a lot of fuckery going on with the intelligence stuff and the crypto. It's like obvious. A clear. But whenever there's money, the amount of money that you can make in crypto is fucking bananas. And it doesn't make any sense, right? So whenever there's money in drugs, right? Like this is our end contre. Whether there's money in anything. They find a way to get a part of that money. I think what concerns people partially about this administration is some of the crypto stuff. I think people are concerned with some of the coins and some of the crypto. Well, Melania coins legit, that one I love. But the rest, I worry. No, but I think it's a fair concern. It is because it's a fair concern. It's an eagle. But it's like should it be. Is it should it pay? Should it pay? Should it pay? For sure. I mean, there's some freedom to you being able to make your own coin and you back it with money, I guess. But it's also a way that you can launder money. And it's also where you could pay people off for stuff. And do people into spending their money? You know what I mean? Like I think a lot of people. Yeah, I mean, that poor girl, poor girl, they got her. They got her. They got her. They got her. I hope she did well on that. That she didn't really? Probably not. So many terms of what she could be doing. Sad enough because the shoes they get mad at you for something like that. Well, they don't like you anymore. And the wrong thing and it's sad. No, I actually want to. I want to. I also don't know if she was going to be Meryl Streep. But it was it was a good answer. Could have gotten on that girl makes more money than anybody. It's true. But I think it could have gone on longer than it would have to society. We like it. I mean, that just hit me. That just hit my brain. That she makes more money than anybody needs to try. I was listening to your take on the White House UFC card in the end of MAGA. And that the moment when that guy said Michelle Obama was a man. Yeah. Well, it's just the greatest thing for if you're a deep, deep, hardcore. And I don't even mean the America First principles. I just mean like you're along for the ride. You're here for the part. There's a lot of MAGA people that I'm friends with that are deep. They're not political. They're alone for the part. They like the party. They want fun. Florida. It's 4 p.m. They drunk. You know what I mean? And they're in for the fun. And it's fun. They have like they have like boat shows and ricottas where like a bunch of boats will go out with Trump flags. When they're watching that, you have see a vet in their house in St. Augustine or Tampa or or fucking West Palm, whatever it is. And that guy stands up because Michelle Obama is a man. It's the culmination of things that they're not going to be that. It's hard to beat that. There were houses to cheered when that happened. 100% of you think over the whole country. It was audible in Florida. Florida I know for sure was audible for sure people cheered. And it was like listening outside bars. Yeah. It was a party. The fights were good. You know, it's like to me, it's like there's this, there's this every cultural thing has a moment where it just explodes. And it's over after that. You know, it's like Hunter Thompson has that famous quote about it. Mm-hmm. Where he was part of this thing. And then it just, you know, we saw it happen with like celebrity culture. A lot of it like that imagined video during COVID was kind of the end of it. Like people are like shut up. Yeah. It was like they did that video and they didn't know it at the time. But people really started to turn on them. They were like just shut up. There was the other one, the BLM one. Totally. All of them. Sorry to be white or whatever it was. Same shit. Same kind of thing. People just said, okay, enough of this. And I do think that every movement just gets to a point where you've done all you can do. You've done all you can do. And when you are standing in the octagon of a UFC fight on the White House lawn and you're asked if you have anything to say in your screen, Michelle Obama's a man, that is the clock is struck midnight. That's that. I mean, I don't know what else you could do. That guy, Josh Hoke, yeah. You know, that's like he's got a stick. Like he's got a character. Talked. It's fun. The incredible Hulk. And so he's basically like a pro wrestling bad guy who also is a really good fighter. Right. So there's a real problem there. What's the kind of hat winning? Yeah. That's crazy stuff. Well, they probably in retrospect, yeah, if they wanted to avoid this, probably shouldn't have had him fight on the White House lawn. Sure. Because if he said that at the T-Mobile arena or in Madison Square Garden. Totally outrageous. Sure. But not that big a deal. But it's the yeah, but here's what should have happened afterwards. Michelle Obama should have made an undertaker like entrance. Let's go. All of a sudden the lights go light. Don't give. And then the light goes on on the balcony. Michelle. When she comes on a cord, they shoot flies over. If Michelle Obama had made an undertaker like entrance and got in the stage and then body slant like can you imagine unbelievable? That would have been amazing. The country just exists for ratings now anyway. It's all it exists for. It's just that's all we're doing anymore. That would have been unbelievable. Here it is. This is what you guys read. Thank her. Yes. Yes. Yes. She's in a silly, me entire time. Michelle Obama comes down. You see Trump starts doing his dance. He's doing his Trump dance. Michelle Obama comes down. She's got a cape. Bro, it would be the end. It would have been on fucking believable. And she would have been president next. She would have been president next with no election, no election. Dance is going to stand up to that. She should have descended from the rafters in a cape, fought that guy. You know, you know, choreographed. Just body slant. It's fun, fake. And then she does an upper cut and then he's on a cord and he sails out unbelievable. Missed opportunity. Missed opportunity. Because why not? Why not have some fun? Yeah, why not? Why not have a little fun? There they said or some wrestling event there. They could, they could pull it off. They could do it. And if she's smart, she hears this and she's on her phone with her people. Don't sue them. They were going to sue them. They thought about suing them. It's like, what? Stop with the ceiling all the time in this country. Yeah. Do something fun. I agree. Too much suing. Well, there's, there is this moment where the UFC thing was going on where like the the planes flew overhead, where it's just like, I'm like, is this even real? It was, it was, it was wild. It's such an amazing spectacle. It's hard to top. It was pretty amazing. That's what I mean. That's a totally. A piece of entertainment. Of course. It was also the only UFC card in the history of the, the sport where every fight was a knockout. Yeah. It's, this was the, that this is senior prom. Everyone's got to go to college next year. And you know, wherever they go, this is it. This is the party. There's a moment after a senior prom or you know, some party that you have senior, you know, the summer of seeing you looking around at all your friends, you're a high in drunk and you're looking around and you, any of your smart, most people, a lot of them have this thought they go, this is never going to be like this again. Right. This will never be like this again. We'll never be able to get together on the White House lawn and do motor cross and watch you have see in Colma shallow, Bama, a man. It started when he walked down the escalator. We went through a lot of things. The guy almost got shot. Who knows who did it? No one knows. No one seems to care whatever fine moving on. But you know, he's, he's, you know, he's gone through many iterations. There's he's been out. He's been in. It's the most, it's the most interesting story really in recent human history. And, and this is the party to throw and it's wild because we're not going to win the Iron War. We're not going to win the Iron War. It's, he's very clear that it's very difficult to imagine a scenario where we come out with like a decisive victory. So instead of that, we, this, this, we did this. How was there no more open investigation into the assassination attempt? What happened there? Cause that's where Kent said that he was told to start the best. So you want to honestly done. Do you know who you put in charge of it if you want it truly? And I'm being very serious. If you want an honest investigation, put his real in charge. Joe, if you want, if you want it done right, have them do it. I'm saying, just have them do it. I, I would trust it. I think they should look at the Charlie Kirk assassination as well. I would trust their conclusions. Have them do it. That would be my thought just just a fun thought. There's a lot of people that think it was a hoax and that it was a setup. And if it was, I've said on my show, just tell us how you did it cause that's fun too. It's fun. It's a venue men shot during Trump rally and Butler sued the United States. Two men who were wounded in the shooting. They're suing James Copenhagen, and David Dutch were shot during attempted assassination of Trump. Their Tony used filed federal lawsuits against the United States for their life altering physical and emotional injuries, claiming those injuries were the direct result of negligence on the part of the United States Secret Service. Dutch was shot in a stomach while Copenhagen was shot twice. Yeah. Just pursuing ever-end in this country. But there's an argument that was negative. That was intense. Remember that woman Kim Chital who was in charge and then they put her back in a bunker? Who? She was in charge of the Secret Service. That's right. That's right. That's us. She was like, did Cheney's assistant? Yeah. The rope was too slow to something. Yeah. The rope was too slow to get off the side of her. But they shot the guy. He didn't even fall. He didn't roll off the rope. The slope of the route that they were on was steeper. If it's a fake assassination attempt, I don't care. I want to know how it was done and so does the rest of America produce a special or Barry White's interview Donald Trump about how they fake the assassination attempt. Put it on CBS where she's doing and she's taking over CNN now. So I think and she's now isolated herself on the sixth floor of CBS where she can no longer see the staff and they cannot approach her. Is that true? That is correct. And she's guarded by guards. What? Yes. Where'd you hear this? She is. She's in a bunker like the chaining the P.O.K. during 9-11 except it's Barry White's at CNN surrounded by guards and no one can. And it's like it's like a militarized zone. She's in a militarized zone. Barry in the bunker and Ellison at the gate. Yeah. Is this real? She's on bullet by the way. I like her more now and she hates me and that's sad. Why should I hate you? Well, you know, I've said things, but here's the thing. I like her more now than ever. When did she start hating you after your hilarious impression? She's turned on me. She turned on me a while ago. It turned on you how. She texted me and was like, you're part of a world in which people are anti-Semitic and I'm like, well, am I, what am I, what am I doing? And she's like, you're part of this thing and I was like, well, that's like, what am I am I, what is this guilt by association? I don't like this part of a thing that's anti-Semitic. It's like you're part of a cultural space of anti-Semitism and I'm like, so she's connecting you to anti-Semites. She's connecting me to all these different people because if the thing that she hated and the thing that she crusaded against was this whole idea that like, she's applying the same principles that she supposedly didn't like, which is like, if you're willing to have a conversation with somebody, you endorse everyone of their views. Or if you question something like Israel, you hate Israel or you hate Jewish people, which is insane. And that was, I thought she was the one who was like, we should have nuance on the transition. What happened to that? What happened to being able to question gender ideology and all these things? Like, why aren't we, where's the nuance? Where's the, why are we holding space for nuance? Bear. See B.S. news boss Barry Weiss poised to oversee CNN editorial operations. Yeah, this is what he just said, right? Yeah, I saw that. But she's living her best life as people would say, this is what she was meant to do. And when someone steps into their truth, I support them and she has stepped into her truth. She's exactly where she should be in a bunker guarded by the military while she systematically destroys CBS. She's stepping into her truth. This is what she was, that she was put there to destroy it. She was obviously put there to destroy it. She wasn't put there to make it work. She put there to just destroy it. And she's doing it. Do you think they understood the amount of pushback that they were going to get? I don't think they, I think they said, listen, let's just put her in there and see what happens because who can't? Like, the, but it's like these legacy media institutions are dying. They're not turning around. No one's going back to watching the evening news. And they know that these are billionaire idiots. The listens are not done. They said, let's have a little fun while this thing goes. It says she took the helm of the struggling organization last month with a mandate to shake it up following David Ellison led Skydance takeover of CBS parent company Paramount in 2024. Paramount Skydance bought Weiss online outlet, the free press for a cool 150 million as she became editor in chief of CBS news. Yeah. That's a lot of money for the free press. Well, no, because if you look at the podcast ratings, it was those you and then she was number two. Wow. So that's why no, she would get 7,000 YouTube views. And it seems high. It certainly seems like a lot. But you know, when you take into account her cultural impact, it's interesting because like when it came to her like pushing against woke ideology that in effect of the New York Times, she seemed really reasonable. And there's this very famous clip of her talking to Brian Stelter, where she talks about the world gone crazy. Remember that? The world gone mad. Yes. Like very brilliantly lays out why if this is what you're saying, you know, when people are saying that silence is violence and not actual violence is violence, the world's gone mad. And she lays these all out. It's so brilliant. Well, there's got to be room for nuance. Like October 7th was horrible. Hamas is not good. We all know this. However, you also cannot look at what's gone on the last few years and think that Israel has not number one, perpetrator, you could call it. I call it a genocide. People can call it anything they want. Doesn't matter. It's a campaign of mass murder where a lot of people have died, civilians have died. Many children have died. People that are innocent have died. And they're doing, they're starting to do something similar in Southern Lebanon. And they're now talking about Turkey going, by the way, Turkey also is a very good role as a part. Turkey is a NATO fucking country. So the idea that any criticism of Netanyahu or these really government or Israel or our relationship with Israel or the money makes you anti-Semitic is an insane thing. It's the exact thing that she fought against in race and gender. She fought against that mannequin, good and evil, black and white. She fought against it. And she was right. She was correct to say you should be able to have conversations about when is it appropriate for a child to be exposed to certain ideas and when should they be able to make a determination about how they want to live their life? And like when is it appropriate for people to call, you know, to designate between a protest and a riot and the silence is violence and all of that stuff. She had really pretty logical opinions on all that stuff. But when it came to that one issue, she seems very incapable of understanding any nuance or gray area or complexity regarding this particular issue. No, she is all in for Israel. And that's fine. That's her choice and I get it. But it's so obvious when a Mark Levin goes, the president's great because we're going into Iran because the president's great, he's the greatest leader of all time. And then he goes, well, this didn't work out like we thought we're going to make a deal and we're going to try to, you know, and then Mark Levin goes, this is a failure, this is a blunder, this is a strategic thing and it's like, for who is it for us? It's not not a failure for like it's clearly a failure for us. But like it seems like the bigger failure would be for Israel that wants Iran neutered because they have aspirations regionally globally, but certainly regionally. So who's it a failure for? That's a fair question. And I think it's like there's you've kind of be able to have that conversation without being tarred and feathered as someone who's like a conspiracy, mongering anti semi, which is like very, there's a scrupa people that are, but a lot of people just want sanity. And this is not this is not saying. And just like you were talking about with the banks forcing that shit down people's throats that's going to make them. Yeah. Same thing. Nobody understands blowback. Like the CIA turned blowback when you're like going to a country, kill everyone and they go, you like us, right? They go, no, not really. We killed your mother, but we're sorry, but you want the mall, we're going to build them all. They go, no, we're going to bomb you and try to kill you. This is blowback. There's blowback when you shut down conversations and in order to shut people up, you got to pay them or kill them. That's the only way to do it. If you don't pay people a lot of money or kill them, they're going to talk. And if you don't, if you limit that, they're going to get angrier and the blowback is going to be intense. Well, so yeah, yeah, I mean, that's entirely accurate. CBS News, I'll go on. That's a thing. I have the beef with her. I like her. I like to choose in a bunker. I will go on to that show. I'm there. Things that I thought was hilarious. It was some fake story. It was that they were going to bring me on for 60 minutes. Everyone keeps saying, man, I texted you about it. I'm like, are you doing 60 minutes? I thought that was wild. But why not? I mean, what, you know, half the staff has left. One of that guy, that guy, Bill Pelly just got out. Yeah. She got out and then she's got that dokapole, whatever his name is, and even a news crying like a psychopath. Who's that? He's the guy that does a CBS evening news. And his first, his first. She got out and then she's got that dokapole whatever his name is and evening news crying like a psychopath Who's that he's the guy who does a CBS evening news and his first his first episode? He's in Miami and he's crying can you get that up? It's unbelievable He's a cracker of the news. Why's a crime? He's crying because he's he starts talking about his family And how he grew up in Miami it's unbelievable This is the guy who was selected to to run the CBS evening news to be the anchor of the CBS evening news and Like he does this thing Where he's in Miami and they take him out of the chair because they want to start she's shaking it up Barry shaking it up some instead of sitting at a desk and doing the thing they bring him to Miami to like visit his childhood places and he starts Sapping in a I forget it was like a restaurant or something Jamie can find it He's crying like a restaurant or he's like choked up And it's deeply uncomfortable and it's really weird And he starts talking about how he had a hard childhood. It's like unbelievable. This is the guy Embarrassing first days CBS even news savage by staff. It's state TV Whoa the conversation with one of his handlers during an ad break Pete Higgseth said during his interview with Tony How do you say his name doc? Dokapole. Dokapole We did it at Barry's request and because CBS news did something right on this I Wish you had him crying or she had him in his in that restaurant So his Marco Marco Rubio's moment is what he's talking about No, he's in Miami and in Dokapole. Yeah. I mean, yeah, this is psychotic if the watch Just keeps crying. There wasn't showing the video. Maybe that's this thing. You know like George Hamilton was channel time. He's crying He's talking about Yeah, look at this is the anchor of the CBS evening news so he's being interviewed. Yeah, can we listen to this? I can't Facebook's weird damn it doesn't let me control the player because there's a off-scish We get a second yeah, yeah, check it from the beginning. So you know what you're crying about What makes me emotional it's so funny. I didn't mean anything to catch you know This is your favorite place in the world. Why why South Florida in Miami? What makes me emotional it's so funny. I didn't mean anything to catch you know Because you only have one child in it, right? So We get a second I can relate this is home people will attempt to help people understand why I have such a reaction Florida's where I grew up Waiting at a lot of sleep My grandmother's here my father my mother My aunt's and uncle's cousins and it's where I would have spent all of my childhood, but we left Because my father got in trouble with business. It's like we laugh about it now, but he was a drug dealer But he was a drug-yelly with a jail. It's kind of a hot thing that we say now, but the reason for emotional for me I feel like He's this head of the CBS evening news. He's the anchor of the CBS evening news This is what drives everyone so crazy, but the world have fake everything as that's the guy That's the best guy for the job This is when I grew up you'd go see Whitney Houston and go fuck she's good I can't sing like that who cares if she smokes crack She deserves it You watch this and it drives you insane. You go this guy's crying his father's a drug deal. This is who's The best guy for the job. He's gonna have to report on that like like murder war famine Whatever and his crying in a fucking in some Cuban restaurant about his drug dealer father so they had to leave my ami No one believes anything's real anymore. This is a huge problem in our world people the people that that's the guy That's the anchor of the CBS evening news. It's crazy Well, the other guy who was on a bunch of people attacked him after he left right So he left it apparently he made it very public. Yes, they got pelly or something big public. Oh, yeah, yeah, so what was he pissed about? He was saying something about they were going against science or Some of it had to do I believe with climate change some of it had to do with a bunch of other things that he disagreed with the Where the news organs it was fine at what is exactly planes were yeah, let's find out. I don't know what they were but I you know Barry chairs the meanings there and really goes on in embarrass yourself and on the calls and stuff has no idea what she's talking about and so here it is following his criticism News editor Barry wise 60 minutes executive producer Nick built in at a staff meeting pelly was fired by CBS news What did he say? Was CBS fired pelly Built and wrote a cover letter which obtained by the New York Times built in status falls your and Tippethi and tippethi to the future of the show has come through loud and clear and we have I have heard you therefore Right on behalf of CBS news ink to inform you that your employment with CBS is terminated for cause effective immediately Next day why said I'm only interested in working in a newsroom that is built on trust and mutual respect Okay, so what did he say? pelly accrue accused the new CBS leadership of instructing him to insert falsehoods into a political story and to include assertions that We're not verified instructions. He says he ignored the collapse of values at the top has become untenable the leadership at 60 minutes There's no longer recognizable the principles I hold dear are gone and so I must leave as well Wonder what exactly they meant though by the falsehoods in a political story and including assertions that were not verified Well, oh here it is. It says the story CBS intervened on was a report about the 126 protests in Minnesota and the falsehood CBS asked for was to describe Protests to Renee good as driving her car toward the officer who killed her Which pelly said contradicts video evidence of the event. That's correct It seemed to me that he was The lady was trying to turn the car away from him, but it did brush up against the guy Which is enough for him to decide the killer? Well, I know but it wasn't it was not she was trying to run him over No, and I think it but however that guy had been dragged by a car very recently So he's probably filled with PTSD almost a short died. I think he got dragged like 300 300 yards rather I think it's fair to ask if it's 100 feet Yeah, but I was also fair to ask at this point like what is the media? Like what is the media like right older respect to Barry Weiss put like so it was a heavily inflated price for the for her blog that zoom sold and YouTube channel whatever it's clearly there's clearly political agenda to this you have billionaires it own all of these companies and We're asked to believe that like she's the most qualified for the job Even though she's never ran a newsroom. She didn't like work her way up the ranks She's an op-ed columnist an opinion writer stuff like that great she made a lot of sense. We said it before And then she appoints hires this guy who's crying And in restaurant in Miami, but it's dad and it's like who the hell's that guy so I think it's fair to ask like Do we have any trust left in these institutions? Do we have any trust left and like people that work there are leaving and saying I'm being asked to insert things into this isn't true Well that alone just that alone like driving the car towards the officer. That's not that's just not technically correct Right it seems like she was steering it away Why would they want to say? Something that's not correct when you could just see it in a video like if you were running a newsroom That would be the last thing you would want to do is contradict something that's obviously Verifiable so that would for what reason would you sacrifice your credibility because that's essentially what it's doing Yeah, it's such a short term play. Yes, but I'll tell you exactly why okay because their main demographic is 70 year olds who are having strokes on their couch They're not verifying this. They're not they have a very old audience that is not Online savvy. They're not looking at many angles. They're they're their pet cataracts and they're hearing this and they it allows them to dismiss it as Well, she did the wrong you know, I'm sure drove justifiable shooting Yeah, I don't think there are some as motivating them to do that for those for sure Yeah, well because she's in the tank for Trump because Trump promised or it maybe didn't promise but like whatever He's useful In the sense that he's gonna go on a top of the regime in Iran He's gonna sue all these you know, or he's gonna bring Harvard College to heal for whatever the hell they did um and You know, she believes that and again a lot of this is just connected to her her view that You know, Israel's interest are always 100% concurrent with America's And Trump gets that and he understands that so she's in the tank for Trump which by the way if Biden would have invaded I ran she would have started protecting him. It doesn't seem like it's She doesn't care that much about A ton of issues. It seems to be that this is her big issue That's the disturbing thing to a lot of people like how much influence do they really have on this country? That's that's what creeps people out because I think no one even really considered it before October 7th It wasn't mean upshore people considered it Nick went to us considered it It wasn't like it was an openly discussed thing amongst young people right it wasn't until We started realizing first of all it was a pack it was the The weirdness of the New York City mayoral race. Yeah, of course very weird where they were all like we're gonna visit Israel What well it's also in direct opposition to the stated goal of the Trump administration which is to repair The United States and to make it great and to elevate it and to focus on the United States and to Not going to Middle Eastern wars which was a huge very popular plank of his platform and to Not waste money and saddle ourselves with that and Meyer ourselves in these unwinnable wars and there was such a gaslighting campaign the Secretary of State came out If the Iran war goes well Israel is gonna attack him anyway in our bases. We're gonna be vulnerable so we had to join and Then he went no I didn't mean that I didn't really mean that it were partners. It would both think it's a great idea and There was tremendous pressure on him to do this. Yeah, and you know it hasn't worked and it's it's it's clearly not in the interest of the United States to be in a Middle Eastern war Iran tons of Jewish people don't believe it is lots of you know People from all walks of life don't believe it, but there's an ideological group of people That donate a lot of money and that are incredibly powerful and they are really pushing this they're pushing troops and they're pushing Nukes The lick or none you know unconventional weapons a crazy bombing campaigns They're pushing troops on the ground They don't care what it takes. I ran has to be either completely destroyed Or it's just got to be a chaos zone But for the regional ambitions of Israel. They can't it can't exist So I mean again and not in a paranoid conspiratory way because I don't like the victim stuff either is a bunch of people in America being like I can't get ahead because Jewish people are successful. I think that's a stupid road to go down That's a victim road. I hate that. I hate it. I hate it when gay people do it or anyone any group of people I hate when they Drench themselves in victimhood. I think when you become a victim you lose autonomy over your life. It's insane But I do think there's a fair there's a fair question to ask about what is you know What is the motive of Certain massive big donors is the motive The strength and prosperity of America or is it the strength and prosperity of Israel? That's a fair question yeah, and Like what about the rest of the world? Like how much are we putting ourselves at odds with the rest of the world? Indiscuriably the worst PR ever and you know people cannot Justify you know you've got to be a very ideological person to justify You know southern Lebanon Gaza, Iran perhaps Turkey. This is starting to feel like this is like a friend you have Who you make excuses for for a certain amount of time and then your wife eventually goes if they're not allowed here You can't go out with them. They've there were problem. They have a fucked up home life I know they're fun. I know you share values. I know the enjoy each other known each other for a long time But here's the deal They're not coming to the house and they can't be around the kids Because you know that's what it's coming down to it was even worse than that The thing that drives me crazy is the negotiators when they get negotiations Yes, then they want to walk on them. They kill the negotiators and then come the Iran deal stop stop killing negotiators An Islamic Lebanon is this Iran deal gonna work is it gonna work? You know stop bombing Lebanon. I think we're at odds now. We're in the in the last two years. We are now It's we're at odds with Israel for the first time where Trump is really at odds with them and he's had enough and I think he Is starting to understand that his legacy will be permanently tainted If he doesn't find a way to extricate us from this war and I think on on on the other side and that's an advance Again for all the disagreements. I might have the advance about certain things um He is the one of the only people in that administration who does push against The continuation of this war which is why a lot of those neo conservative donors try to destroy him Because of that. I don't love his tech alliances. There's a lot of things. I don't like about him But there's a lot of things. I think we're good about him. I think there's an it's not like I don't like about him per se I worry about You know some of his Relationships how many how many of these are which is just you think are like nisest necessary for survival I'm sure all of them are and that doesn't me and they but they still need to be criticized and looked at Oh, yeah, it's a hundred percent not not just to find out at all, but I'm totally I have a feeling like no Completely autonomous person is ever gonna make it through that makes never never but I think the job is you turn the heat up enough Where maybe if it everyone's gonna do ten horrible things they do too, right? So I think it's it's certainly The job of anyone who looks at this stuff to look at it and go. Yeah, what is going on? What is happening? But I will say for all of the tech, you know things that I find a little you know It's a little like what I do I do think that To his credit. He's the only one in there and you can tell and it's not that I Have some in technology. They're only a he's being attacked the most By the people that want the war to continue. Yeah, and I think he knows his political ambitions will be completely destroyed By a continuation of this war So I look at all these people Not as human beings even though they are human beings, but I look at them as like They're running the show to running the country So they all ambitions and it's hard to know their hearts or heads or how they feel from one day to the next Very difficult. So I think when you look at them. You look at them and you go Yeah, he's a He's calculated and ambitious, but he also Is the one being attacked By people that want the war to continue Tucker Carlson who again I have a green list of Tucker of disagreements with Tucker He the attacks on him are insane the attacks are making Kelly are wild Because of this issue It's not a myriad of issues is this issue Yeah, undoubtedly and it's weird It's weird because it's so transparent It's so transparent in the the whole world is seeing it play out and it's Like the amount of Gaslighting that you have to keep pumping Yeah, it's it's not sustainable But to say that this was not in the interest it is who's in America's interest. You have to do you have to You have to jump around logically so much Well, this is also the problem with the justification of what happening Gaza when people will try to say Israel Like God was saying they they're doing the best they can like Look at the drone footage fly over that. That's the best you can do. That's crazy Like it's better is that better than a nuke because I don't think it is it's like it's the humane It looks like the damage of a nuke just spread out over two years instead of one blast It's inhumane. It's evil. It's children being killed It's mothers being killed in front of their children and by the way October 7th was inhumane But I should not to keep doing that Of course you should not to do that, but it's also October 7th You know the people that got killed those are the waivers right right So those are the people that were anti Netanyahu Those those are not the people that were also killed. I think probably a lot of like monthly Drake people at their houses They killed a ton of people that were in a situation there like it's also like why did it take so long to respond to that? Well, this is another very interesting very important question. Yeah Because there's a lot of people that say It's a state the size of New Jersey and the security failures are They're pretty wild and there hasn't been a real investigation into them And Netanyahu's kind of prevented that And they've kind of made it illegal to question that in Israel like people were like writing about that and going what the hell is going on But like no illegal well, there was they've made a law and you can look this up about Things like this in Israel because during wartime. They haven't had an election. No since October 7th. No Right Had an election war right right and you crane as it had an let nobody said in LA So if I'm living in a country in the leader of my country just wants to be in a war forever There's no democracy. Well, you know Clinton said that Clinton said that about Netanyahu said he wants to maintain a war Me said it openly in an interview right And then it turned out and then a nice chubby intern showed up Oh He was the first guy to go viral so I mean that's a thing you don't you don't have elections You don't have people looking into things and by the way That's not the only thing that should be looked into looking to look at everything Right we're the 9-11 docs. What happened? We know why can't we know anything? What why can't we know anything? Yeah, you know This is all of it. It's like release. Oh, we're all adults release it. Let's see what happened But don't you think it's fine? I'm sure no one did anything naughty I think this is all kind of breaking though, and I think this is one of the breaking one of things is happening with AI It's like all these things that they are protecting us from the they're gonna we're gonna find out that stuff Well, here's the thing I mean I met you in 2019 At the first time I met you was 2018 big J. O. Kerson was opening for your in Toronto. Oh wow. Yeah But then I met you in 2019 and that's what six years ago seven years ago. Mm-hmm They were cracks of it breaking down but almost Invisible like you couldn't see them now you have fun like huge sinkholes opening into the reality that most people have accepted for their entire life. Yes Big yeah big big and you see like this Tulsi Gabbard is Press release that she did this yeah conference. We're just talking about fouching or didn't all yeah all that There's there's we're getting information now that getting information let us know that the entire system has been Completely corrupted for a long fucking for a very long time very very long. And it won't survive. It's clearly Can't survive the way we're in it. Is it 40 trillion dollars worth of debt? It's close right it was at 39 no one thinks that's getting paid back Yeah, who will it to? Tom will go fuck off right so we have a lot of his China But like no one thinks that's getting paid back the dollar is the world reserve currency seems to have a Limited amount of time. I don't know but this is what's discussed No, I mean, how does this system survive this level of information people are not gonna Do you think that this whole race to AI this like Manhattan project style race that's going on right now? Like the future of whatever the United States is kind of depends on us getting there first Right I think part of it we don't get there first then it's probably a wrap If you really thought about it like if China is their first If control of resources everything shut off sure whatever How what if it's weaponized? I worry is that in the guise of fighting China. We're gonna become China You know so I would take the government a lot more seriously if they weren't you know potentially having like like Saying pound to should merge all these different government databases So your health data and your criminal justice data and your tax data All merges and who's doing that pounder? She go and then they go well, China's got a Credit score. What the hell is that? What the hell's this What right to advance comes out and he goes I'm worried about a credit score. It's like okay. Hey, buddy me too What the hell's this? So it's a little bit of gaslighting in that sense too. They're like if China gets all this stuff You're all gonna it'll we lose and you go okay So it's almost like China will enslave you let us do it first Everyone's gonna be on their best behavior. That's right Everyone's gonna be on their best behavior. We're gonna be watching them. You heard that quote. Yeah Everyone's gonna be on their best behavior. This is what these but the world economic from people like that They don't have any interest in you owning a house or farming land or starting a business Or they don't have any interest in that there. It does not serve them at all. It did for a while But their economic Projection is that that's not gonna be possible for you So what they're gonna do they're building bonkers. They're hoarding all the wealth and They're you know heavily invested in all the say and one of the reasons I think that we have to strike a deal with Iran As well this UAE money props up Hollywood all these startups it props up all the AI a lot of it a lot of that money's coming from Qatar in the UAE and There and our bases getting blown off the earth in those countries those countries are getting attacked because of this war And they're a huge finance here of American startups and some AI startups so like One thing that I wonder about all of this is just how much this just does seem now to be a high-level chess game About the the future and what is and isn't possible But the only thing that makes me personally happy is that Jared Kushner and Ivanka Trump just bought an island That gave the Romania people were really excited. They're really excited. I see other somewhere I believe they burn the prime ministers house of the president or whoever they had just started lighting houses on fire and that's coming by the way They just did it in Belfast that's coming People starting to light things on fires coming That's coming. I'm not calling for it. I'm not saying it's good but it's coming because Voting's become fake No one cares To you know people are threads It's fake It's fake It's so obvious. It's fake X mmm, mmm, it's all fake So the only and you know again, I'm not calling for it. It's bad But fires real If you ask the people at Pal stage of Malibu and whatever I P I like the pal say that stupid mall. I like that but This is real people are gonna start Realizing that this all this technology has just been set up to give you this idea that you have some effect and all the while Jared and Ivanka Just go buy an island That's what's happening But maybe it's fine. Have you got any invites to any bunkers? No No, they're not you feel differently if you did. I don't know I know you've had invites to do interesting things I've had invites to teal and I've said no because I would I think you know He'd probably sent me down and go listen to me you fat fuck you're gonna shut your mouth And I'd sit there and I go No, I think it's I think if they were gonna invite me someone goes This is the guy who dressed up as Kristy gnome's husband with fake tits And they can we can't have it but but but that's absolutely Absolutely if somebody said to me a few people are gonna survive and it's just gonna be you and these people and everybody else is gonna die It's tough How fun would it be though? Is it fun? Is it fun if the whole world dies? And I'm just sitting and having dinner with you any fancier's wife I mean is that the foot with Peter tale me and Usha and Jai just Needn't stake. Yeah. I mean is that is that what we want? I don't know probably not Probably not. What's the best case scenario? The best case scenario is a new era of enlightened people and enlightened thinking and soulfulness and spirituality and a healthy attachment to technology and religion and You know people's people's You know a common kind of a sense of morality and togetherness and love for community that's not enforced by government's corporations and armies Hmm, I'm not betting on that but that would be Good well, there's a battle right. Yeah, there is not it's it's not like one side is Clearly going to win. We're moving in a very weird direction of uncertainty But humans today are way better at being people way kinder and nicer Despite all our problems then we have ever been in the past Yeah, society is generally at least first world countries safer than it's ever been in the past. Yeah, and it's also There's more opportunity to do things now because of technology that's ever existed before so but this is it's not Worse, but it's not moving in the best direction Possible like if you had a chooser between living today the way we're living now or living in 1976 in San Francisco They'll fuck yourself. I don't want to shitty breaks and live with these fucking people Don't know anything because no matter the internet fuck that. Yeah, you're better off living today The communication It would go see Janice Chaplin Right, I need to be smoking weed and a burrito would be 50 cents And then you would go into a park and fuck and then die And it might not be as bad as one thinks and who knows I didn't live during that time So I'm sure there was a lot of pitfalls you get stabbed whatever like New York Was more culturally interesting when there was crime? I'm against there being crime because New York couldn't have existed It can't be 1983 in New York now Times Square is a mall Times Square right now is a TGF Fridays But sure has to be case to be cast but it can't be cast forever but again in that city do you get the Ramones do you get All of that stuff probably not no You need some chaos for art for sure. You don't get chaos from Right. All of that stuff's probably not. No. Probably not. No, you need some chaos for art for sure. You don't get chaos. You don't get chaos from TGI Fridays. You don't get that kind of chaos. But I do think that there's a time for certain things and there's an inertia that moves certain things forward, meaning like it would be crazy to think about New York in the 80s today. Like no one's built for that life today. No one's even built for that. Like one of the reasons it was don't work anymore is which is not built for it. When a bill used to be built for war, people used to be built for war. They were built to like, just like, yeah, somebody calls me and I just go die. You know, there's a competition on the door and it's like report here, we're going to war. People are built for that now. People are file complaints with door dash. I file complaints. 1981 Rolling Stone magazine called West 42nd Street located in the heart of Times Square as the sleaziest block in America. Yeah. Now it's probably prime real estate. Yeah. I mean, listen, there's parts of it that are, it's all prime real estate there. Whether people like it or not, it's not necessarily, that it's better because it's safer, but it's worse because it's safer. Nothing's all one thing. Nothing's all one thing. There's still great art there. There's still great music and comedy and theater and all that stuff. Is it as good as it was? No, no. But again, it's just because the people that are doing it are amazing and they're talented, but culture is so decentralized, now and fractures, nothing can stay cool. Everything that popped, what's depressing me about New York is it's become like, it's a cool place where people just go on Instagram and post them. When you used to go to dinner in New York City, you would eat French food or food that could never make it home. You've never even seen, you didn't hear it. They would treat like shit. It was fun. Now you go to these places because Taylor Swift went there. You have like, they just do like a high-end version of a like a Totino's pizza roll that put trough the oil on it. Here's a French dip. Here's a burger, people with a burger. It's just a basic bitch mall city now. That's really what it's become. That doesn't mean there's not a lot of psychopaths they're making lots of money and good for them. But it's becoming a suburban city. It's a city where people talk about chicken salad. It's a city where people go to wagmans. It's just a different city. It's Pilates and toddlers. It's all great. It's fine. I don't want to see people getting shanked. But it's not what it was. It's just not what it was. It doesn't have that same magic. And nothing does that. Lay does nothing really does. And it won't come back. No, I don't think it's coming back. I don't know if that's good or bad. If I live there. I mean, who knows what the fuck's going to happen now with mom Donnie as mayor? I mean, that weirdness where, what's that guy's name? Ken Griffin, the guy who's a billionaire guy. He's in front of his apartment. Yeah. Billionaire guy lives here. He's got so much money. We're going to take it. Well, they don't tax it. Well, here's the thing. It's all fake. It's all fake. Mom Donnie's Trump. He's smart. He's sharp. He's good looking and young. He just, he's, he's, he's all crap. It's YouTube. It's like, look, billionaire guy. Ken Griffin's a pump beach. Building a house worth of billion dollars. You're not going to do anything to Ken Griffin. You're a city employee. The mayor's fake. Like it's like he'll raise taxes. Maybe if he can get it done to the can't, it'll get dirty or crime will go up or it won't. It's kind of whatever. It's just not, you know, I think it's not. It's, it's more just the corporations rule. And guys like, it's like Bernie Sanders. He's the version of the socialists you get. What does it even mean? He has a bunch of military industrial complex jobs in Vermont. Sweetheart of a man, but has not gotten one goddamn thing for 30 years. Worth billions has three homes. He has three homes. He has three homes. He has three homes. For God only knows who the Goldman Sachs and the devil. And, and he goes and says, Hillary's great. They're all great. It's all great. The system's fine. I lost. He could sandbag like twice. And he doesn't, and he doesn't burn it to the ground. He won't burn it to the ground because that's the version of a socialist. You get an American. I'm not even like a socialist, but I'm saying like, that's clearly this is you throw the bond to placate someone. It's also they're playing a game and his game is a stay relevant. Totally. He's a politician, keeping a senator from Vermont. He's stay there forever. Everybody loves you, Ben and Jerry's. Vermont is a really white state of frozen people. A frozen people and it's just a bunch of lesbians and I think Alec Baldwin now because he shot someone. Does he live there now? I think he does, but I don't know. And I like him shout out to him. We've all moved on. But I think, you know, Sanders is doing what he has to do to please that demographic of people. What do you think happens in 2028? I think I think the donors want Rubio, but Rubio is kind of a buffoon. Why do they want Rubio? Because he's not Vance's more isolationist than Rubio. And I think Vance is more in league with the tech people. Whereas Rubio, maybe the central banking cartels of intergenerational pools of capital that are more invested in the war industry and might be slightly more aligned with Israel like Rubio. Like there are different the symptoms of the super rich. I think the tech guys are relatively new. Not that they don't get involved in war, of course they do. But it's not all hunky-dory. You know, if you had a banking empire for years and centuries and you're like, now all these new tech Fox are here and you're like, what is this? And you're like, we make our money with war and sort of the tech people, by the way, but they have other ways to make money. So I do think that's we'll get the nomination. I don't think Rubio, I used to think it would be Rubio. But I've watched Rubio recently more and I don't think Rubio, he's too, he's too pathetic. I can't take him seriously. I don't know why. Trump again suggests a Vance Rubio 2020 presidential ticket or perhaps Rubio Vance. So this will probably be those two. Interesting. But do you think that people are going to want to buy into another Republican party? No, no, it'll be a Democrat. I think it'll be a Democrat. It'll be a good thing wins. I don't know. I think it's somebody that we don't know who it is yet. I think it's somebody that we don't know who it is. I think I don't think it's new to some. I don't think it's AOC. I think it's somebody that comes from a red state, who's a Democrat governor or purple state. We don't know who they are yet. They pop up their boring. I think we need boring. I think a boring person's going to come in and just be like, hey, I'm the president reasonable. The show's over Michelle Obama's a woman. You'll hear some of the country go, because Trump's a drug and you've got a detox from that. And this whole last decade has been a drug and it's been the craziest decade that I've been alive. I remember sitting with you in election. I remember me, you and Alex sitting down. I remember all these things where we're watching these crazy porn. I remember the, I remember when Trump was shot, I remember tragically when Charlie Kirk was shot. I remember all of these things that have happened that are just so crazy. And now seems so far away and like they're so far in the past. You have a new somebody there. They like this guy, John Ossoff. Who's that guy? It's looked them up. I didn't know either. Young is in common Senator out of Georgia. Yeah, he's having a moment. You could be just nailed it. You just nailed it. You could be him. Look at him. Look at him. Just put him in. He's put him in. Yes. Yeah. His neck is medium. It's not too thin. He's got that face. He's a little too small. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's probably true. A little bit more square. John conservative Georgia radio host. And Dors is John Ossoff for US Senate. If they want to win, they just have to go, hey, everybody. Remember healthcare. Don't you want that? Is he a Republican? He's a Democrat. He's a Democrat. But he's going to larp his Republican in the same way that's been so proud. I'm actually a Democrat. You know what I mean? Worked as a national security staffer. Yeah. He's a spook. Put him in. Who cares? It's fake at this point. We will know it's fake. How much more evidence does anyone need? Jesus Christ, Tim Dillon. Sorry. Glad you're out there. I'm glad you have me in here. Your podcast rules. Thank you, brother. I really appreciate such a great escape. Thank you. It's so beautiful because just the way you're able to just combine. Reality with humor is very rare. Well, thank you, dude. I appreciate it. I appreciate it. It's very unusual thing you're doing. It's very insightful political commentary and social commentary mixed in with hilarious takes on things that's very nihilist. Well, I'll keep doing it until I'm putting it in jail. Thank you, brother. Thank you, Shira. I appreciate you. Bye, everybody.