Joe Roman, fine. The Joe, Rogan, experience. Join my day, Joe Rogan, podcast by night. All day. Great to see you again. Good to see you, Joe. Happy to be here. Happy to have you here. So you've got a documentary about the essentially about the same subject that you talked about last time you're here, the impact of microplastics and all these various endocrine disrupting chemicals that we're dealing with. Right. Right. Right. Just tell me about it. Huh. Well, it's darted as a movie on plastic. And when I met Louis and he filmed me in New York about five years ago also, it wasn't the small study that we have today. But let me backtrack, because I want to tell you something that I never told you, but it's so important to me. So you remember when I was here, you said, are you saying that toxins in the environment are threatening the survival of the human race? Right. And I said, that's my story, and I'm sticking to it. Yes. Yes. And then you said something which changed my life. You said why don't people know about this? Remember that? Yes. I went home and I thought a lot about that question. And that was what led me to create the program that I have now, Action Science Initiative, which is doing short, impactful, relatively cheap interventions to alert people to the problem and communicating this in a way that I'm hoping will reach more people than academia where I was speaking before. Because before I talked to you, I talked to my peers in academia. And I've retired at the meetings where they all went, they read the papers that we all read. But the general public didn't get this. So you really have to tell you thank you. And you were actually very influential in my life. Well, I'm very happy to help. When I first heard about your book, and I started going over the details of it and the subject matter, I was shocked. I couldn't imagine that something like this could not just have happened, but there's no large-scale effort to reverse course or to change course or to do something about it, or at least to make people aware of the impact the plastics are having on us. Let me tell you a story about a friend of mine. There's a guy named Philip Franklin Lee who is a Michelin star chef that lives in Austin. And he has this amazing sushi restaurant, sushi by scratch and great chef. Anyway, he was experiencing fatigue, like always tired, got his hormones tested extremely low testosterone, but then got his microplastics tested, and there were off the charts. Did a series of interventions to try to clean his body out from that stopped drinking anything out of plastic, stopped using plastic just by whatever he did. I'm not sure if he did the plasma for esis thing that I just did recently. His testosterone went up to 1,200. With no testosterone replacement, no nothing. Just eliminating microplastics from his life over a period of time raises testosterone. So that's fantastic, and it's what we are seeing in the film and so on. I wanna just make a small point, which is microplastics and plastics and plasticizers are not identical, right? Okay. So microplastics are relatively newcomer to the scene because we've had plastics since 1950, right? Microplastics have been there, but not recognized until relatively recently. And actually measuring them in our bodies is much harder than measuring the plasticizers, which are the chemicals that are put in plastic to give them the various properties that they have. Pallets. Thallets is one, Bisphenylase, another, and so on. So there are other, you know, and by the way, well, we'll come back to that later. So yes, we can measure those, but measuring microplastics, in particular, if we're gonna go into your brain or into your testicles, you know, into a woman's placenta, obviously that's much more difficult. So they're not the same, but the microplastics, what they are is the actual pieces of plastic that carry the plasticizers along with them. So they kind of piggyback on. So they do double damage because they carry the chemical harms. And they also physically enter the cells, right? So do you remember, I'm sure you, as best as you know about, you know, and silicosis? And these were other examples of particles that went into the body and conveyed both chemical harm and physical harm, like inflammation and so on and so forth. So they're all bad, but they're not identical. And what we studied in the plastic detox, which is the film, that was, we did not study any microplastics. We studied the plasticizers. So you're probably remember, I think I told you last time, well, why should you remember anyway? They're water soluble. And so they go into your urine and then they're pretty easy to measure. So I'm gonna give this to you. This is a kit. Open her up, I don't tell you what it is. Okay. Learn what's inside. All right. It looks like you peeing that. Hmm. Okay. That's right. Keep going. And there's more stuff in there. Yep. We can. Something to send it back. Right. And then this is like biohazard bags. To put your pee on. And pee doesn't kill anybody. And this is, it's got a QR code on it. I'll say hello to a healthier you. So those are ways to find out ways to lower your exposure. Okay. Yeah. I know a lot of people get these harmful chemicals from drinking coffee, hot liquids, out of paper cups. Yeah. From the paper cups that are aligned with, for example, Bisphenyls. But the coffee itself is made in most coffee makers contain a lot of plastic. Awesome. So it comes in both the cups and in the device that's making coffee. That's why I'm just going to fetch press. I do that at home too. I got rid of my plastic coffee machine too. Me too. I was thinking about it. It was like, why am I pouring hot water into this plastic thing? Yeah. But it can't be good. Yeah. It doesn't taste as good. You're learning, you're learning. French press tastes better anyway. So here's my suggestion. If you're willing to do this, I am willing to do this. You are. Yes. Good. Yes. So not hard. Okay. Pee in the cup, centered in. My colleague, Jenna Waugh, and her team will analyze it for not everything in the world, but the Bisphenyls, the phthalates and the parabens. Okay. That's what they're going to be adding pesticides soon. And that would be great to have that as well. Then if you want to go to phase two, I can, I have some things here that you could swap in your kitchen. And you could go to that QR code and find out other things that you could reduce. And then if you wanted to, we could send you another kit, and you could see if your level's changed. Okay. You want to do that? I would love to do that. Yeah. What is phase two? A phase two would mail you back another kit. You take your urine again, and that's it. So that's to see if it's changed because of lifestyle changes. That's right. That's right. So you would be doing what the couples in part of what the couples in the intervention did. The couples in the intervention also were infernal. And so we're not going to touch your fertility question, but they also, the men collected sperm, and we can do that if you want, but I don't think you may not want to talk about that on your pep. And that's what we did in the intervention. So in the intervention we found, oh, just this is what the intervention was. There's a company called fellow, which is growing out of UCSF. And they're very big now. I think they have like 200,000 men in their files who have had their semen tested. Okay. And at the time they have their semen tested, their asked, could we recontect you for research? That's one important question. And they're asked, why did you want your sperm tested? And if they say, because we're infernal or sub-fertile, or we're worrying about our fertility, we ask, or they ask, how long has it been that you've been having this problem with fertility? And if it's more than 12 months, then they're technically infernal, right? So if they said they would agree to be recontected and they were infertile, they were potentially eligible for this intervention. You with me? Got it. So actually finding the couples that are in the film was a long process. They had to, of course, agree to be filmed. They had to have what we call terrible word, idiopathic infertility, no known causes. So they couldn't be obese. They couldn't be smokers. They couldn't have a diagnosis, a medical diagnosis that explains. We don't want it to be unexplained, okay? So sort of we went down to what was six couples, one of them dropped out for personal reasons. So I won't go into that. But that's how we got those couples, and they had to be couples, by the way. And they had to be staying together for the next three months and not doing IVF, okay? So that was a set up. And then the company called Million Marker that you're gonna send your P2. They have an education program. And that's a lot of what they do, the testing and the education. And so all of those couples, you know, they talked to them and said, tell me about what you put on your face this morning. Tell me what you watched you close with. Tell me what you clean your counters with and on and on and on like that, right? So they took an inventory of what the couples were doing. And then they started this educational program which they're very good at and doing for a while. Once a week, they talked to them. So how's it going? Have you changed this? What are you using now and so on? So it was not just a one-time thing. And if you were doing this, it would be short, you know, just like use these things maybe. But along with that, we sent them the fellow kits to collect their semen. Okay, so we have the beginning, middle and end. It was three months. So beginning six weeks, 12 weeks. And you know why three months? Why? Take 70 days to make a sperm. So we wanted to have a turnover within the course of the intervention. So we sent them a kit and they collected their semen at home, which is nice for guys because you don't have to go into lab and do it there. And you know, it's much better at home, right? Yeah. And they centered in and they figured out how to get all the parameters right, even though it's mailed. And yeah, so the couples did that. So we had over time levels in their body of the chemicals, semen quality, what they were doing, what they changed in their life because we had this record of everything they changed. And then finally, we saw who got pregnant. And I hope your listeners will watch the plastic detox. It's a movie that a lot of people love and find really moving. And you should say, much. Can I ask you about the coffee question? When you go to a place, like let's just say Starbucks, not the single amount, but are they using plastic with their coffee machines? So their coffee machines made with plastic? I don't know about any particular place except my kitchen. I was just with the question. Yeah, my suspect that they are using plastic. Right. So if people stop at a place like that on a regular basis on the way to work in the morning to get coffee and they use, they bring their own plastic, or excuse me, they bring their own stainless steel, thermos or mug, that would eliminate some of it, but perhaps... One source. Yeah. But perhaps they're getting it actually from the coffee machine itself. Because yes, yes, yes, yes. When you see these big industrial machines, they slide those filters in, those filters are plastic. Yeah. Well, they're probably, they probably have bisphinal in them. Right. It's a plastic tray. It seems like I don't know. But then there's a paper filter in the plastic tray. Right. So you're getting it. No matter what. And if they use those pods, you know, yeah, they hit home. Bruno, one of our guys in the film, wonderful guy. He was kind of addicted to his coffee machine, his pods. And we said, Bruno, we want you to stop using those pods. No, I don't want to stop with him. But he did. He did. And they've had two babies. Now, I'm not saying that's the reason, but it's a contribution probably. Well, there is certainly an issue. Like I said with my friend, Philip, that it made a radical difference in his firm count and his testosterone levels. And so this is probably the case with so many Americans in this country that are dealing with infertility issues. A big part of it is probably these plasticizers. Is that how you convert them? Yeah. Plasticizers, all these various chemicals that are endocrine disruptors that are ubiquitous in the modern world. Yes, unfortunately. Let's pray. By the way, not the women. Let me show you something. You wouldn't talk about the women last time, very much. Right? The women we did. Yeah, I think we did. So the women need testosterone too, for sexual arousal and libido and so on. And muscle. And we in our study, study for future families, I think, or maybe, yeah. We asked, we got the urine. We saw how much phallates were in their urine. And then we asked them some questions about their sexual experience. So how satisfied were their sexual life and frequency. And the women who had higher levels of phallates were had less satisfaction and lower frequency. So it's not just the men. Completely makes sense. Everyone needs testosterone. Yeah. My wife's friend got on testosterone. She's, I guess she's about 50. She got on testosterone because of her doctor put her on some low level of cream or something like that. And her response was like, it makes me horny like a bloke. She's English. Yeah. So. I thought that was a very funny thing that she said that way. Did she think that was a good thing? Yeah, she enjoyed it. Apparently. Allegedly. I didn't speak directly. But I think that's what she was saying. Like, whoa, you know, just whoa. Well, I mean, it's the thing that came out of your, the episode that we did that shocked me the most is how little this is discussed in the mainstream. And I had not known until you brought it up until you became a guest on the show until I started researching it. I was stunned. I couldn't believe that this was something that was so common. And so, so one of the things that comes up all the time is infertility with couples that are trying and they're using IVF and it's more common now than ever before. And there's been a lot of things that people, a lot of factors, people have attributed to that reason. A lot of them being older people that are, you know, they put their careers aside in their 30s. They decided now it's time to have kids. They're worried that it's too late. But listening to you talk about it, it seems like that's only one part of the issue and not the big part. The big part seems to be that we're being poisoned and we're doing it by virtue of our modern world that we live in where so much of your life relies on plastic. And it's very difficult for people that are so set in their ways they have routines. They don't really understand like what can I do to eliminate this stuff from my life? Just having the conversation and understanding that these things are having an impact is great. But the steps that people need to take in order to eliminate these things from their life, I think that's what's really important to get out there now. I, thank you. You said it really well. Let me just give people a place to go. You go to onplasticyourlife.com. Okay. And then there's action and then you can go to the various places in your home that you can do. It's just on plastic your life. On plastic your own onplasticyour life. On plasticyour life.com. Yeah. Let me see if I got that. Yeah. So onplasticyourlife.com, go to action hub and then to protect yourself. And that'll give you lots of things to do to lower these exposures. It's almost time for spring break. So maybe you're headed to the beach or maybe you're taking the kids on a road trip or maybe you're just taking some extra time for yourself. No matter what you deserve a break and a reset and AG1 can help. AG1 is your daily health drink. Just one scoop combines your multivitamin, pre and probiotics, superfoods and antioxidants to help support a healthy immune system and digestion. Plus it travels really well. So you can start working it into your routine even when you don't have a routine. Just slip a few travel packs into your luggage and have a nice flight. I've talked about AG1 for a long time and it's not just me. I know a lot of people enjoy it. It's very easy. It's very convenient and you deserve to take care of your health. Visit drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan and for a limited time get a bottle of Omega 3, vitamin D3K2 and an AG1 flavor sampler for free. In your welcome kit with your first subscription. That's an $111 value at drinkag1.com slash Joe Rogan. Nonstick cookware. That stuff has, is that different? Yeah. When you have nonstick cookware, does that have any endocrine disrupting chemicals as well? But different ones. Different ones, which ones are those? So those are what's called the PFAS chemicals and it's in actually not just cookware. It's anything that puts a barrier between two medium if you will. Like a rain jacket will put a barrier between the rain and your skin and also stain resistant. It'll barrier with the stain. And it's very, very prevalent. It's all, it's in clothing. I've read it's in a lot of yoga types and things along a lot of lines. Yes, work out clothes. That's so crazy. You think you'd be unhealthy and you're exposing yourself to endocrine disrupting chemicals. And uniforms, there's a book. I probably shouldn't recommend another book, but I think it's a good book. I'll just say it's called to die for D-Y-E and it's about the flight attendants' uniforms and the harms that they do because they have a lot of PFAS because they have to keep clean in the, and they've got, they're not clean, right? Right. Because they have PFAS in them. It's in sports uniforms. You can do them in sports. All the sports uniforms. No, I won. Yeah. Is it anything with nylon? Is that what it is? Probably, but I'm not sure. I'm not, you know, I could refer you to somebody but I'm not the clothing expert but I know that they're in the used thing. And one of the things that is kind of scary is school uniforms. A lot of kids have school uniforms and they're loaded with it. Oh, yeah. Yeah, my kids used to wear a uniform every day. Yeah. When you say to die for our dies in cotton clothes also releasing really. Yes. Dies are very risky. We've got to go back to be an homage. Yeah. Here it is. Oh, good. So, as fact, there's little or no regulation of clothes or textiles we wear each day from uniforms to fast fashion, outdoor gear and even the face masks that have become ubiquitous in recent years. We're going to explain how we got here, what the stakes are, what all of us can do in the fight for a safe and healthy wardrobe for all. Wow. And that's in the film. It's discussed in the film. A little bit. Not the major, but it's just a little bit. So, blue jeans? Probably. Probably. I can't, you know, speak about it. There is a river, I believe it's in China where a series of blue-gene factories exist where the entire river is blue. It's so disgusting. Like not blue, like beautiful, clean water. Blue-like died. Like, like, look at this. Look at that. Oh. That's the blue-gene capital of the world. Wow. That's where they make a lot of blue jeans and look at the stinky, dirty, disgusting blue-die water that is just that river leaking out into the ocean which also looks polluted. You want cheap clothes, kids? This is what happens. It's so crazy. Like, look at that stuff. I mean, how many jeans are they making? And what are the, you know? And this is a good point for me to point out that these things are affecting animals, of course. Like the animals fishing this way. Look at this. African rivers as well. Sure. Of course we do it in other places. If we did in America, people would be aware. Canada too. I'm not sure they'd be aware. No, thanks, so. We're trying. We're trying. We're trying to get them more. I mean, that's what we're doing right now, right? Yeah, right. So to go back to that point you raised about, you know, reasons that people give for low testosterone or low fertility, low sperm count. And particularly this comes up for fertility. A couple more couples are, you know, fertility is in the toilet, right? Yes. That's a weird thing to say. Yeah, right. For lack of a better. Yeah. And I mean, used to be five children per couple on the average in 1960. And now it's in South Korea, it's like 0.88. Wow. That's the worst, you know. Why is South Korea the worst? I don't know. I mean, all of these Asia's very very. South Korea's their replacement numbers are so low. That's right. It's their endanger of complete population collapse. Absolutely. Absolutely. And Japan is getting there and, you know, all of that South East Asia. And so when there's a lot of articles about this, a lot of editorials, a lot of articles, and they make me so, Joe, they make me so mad because they say correctly that having a child at an older age will do this to some extent. You know, not wanting to have a children as many children will do this to some extent, but they never mention toxics. Mm. They just, and so I've written editorials saying, hey, guys, we're not alone on this planet. And we're not the only species that's declining in number. And then if you look at the curve of the number of species that are declining and the rate of decline of human fertility, they're parallel. It's all about 1% per year. And so there, and we know they're exposed these other species. You showed it. They're the most efficient in that water exposed and, you know, animals on the periphery. So I would love for everybody when they look at these numbers of declining fertility, consider that it's not all choice. Right. Animals are not choosing to have their children later or to delay childbearing, right? They have big careers. Evers are trying to make dams. They don't have time for children. Right. Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. So for me, you know, it's not, those are good, those are explanations for sure. Obviously when you get older, your fertility is less. Obviously if you have a busy life and you don't have time to have children, you shouldn't have children, but the toxics matter. They matter a lot. Yeah, 100%. And the animals is the issue exposure to water that has these chemicals in it because of pollution. What is causing it with that? Well, it's in the water. It's in the soil. It's in the what they eat because it comes in, you know, in the plants. It gets into the plants. Yeah. Do you know that the phthalates? This is a little look. Fun fact, phthalates are put in pesticides. Why would they do that? Well, they, because one of the things that phthalates do is they increase absorption, that's why they're in hand cream. Right? You see you put your hand to cream on and it goes in your skin, right? Phthalates help that. You have the pesticide you wanted to go into the plant. Phthalates help that. So, you know, this exposures are all over the place for animals or getting them too. A long time ago, I don't think we talked about this, but there was a wonderful scientist who's not living anymore. His name is Lou Gillette. He lived in Florida. And he showed that alligators swimming in a lake that had a lot of runoff of pesticides get this. Their penises were small. He measured them. And he was a big, he's like he was a big guy. He went, he had to do it at night. He went at night, wrestled them into the boat. And I have pictures of that. Took them to his lab. Measure their penises. Measure their penises. They must have been very confusing. They got to let go. What is this guy Keke with? What is his thing? You know, and they had fewer eggs. Right. So they were declining species. That's just a very dramatic example of, you know, if you can put up penises and alligator penises, I'm just wondering. As if you don't already do that, Jamie, find you off the boat. I asked our perplexed view this thing. And it's so our sponsor perplexed. He said, yes, this has actually been documented in wild alligators. Males and heavily polluted lakes have on average smaller penises, and other reproductive problems linked to hormone-disrupting chemicals. We are shrinking alligator penises, ladies and gentlemen. And not only. A 25% smaller penises compared to males from a cleaner reference lake. Males of lower testosterone levels around 70% lower. Abnormal relationships between hormone levels and penis growth, unlike alligators from cleaner lakes. Alligators from polluted lakes also show other reproductive issues, abnormal sex hormone patterns, altered gonap. Normal levels and penis growth unlike alligators from cleaner lakes. Alligators from polluted lakes also show other reproductive issues abnormal sex hormone patterns altered gonads low hatching success various birth defects all consistent with exposure to endocrine disrupting contaminants EDC such as DDT derivatives Dale, Drin, PCBs and related compounds. Wow. So it's all endocrine disruptors from pollution. Oh boy. Yeah, I mean, you would think that this would sound the alarm. And this is not new. This is his dad. This is old work. Oh, and no one knows. Yeah, it's never just going first of all. It's not a lot of people that say first problem on my list today, Algator, penis. It's a real issue. Like you're in front of Congress. We had to talk. Algator, penis sizes are shrinking. They kick out of the bill. Actually, he Lou to let went to Congress. And he gave talk and he said, every man in this room is half the man his grandfather was. As far as testosterone levels, right? And penis. Well, he didn't measure the difference. Take grandpa. What's making this point? Yeah. I'm sure what all this. Yeah. Yeah. Well, I mean, it completely makes sense. But what doesn't make sense is how little attention is being paid. You would think that in a society that is fake, I mean, America is also facing a potential population collapse. People don't think about that, but our reproduction numbers were not repreduce. Yeah, they're down quite a bit. And they're not at the level that we need in order to keep our population. It's the, you know, the normal shape of the population is like this, right? Mm hmm. This is up here, not very many people and down here, lots and lots of people. And this is terms of age older, younger. So I'm going on this. Right. Lots of people are living longer, but few are down here. And then what that means is the ones down here are supposed to support the ones up here. But there's not enough of them. But not enough of them. Right. Yeah. So it's a huge societal problem. Well, it's just so confusing how few people are even aware of this. We were talking, I didn't realize it had been five years since our last podcast, which is pretty crazy. But in that five years, you barely hear about it. It's occasional people bring up certain chemicals that think are bad. Oh, avoid this. Paul Saladino is the one that showed that the paper cups that you get from a coffee shop that if you take that paper away, what you have is essentially this plastic membrane. And that's what you're drinking your coffee out of. You're not drinking your coffee out of paper. And how terribly things are for you. But even that it's like people just dismiss it. The line around Starbucks is always the same. So these people go in and get the coffee. They don't think anything of it. And they're just consuming these chemicals that mess up your health, mess up your vitality, your energy levels, everything, brain fog, all these. Who's responsibility? Is it, you know? Well, to talk about it, I think it's ours. It's certainly yours and more. And well, we'll spread this word and more people discuss it. And I think more people need to be aware that this directly impacts you. Like, this is not like in the future. I don't have to think about it. I'll be dead. No, it's it directly impacts your health, your energy levels, your vitality. Right now is a living human being listening to this show. So just add to that how it affects you, not you humans. Maybe you levels are lower. I don't know, but I will find out. But both men and women who have lower fertility on average, these are studies. There've been about four or five studies that have shown this lower fertility and sperm count on the male side, die, younger, die, younger. Okay. This is should be of concern to everybody. Yeah. You have less vitality, less energy. Yeah. And the things that affect your sperm, your vitality, your testosterone are also affecting of it's a it's a canary in the coal mine, if you will, of lots of things that are going south. Right. At the same time, which completely makes sense. And as the case of my friend Philip holds fatigue, always issues that he was experiencing. Yeah. Yeah. It's not just one, never just one thing. Right. Yeah. It's it is quite disturbing how uncommon these discussions are though. That's what's crazy. You know, that this is a, this should be a huge factor. I mean, we get concerned with so many, oh, there's people concerned with alcohol consumption. It's a big thing. Like in that has had an impact, children today, or young adults, I should say, today are consuming much less alcohol than people in the past, cigarettes smoking, we're aware, very dangerous, much less cigarettes smoking than in the past. The consumption of these asynchronous corrupting chemicals is essentially the same as when we talked five years ago. So I want to go back to this question. I asked this, who's a responsibility? So I don't think it's, I mean, it's great for you and I to be concerned and for your listeners to be concerned. But in fact, it shouldn't be our responsibility because the, you know, the drug FDA does drugs, right? Pretty good control of, you know, safety of drugs. Pretty good. Yeah. Okay. We can talk. But, but compared to chemicals in our daily products, the products we use every day, it's fantastic because the regulatory agencies are not doing the job. Right. Okay. And so that's why it's all out there. Not doing the job here in Europe. It's much better, by the way. Is it? Yeah. Well, that's bad because they're going to be in a, the outreach produced, that's what we'll go away. We don't talk over. No more America. We have to get people angry. Yes. To put pressure on, you know, there's a bill, the TOSCA talks, exceptions is control act, which should be doing a lot of this. And I think it's coming up for revision and, you know, maybe people can pay attention to that and read about it and, you know, think, government should be doing this. It's not our job. It's not our job to worry about what's in our pants and what's in our this and our this and our this and our this. You were asking what kind of, you know, denim and so should we have to read up on that? Is there, are there dies for jeans and clothes that are not toxic? Yes. But as I said, this is not my area. I understand. Yeah. You got to get, I can give your neighbor's one, because I'm going to clothing and, you know, on this. Yeah, I'd be happy to. Yeah. Yeah. But just because it was relatively new to my consciousness when I was, you know, doing a film and before that, we didn't collect data on that. Unfortunately, you know, maybe we should do another study, which reminds me there is just like so much work to be done. And for my program, there's so many interventions I want to do that we did this one, which great success. And now we're doing another one and we have another one. But if anybody wants to help, you know, with this, it's all privately funded. The government is not going to fund this. Right. Unfortunately, unfortunately, so, you know, I mean, if anybody comes to you and says, how can we help and all that? Well, I'm sure somebody will reach out. They usually do. Um, the thing that I would imagine would be the response to something like this was that there are so many industries that are established already that require the use of all these compounds, all these chemicals, all these endocrine disrupting chemicals. And it is, it's just everywhere. And it's everywhere and everything they use plastic in the production of so many different things. These things are leaching into our food, they're leaching into our clothes, they're leaching into all these various products that we use that contribute to these chemicals entering into our body, disrupting that. So like you're where glyphosate, I'm sure, um, they were trying to eliminate glyphosate from the industrial agriculture. Good luck. Exactly. Well, the president passed an executive order blocking it because some enormous percent 90 something percent of all of our food. And when in terms of wheat, corn, all the agriculture in this country relies on glyphosate for production. And so the, the ideas we need poison so that we can make food, which is so crazy. Especially when you consider the fact that all these other countries don't use glyphosate and feed their population. So how are they doing it? And what do we need to do to get back on that track? And, you know, I had RFK Jr in here to discuss it. And he was very crestfallen when he was explaining that there was an executive order passed and that, you know, he was working very hard to try to eliminate glyphosate in something that he discussed in, you know, previous meetings that he and I had that was one of his primary concerns. Glyphosate is toxic. It's terrible. It's just completely awful for your body yet. The use of it is ubiquitous in agriculture and industrial agriculture. Yeah. Agriculture. And he was trying very hard to try to eliminate it and then the government passes this executive order because in their estimation. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Pressure. Yeah. And this is what I worry about with. Yeah. And I want to mention names, but there's a lot of these popular clothing brands that people wear that are, you know, fitness. I'm healthy. I'm fitness where. And he's fitness where that you're these clothing that you're wearing or reaching these chemicals into your body, but they're screwing up your health, which is so crazy. But it's so. I don't want to say it's perfect, but it sort of encapsulates how screwed up our part of life. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The paradox. So I did a study on glyphosate. I mean, I examined our populations for glyphosate. And interestingly, they also have an effect on remember anal general distance. Yes. The tank size. The tank size. Yes. They influence the tank size. Yeah. Now that's not we did it in two studies and there's been some animal studies. I can't say this is an established fact, but I'm just pointing out that it has very, you know, many unforeseen consequences, none of them good. And by the way, I was asked to go to talk to arcade tomorrow, but I can't because I have another another meeting. But, but I would love to talk to him about this because this this glyphosate is a big concern of mine. Yeah. Well, I hope you do talk to him. Yeah. He has these round tables and on different scientific topics. So this one is on microplastics, which is not perfect for me because I haven't measured them, but but if he has one on glyphosate or pesticides, that would be a good place for you. So hands are tied right now on the glyphosate issue momentarily. Yeah. They have some non-toxic solutions. One of them is they have this new device, which is like the same way these machines pull the crops out of the ground. These machines go over the crops and zap all the non-essential crops with a laser beam. Non-essential crops, excuse me, non-essential plants. So weeds, I would say. So as the corn's growing or whatever it else it is, there's zapping all the other stuff that's growing around it that's sucking up all the resources, all the weeds. Yeah. Yeah. That sounds like a good step. That's a great step. Because it minimizes the use of pesticides. Exactly. And I asked does it have any residual effect on the food? He said, no, well, that's great. But then, you know, farmers, one of the big problems is they're already barely making money. Yeah. So if you now require them to spend, you know, X amount of dollars on some gigantic weed zapping laser that has to cover who knows how many acres they're running. These monocrop agriculture for people who've never seen some of these places that grow corn and wheat, you're talking about these massive pieces of land that only grow one thing, which in nature doesn't exist. So of course nature wants to rectify that nature's like, why isn't only wheat here? You need weeds. And so, you know, birds drop seeds, all these seeds fly in the wind and then all these things grow. So you're going to have to get these machines that are capable of traveling over all of those crops and zapping out all the weeds. How much is that going to cost to people that are already struggling? Yeah. You know, because the American farmers are barely getting by barely. And we need them. And, you know, the last thing you want to do is burden them with another cost. But also, the use of, especially when it comes to things like wheat, because they're using it after they harvest the wheat to dry it out quicker so that it doesn't grow mold on it. That's why they're using glyphosate. So it's not even, it's not even as a pesticide. It's the using it. Yeah, the using it as a, I guess a desiccator. Wow. Yeah. And that's why so many theorized to be why so many people in this country have a problem with bread. You know, which makes sense. And with your tape. No, it's a tape. Yeah. A lot of tape problems. A lot of people complaining. But it's just, it's so weird that we're so intelligent and so informed. And you know, now we all have supercomputers in our pockets that have access to things like perplexity that can answer any questions you have about anything. But yet we're being poisoned by the very food that we eat, the coffee that we drink, the clothing that we wear. Water, we drink. The water, we drink everything. Here's a good question. Are there any good filters on a consumer level that will remove a lot of these chemicals from water that a person can buy? I can't name any brands. Right. But are they available? Yeah. But yes, there are. But is it reverse osmosis? Like what are the ones that work the best? I'll tell you my, my solution in my house. That's very personal. We distill our water. You know, so, so the water out of the tap goes into a big container. And then it's boiled. Steam is formed, crosses over and the steam is condensed into another container. Right. And that has nothing in it and removes everything. And by the way, all germs also. So that's what we've chosen. And then in this thing that sits on the counter, my husband does this every other day. It's kind of a nuisance, but not too bad. And the water is fantastic. Do you have to remineralize it? You should take minerals somewhere. You can do it in the water. You can do it in your supplements. Yeah. It is does remove the minerals. Yes. Right. And that's what I've heard is the problem with drinking distilled water. Is it actually leeches minerals and nutrients from your own body? That I don't believe. No. Okay. But the water itself has had its minerals. Well, let's put it into perplexity. What what is the issue with drinking distilled water for health purposes? And is it recommended that you add electrolytes or minerals or what have you? Because that's what so one of things that fighters do when they're cutting away, I don't think most of them do it anymore, but a lot of them were drinking distilled water so that the water would go in their system and right out of their system because cutting weight for fighting. I don't know if you know about this, but they have to weigh in a certain weight class and essentially what they do is radically dehydrate themselves 24 hours for a fight. It's not a great idea. It's terrible idea. So perplexity says is generally safe to drink distilled water. Most people do not need to add minerals to it as long as they eat a reasonably balanced diet. Distilled water simply water is spoiled and recundanced. So it's very low on contaminants and minerals. Health sources note that it is safe to drink but tends to taste flat because minerals like calcium magnesium are removed. What about minerals? You get the vast majority of needed minerals calcium magnesium, potassium, et cetera from food, not water. So distilled water alone does not usually cause deficiencies in healthy people with a good diet. However, some organizations and reviews point out that long-term use of very low mineral water may slightly reduce mineral intake. And in specific groups, children, heavy exercises, there we go. People with certain illnesses could contribute to electrolyte imbalance if diet is poor. So when might adding minerals help to still waters your main or only drinking water and your diet is low in fruits, vegetables and other mineral rich foods, adding a pinch of mineral salt or using a remineralization cartridge. That sounds terrible. Cartridge sounds like plastic, right? Or drops can help restore small amounts of calcium magnesium, intellectualites and improved taste. Athletes who sweat heavily, people with kidney or hormonal issues affecting electrolytes and those on very restricted diets should be more cautious about relying exclusively on distilled water and may benefit from electrolyte or mineral placement as advised by a clinician. I recommend people take electrolytes anyway. I always add electrolytes to water every day. Here's a funny anecdote. We have a cat and his name is Archie. Archie and Archie comes patrols the house and steals our water whenever possible. He comes and drinks from our glasses unless we cover them up. So they think Archie probably likes your water because it doesn't smell like poison to him. He loves our water. He has the choice of his own water, which comes out of the tap. And he will 100% prefer our distilled water. Which makes sense if you think about a cat sense of smell. It's got to be off the charts. Yeah. So he can probably smell like this water's got a bunch of junk in it. And when you do the distill, do the process, which Steven does, you know, every other day. And he goes to clean the container that you put the water in. It stinks. Really stinks. You would be shocked. Wow. Well, we have a crazy filter at our house. We have well water. And we have this crazy filter, this giant machine that filters all the water. It tastes delicious. But it's not distilled. I'm not saying that, you know, that you shouldn't distill that's an all turn. I mean, sorry, you shouldn't filter. That's an alternative. But I'm just saying what we chose to do. Right. And so the distilling it removes chlorine and all these other issues that are in the water as well. Yeah. Yeah. And fluoride, everything. Yeah. Florida is another one that's bananas that we add to water under the guys that it helps your teeth like shut up brush your teeth. You know, I don't have any cavities. I don't use fluoride. I have fluoride free toothpaste. I don't have fluoride in my water. It's dumb. It's not just dumb. It's completely connected to lower IQs. There's a core, direct correlation between higher fluoride content and water and lower IQs. But there's a giant business involved in selling fluoride to these municipal water spots, which is nuts more poison. And we are so screwed up. Clorination. Yeah. And I've said for years, I said the chlorination by products and they cause miscarriage. So it's got to be terrible for people that swim a lot in public pools, right? Yeah. Because then it's being absorbed by your skin. I don't know how much exposure you get in the relatively short time you're swimming. I don't know. Yeah. Let's find out and put that into perplexity. How much of an issue is chlorine exposure in swimming pools? Hmm. Let's find out. We don't know. We're learning so much. This little science. It's like that question is going to get tossed around here by perplexity. Because it could go multiple ways with it. Is it too much chlorine? Like what are you? I mean, right. Okay. Let's say is chlorine exposure in swimming pools a health concern? Yeah. That's good. There we go. Let's try that. How bad it is. I mean, it only makes sense. I would like to study someone like Michael Phelps. Someone who spent like, just been just life. Thousands of hours in a pool. Whether or not it's affected his body in any way. Whether or not there's like measurable chlorine levels in his urine or what have you chlorine and properly maintained pools is generally considered safe, but it can cause irritation of eye skin and airways. Well, that can be good. And heavily frequent exposure, especially indoors, can contribute to respiratory problems in some people. What chlorine does in pools, it kills germs like bacteria and viruses and pools and is key for preventing infections and diarrhea illnesses from contaminated water. Public health guidance typically recommends free chlorine about one to four parts per million with pH 7.0 to 7.8 within this range. Disinfection is effective inside effects are usually mild. Common short term effects irritation of eyes, nose, throat, skin, common when levels are high when chloramines build up, especially in indoor pools. Corobines, form when chlorine reacts with sweat urine and other organic matter can become airborne and irritate the respiratory tract, causing coughing, wheezing or tight chest and some swimmers and staff. Long term regular heavy exposure in indoors, poorly ventilated pools has been linked to increased respiratory symptoms. Some studies suggest increased asthma risk. Okay, put this in as a follow up question is exposure to chlorine through the skin responsible for any health issues. Let's just just through the skin. See if there's any studies on that. Chlorine getting into the body through the intact skin for pool water does not appear to cause systemic whole body health problems. Otherwise healthy people, its effects are almost entirely local to the skin itself. What skin exposure you actually does, chlorines and irritant that strips the natural skin oils, disrupts the outer barrier leading to dryness, tightness, itching. So put about put this in. What exposure does chlorine have to healthy skin flora? Because healthy skin flora, you know, I, I did you jitsu and one of the things that happens with jujitsu is you get a lot of skin diseases like you get. People get ringworm, staff infections. Well, you're getting scratched up a lot. You're rolling around on the the mats and if the mats are dirty. And if it's just, there's exposure to it, you can have a problem. And then one of the problems that people have is to treat that, they use antibacterial skin soap. So what that does is it strips the skin of all the healthy floor, which actually protects you. The count, the counter that I always brings up. I have no affiliation with this product, but it's an excellent product. It's called defense soap. Defense soap is my friend, Guy Sacco. He invented a he's wrestling coach and his, it was a solution using healthy things like tea tree oil, eucalyptus in the soap that kills the bad bacteria, but does nothing to the healthy flora. That's great. Yes. So that's the only soap that I use. Um, chlorinated pool water does disturb normal skin flora temporarily, but in healthy people, the microbiome usually recovers within hours to a day or so after swimming. So that's a problem if you swim every day. Chlorine is a broad disinfectant. So it kills or suppresses both good and bad bacteria on the skin. Yeah. Reducing overall microbiome diversity right after swimming, experimental and field studies show that even short exposure can cut measured microbiome diversity markedly, often cited around 30 to 40% with composition shifting away from the usual dominant groups right after a swim. How long disruption lasts after leaving the pool, many of the resident species begin to recolonize from deeper skin level layers, hair follicles and the environment and community composition tends to drift backward towards baseline over the next 24 plus hours with frequent repeated swimming, daily or high volume training. The skin may be in a more chronically perturbed state with less time for full microbiome recovery in between exposures. I know a lot of people have switched their their pools over to salt water pools for this very reason. I think there's a problem with salt water pools in very high temperature areas. No, where it's not effective enough to stop mold and all the junk. Yeah. Do you want to see these products I brought? I would love to see these products about here you go. These are for cleaning up your center. What's up, Jim? I know. And what you just said, a salt water pool is still technically a chlorine pool. Oh, still a chlorine pool. It just makes the chlorine on site instead of pouring it in. Oh, yeah. Salt systems or pool is ordinary salt. Sodium chloride dissolved in the water, usually around 2,700, 3,400 parts per million, which is about one tenth the salinity of the ocean and close to body fluid levels. The water passes through an electrically charged salt cell, which use electrons to convert some of that salt into active chlorine, mainly hypochlorous acid and sodium hypochlorite that sanitizes the pool after chlorine does this job and is up back as chloride and the cycle repeats. So you keep generating chlorine as long as the system runs and there's an of salt. What's different from your standard chlorine pool, you still have free chlorine in the water at typical pool levels about one to four parts per million. The difference is the source salt generator versus liquid, tablet chlorine, not the sanitizer itself. Most people find salt pools a bit gentler. The water feels softer and continuous low level generation can mean four fewer chloramines, the less smell and irritation if the system is sized and maintained correctly. Interesting. Okay. So it's still chlorine. So it still probably disturbs your microbiome, which sucks. This episode is brought to you by Intuit Turbo Tax. April 15 is coming fast. There's been so many tax law changes this year, which means you're going to need an expert who has your back, your in luck. Turbo Tax now has in person locations nationwide, walking to their tech enables doors and meet face to face with a turbo tax full service expert who will get your best outcome. Your expert works to get you every doll you deserve while updating you as you go about your day. Head to TurboTax.com to find a store near you. Come on. Let's see. So show up today. Should be open. No, it's not sealed. It's tight. What have we gotten here? A lot of stuff. So in the movie, you'll see that I came to the homes of the participants with a big box about this big. So this is obviously a very small part of that. Yeah. This is just part of your kitchen bags that are safe, freezer, microwave. It's called zip top silicone. They're made of silicone. Okay. Yeah. So silicone is okay. silicone that's there is food grade silicone. Okay. And then that is like spatulas. Yeah. And food grade silicone is free of phallics and disvenal. So you can use that. Oh, this is a lot thicker. This is a lot thicker. Yeah. Yeah. And so this is reusable. Yeah. Absolutely. And you just store your put your food in the fridge in that instead of in a. So you can buy these things. They're this company zip top. Is they make them specifically for that reason? Yeah. I'm sure. Yeah. There's one of many companies that makes So this is essentially like a zip lock bag. Exactly. It's way thicker. Yeah. Kind of cool. And so they make these larger as well. So you can. Okay. There are a lot of good alternatives for food storage. You know, glass, of course, is really good. And ceramic. So it's so much better too, because it's not creating as much plastic waste. Since it's. Glass of course is really good. Mm-hmm. And ceramic. So it seems so much better too, because it's not creating as much plastic waste since it's used. Right, right. Now, do you just run this through a dishwasher? Sure. Now, what about dishwashing solvents and detergent stuff like that? Oh. Oh. Yeah. I brought them. Yeah. I want to do a problem, Jamie. The pods are probably not great. Oh, right. Of course, right. Yeah. Damn pods. Pods, tea bags, coffee pods. Remember my kids are eating tide pods? It's like nature's trying to get rid of some of the dummies. OK. So this company. I think there's two of those in there. Yeah. These are just little examples. Let's give this company a shout out. It's called zip top. And I guess they make them all sizes. This is like sandwich size. This is, I guess, a snack size. And they make them larger too. Yeah. And they seal well. You know. Yeah. That's another question that I had about Suvie. There's a lot of people that cook their food in these Suvie machines. Oh, really? That's very common. Oh. I thought it was kind of high, you know, kind of in restaurants and stuff. Well, I mean, I know there's consumer versions of it that I know a lot of my friends use it. Yeah. So what is it for wild game in particular? Because you can slow cook. So one of the things about wild game has a very low fat content and a lot of people find that it's more tender if you slowly cook. So let's say if you like medium rare is like what is medium rare, like 135 degrees, I think. So what you would do is you would take this piece of meat and you would seal it up in a vacuum sealed container. And you dunk it in this Suvie machine and it keeps the water at 135 degrees. You can cook it for several hours at 135 and then you sear the outside of it. Nice. Yeah. And so a lot of people like that and it's really good for breaking down some of the harder stuff like, you know, the fascia. Gristle. Yeah. Mm-hmm. And so is that stuff leaking chemicals into your food? It has to be, right? Why? Well, because it's in plastic. You're getting these vacuum sealed plastic bags that the food goes in and you have seen how Suvie beef. Oh, you're going to have to put it in plastic. Yes. Have you seen how these Suvie things are? No, then it's bad. Then it sounds just as bad as I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. So what you do with Suvie is you season the food in a lot of times you'll add like olive oil and things like that to the outside of it. You couldn't make it ever silicone? I would imagine you could, right? I don't know. Let's find that out. Has anybody made silicone based Suvie bags and do these Suvie bags leech chemicals? This is a discussion on Reddit about this, but they didn't really have an answer. Like they're asking, temperatures might not be high enough. I don't know. Yeah. What are the temperatures that start these chemicals leaking into from the plastics into your water? Because a lot of times they say don't leave a bottle of water in your car. That's right. Because your car can get really hot. So how are hot your car yet? Doesn't get that hot. Doesn't get like cooking hot. So it's like what is... But if the Suvie bags don't have plasticizers in them, like if they're made of silicone in a food base, if food, what is it? Food spray silicone. Yes. It's a similar. So it says we use vacuum sealed bags to really go through them right now, even on an early Suvie. I tried silicone reusable and I wasn't happy. I don't really recall why. I think it was hard to get stuff in without a mess. Okay. That doesn't make any sense. Just deal with the mess. We made a switch to vacuum bags. I love it, but oof, we use a lot of bags. Okay. Put this into perplexity, please. Do Suvie bags leech and the current disrupting chemicals into your food when you cook with them? Let's try that. Sorry. We're learning things. Yeah. Doesn't it happen to be vacuum sealed? Probably right because you don't want water leaking in there. Yeah. You don't want water leaking in. The one I have a machine, like, and I use this vacuum sealed machine like so if I get wild came and then I cut it up into pieces and then I seal it in these vacuum sealed bags to freeze it. Silicone-based Suvie bags are generally considered safe for food use and do not significantly leech. Significantly is a weird word. Leech harmful chemicals under typical cooking conditions. High quality food grade silicone is a nerd BPA-free. This is silicone though. Food grade silicone shows minimal chemical migration such as siloxanes, especially compared to plastics that can release microplastics like BPA. This is a silicone though. And what was the question that you asked? How'd you phrase it? Well, you're asking that, you write silicone-based Suvie bags. Just let's not silicone-based. Just like plastic Suvie bags. Well, you know, they're going to leak stuff. Let's find out regular plastic Suvie bags. Let's see what it says. Right. But I want to make sure that it's vacuum sealed Suvie bags. It should know that we're talking about Suvie bags here. Other plastic bags can be reasonably, like that word, safe for Suvie. If you use the right kind, food grade, BPA and thalate-free and rated for hot food. But all plastics can leak some chemicals. And the data specific to Suvie is still limited. What regular bags are safe? Look for bags made with polyethylene and or polypropylene that are labeled food grade and microwave safe. Is there a plastic that's microwave safe? Those that real? These are considered safe with food up to around one diet in 195 Fahrenheit. Most brands zipper bags, ziploc, glad, are polyethylene, BPA and dioxin-free and are commonly used for Suvie at typical temperatures below 176. Purpose made vacuum sealer or boil in Suvie pouches. That's what I use. Are specifically certified as food grade for cooking and the safest plastic option if you want disposable. So it seems like it's reasonably safe to do that. Review by Utah's Department of Health, no notice, excuse me, notes that there's a lack of studies directly measuring chemical leaching from Suvie bags, but recommends using FDA compliant BPA and thalate-free plastics which are not known for estrogenic activity and are considered safe for food contact. Okay. It says trout. He says there. One trout study found detectable BPA and fish cooked. But the problem is food, like here's the problem. Freshwater lakes, if you're catching a trout in a freshwater lake, freshwater lakes have horrible levels of these chemicals in them. And most people do not recommend eating food from freshwater lakes, which is so crazy. You think, oh, I'm going to go catch a fish from a lake. This is going to be really healthy. It's right from nature. Uh-uh. Now we've ruined lakes. Yeah. What is the issue? Put this in. What is the issue with eating fish from freshwater lakes in America? What are the health issues? Eating fish from freshwater lakes in America. We've looked this up before. It's kind of stunning how much chemicals you get from a single fish that you would catch. if you catch a trout from, you know, a regular lake. You go to a lake. It looks clean. I can see the bottom. Everything's fine. No. It's bad for you. In fact, I know a guy who is friends with someone who does a lot of fishing tournaments. So he goes to these fishing tournaments, catches a lot of fish, and eats a lot of fish, obviously. And he got horribly horribly sick because of heavy metal poisoning. Is that terrible? Crazy. You think you're eating fresh fish that you've caught yourself. It's gotta be good, right? It's gotta be bad for the fish. Eating US freshwater fish can expose you to chemical contaminants like mercury and PFAS. And if eaten undercooked or raw parasites in some bacteria, most people can still eat freshwater fish safely if they follow local advisories and avoid high risk groups pregnant people young children eating too much. Main chemical risks. Mercury, methylmercury, nearly all wild fish contain some mercury, but levels of many US freshwater fish can be high enough to harm a fetus or a young child's developing brain and nervous system if eaten often. That's crazy. PFAS, forever chemicals. Many US freshwater fish have measurable PFAS and in some studies show widespread PFAS plus mercury and fish tissue at levels that pose health risks for frequent consumers. PFAS exposures have been linked to changes in liver and kidney function, cholesterol, immune response, pregnancy complications and increased risk of certain cancers. I don't know why they have it in the change. Autoimmune. Immune response. Oh, they do say immune. Immune response. Yes. Yeah. A immune response. Yeah. The sky and Denmark studied people on the Fero Islands, which they all eat fish. They catch them, you know, the Fero Islands and they catch them there. And so he looked at the levels of PFAS and then he looked at their antibody response to vaccination. Oh, down. And so think of what that means in like this time of COVID or whatever. I want to do an intervention where we take kids who are getting PFAS free school uniforms. Remember I told you PFAS was in school uniforms. And then when they come in at age six for their first, you know, grade, they will have just had their booster. So then we could get their blood and see if the booster, you know, antibody levels were lower in the kids that had the PFAS uniforms versus the clean uniform. Booster for which vaccines? Um, mom's, pertusses, this MMP, I think it's good. Yeah. And so it's lower, it's a lower response if your body is supposed to be chemicals. So you would imagine even if you're not, you just lower response period to all immune function based on this. Right. Right. Yeah. What is these, these things? Lufa Mitz. Oh, you can use them to scrub your sink and or your case. Use them in the shower. Yeah. Or in the shower. You use those for your food. The, the, the sponges that you most people use have a lot of chemicals in them. Of course. Makes sense. So these are better. Yeah. They're plastic sponges. Yeah. And scrubbing things and some of the stuff probably gets in your plates and your food and your, your cooking. Yeah. That's good. All right. What else we got here? Bees wrap. That's really nice stuff. What is this stuff? It, actually you can treat all that, this is some kind of paper that's been treated with bees wax. So nothing dirty there and take it out. You'll see how nice it is. Okay. I love this stuff. I have a lot of it because it seals the wax. It's the wax. It's all in case you use that to wrap your, your food with. Yeah. And it seals on itself and you just rinse it out afterwards. So you don't have to use saran wrap and you know all these. It does seal on. So it seems like a form fits around. It's like you can put it on an egg or tomato or anything. Well with my friend, Phillip, I guarantee he eats a lot of sushi. He runs a sushi place and if you ever go to a sushi place, all the fishes wrapped in plastic. Yeah. And they cut it open and so it's exposure to all this stuff. You should use this stuff. Probably the same level of sealing. That's plastic. Might be more expensive though. Yeah. What's your health worth? Right. But it's also reusable. Oh absolutely. Just wash it. Yeah. That's the thing. It's probably economical in the long run because plastic wrap you don't reuse unless you're a sucker. I guess all over the world. Right. Everywhere. I'm sure you've seen the Pacific garbage patch which is crazy. Right. These are bags and these bags are called wawy. W-O-W-E. Right. And what is this? That's another food storage. You know choice option. Paper or no. No it's cloth. Cloth. But clean cloth. Yeah. And to use this. And it's really good. Oh yeah. The cookies. You know stuff like that. OK. Yeah we use those. And so is this all all these different products listed on your website? So people can. They're listed on the million marker. There's a can their card there to scan the QR code and you can go to that. And but it would be nice if it was like a once. So if you scan the QR code is there a one stop shop. People listening to this right now. Can we send them to a website. Yeah. The website would that be. I don't. I can't. Look at the card. This one tips for a detox journey. So this is the QR. So if I scan this right now it'll take me there. Yeah. That's my phone. It's world that we live in. We're not ready. OK. It says the website is million marker dot com. So glossary. So this is the chemical glossary that's on this card. But it doesn't. Not the products right. It says and say the products. It says partners. So there's products on that other website I told you on plastic your life. Unplastic your life. Yeah. So that's the place where people can go and see these products. And then there's three steps on plastic your life.com action hub. Protect yourself. Tell you how to protect yourself against various things in different rooms. I have it by rooms. What is this one Jamie? This one says this is the same website. I just already went to that. Oh. So when you go to unplasticyourlife.com it takes you to a West piece. And they go to action hub. So it redirects to this website. Got it. And then go to the action hub. Protect your family. And then are the products listed down there? OK. There it is. OK. Single. OK. Nonplastic bags. Non steel cookware. Got it. Replace the plastic cutting boards with wood. So I think some people use titanium, which is fine too, right? And then what above that? What's above that? Steel single-use drinking water containers. Never use plastics to store your food and never heat plastics. Holy. Save your skin by selecting personal care products with natural ingredients, such in glass or tin packaging. Boy, soda's disturbing. Washing your clothes. Yeah. By the way, we didn't talk about smell. Smell. But everything that's fragrenced has that, ladies. Of course. And you think you're doing good if you hang that little pine tree in your car? Not good. Not good. And you plug in things in the wall that is supposed to clean up your air and refresh your air and so on. Not good. There's ones that are in cars now, like certain cars. I think Mercedes has one where you refill it. And it actually will spray air freshener through the fence. Does the Mercedes do that? I think it's Mercedes, which makes sense. You know, luxury. I want to smell like lavender as I'm driving. Look at me in my little car. Smell and lavender. A dying of chemical exposure. We asked women on this, our study. We said, what do you use? And then we said, was it fragrenced? And anything where they said that was fragrenced, their body burden of phthalates was higher. Of course. What about natural deodorants? I don't know. You can look at it. I use natural deodorants to try to avoid a lot of that stuff. I'm the product for it on the website. It says it's a miscellaneous danger is good. I think. What that is. What? It says miscellaneous dangerous goods. Maybe it's when they ship it or something. What are you doing? Other dangerous subs. The interior of the vehicle will be fragrance. It says it right there. This is under Mercedes, under their smell. A Roma system, Pacific mood. Ooh, I want a Pacific mood. I'm living on the coast. I'm fabulous. And it says miscellaneous dangerous goods other dangerous substances. That's crazy that it's labeled that way. The interior of the vehicle can be fragrance to suit your own individual preference with the air balance package. Flakon Pacific mood, lemon and orange top notes accompanied by a blend of spices. Ah, but meanwhile, it's probably not good for you. So what is in there? Their engineer specifically doesn't say what, their also subject to rigorous testing, which means each part comes fully certified. In the end, you can be sure that your vehicle will perform up to its potential. Mile after mile. I don't know if you want to try this. Whoa. Can you say that word, doctor? Oh no. Give far good 10 seconds. I'm guessing that means it's not dangerous goods, but why not? Other dangerous, they're calling it dangerous. That sounds really crazy. It's dangerous goods. Look at this, like hazard warnings. This is crazy. Like why would they say that? On the outside, yeah. And then you're spraying it and you breathe in it. It could be very well. Like when those California rules, they say like this building has got dangerous chemicals that could cause cancer and people and it like has to be better than that. Right? But it's just weird that that's in the actual stuff that you breathe in and smell. Yeah, I've heard of nothing. It's really bad for you is incense. Probably varies with the, you know, what's in it. I wouldn't blanket all incense. I haven't studied that. So let's put that into perplexity. What are the, because I know candles are bad for you. Sented candles in particular. Sented. Yes, yes, there's the aroma again. See, one of the things that salads do is they cause something to hold scent. Retain scent. So they're put into perfume and they're put into makeup and they put into, you know, the things you put on your wall. And so, you know, you want something to smell for a long time. You're going to use that light. It says burning incense products, smoking chemicals that can irritate your lungs, worsen asthma and allergies. And with heavy long term use in poorly ventilated spaces may increase risk for heart disease and some cancers. You know, you think incense, you go over someone's house, they do yoga, they vegan. They burn incense, they must be healthy. Right. Long term health risks, repeated long term exposure daily for years, been associated in studies with increased risk of bronchitis, reduced lung function and children, and chronic respiratory symptoms and workers heavily exposed to temple incense. God, epidemiological studies, mostly in Asian populations with heavy daily use, have linked long term incense exposure to higher rates of cardiovascular problems, hypertension, coronary artery disease, stroke, chronic limb. What's that word? Excuse me. Ischemia. What's that mean? What is the scheme you mean? It can't be good. It sounds terrible. What is a scheme? Yeah. What is a scheme? Yeah. Oh. Lack of blood flow to part of a body, usually because of an artery is narrowed or blocked. Severe or prolonged, the effect that tissue could be damaged or die. Oh, great. Oh, wonderful. So you think about incense, you think like healthy natural people, oh, they burn incense. It sounds lovely. It sounds like they're spiritual. Oh, incense. I just love incense. I used to use it all the time. Thought it was cool. Made you be more peaceful incense. Bad for you. Everything's bad for you. You know what's bad for you? These straws, if you trip with them. A lot of people have died. These are metal straws. Really? They've died because they're on their phone and they're not paying attention. They stub their toe and fall. And this thing goes through the eyeball and they die. Yeah. OK. I'm not recommending that. But also, you could die just falling. I mean, if you're falling and you're holding a steel straw, throw it to the side. That's my advice. So if you want to do this little experiment of one that we're talking about. OK. And of one. And let's Jamie wants to do it too. Jamie's in. Look at him. He's down. Then, Jenna or somebody on our team, if you had an hour, half an hour, I don't know how long it could call you. Said, ask you, what did you use? What did you use? What did you use for this? This, this, this, this, this, right? And then they'll recommend what to change. Right. I recently underwent this plasma for recess. I know. Yeah. And that's supposed to remove a lot of that stuff from your blood, correct? So my, but I'll tell you what, the next day, I was very tired that day, like exhausted that day. But the next day after it's, I felt like later, I felt like, well, this is crazy. I felt like I hadn't more energy. Like it was, it was like kind of late at night. I was like, I'm not tired at all. It was weird. Like I felt different. You know? So that would be great. Are you going to do it again? Uh, no, I just did it. I mean, I would do it again. But I just did it a few days ago. I was just wondering, you know, if you measure chemicals in your urine before you did that. I should have done that. I don't have any pain when you ran around from before. No, I don't. But I could do it now. And maybe I have very low levels. And we could have attributed that to that because I, I haven't done the best job. Well, like I said, I did get rid of my plastic coffee machine at home. Uh, I did that about three or four weeks ago. The other thing that's done is it's made my morning coffee a lot harder to get. It's more of like a ritual now because I use a steel water boiler thing that heats it up to 200 degrees and then I have a steel French press and I grind the beans and a steel thing is right. And then I pour the beans in the French press and it takes 15 minutes rather than 30 seconds. It tastes way better. I'm a big coffee drinker. I love coffee, but I like it black. Like I love the flavor of coffee. I really do. And so it just tastes better. It tastes French press I think is the best way to drink coffee anyway. And so I kind of decided like why am I, I'm avoiding all these microplastics. I don't drink out of plastic or paper cups. So I do all these different things. Why am I still using a plastic coffee machine? I look at that thing every morning and I was like, yeah, but it's going to give me coffee right now. So I press the button to get my coffee right now. And I was like, that's stupid. So now I just, I only use something like this. Yeah. So I'd be interested to see if maybe I have low levels because I certainly feel like my body, it felt refreshed. I've got to have less inflammation. You know, but that's like a two hour procedure. It's pretty in the butt. Yeah. You know, you gotta sit there for two hours. You look like a psycho. You know, like I should have taken a photo of what I looked like while I was doing it. Cause I was laying there and I had like cords in this arm and cords in that arm. So I had blood coming out of that arm and going back out of that arm is really kind of nutty. How expensive. I don't know. Oh. Yeah. I don't know. I'm sure it's not cheap. But the benefits of it in terms of like the people that I know that have done it said it's a game changer in terms of your recovery, market recovery levels, much better sleep, you could be wearing an or ring or a whoop strap or some other ones to get much better recovery. And I think that's probably the case with me. It feels pretty good. But to a lot of stuff, you know, I do a lot of things to maximize my health. So it's really kind of difficult to know like what's doing. What's doing? Yeah. I just know all in all. We always say, you know, it might feel, you know, do one thing at a time. Right. Of course, if you're doing science, yeah, I'm not doing science. I'm doing chaos. Well, you're doing, you know, experiment of one. So yeah. Yeah. But it works. All of it together is definitely working. My body's pretty good. So you know, you were mentioning how it's going to be very hard to get these things regulated. And I just wanted to point out, we probably talked about this last time. But you know, where do these chemicals come from these plasticizers? You probably know they're made from fossil fuel by products. Yes. Yeah. So the forces against eliminating them are not only the manufacturers of the plastic, but it's also the fossil fuel industry. Right. So that makes it extremely difficult. Right. Yeah. Yeah. And it's probably one of the primary factors and why this isn't discussed. Because it would reduce fossil fuel consumption, which would affect oil markets, which affect the economy. It's big. It's big. Yeah. But I mean, the rate at which plastic production is increasing is astounding. You know, and no end in sight. Well, I don't think you're going to get the government to act about the stuff. I think this has to be done on an individual level where people are aware of it and take steps to protect themselves and their family from these issues. That's my cynical view of how this is going to be played out. And I'm really hoping I know for a fact a lot of people listen to our last conversation and made some lifestyle changes. I'm really hoping that now with this follow up visit more and more people will be aware of it. And watching the movie. Yeah. And the movie's called What's it to call again? The Plastic Detox. The Plastic Detox. Yeah. You're available on your house. Everything's right. But is it available on Amazon Netflix? It's Netflix. OK. Watch on Netflix is great. There's so many great documentaries on Netflix. They hidden dangers of plastics in our homes, six couples in bark on a plastic detox within their homes, it changes their families forever. The plastic detox explains what microplastics and their chemicals are doing to our health and how we can take matters into our own hands from hormone disruption that's fueling a worldwide fertility crisis to growing rates of cancer and early heart attack and stroke. It's powerful document to reveal the shocking science behind plastics impact on human life. Do you want to see a little trailer? Sure. Let's watch a little trailer. Put your headphones on. Well, you already know what it says. It's something leetous. A crap ton of chemicals. Even the smallest levels of exposure can have profound effect. Your quality worldwide is going down and it is tightly linked to chemicals that are commonly used in plastic. You have been trying to get pregnant for over 10 years now. 22 months. Two and a half years? Say what you always call yourself. I say, you know, Julie, I'm not a human deal, though. This is a free mug intervention where we recruited six couples who have unexplained infertility. We look at measures of semen quality to cut off for fertilists, month 40. You're technically some fertile. So that's kind of scary, right? Yes. The question is if we lower people's exposure to chemicals that are in plastic, can we change their fertility? These chemicals not only affect your fertility. They also have other health consequences. These chemicals can contribute to early heart attacks and stroke, autism, as well as obese agents. Learning more about plastics, it's opening my eyes. These chemicals can contribute to early heart attacks and stroke autism as well as obesity. Learning more about plastics, it's opening my eyes to how much bigger it is. Many people think the government takes care of us, but very few chemicals are actually banned from personal care products and over 1,100 are banned in the EU. To have a child, I believe it is a fundamental human right. I think keeping the best mom ever. And I really want to see that for you. Plastic doesn't have to come from a toxic petroleum basement area. We can learn to do it otherwise. It can change and you can help with the change. That's another good point that he just said right there. The plastic doesn't have to come from petroleum-based materials. And most people aren't aware of that, but you can make plastic out of plant compounds. Yes. Like, and it's biodegradable. Yes. It's just like they make a hemp plastic. And potatoes. Yeah, potatoes. Yeah, and probably a bunch of other stuff, too, right? That you can make plastic out of that doesn't have these effects. Right. It'll be really nice if we move in that direction, wouldn't it? Absolutely. Absolutely. The plant-based plastics have the cost of raising the plants, of course, there's that added cost. Right. But does that even compare to the cost of pulling oil out of the ground and refining it? Right. And then turning it into plastic through some horrific process. That turns the rivers blue. God knows it would just color it to ourselves. Right. Is there a list of garments that people shouldn't wear? Are you aware of that? The plastic leaching garments? Well, the only specific ones I know are because people have told me about them are the sports uniforms, team uniforms. Because they have a coating on them. Yeah. And to make it to make them more durable, it's the idea. And I probably this book to die for will have more information. And I have it. And I'm just so busy with this right now. And I'm going to read it. And then sports uniforms, kids uniforms, airline, personnel, uniforms. I think uniforms, firefighters, firefighters are big, big exposure to these chemicals, too. Right. Yeah. Because they wear those waterproof. Yeah. Anything that's waterproof, stain-proofed, just like your Teflon pans, you know, in the area. Yeah. Yeah. But I don't know any particular brands. So imagine nylon track suits and all those different things that we terrible for you. So the worst of the time is customers could look for when they buy these things. They could look for PFAS-free. Just like now people know to look for BPA-free or, you know, it's a good look at PFAS-free, then they would be avoiding a lot of this. So go back to the top, please. So the worst offenders are synthetic, plastic heavy garments that are fuzzy, coated, or very tight to the skin, especially polyester fleas, recycled polyester, fast fashion, and PFAS-coated water, stain repellent, outerwear, and activewear. Polyester fleas, jackets, blankets, lounge wear, extremely high microfiber shedding. One study found that polyester fleas shedding orders of magnitude more fibers per wash than other nits, which estimates around 110,000 fibers per garment per wash. This is both bad for environmental plastic pollution and for indoor dust and air. We recycled polyester, fast fashion like leggings, teas, dresses, and sports wear, new testing shows. Recycled polyester garments shed far, said more, and finer microfibers than virgin polyester. Interesting. So you think recycled, oh, recycling, I'm a good person. No, you're killing yourself. Increased particle numbers and potential toxicity, these items are often cheaply made, shed heavily in washing, and frequently used intense dies and finishes. Hot pink. Tight synthetic sports wear and underwear. Yikes. These are worn for long periods directly against sweaty skin and mucus membranes, increasing opportunity for contact with microplastics and additives like antimony, thalates, and PFAS finishes. Cheap synthetic performance or wrinkle-free fashion. Stained resistant, easy care, anti-odor, and heavy print coating garments are more likely to use chemical finishes that can off-gas or leech on top of the base synthetic fiber issues. Holy, lower concerned choices. OK, not perfect, but generally less problematic for leaching and microplastic shedding, undied or lightly dyed natural fibers like cotton linen, wool, hemp, silk, without stain resistant or wrinkle-free finishes. Simple weaves, nits rather than fluffy or brush surfaces, which shed less PFAS-free ring gear and outdoor clothing. Brands now often, what ring gear is PFAS-free? That's interesting because I've always thought that like has to be coated. Right. Whoo, that worked, it worked, it worked, huh? What has been the response to your first of all, you're releasing your first book and then coming on podcast and talking about this thing? Has it been surprising to you? Like what has it been like? It has been kind of surprising how much interest there is and how much people are taking this up. And what's great is there are a lot of nonprofits that are in the space that are getting out these messages. So it's not just me, many, many nonprofits. And then there's the plastic treaty which is a worldwide, it didn't pass, but hopefully it'll come back and maybe next time. And then there's the work that the EU is doing, which is miles ahead of us. For example, I think I might have said this before, but just so in Europe, if you're gonna put a new chemical into commerce, you have to pass certain tests to be safe. Right. Not here. Right. The testing is on you and me and everyone listening. I mean, we haven't really raised our hand and volunteered for that. Well, I mean, I don't want this to happen, but I think maybe what has to happen is these companies have to get in trouble. Well, some of them have, you know, there are lawsuits and that's- Are there lawsuits against like outerwear, clothing? Like yoga pants? I don't know, I don't know. Because yoga pants are a problem, right? Yoga pants. Yeah, those tight nylon things that a lot of the gals wear to- Yeah, I don't know where the lawsuits are. I might at some point get involved in that, but at this point I don't know, but I know there are lawsuits and that they can be effective way to push back. And by the way, we wouldn't get a federal law and I think that's not for a long time, but states can do it. California, for example, is doing lots of good stuff. What are they doing about it? I can't name you the laws, but I know they're very active. The Bonta, Ron Bonta, he's a district attorney, attorney general of the state of California, he's very active. And so the states that have active, you know, push back, able to get laws passed, that kind of sets the tone for, you know, for what's possible, but I don't see a getting federal push back very soon. No, it seems like industry controls the federal government more than the health and safety concerns of the people, which is very disturbing, but not too surprising when you consider a lot of the other things that are allowed in this country that aren't allowed in other countries. Like we need to show the list of the chemicals that are illegal in the EU, they're illegal in America, that's disturbing. Like we're supposed to be number one. We're number one. We're number one in chemicals. Number one in chemicals. Yeah. Probably. The response when you run this podcast was pretty shocking for me. So many people reached out to me. A lot of my friends that watched the episode were like, I can't believe this. Oh, I have no idea it was five years ago, but quite a few of my friends that, you know, don't reach out with every episode, reached out and said that is just nuts. Like I can't believe this, and especially people with children, and they're concerned about the development of their children or people who are pregnant, who are concerned with the intake of these chemicals while they're pregnant, which has a radical effect on the child's development. Well, and alligator, if your friends are listening now, I can tell them that it hasn't changed much. It hasn't improved much, and we have to do a lot more. Well, I personally, and you know, I hate to say it, but I think, like I said, I don't think the government's gonna do anything. I think it's gotta be up to individuals to make choices. And I'm really hoping your documentary has another big impact. One of the beautiful things about Netflix is that it's even though things get promoted on Netflix. Whenever there are so many people have Netflix, there will never think anything's good. A lot of people just start sharing it and start talking about it and posting about it on social media, and then next thing, the conversation starts happening, it starts raising awareness, and I really do hope you're gonna go on a bunch of other podcasts as well and talk about this. Thank you. And there are showings and Netflix, you know, encourages that, and I'm going actually all over the world talking at showings now. The schedule is like crazy. Do you ever think like how crazy it is that you're this one person that's sounding the alarm? Because you kind of are the most public face of this problem. That is a little crazy to me, especially given what I've come from, but what if you didn't exist? This is the question. Oh, there are many, many people pushing back, many, many. Right, but I don't know if they're doing it as publicly as you are and certainly not. I mean, they have them in this podcast. There are many, there are. I feel lucky that I've had this like speaking to you and your followers and other podcasts. And then having the opportunity to have designed this intervention and have worked with Louis and others on the film team to put this forward. It's a very big thing. And you know the film costs a lot of money. And we've had worldwide support for putting this out. So there's a lot of support behind the pushback. And we just have to get everybody on board and just say, no, I'm not going to use that stuff. Yeah, that's really what has to happen. The conversation has to increase. The volume has to increase. More people have to share it and talk about it. And more people have to have you on. And we just have to sound the alarm. It's kind of crazy that five years later, nothing's changed because like I said, it shook up a lot of people that I'm friends with. But I didn't hear it from any other places. I mean, I didn't see you on a, did you do any other podcasts after you did my money? You know, Hugh Riven? Sure. Very well. He's great. Yeah, he's great. And I can't remember the rest. Yes, a lot of podcasts. But hopefully now more, I do have more coming up. My schedule is really kind of crazy. Well, nothing is great as the documentary is easily digestible. You know, it's on Netflix. Everything's on Netflix. You sit down, OK, let's watch. And then you go, oh my God. And then there's all these, you know, places to go. At the end of it to learn more. Right. People want to do that. I would love to see it viewed by influencers, not in the typical social media sense, but people like religious leaders, leaders who could be one over, if you have any ideas. But I thought about having, you know, the Pope. I mean, that sounds really well. But a lot of people get there and where do people get their information from their religious leaders, from their peers, from their doctors? By the way, none of this is taught in medical school. That's crazy. That's crazy. Right there. Well, neither is nutrition. Right. Yeah. So, you know, somebody's got to spend a lot of time getting that curriculum changed, right? Actually, you have to get the test change because the teaching is to the test. Right. So if we could get this stuff on the test, there would be more doctors learning this. But they don't get it. They don't get it. They learn about lead. That's about all. Well, there's not a lot of incentive to teach this stuff. That's part of the problem. Right. Especially these petrochemical companies and the use of these things is going to affect so many different industries. Because if you cut that out and they know, I mean, how much of an impact is that going to have on the economy? If everybody just stopped using all these chemicals, all the Lulu lemon brands, and I don't know single them out, but all these different companies, if they all just went under tomorrow, it'd be a giant problem if everybody just stopped using these things. Maybe for a little while. But then they'd be healthier. Well, the people would be healthier, but the companies would go on. Oh, the companies will not be healthier. Yeah. No. Unless they make the switch. But what could they do to make the switch? Like if you're a company. Oh, well, you were saying plant-based plastics. Mm-hmm. Do they make plant-based plastic clothing? Does anybody do that? Like plant-based plastic leggings? Let's find that out. Does anybody make plant-based plastic? Used in clothing. Yeah. What is the primary chemicals that come out and is it PFAS? It's like that. PFAS-free leggings. Because I would imagine, especially if you're not wearing underwear, anywhere in those kind of yoga tights, that would get in there, right? Well, speaking of that, they're looking for it. They want them to be squat proof in quotes. So they're not see-through. Squat proof? Yeah. If there's a girl's wearing leggings, you know they're going to be doing a lot of squats at the gym probably or something. Squat proof so they don't want people to be watching them a lot. But there are some. I don't know what that means. Watching them a lot? Yeah, you know. Dop, dude. Oh, see-through. Yeah, there's see-through. Oh, that's a weird way to say. Squat proof sounds demeelic. You can't do squats. Also probably ripping out what I imagine, too. I think it's just a bad phrase. It's just like when you do a squat or downward facing dog, the fabric stretches out. You can see some undies through the fabric. This is tested nine different kinds of them. So there's a few different brands. Now this isn't even really. So let's- On the bioplastic, you just go back there. Yeah, bioplastic three primary categories of non-toxic workout clothes. All natural or almost all natural. For example, 100% are getting caught in a 90% cotton, 10% spandex. Most semi-synthetic fabric, for instance, 10 cell fabric, plant-based plastic, which is a plastic source from something like castor bean oil instead of fossil fuels. In general, I'm not a huge fan of plant-based bioplastics. They're advertised as plastic free alternatives, but they're still plastic. And some research shows that they're not truly non-toxic. I know, it's disappointing, it says. Here's the honest to God truth. When it comes to performance, stretchiness, compression, durability, the plant-based plastics do tend to perform the best. Huh, followed by the semi-synthetics, followed by the owner. I think they mean performed the best in terms. Out of the three, I think not. But in terms of stretchiness, oh, the other three, a lot of product categories were non-toxic options, performs just as well as a synthetic option, like shampoo to give you one example. It's not really a straightforward with leggings. And in the day, you're gonna have to decide for yourself what kind of material you prefer. It will largely depend on things like what type of workouts you do, how you like your leggings to feel, where you work out and more. Okay, my reviews on these nine almost plastic free non-toxic leggings. All right, let's get to it. It says, what are the ones? So, mate, it's a company called Mate. Overall, review, it's, they were the best middle ground leggings. They're not super high performance, I don't know what that means, but they're made from healthier materials and they're very comfortable, the great for lower impact workouts, just for general everyday wearing squat test past, but had the size up. So let's find what the best one is. Do they have the best one? I don't. So mate is one of them. What are the other ones? Pang Gaia, overall review, find myself reaching for these leggings more often than any of the others when it comes to hardcore workouts. Compressive nature of them makes me feel very held in when I'm jumping around, they have great stretch. Squat test past, material blend, 92% polymed, bio-based, EVO, bio-based content, 8% part, bio-based, crayora, elastane, 30% bio-based content makes them different, closest to conventional synthetics in terms of fit, feel, stretch, and compression. Okay. Well, so this website is the fitory.com and forward slash plastic free, non-toxic workout leggings. Go check it out for yourself. So there's some options that are out there. Hopefully we'll give those companies a boost and more people will wear them. Anything else before we get going? I think we covered it all. I think so. I think we sounded the alarm. I think we tried again anyway. Yeah, we did something. Yeah. Like I said, I think it's just a volume thing. More and more of these conversations have to take place so that in the general's like-ciced, more people are aware of it and it's just increased awareness and just makes it where more people are making better choices. And you're a platformer. So huge that I'm really encouraged to have the opportunity to talk about this with you and happy to come back. Well, I'd be happy to have you back. I love you the first time. You're great the second time as well. And for everybody, one more time, the plastic detox. That's the name of the documentary. It's available right now on Netflix. Go check it out and fix your life, kids. All right. Thank you. I really appreciate it. Thank you. Yeah. That's great. And I'm really so happy that you're out there. Because like I said, if you weren't doing this very important work, I wouldn't know about it. And I think a lot of other people wouldn't either. So thank you. So pee in the cup. I will pee in the cup. I promise you. I promise you. And then if you want to do the next steps, let me know. I will do the next steps as well. You want to do the next steps. Sure. When you're ready to have another time. Talking of that microphone so people know you're saying. Yeah. So when you're ready to have another test kit, or you can go to a million marketing just to order one. OK. Yeah. OK. Yeah. It's 100 bucks. All right. We'll send it for nothing if you want. Just one minute. OK, be the 100 bucks. I don't want. Thank you. Thank you very much. OK. Thank you. Bye everybody.