[Music] Uh, you got accused of being a fed and now you look the part. >> Well, you know, if the suit suit fits, I guess uh wear it. >> The suit fits. >> I don't know. But I I just can't believe I'm sitting here talking to you. I just saw you and Joe Rogan like two days ago. Dude, that blew my mind. >> Yeah, it was blew my mind, too, bro. So, I just want to say I'm I'm dying to know what the secret that Bob Lazar told off air is because he >> Okay, the secret is uh Bob Lazar had a quantum anti-gravity dildo in his ass. >> I was going to say 51. >> I thought it was the element 115 under John Leer's driveway. >> No, >> you know, like that that's what he said. It was buried under the driveway. Like like literally um the we can see uh we have GPR that can see structures underneath the pyramids, but the government can't uh look underneath John Leer's driveway to find a a trillion dollar trillion dollar gram piece of stolen element 115. >> Well, Bob smuggled the element 115 out of S4 in his butt. That's that's what happened. And he showed it to Rogan and he promised not to say anything to him. >> He didn't get rectile cancer from that, did he? >> Right. No. No. It actually it actually made his ass 20 years younger. So he's now he has the ass of a of a 20-year-old. >> My god. >> Yeah. >> You see like a a butt model. Does Does his sphincter look like your sphincter? >> That's funny. >> That was good. I like that. >> Oh man. >> Yeah, we got a lot to catch up on, man. >> Yeah, we do, bro. We got a ton to catch up on. uh first >> Epstein stuff, the UFO stuff, and you've been doing a crazy deep dive on 9/11 and how this 9/11 UFOs and Epstein are all connected. >> Well, yeah. And it's connected to a lot of other crazy stuff, too. Like, I mean, basically Epstein's entire network comes right from Iran Contra. It comes right from when Carter shut down the the CIA in the 70s and 76 for the House Select Committee on Assassinations. He shut down the CIA and basically a private CIA popped up to fill in the holes called the Safari Club. And the Safari Club was named after this uh retreat where they all used to meet called the the Safari Club and u it was owned by a guy named Adnan Kosigible, right? >> That name comes up quite a bit in the Epstein case and and it was one of Epstein's early clients. Those are the same network of people that Epstein was involved in and started out in at Bear Sterns, which is a company that was, you know, owned by the Bronman family and all that. And you dig into these families. They they got rich during Prohibition and got a lot of money during Prohibition. And um they also have their hands in a lot of lot of history, a lot of hidden history um when it comes to you know behind the scenes stuff. Not just Iran Contra, but that, you know, the Bronman's um had an operator similar to Epstein was this kind of operator for these billionaire elite families. Um back in the day, they had another guy named Jack Alustin Kiteon who uh ran for the governor of Texas in 1964 against Governor Connelly in Texas. Um and also Bush, George HW Bush, ran for the Senate that same year in Texas. So both of those people uh Jack Kiteon and George HW Bush, it turns out were were deeply tied to the JFK assassination through uh through the the documents and the history that the researchers have have pulled out of this. Uh Jack Kiteon was in the 488th Intelligence Squadron with George Lumpkin who was a captain on the Dallas Police Force driving the car in front of Kennedy that slowed down right in De Plaza so that you know the they could take the shots. They had an ambush there waiting for him. Um these these were the these were the these were like the key people involved in the sa in the assassination. I know everyone's talking about Joanites and the whole uh counter inelligence operation out of a JM wave and those connections but you know the Miami station that did the whole Bay of Pigs thing. Um tons of these Bay of Pigs operatives um left uh Cuba very angry at at Kennedy uh swore swore revenge on him. They blamed him for the failure of the Bay of Pigs. >> Yeah, I interviewed one of them. Um the staging operation, the platform for the Bay of Pigs was actually the Zapata oil offshore oil platforms run by George HW Bush. Um he owned these oil platforms. They used those as the station between Miami and uh Cuba to launch the in Bayig's invasion from. So Bush was tied to this whole network of um you know CIA anti-Cuban cast anti-Castro Cubans and then also uh the CIA in Dallas and um a bunch of these oilmen you know he's Jack Kiteon was business partners with D Harold Bird who owned the schoolbook depository building um where Lee Harvey Oswald was shot from and then you have uh >> you know you have Ruth Payne involved she's she's uh connected to Um, De Harold Bird, she was friends with D. Harold Bird, introduced uh Oswald, got him the job at the schoolbook depository building. She was Oswald's land lady, basically. You know, she's still alive, by the way. And that's one of the reasons I I think that the the a lot of the files haven't fully come out yet, cuz people are still alive from the JFK assassination. She's like 94 now. But um it's uh it's pretty crazy uh when you when you dig into all the JFK assassination stuff that's come out uh in these files in the in the in the Luna hearings. A lot of the stuff is coming to light slowly. It took 60 years for this to get out. We don't want to have to wait 60 years to find out, you know, which elite politicians were abusing children. >> Well, I think it's I think the JFK files are the same thing as the thing same thing is going to happen with the Epstein files. I think they're just never going to admit this stuff and it's going to be like the way it is now. Now, if you took a poll on every single American that paid pays attention to this stuff, a vast majority of people would say they know that the Jeff that the JFK was not that Oswald was not the lone shooter, right? Like people know there's a conspiracy behind that. Whether >> whether they understand like who was truly behind it and who specifically all worked as a part of it, I don't think people know that, but like people can see the forest for the trees that this was something that was covered up by the US government. And this is the same thing with Epstein and and the US government is just like giving you the us the middle finger saying you. You're never going to find the truth. >> No, they we you know it it's sad that we live in a country where our the people inside the prisons do more to protect us from child abusers than than our government. >> These people go to prison, they get they get the crap kicked out of them by by inmates, you know, >> like once they once inmates find out that you're a child molester in jail, it's like you're done. >> You're done. >> Mhm. Like, but the government it's like, "No, we're going to protect these people." >> Yeah. >> That's just messed up, man. It's like, >> yeah. >> Uh I just uh I just don't um >> Tim Dillis Tim Dylan really said it best uh about America. He said, "America has become when you're going to vote for the president, it's just pick your p your favorite file. Pick the file you agree with because all these people are compromised. It's almost a prerequisite to have some sort of blackmail on you to be a leader of the free world or to have any high position in government or intelligence or anything. >> That's so crazy how they told us we're getting the files. They got people to vote. A lot of people voted for Trump because of that. They wanted this all to come out. Um, you know, all a lot of stuff, >> right? That's what he ran on. He literally ran on on releasing the Epstein files was one of the major things that he ran on. And now he's saying, >> "Are we still talking about these Epstein files? Come on." >> Oh, this is the weird thing, right? In those press conferences, the interview, he's standing next to the his department, head of the Department of Commerce, which a lot of people are like, "Who's this guy? I've never seen this guy before or heard of him before." And, you know, I remembered who he was. And I was like, "Oh, this is Howard Lutnik." Howard Lutnik was the CEO of of >> When was this? in in the in the press conference where where Trump basically takes questions about Epste and calls everyone calls his base stupid for uh being interested in the Epstein files. He's sitting directly next to >> this the one with Pam Bondi. >> Um no this not there's one in the White House conference room and then then there's another one. >> Can you find the one where he's talking about Steve with so we can see see Howard Lutnick sitting next to him? >> Howard Lutnick sitting right next to him, man. >> So I I I was I was amazed. I said, "Why is Howard Lutnik >> that >> co cover covering up for this?" And you find out >> Yeah. Yeah. This is This is one of them. Um I'm not >> I know that uh you can maybe you could find the clip. We'll we talk about this for a second, >> but he's sitting next This is the This is a clip where Trump calls his base stupid. You know, basically >> I haven't seen this one yet. >> He insults his base like says everyone, "Oh, people the people who are interested in this are are stupid and and basically calling people silly. Oh, this it's old news. Let's not worry about this. This is it's nonsense. But he's sitting next to Howard Lutnik. And I'm saying, why is Howard Lutnick covering up for all this? And then people have pointed out that, well, Howard Lutnik bought the house right next door to Jeffrey Epstein that Epstein was running his whole New York operation out of, 971st Street. Well, the house next door to it, 1171st Street, was also owned in part through um this Comet Trust is what what actually owned the >> Lesie Wexner gave that house to Jeffrey Epstein, right? >> I I believe so. I believe he gave the house to him or it gave it to him through a series of trusts, but he had this in the background and then the then a trust called the Comet Trust sold it to Howard Lutnik. And I'm I'm like, comet Trust? I never heard of that before. But if you search for anything related to Comet and Jeffrey Epstein, you get the the all that QAnon disinfo garbage about ping pong pizza and Comet pizza and the pizza gate crap. >> Uh which I I think was a uh I think that was a counter intelligence op that was put out right after the Epstein stuff to to really off. Yeah, a lot of the Q went on was it was uh was a limited. >> Here's the video. >> Yeah. Yeah. So, he's hit it. >> I'm curious. Why do you think your supporters in particular have been so interested in the Epstein story? So upset about how it's been handled. >> I don't understand it why they would be so interested. He's dead for a long time. Uh he was never a big factor in terms of life. Uh I don't understand what the interest or what the fascination is. I really don't. And the credible information's been given. Don't forget, we went through years of the Mueller witch hunt and all of the different things, the Steel Dossier, which was all fake. All that information was fake. But I don't understand why the Jeffrey Epste would be of interest to anybody. It's pretty boring stuff. It's sorted, but it's boring. And I don't understand why it keeps going. Uh I I think really only pretty bad people, including fake news, want to keep something like like that going. But credible information, let them give it. Anything that's credible, I would say let them have it. >> So, here's the thing. Here's the thing. We know what Jeffrey Epstein was doing. We know he was an access agent for the MSAD, right? It's pretty obvious. That's pretty obvious with with Robert Maxwell, his whole background, and how he was recruited by MSAD when he was part of Brit British intelligence and and his daughter being hooked up with him and and Aud Barack visiting his house every day of the week. um being likely being his handler. Here's the thing. I if Jeffrey Epstein was an access agent to the MSAD and he was gathering intelligence and keeping blackmail on all these powerful people around the world, right? If Donald Trump, if people like Donald Trump and Bill Clinton are on those hard drives that were connected to all the cameras that were in every single one of his houses all around the world, they're not going to let anyone else have that. That's a nuclear bomb. If you let anyone else get their hands on that blackmail, the ch the risk of someone else using it before you can completely ruins the value of it. Right? If you let somebody else get their hands on that blackmail, say just say for example, just hypothetically, if there's footage of Trump and a young underage girl, right? >> Yeah. >> And you let anyone else see it, they could anyone else can use that, rendering it useless for you. So now you've spent all this time with Jeffrey Epstein, all this time, all this money on this guy, right? You've had so much investment in Jeffrey Epste to do all this work and get all this blackmail and all these powerful people around the world. You can't let anyone else get their hands on that ever. There has to be a hard >> it now. It was on Pam Bondi's desk. >> It's on a hard drive. No, it was never. I don't think it was ever. I think it's on a hard drive sitting in Tel Aviv right now. I I don't think Pam Bondi or any of those people have ever seen any of that >> Why do you think Cash Patel did a 180? He went from we're going to I'm going to shut down the FBI and make it a shrine to the deep state to, you know, being basically this, you know, a cow. A a cow. >> It's hilarious. It's hilarious. I mean, he sat on he sat right in front of Rogan on his podcast saying, "There's nothing. As soon as I see it, you'll see it." Like, >> right. >> Okay. >> Well, I thought it was There's a lot of suspicious stuff going on there. >> She said it was child. They said she said that she had like tons of No, no, I'm sorry. She didn't even say it was child. Did she say it was child? She just said she found >> disgusting. It was all It was all >> internet. >> All videos of uh Jeffrey Epstein himself with with these people. There was no clients, no other people. >> He was a lone trafficker. >> Yeah. Trafficking to no one. And that's why Gizlane Gizlane's in prison now. And >> yeah, this is all this is all And um and the fact that Howard Lutnik, the guy who the CEO who's who suffered the biggest losses on 911, I CEO of Caner Fitzgerald, his company lost 658 employees that day. He lost his brother Gary Lutnik that day, right? and uh and he would he said he cried for 3 years after that and and couldn't get himself back together and and and you know I felt really bad for the guy. I didn't consider him you know on my list of of suspicious people because of all that but the fact that he's on you know with Trump defending this ep the release of these Epste files when he bought the house next door to Epstein lived in that house next door to Epste on 11 and it's it's interesting 9 and 11 >> people like Andrew Huberman and Dr. Dr. Rhonda Patrick have talked about a special compound called epicadicanin. It's found in dark chocolate and green tea. It's shown to improve blood flow, delivering more oxygen to the muscles and the brain. Studies show that it reduces stress and fatigue while improving mood and enhancing muscle growth, strength, and recovery. One study found that it boosted muscle growth factors by nearly 50% in just a week. But don't reach for chocolate bars. Processing destroys these compounds and you'd need an impossible amount to get the results. That's why Verso created Morning Bean, a rich chocolatey morning brew packed with epicin, cocoa polyphenols, antioxidants, and electrolytes to fuel energy, performance, focus, and longevity. Unlike coffee and other coffee alternatives, it supports muscle recovery, cardiovascular health, and cognitive function, all without caffeine crashes. Cocoa powders, drinks, and other products are commonly contaminated with high levels of toxic heavy metals. But Verso conducts third-party testing on every batch to ensure they have pure, highquality cocoa, prioritizing safety, and high antioxidant content. I personally use Morning Bean to replace my second cup of coffee. And I can tell you, I have far less energy crashes, longer sustained focus energy, plus I love how I get my daily dose of superfoods from it. If you're looking to improve your health with something that's actually backed by research, click the link below or head on over to ver.so/danny and use my code Danny. D an n y for 15% off your first order. Again, head on over to ver.so/danny and use code Danny for 15% off your first order. >> 71st Street in New York City were the addresses that that Jeffrey own. >> You can't be connecting those dots. >> No, no. I Well, there's some weird dots here. There's some weird dots here because >> you're saying because it was 9 71st Street and 117th Street is 911. >> Yeah, that's that's a crap connection, but some people have made that connection. But I'm sure they have. >> But how about this? >> How about Yeah, because it it's only odd numbers on that side of the street. So it's it's just nine the house next door. So it's it maybe it's coincidence, right? It's it seems like one of those things, right? But the here's the interesting thing is that Howard Lutnik, you know, if you're going to commit a massive crime and a financial crime, the best thing you could possibly do is to disguise yourself as a victim and to to portray yourself as a victim. >> Um, so I'm saying there's a lot of weird CEOs that miss work that day, not just Howard. >> Oh, yeah. Larry Silverstein. And then you ask Grock these questions like you ask the AIS these questions. You'll say who which CEOs missed work on 911? They'll tell you Larry Silverstein and Howard Lutnik, but they won't tell you any of the other ones and they'll you know you ask it questions and it won't tell you the answers. It's kind of like the same thing as if you ask does vaccines cause autism. It will give you these you know responses that are you know according to the books these authorities and there's no but but if you ask it specific questions tailored to certain things and certain studies and you you know the information or you know the people suddenly you get real answers from the AI which is means somebody's programming these AIs to hide certain information from us. they are, you know, and and I thought that was really weird because I'm asking it questions about, you know, well, was Gary Gary Lutnick ever connected to Jeffrey Epstein? And it said, oh, he couldn't possibly have had any connections to Gary Jeffrey Epstein because Howard Lutnik brought the property from Jeff uh Jeffrey Epstein after uh his brother died. And I said, "No, he didn't." Uh he bought the property in 1998. His brother died in 2001. >> How did you find that out? >> And how did I find that out? >> That he bought it from him in 1998. It's it's you ask Grock. If you ask Grock when he bought it from it, it will tell you 1998. So it tells you the truth. >> And then then then when you re-query it and you tell it, it'll say, "Oh, I corrected myself." Uh, you know, but for some reason, it's trying to like separate these people in these entities, which is is is really strange. And it won't tell you other CEOs uh that miss work in the towers that day like Paul Bremer of Marshia McClennon or uh Jeff Jeffrey Greenberg of Marshia Mlennon or um >> Well, here's the thing. It's at Google. Have you heard of this guy named Robert Epstein? >> He does >> Robert Epstein. >> Robert Epstein. He Epstein Epstein. He calls himself Epstein, but uh he he does all this stuff where he like points out all the bias with Google and how how Google's curated for certain things and how he basically pointed out largely how Google suppressed and amplified certain stories like during the the last few elections, right? Like if you were to Google anything about if you were to try to get a positive story about Trump, you couldn't find anything on Google, right? But if you try to find it and if you try to find a negative story about Camala, it would only get positive stories when you looked for it. And this guy found it out and he he um he installed um like software on he he started a trial where he got hundreds of people to be to agree to be involved in this trial where he basically was monitoring their search engine and and they were all searching stuff and he was trying to gather data on what kind of results they were getting on certain searches. And obviously it's different for everybody because everyone's got a different algorithm. But by and large, he found and he he measured this all and broke it all down that like the bias towards the left-wing news was far greater than towards the right-hand stuff during especially leading up to the elections. And you know, this is I'm sure it's not just in like elections and stuff like this. It's throughout politics and with everything. And you they bury stuff on Google. Like we know that that Google cures stuff. You know, you you know by just being on YouTube, you see shadowbanned all the time. So if these things if these LLMs are running their queries on Google, you're flawed from the get-go. >> Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's it's also um it's also crazy the the amount of programming um stuff that comes up in the whole history of Jeffrey Epstein, too, as I was talking about with the Inslaw affair and the Promise software. Robert Maxwell um was part of the team that stole the promise software from the developers who made it >> really and they um he he sold a backdoor cop yeah well the guy who stole it was Ben our who was later um identified as this uh top Israel spy Rafi um itan or something and um then Jeffrey uh Robert Maxwell took sold a um a hacked version of the promised software to Los Alamos Labs and Sandia Labs and and they had to put a back door inside the software so that they could get into the the labs and stuff and that's how basically Israel stole all our nuclear secrets. >> Uh >> I thought we started selling promise to a whole bunch of other countries and we put a back door into it so we could get into those. >> They did too. Yes. This was all like it was all spy work would do that they did with this stuff. And then they had I I heard about other um software. this uh Silverstream company, a guy named Richard Andrew Grove was working for them and they were developing this financial new financial trading platform that um a bunch of Fortune 500 companies in the World Trade Center had just started using before 9/11 and he had found a back door in the software and reported it to his superiors. They told him, "Don't worry about it. Oh, it's nothing, you know, it's no big deal." And he kept drawing uh bringing it up and bringing it up and they finally said, "You know what? But we want you to take all your evidence of this and and and stuff and we want you to come and and bring it to a meeting on the 98th floor of the World Trade Center um on Tuesday uh September 11th, 2001. And he was actually late going to the meeting and went saw the planes hit the towers and and didn't go didn't go into the meeting. Um and but they had basically told him to take all his evidence for this back door in the software and bring it to the the 98th floor of the World Trade Center where someone knew the plane was going to hit. So there's some weird 911 is the weirdest day in American history. When you look at Howard Lutnik's behavior that he's living in this house next door to Jeffrey Epstein, he his working in Caner Fitzgerald most of most of the people that that died um the financial that he lo suffered the biggest financial losses in the World Trade Center on 911. Again, >> if we ask Grock right now if uh Howard Lutnik about Howard Lutnik's house next door to Jeffrey Epstein, will will it tell us about it? Well, this is the weird thing, right? Because I've gone through this in my head because obviously Jeffrey Epste all of his houses had c hidden cameras and microphones like all throughout them, right? So, if he's selling the house next door to Howard Lutnik, what's the chances that things not wired up to record him and and and spy on him? It's it's kind of it just makes it makes you know it's less than zero, right? So obviously Howard Lutnik buys his house in 98, lives there for two year three years until 911. What what did they collect on Howard Lutnik? Did they blackmail him? Why is and then why would he protect these people if if he was blackmailed or or or or you know I don't get the whole dynamics here and it just makes me very suspicious of him involved in in something much deeper because of all the other CEOs that miss work that day. I was I was getting into the whole list and I want to I want to name them all and talk about who these people are and their connections. There's a lot of interesting stuff when you dig into >> Look at this. Yes. Howard Lutnick was neighbors with Jeffrey Epste in Manhattan. Lenick purchased a townhouse at 11 East E71st Street in 1998 which was uh adjacent to Epstein's property at 9 East1st Street 1998. Known as the Herbert and Strauss house. Real estate records indicate that Epstein had significant ties to the property Lutnik acquired, including being listed as a trustee in transactions involving the property between Lutnik's purchase. Wow, bro. >> And now Lutnik, the head of the commerce department for uh the Bush that the Trump administration, sorry. But the but um it's interesting that the commerce department also helped to cover up uh 9/11 after the fact because the commerce department owns the national institute of standards and technology NIST which wrote all the reports saying you know the fire the fires brought the buildings down and that it couldn't possibly have been pre-planted explosives or demolition devices and or anything like that which numerous physicists and engineers have you know there's architects and engineers 911 truth there's a whole ton of people that have examined these billion. There was a there was a million-doll study by the University of Alaska Fairbanks that uh published a you know a comprehensive 147page study uh and analyzing the collapse of just World Trade Center building 7 which is that third tower that nobody on the mainstream media will talk about and we only know about because of alternative news media and everything >> and all these people are are super connected. That's the Solomon Brothers building. Solomon Brothers is Solomon Smith Barney which be went through that whole big merger and became City Corp. Cityroup. So uh basically um City Corp that that whole thing that was the major tenant inside that building and who worked for >> Cityroup >> who worked for Solomon Smith Barney? Yeah, Solomon Smith Barney merged into Cityroup in a in a in a very large merger. Uh, but who worked for Solomon Smith Barney in World Trade Center building 7, but none other than Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld? You can look up Dick Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld's resume. They both sat on the foreign policy advisory board for Solomon Smith Barney Bank, which was in World Trade Center 7. It was the largest tenant and they quit right before joining the Bush administration. And then who was running security in the buildings? Well, the security of course was run by the Port Authority of New York, New Jersey and a guy named Alan Ree who's who's uh got some interesting connections himself. But the security systems themselves were designed and the electronics and all the badging and all that stuff, all the camera systems and all the badging, all the electronic stuff was uh designed and installed by a company called Securecom Stratk, which was um actually a subsidiary of a company called Kuwaiti American Corporation. And these guys um George HW Bush's I mean George Bush's brother Marvin Bush sat on the board of directors for that company uh which ran security at the trade centers and then the CEO and COO of that company are guys named Wart Dexter Walker III. He's now an in a private equity banker in in um Restston Virginia. He right next to the head CIA headquarters and the the the vice president of that security company in the World Trade Center now works for SIC. He's a vice president at SEIC, Lidos Corporation, which makes all of the airport scanners in our in our airports that I had to go through. You know, you have to go through those big people scanners and get your uh genitals taken. >> Oh, I don't go through those. I go through the old school ones. I don't I don't go through the cancer tubes. It's all terraertz radiation, short shortwave radiation that that can look through your clothes and stuff and that and all that technology was developed by sic uh contractors in the in the 80s and and uh '9s and they were dying to find a way to market and market on it and then now they have a way to make billions off it because every airport's required to have these scanners now post 911. So you look into the people involved in the World Trade Center and how greatly they benefited. They they all made tons of money. Larry Silverstein took out these massive insurance policies. Good friends of Howard Lutnick. By the way, if you've ever shopped online, chances are you've bought from a business powered by Shopify. It's super easy to spot by the little purple shop pay button. That's what we use for our merch store. That purple button has all your payments and shipping info, so you don't have to track down your card or hope your browser remembered your payment info. There's a reason why so many businesses use Shopify. That's because they make it incredibly easy to run and start your own business. It's the business behind the business that matters, and that's where Shopify excels with convenient tools and workflows. Shop Pay has the best converting checkout on the planet, meaning fewer abandoned carts and way more sales. It's a gamecher. You can spread your brand's word with the built-in marketing and email tools. Don't want to build your page? Shopify has hundreds of beautiful ready togo templates to express your brand and forget the code. Like Daylight Computer, whose website is gorgeous. So, if you've got a product, a dream, and a drive to make it happen, Shopify is the platform that helps you do it with ease. Because businesses that sell sell more with Shopify, if you want less abandoned shopping carts, it's time for you to head on over to Shopify. Sign up for your $1 per month trial period at shopify.com/dannyjones all lowercase. Again, that's shopify.com/dannyjones to upgrade your selling today. Again, shopify.com/dannyJones. It's linked down below. Now, back to the show. >> Um, he took out these massive insurance policies, insured the building specifically against terrorist attacks. Then 911 happens just a couple months later. How far how long before 911 did he take out those policies? >> Just a few months. >> A few months. >> Literally like four, five, four months before. >> And they specifically targeted against terrorist attacks. >> And also another thing is, sorry, I don't want to I don't mean to derail you, but the uh >> all of the stocks that were sold on American Airlines >> literally a week before 911, >> right? A bunch of put options. Yeah. put options by um American politicians, right? >> Yeah. They were connected to uh the AB Brown, I think it was uh the the stock of the firm. AB Brown was the firm. And um >> they're connected with Buzzy Krongard. >> Oh yeah, Buzzy Krongard. He's he is everywhere. Every conspiracy has him at the freaking footnotes. >> Yeah. And um also uh we're at Dexter Walker III um the the investment banker. I said that, you know, has the only thing he does in his life is run CIA front companies. Gloran, you look at his whole history. It's literally he just he's he's just a managing guy. He's a business uh plant guy for for CIA front companies. And he runs a a company called Igerhawk Private Investments in Restston, Virginia right now. And um yeah, these guys were never investigated, have never been interviewed. In fact, there's no pictures of Wart Walker anywhere on the internet. And he's a cousin of and you know what he the Walker family, he's actually a cousin of of the Bush family. George HW Bush spoke at Lafayette College the year he graduated, which I think was 79. I'm not sure, but but uh >> yeah, it's it's it's pretty small family. It's it's just uh the Bush a lot of the Bush family, a lot of the Bush clan keep keep coming up in these conspiracies, too, it seems. Uh there's there's a lot of connections to them. His whole family, the Walker line, comes from um >> this guy, you know, George George Herbert Walker and all and all that side of his family, right? So these guys came from a Russell and Company, a guy named Walter uh not Walter Russell, but um Russell and Company was basically they were the the guys that started the opium war. They were the they were they they were smuggling all the opium in and they they were like the biggest opium and heroin smugglers in the United States back in the back in the day. So these guys >> are are drug dealers like and that's not in not outside the scope of uh you know 911 when we went into you know Afghanistan and reclaimed all those poppy fields. The the Taliban had slashed and burned all the poppy fields and brought the production to um the lowest levels ever. and we went over there invaded and it went right back up. And all that all that drug money is untraceable uh funds. It's it's illegal illegal um funds. So, it's it's real good money for the the CIA to be able to fund all these black programs and projects with because it's untraceable, >> which is like the sim similar to what we did with Iran Contra except it was with weapons illegally selling them through Israel to Iran and then taking that money to fund the fund the Contra. >> Right. Right. And the whole Iran thing, that was just a uh a thing to get Carter out to so so that Carter wouldn't win the election. >> Um >> Oh, yeah. The October surprise. >> October surprise. Can you explain that? >> Yeah. So, they had these hostages in Iran and uh they were going to release them during Carter's administration, but we purposely stepped in and sent these arms deal and did this whole backdoor deal so that they wouldn't release the hostages until after the election because if if Carter had released him, it would have boost his approval rating. >> Right. >> Right. So, Yeah, the the uh the Epstein stuff like like every all of this stuff is connected in a weird way. It's like it's like the octopus. I don't know if you've seen that documentary, the octopus murder with Danny Castillo and he's like uncovering this stuff through the promise software and basically it's like >> it all connects to Epstein and Epstein was likely just a cog in this giant wheel of criminal underworld espionage and organized crime and intelligence. >> Yeah. Yeah. But it goes so much deeper because you know I was back to back to my point about you know Larry Silverstein in the World Trade Center. He brings he takes out this insurance policy. Well, who wrote the insurance policy for for that? You know, it was a company called AIG which has a huge history with the CIA. They they basically were the CIA's main guys in in in China because the insurance people in China have all the good intelligence because if you have infrastructure, you have anything worth money, you have to insure it if it's, you know, if it's >> and so if anything worth anything is insured, the insurance companies have, you know, the goods on a lot of a lot of stuff. So, of course, they were the number one choice for the intelligence agencies to, you know, they knew which factories to bomb. They knew which, you know, they knew they knew everywhere, they knew everywhere to bomb during if they with the intelligence that they would get through insurance policies. So, a guy named Cornelius Vanderstar, you can look look him up. He's the guy that founded AIG and he he was definitely a CIA and >> Cornelius what? >> Cornelius Vanderstar. >> Vanderstar. Yep. >> Okay. And uh but AIG is was run on 911 by um a guy named Maurice Greenberg. And uh Maurice Greenberg's son Jeffrey Greenberg was the uh CEO of Marshia Mlennon which was right in the impact zone of uh the the north the south tower. I believe it's north tower with Caner Fitzgerald. Right. So El Paul Bremer is also working for Marshia Mlennon. He's also El Paul Bremer is also the head of this national commission on terrorism at Harvard and he's basically this guy that's writing a lot of the the literature and and the scope on on terrorism. This you know warning people that you know this threat of terrorism is going to be the new thing once you know it's basically the cold war was you know the the idea of the communists in the cold war was you know running out of its out of time and they needed a new they fell. Yeah. They needed a new threat. after the Soviet Union, a lot of these guys were hired to, you know, what do we how do we get money now and what what kind of threats can we, you know, come up with and and create around the world to um generate more wars for profit for our, you know, businesses and stuff like that. And uh two of the guys that they they hired for that were a guy named Brian Michael Jenkins and L. Paul Bimemer. and Brian Michael Jenkins ends up working with Croll Associates to design the whole um World Trade Center security system um alongside you know these other guys. When you you really you dig into all these companies and you're like oh who was who was head of Croll Associates? Well, this guy Jerome Jerome Hower um who becomes the director of the National Institute for Health in time for the anthrax attacks which targeted all these senators that were asking questions about 9/11 and demanding an official investigation. They all got sent to anthrax and then >> Yeah. Can can you explain that too? Break that down a little bit a little so people can understand that because that's that's really interesting. If they want a real solid thorough breakdown, uh, look up a documentary called American Anthrax by Robbie Martin, who's Abby Martin's brother. >> Oh, really? >> Yeah. He did a documentary on it with Ruth. >> So, there were there was a small number of actual sitting senators that were questioning 9/11. >> Yeah. Tom Dashel. >> It was only those guys who got anthrax sent to them. >> Yeah. And they later found out that the Afra was created by the FBI or something from like an FBI, >> a US bioweapons lab. And it was it was basically these it was an inside job to cut to to get people to not investigate 9/11 and not open inquiries before they could destroy enough of the evidence. >> What was Abby Martin's brother's name? >> Robbie Martin. >> Robbie Martin. >> Yeah, I've interviewed him before um a while back, but it's been a while. You should definitely talk get try to get him on the show and talk about more about that cuz he he goes into real he knows all the details. It was like Sean Hatfield was blamed and it was Steven Hatfield was the guy that was like blamed but it was really some other guy or something. I I don't know all the details but it's been a while. It's been a while. So, but back to the the the people who worked in the World Trade Center, all the CEOs that missed work or all the companies that like moved around there because there was this whole ZIMS shipping company that ex was in the World Trade Center and they they moved out of the World Trade Center um just before then. And then you have in the Pentagon even this corporation called Amech Corporation, which is, you know, this guy Peter Jansen who owned Amech was good friends with Donald Rumsfeld. They had a $258 million contract to refurbish the entire west wing of the Pentagon. Uh right before before 911, the months before 911, they were they were moving offices all out of that wing, moving people all around. And it was lucky for the ter lucky for us that the terrorists hit that wing that was just being remodeled. Uh because there was a lot of construction going on there. So not a lot of people were in their offices. only like 212 people died at the Pentagon um in in the attack when normally that office that large of a section of it would have been like thousands of people normally in in in >> that that area. >> So >> also people claim it was a missile. People don't think it was an actual jet because the foot the footage is weird and the FBI confiscated the footage, right? But there's pictures of Donald Rumsfeld picking up pieces of what look is clearly an American Airlines jet and and getting pieces off the lawn, which is, you know, that I don't agree with all the theories. Again, we're we're separating conspiracy theory from fact because there's been there's been too much theories that have gotten in the way of all this. >> So, all the stuff that you're talking about is not speculation. >> No, it's not speculation. This is all you can verify and look look this stuff up. It's all factual. Um, >> got it. It's like a basically a crime scene proximity investigation is saying this should be treated as a crime scene. Who was close by? Who was involved and who who's got the closest proximity to this crime scene? And one of the people with the closest proximity to that crime scene was Howard Lutnik who's now covering up the Epstein files right next to Trump. And it just makes me feel like the Epstein files have to connect to 9/11 or something. You know, you say that that that these pre these people sleeping with, you know, underage girls and that that's going to be I don't think that that is inflammatory enough, Danny. I I think that that they can release all that. They can release all that and people aren't going to be like if they release the if we come out and so it shows that Jeffrey Epstein worked with this network to compromise CEOs in the World Trade Center and set them up to be part of a 9/11 conspiracy. Then you know people are like oh the government can you know can they'll never trust the government again ever if they if they if they the 911 they won't 911 is so much bigger >> than this this Jeffrey Epstein case >> it is so then yes >> this is this is mass murder >> I mean thousands of people dying I mean it's hard it's hard to play the game of what's what's worse with those two things because they're both insanely evil things. But people that have it's a difference because you have like with the 9/11 stuff you have like you're going down like everyone goes down with the ship at once. >> Yeah. >> With the Epstein stuff, >> specific people can go down by themselves like Donald Trump or Bill Clinton or whoever else is on there, right? And people like Donald Trump are going to do anything they can and use every last penny at their disposal to try to escape it and try to get out from under it. >> So, >> well, yeah, anyone who's stuck in in in um that sort of >> I think both of them would cause a re revolution in the country. I think I think I think if the if we found out that that all these people that are running the government all the you know if a handful of ex-presidents and people in intelligence or CEOs uh I don't think CEOs would do it but I think like if Trump and Clinton and and a lot of people came out and it was proven that they were and that they were doing this kind of I think that could potentially cause an uprising and I think 100% if it came out unequivocally hard evidence that 9/11 was an inside job, the same thing would happen, >> right? That's one why why it's so incendiary that they they they don't allow you to even talk about it. And >> what was the quote? Um, who said I think Mark Epstein said this on a multiple interviews, he said that when he was talking to Jeffrey Epste leading up to the 2016 election between Hillary and uh Trump, he said that his brother Jeffrey Epstein told him if they knew what he knew, they would cancel the whole election, >> you know. And it's crazy because that election um it's it's like Jeffrey Epstein got arrested and and uh all that stuff came out in 2019. And it's almost like the people involved like Bill Gates who are on that list and was meeting with Jeffrey Epstein even after he was arrested and convicted still going into his house and still meeting with them and stuff uh many many times is you know >> it's so crazy that they literally shut the world down with co they they released a bioweapon on the and and shut the entire you know locked everybody down and it was right when the Epstein stuff was coming out and and uh >> yeah no do you then this is something that I've been thinking about do you think it's possible that with all the COVID passport stuff, all this all this new uh stuff that's going on with Doge and Real ID and um the Genius Act passing with the stable coins, it seems like there's all these little elements of control of the population that are coming together and then Palanteer coming in and trying to consolidate all this information on everybody. If you were the government and you knew that some of these secrets could potentially come out in the in the near future. >> Yeah. >> Whether it be Epstein, 911, or even like UFO disclosure, right? That they know that UFOs are real aliens are here controlling the world. >> The the the real possibility of like an uprising in the country happening if that kind of stuff comes out is I think it's a high degree of probability that that could happen. So before that, why not lock down total control on the population first? >> Yeah. Yeah. Well, they know they know it's coming. I mean, with the internet and the the the they've really tried to crack down with the algorithm to prevent the spread of information. I've noticed the algorithmic shadow shadow banning. I've noticed the um >> the prevalence of these bots, the these bot armies. It seems to be um a lot of uh these influencer bots and stuff and they're around certain subjects and stuff. And then it's it's they've really tried to corral people away from this information and take the people spreading it and really silence us. Uh I've been, you know, talking about this stuff for 20 years now. And I feel like now finally that people are interested in the Epstein files. Maybe we can get them to look into 9/11. Um a couple people have, you know, started asking, you know, a lot of questions about a lot of stuff after CO and and I think that's a that's a great thing. we're we're starting to wake up. But they've just dumped they've doubled down on the disinformation, pumping up the disinformation, and then also the creation of these limited hangout operations, you know, like like the whole the whole thing you had that you were just on Joe Rogan, man, talking about Bob Lazar and and and that whole thing. And that was our that was what we talked about the entire last time I came on your podcast was Lazar and all that, right? And I really feel like they they locked down the conversation on that stuff, too, because they came out with that that group TTSA came out and it was all these CIA guys with all the CIA background. They're like, "We're going to build you a spaceship. Invest in our company. Give us money." And Tom Dong, you know, uh the Blink 182 guy there saying, you know, being the ring leader, getting everyone to invest all this money into his company and um promising them a spaceship and and they've delivered. >> Wait, what do you mean promising them a spaceship? He promised a spaceship. He had showed it in the very first thing in TTSA when they when they launched, they said, you know, we have this technology. You can invest in this company. You'll be part of the, you know, the the the uh team that's going to bring us to the stars with this technology. They they promised to basically take all the classified UFO technology and release it. >> And uh they raised tons of money. Yeah. They raised millions and they instead gave us an entertainment company. Um and he made a bunch of books. and and including Yeah, it's and I think now they're selling I don't know what they're doing now, but you can go to TTSA and see the mostly t-shirts and stuff now, >> but their big guy was Lou Alzando and then Lou Alzando branched off of that and he came out they promoted him as like this is the the this was the guy he ran the the Pentagon's UFO program, you know, and you look into Alzando's background and it's like this guy didn't run the program, bro. This guy was a torture zar Guantanamo Bay for Christ's sake. He ran the RDI program. Khaled Shake Muhammad accused the guy of being being the person responsible for torturing his son in front of him. He he basically electrocuted Khaled Shake Muhammad's son's testicles in front of him until he admitted to doing 9/11. >> Really? >> That's what they did. >> Alzando himself. >> Alzando himself. that this came out in like an interview or something with Kiche Muhammad. >> It's in it's in all the notes. It's in his files. There's all these guys, all these people that they accused of 911. >> He denies all this >> and all the people that I don't know if he denied. I don't ever really been asked about it, but you go and look into it. He ran the RDI program. He's named by a bunch of these guys as as being the person the person responsible for doing this. Jesus. So, he basically helped the CIA cover up 9/11 by torturing the people that supposedly did it. Um, you know, basically if someone tortured your son in front of you like that, you'd probably admit to doing anything. You know, I I'd get I'd say anything they wanted to get them to stop, >> right? >> It just And so that's the background Alzando has. And he's a counter intelligence guy. Why would he be head of the UFO program at the Pentagon? >> Yeah, I don't understand that. I don't I don't understand any of that stuff. >> No. And he wasn't. It was all a front to basically co-opt and take control of the narrative. >> And why is he also a part of all these UFO online Twitter groups and and >> oh, he's he's harassing people fake accounts and stuff. >> He's paying off there's a bunch of fake accounts and they're paying off other influencers to to go after the people that call Alzando out. and and you know there was this whole thing like we were people are starting to question him and stuff and and and getting called out and there was this >> um you know you could talk to red panda and tupacabra on on X all about it. They hold spaces about it and they have tons of stuff saved. They had to they created this whole archive of all the harassment that was taking place where they they basically created a limited hangout operation and said that this is this is ufology and anyone outside of this is is not someone you should listen to and or pay attention to. And um they shut out all the outside groups and stuff and and then you look at who was Alzando's good friend who was meeting with him and and buddy buddy with him all this time. Well, Jeremy Corbel, the guy that went on Joe Rogan's podcast like six times and told Joe Rogan not to have me on and not to talk to me. like he told all he I do know that because I have emails from Jeremy Corbel to lots of other people other people that I I've tried to interview in connection to the Bob Lazar case that he's written emails to physically telling them not to talk to me not to and to ghost me. Really? >> Yes, I do. He I I have them. They're from his They're authentic. They're from his email address and they are real and and he >> had he copied you on them? No, the people who he sent them to sent them to me. >> Forward them to you. >> So that I could see what he was and know what he was up to. And And >> why do you think he did that? >> Because I I I'm I'm ruining his grift. His grift is this Bob Lazar thing. And he he's got all this popularity and and fame in the UFO field right now. And he's doing better than he ever did. >> Just ego. >> Jeremy Corbell was selling quantum jiu-jitsu videos in California. and he was sprinkling blood on pictures of Sharon Tate and selling it as art. Okay, he had an art studio in California where he literally just sprinkled blood on pictures of Sharon Tate and sold it as art. This is He was trying to make figure out a niche and make a living somewhere and then he found UFOs and he was like jackpot. >> Yeah, this guy is a nobody. He >> jiu-jitsu stuff is funny. I saw the videos of that. I don't know. He's not like, and it's funny because, you know, they have him on TMZ and and they brought in these fake podcasters who I've never heard of. This this girl Kelly Chase of the Rabbit Hole UFO podcast is on TMZ being like, "Jeremy Corbel's been into UFOs for a really long time." And he No, he hasn't. >> Is this the girl that just called me a >> girl that just recently? Yeah, she just recently said you're like a a useful idiot. >> Well, that's probably true, honestly. >> Intelligence asset. Well, hey, >> I could be. I'm sure I've had a lot of >> I'm sure I'm sure I've been a useful idiot at one point or another, too. I I don't get everything right all the time. And I know for a fact that intelligence agency have like tried to infiltrate my work in my show and my groups, everything we've done. >> Um, so that >> cuz we mean we we've run the propulsion conference. We we uh we got all the scientists together who actually worked on this stuff and interviewed them and and brought these groups together and stuff. So So we we've done a lot of >> And you actually had the FBI raid you, right? We had the FBI come to our lab at uh Falcon Space down in New Jersey. Yeah. Mark's lab got raided. >> What happened with all of that? What was that? How did that happen? >> Um I believe it was due to uh a guy who was working with us at the time who would we brought into the group. I'm not going to say his name or anything. Uh he's a weird character. Um, apparently he went back to New Mexico and went out with these uh this Indian tribe and told them of all about the UFO disclosure and stuff and and they they they say he's part of some sacred he's with the Hopy Indian tribe down in in New Mexico now and they think he's like some kind of uh savior according to their prophecy and and he's like big he's like the big big shot in their tribe right now. It's it's kind of it's kind of because of the UFO disclosure stuff. Wow. But he was in our lab and um we had I I I don't know. I think he might have like heard some information wrong about something and report it. But they were looking they according to the FBI they were at our lab looking for a report of we uh of that we were building weapons grade uh uranium >> and and they they went around with a geer counter to see if we had uh you know hot. >> So you think you got like swatted or something? >> Yeah, almost almost. Uh it was really really strange. And I I almost >> That's pretty crazy. >> But the FBI showing up. >> Yeah. >> To look for weaponsgrade uranus. I mean >> Yeah. At our anti-gravity lab that we're we're trying to replicate all these old, you know, we try to replicate the Boeing alafon study on anti-gravity from 1981 or trying to replicate uh >> the Biffel Brown stuff, you know, >> which Jeffrey Epstein was super interested in by the way. You know, Jeffrey Epstein was super interested in gravity, >> right? you know. >> Yeah, because he had a lot of those people on his island. Lawrence Krauss, um >> Stephen Hawking, >> a bunch of guys on there over there. And you know, explain. So, so what what do you think was happening with why was he so interested in these in these physicists and these people that were, you know, high up at these academic institutions? And he was also a part of like the mathematics program. He was contributing to it, the mathematics program at Harvard, right? >> Yeah. Yep. the one that uh Eric Weinstein was at. >> So you don't forget that Robert Maxwell, okay, Jeffrey Epstein's mentor and and basically the guy that, you know, he's working for Gileain and Galileain's just working for her father's, you know, network and doing what her father did. >> Her father owned Pergamon Press. So he basically uh created all the journals in science and basically built science around this whole uh um process called peer review. >> Yes. >> And um really amped up the peerreview and in the process of it. But what he did in that is he created all these journals in this this peer review process which has to go through these journals. So basically you've created a conduit now through which you can control what gets published in science and what gets out there and what doesn't. And that's a great trap for the intelligence community because you know you need to make sure that disruptive science and technologies get into your hands first and not someone else's, right? Mhm. >> Um so it's no surprise that these these kinds of people the intelligence agents were on to that that sort of thing you know and using Jeffrey Epstein and his network uh to cuz you know hey scientists are humans too. Even Stephen Hawking in his wheelchair apparently had girls sit on his face or something. Uh so >> you know we all get horny bro right? If you ain't horny you ain't uh what is it healthy? He me I sat on his face for five minutes. It's your commercials. Anyways, uh yes, here's the idea. You they're compromisable and then once you got them in your pocket, you can control the science through those. And then but the interesting thing is how they've they've uh propped up these people in in the mainstream too. It's like cuz Lawrence Krauss comes out and he has this public debate in in the uh in the academic field. They want to, oh, let's let's have Lawrence Krauss, you know, take the UFO subject seriously and have a real serious conversation about it with one of the experts. So, who do they bring in? They bring in Nick Pope. >> That guy was like head of MOD. He was he was a desk jockey. He's a file guy, you know? He's not a scientist. What business does he have going on in debating Lawrence Krauss about science and UFO science? I just >> What did they talk about? >> And it was it was bad. It was just bad. They didn't talk about anything relevant. And it was it was just basically the same. >> It was like very basic tropes and then the scientist comes in and oh this is so stupid and and wrong and let me explain why and you know >> it's kind of like it was kind of like an alleyoop for for the mainstream science to to you know throw UFOs in the in the the trash bin. Um the same kind of thing that they did you know with JL and he during Project Blue Book, right? It's it's a rinse and repeat of Project Blue Book. essentially what they're trying to do now with the cover up of the UFO stuff, right? >> Um the same kind of the same kind of um stat tactics and strategies that were used in the intelligence world back then, right? So what they did is they created project blue book >> but in reality they had project stork which would had access to the metals and and and all the the real stuff but then the public facing version was this version that they could say oh we're we're taking this seriously and we're looking at all the available unclassified evidence right and um there's nothing there and there's our conclusions and you know this is all just nonsense and you guys uh need to learn more astronomy and need to learn more about Neptune and Mars and uh you need to learn more about the um swamp gas um reflecting off of the light from Venus, right? So, it was it's basically the same kind of stuff. And then we have Arrow. They the government creates this um organization, right? Giller Brands this, you know, championing this government disclosure initiative. We're going to we're going to dig to the bottom of this. So, we're going to create this um we're going to create this group called Arrow, which is the all domain anomaly resolution office. So, it's basically like a UFO group. They're going to look at videos and analyze videos and talk about videos. And that to the public is what UFO is all about to the public. This is like the blue book version. It's like these people have crash recoveries. They have metals. They have debris. They have physical metamaterials. Yeah, >> we've been talking about the metam materials. I've talked to I've talked to people who worked at these places that were talking about metamaterials and quasi crystals 25 years ago. Ed Fucher, one of my good friends who who got me into all this stuff, Ed Graf was talking about quasi crystals and metamaterials in 1998. Okay, this was decades before TTSA ever came out. And we're talking about metamaterials and and and and these these types of things. And now we got an F-47. You know about that new fighter jet that they got, the F47? You never heard of this yet? >> No. Hey guys, if you're not already subscribed, please hammer the subscribe button below and hit the like button on the video. Back to the show. >> This thing is This thing has all It has no movable wing surf surfaces on the craft. It's all metamaterials. It's all It's super advanced. The thing can go invisible. It can go hypersonic. Yes. Look this thing up, man. >> This is next generation. This is basically like one uh a couple steps away from US. >> Is this already done or are these classified? >> This is real. This is this is declassified. It's out there now. >> Whoa. >> And so if this is declassified, >> click on the article, Steve. >> If this is declassified, we got something better already. >> Oh my god. If this is declassified, we have something 20 years more advanced than this. >> Absolutely. >> Damn. Zoom in a little bit. Okay. This came out. When did this When did this drop? Find the date. Should be up top. >> It was just this year. I Right. >> April. Yeah. >> April. Okay. Zoom. Oh, go go go back down the beginning. Zoom in. The US Air Force is firmly of the view that its new F47 sixth generation stealth fighters are key to how we win in future fights. According to the services top general in charge of force uh structure planning d blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah. Uh give me some good stuff about like how it's made. F-47 uh won next generation air dominance combat jet competition as a fantastic day for the Air Force. Get me to the the meta material I want to know how this thing's made. What does it say? Um >> I don't know if they're going to give you too many details, man, cuz it's just a lot of stuff. >> It's certainly insanely cool looking. >> I can do some more searching. It's not in this. >> All right, find it's not going to be on there, but it's goodies. It's super classified and some people think that this is what crashed out. They were testing something that crashed out in Area 51 because there's a huge fire that happened out there >> when >> um just a couple days ago, man. Huge giant fire. You know what's also weird is it it was the same the same exact day the fire broke out was the same exact day a bunch of these guards from Area 51 went and testified in front of Congress, >> which is just we bizarre coincidence, right? >> Yeah. And uh all these guards like a guy named Fred Dunham. The Fred Dunham story was one we covered back in in the in in the 80s. They had all this uh metam materials that they were using on the stealth planes of like the F-17, all that black paint, right? It was a bar it was a barryium titanate paint that was radar absorbent. It's basically a phased array uh >> phased array mirror. >> So I want to go back to the uh the peerreview Epstein Oh yeah. >> gravity interest with with all the physicists that he was flying down there. Um, >> yeah, I'm all over the place. >> Do you think it's possible that that Epstein knew anything about a a secret research program, a secret gravity program or anything like this? >> Well, there was gravity programs that were I mean this the secret gravity programs of the of the 50s, right? 57 there was this big meeting with Bryce Dit and and Cecil Dit >> and um and Richard Feman was there. Herman Bondi was there and uh and also uh Weber the guy who created Weber bars which is what LIGO is based on. The LIGO gravity wave detector is based on Weber's stuff and he got all that from the Bondi sticky >> LIGO is the they used to find the pyramid right >> I don't know I don't know I don't know about that but I think that was GPR or Yeah. >> Ground penetrating radar or um >> there's another type a new type of ground a different type of ground penetrating radar uh >> sur it's called surface tomography. >> Mhm. >> Right. Uh but no that's a little bit different than the LIGO detects um has like basically the X and and it it measures the length of these two lasers in conjunction uh with each other and can detect very minute uh gravitational waves. And there's LIGO there's also a sister facility. There's another one that's the same that that they use to cuz they have two facilities they used to supposedly check the the data to make sure both of them are are working properly and they both match. Right. So >> I remember LIGO now. >> It's got the sister facility there. >> LIGO was the thing that they could figure out how to create earthquakes with. Right. >> No, that's HARP. And uh >> and then there's allegations that there's a bigger version of harp in the ice cube nutrino detector because there's literally a harp that's a 1 kilometer square in Antarctica right now in the ice cube nutrino detector. It's it's these wires that are 1 kilometer long and there's there's a there's a 10 there's 100 by 100 of them that all go down into the deep deep into the uh ice. They drill cores in the ice and they drop these wires down. Um, and they say it's to detect nutrinos in this large nutrino detector. But, um, my friend Eric Hecker, who I've interviewed a number of times, he he was also he was also one of the three whistleblowers that testified to Arrow that never got heard or never got their um, >> that guy seems a little >> he seems a little out there and a little crazy sometimes. Mhm. Uh and and especially when he, you know, cuz he gets into some of the other directed energy stuff and a lot of that gets really wacky because then you get into the directed energy theories that oh these they have these sic beam weapons that brought down the towers that Judy Wood she's a nut another uh not Judy Dr. Dr. Judy Wood and um >> and she's interestingly connected with this whole um gelatin art group and that was in the World Trade Center. There's some weird connections there, man. Um to these these guys that that everyone blames and be like, "Look, there's this Israeli art students that were working in the World Trade Center. It must have been Israelis that blew up the World Trade Center and Israelis did 9/11 and and there's a whole bunch of people that say there's the dancing Israelis, >> right? And the five dancing Israelis that worked for that urban moving systems and stuff, right? And they have this bizarre conspiracy theory." >> Well, they were MSAD agents. >> They were MSAD agents. Yeah. But they could not have without the help of Securecom Stratac and all this. They couldn't have gotten the towers rigged. You know, they need you need the >> insight. No, no, no. I don't I don't think people think that they maybe some crazy people think that they actually did it. I think it's impossible that they did it. I think it's possible they knew about it, though. >> They might have known about it. Yeah, they were obviously people working in in those floors areas shut off. Um stuff being moved around. There was there was a whole uh fireproofing upgrades that took place on the exact floors um that like right in the exact impact zones where the planes hit. They upgraded like all the fireproofing. Why do you upgrade fireproofing? Wasn't that place loaded with asbestous? They didn't have like so much asbestous that it was going to cost billions of dollars to remove it all. And it would have been easier just to knock them down in an accident. >> Really? And really financially convenient for a few people to to do that if if that were to happen. Right. >> All right. back to the anti-gravity stuff uh with >> I know I'm all over the Epste >> Epstein anti-gravity research uh physicists that he was talking to and inviting to his >> Yeah, but the the DEW stuff I wanted to mention one other thing that um people think that these these weapons were used to start fires in in Maui and other things and it's nonsense and and their evidence is literally like oh well look at these houses with blue roofs roofs >> and the blue roofs didn't burn so that they're immune to the lasers and I'm like dude here's Here's a laser taking off blue paint cuz they have laser laser strip paint strippers. You know what I mean? And there's videos you can find of laser paint strippers that can remove blue paint just fine. That's a directed energy weapon, bro. That is and it and it doesn't penetrate the steel. It just removes the paint. And again, these are people that don't understand construction or building materials because all those blue roofs were metal roofs. Okay? Metal roofs not combustible like asphalt roofs are. So that's why those houses didn't burn down. It's just it's it's nonsense though like the the amount of disinformation and miseducation. But again, the SAIC SIC did build a lot of directed energy weapons. They've been involved with this whole Excalibur project, right, to to build the uh Star Wars Defense Initiative, the these space lasers that could shoot nukes out of the incoming ICBMs out of the sky, right? Mhm. >> But in order to get the power on board these satellites, there's no power system >> to be able to generate that much power on a satellite. Right. >> So what they had to do is they have a nuclear device inside the satellite that literally it's like a bomb inside the satellite and it goes off inside this laser cavity and it and and it was it was able to direct the um the energy from the nuclear explosion to create a laser pulse cuz that's how the only reason that's the only way that you can create that much energy up in space with you know a power plant that can produce that much power. >> Um there's real serious issues with the energy >> and they never figured it out. Right. Well, apparently uh some people figure like like Ashton Forbes, he he nailed free energy, right? You know, so these free energy people like say that they got they got free energy and um >> so speculate these people speculate the Star Wars satellites are using free energy to make the lasers, >> right? That's what they have to say because that's what they have to say because they have no other explanation for where the power comes from or or how that power is created, >> right? >> So So there's there's issues with all that. Um this the uh but back to the anti-gravity stuff, you got Kip Thorne, right? Kip Thorne was visiting the uh island, right? Um >> right, >> Kip Thorne uh studied under Bryson Cecil Dit who again was ran ran that Chapel Hill secret conference in 57. So yeah, there are these very top level gravity scientists and gravity physicists um having associations with Jeffrey Epste. Whether those people were engaged in activities that they could later be blackmailed or controlled for uh is is not proven. There's no evidence for that yet. Um you know, Lawrence Krauss denies it vehematly when when he's asked about it. Um but you know again these people are um in a position to control science and mainstream mainstream science and and mainstream physics and prevent uh disruptive ideas from coming out into the mainstream and being you know taken widely seriously which you know >> didn't also uh towns and brown didn't he basically like make up some sort of lie about his physics at one point to like hide it from I remember >> apparently. Yeah, cuz well he he had he was forced to, you know, basically say it didn't work when it did, right? >> To tell the public that it didn't. Um yeah, so there's there's some of that there there's >> And he worked with uh Trump, Donald Trump's uncle, I think. >> Interesting. Yeah. I I heard that he's connected to the whole Tesla files stuff, too. >> Um which is interesting. I wonder what Elon's role in and SpaceX's role is in all this because >> he doesn't know anything >> apparently. Yeah, he doesn't when he's asked about it, but I I and then I've also have a good friend of mine that sat right next to the third in charge at SpaceX on a flight. Um and he he asked him about all this stuff and that guy didn't have a clue either. >> Well, a funny thing about >> he was actually taking notes. My he was like, "What what is all this? I haven't heard of any of this secret space." I wonder how much clearance I wonder how high level clearance Elon has into all of this UFO stuff or curious cuz I wonder isn't his guy that works for him, the the dragon guy, Tim, >> isn't he like the one who says claims to have all this knowledge of all these secret programs and all these uh these UFO technologies that he's patented and he seems to be like the most mysterious all knowing person on Who is that? >> Tim Taylor. You know who I'm talking about? >> Tim Taylor. >> You know who that is? >> Yeah, I know who that is. The guy from >> He works for Elon, right? He works on all the rocket launches, doesn't he? >> I'm not sure. I know that he's, you know, the the Rocket City Redneck show and and then also the uh Skinwalker Ranch right there. >> No, he's not in any of that. >> Not Tim Tail. Oh, I'm thinking >> this is the guy that's in Diana Pulka's book. >> Oh, yes. No, I'm I'm confusing him with um with the other guy there. He's also named Taylor. Dr. Taylor, I think. I forget his name. Um, if it's too >> No, I'm talking about I'm talking about the guy who's like the dragon. He calls himself the dragon at all the uh all the launches at Cape Canaveral. And he's the one who like sits in a room and is supposed to like watch all of the uh the NSA satellites, drones, and and like make sure this rocket gets into the atmosphere safely. You don't you don't know about him? >> I I've heard of him. I I just got him confused with the other um >> right >> the other Taylor guy there. >> Chris Bledsoe talked about him a lot. He said visited Chris Bledsoe and told him all kinds of crazy stuff. >> I've never talked to him, you know. I'd be interested to meet him. >> No one he has except for >> he's never coming like again we have the ape group. So we got we invite a lot of people in there publicly. >> You're thinking of Travis Taylor. >> Travis Taylor. >> Yeah. Different guy. >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That's that's who I confused him with, but you could see why. So, >> right. >> Um >> but no, it's uh it's strange that that Elon would know nothing about this stuff. Nothing about UFOs, nothing about any kind of like anti-gravity secret physics, you know. I mean, >> and apparently not interested in it either because like I if he's not interested in it, he's I mean, he must not be interested in it because if he is, he's doing a great job of lying about it. >> Again, he's not the only Tim Taylor and and and uh they're not the only ones um working on this kind of stuff, too. There's lots of other scientists that have done a lot of other work, you know, like Amy Esgridge's father there, Richard Esgridge, and then also uh you know, that's the scientist that we knew that killed herself. You know about that? The NASA girl, the NASA scientist girl that killed herself? >> No. >> Amy Esgridge? >> I don't know about her. >> You never heard about her, man? >> Well, she had to try to like infiltrate our group. I felt I felt that she was like, first we thought she was a highle source cuz her father is Richard Esridge. She's got all these P plasma gravity, you know, plasma propulsions patents and stuff for uh NASA, does a lot of classified work and stuff for NASA. And she was telling us, "Oh, I know how anti-gravity works. I know how all this stuff works." And and I I can't wait to tell you guys all the secret, and I'm going to help reveal it. I'm going to She was like telling us she was going to be the one to bring disclosure. And um you know, I thought that she was like a like a uh I thought she was like working for the the intel agencies. I'm like, "This girl's infiltrated our group." She she basically she she got into our group and then she started dating um my top my my my main lab guy, Mark. Mark Mark. She started dating him and I was just like, "Oh my god, they just they just got into my group and infiltrated me like, "Holy crap." And I and I thought she was a spy the whole time. And uh I just couldn't stand her. Um, but now she's she killed herself and in uh a couple years ago and and there's a lot of people online that that that think there's a bigger conspiracy involved in it. And um and then also think >> who did she work for? But she worked for uh she worked for her father and uh I don't know she worked for a she worked for a couple different companies and stuff and um she worked for this uh Institute for Exotic Sciences with another friend of hers and uh they were supposedly going to be developing this these Yeah. these >> she co-founded the Institute for Exotic Science. >> Yeah. this this uh group in Huntsville and um >> she publicly spoke about developing a sixth force and described her work as anti-gravity, though she acknowledged it was a non-traditional interpretation. In September 2020, she was allegedly blocked by NASA Marshall Space Flight Center. >> Yeah. >> From presenting her research. And uh we felt that like she I don't know something was up with that because the SC's Park conference was run by u a guy named uh I'm sorry why I can't think of his name right now but >> she was found dead by a gunshot wound concluded a suic >> lived with chronic pain. >> Yeah it's >> according to Reddit >> a lot of interesting stuff going on with her case but um >> is we should try using Grock bro. I think Grock's better than I think everyone think Grock is better it seems to be than GPT. I don't know. >> Yeah, I think Grock's better than GPT. It finds a lot. >> But you got to get you got to be logged in though, Steve. You got to have the super Grock. >> So, we we've we've been digging into this anti-gravity stuff as long if not longer than Jeffrey Epstein was. I didn't, you know, hire a lot of these people to come to my private island as I don't have one. But we did set up a conference, our own conference after the SDS Park conference. Um it's run by Jim Woodward and uh who's the Woodward effect, the M also called the Mock effect and um but that's again a whole another story. And there's all these different scientists that have uh you know come out over the years. He used to they used to actually run this uh STA conference which was the original DARPA conferences where all the propulsion stuff would be discussed and and all the all the papers would be presented and and picked up by DARPA projects and and stuff like that back in like the 80s and 90s. So, I've been I've known I knew the guys that were doing this like when I was just a baby, you know what I mean? And and I talked to interviewed all them, got all their all their best info and all their best intel. If someone figured out anti-gravity in 1954, like Steven Greer came and sat in this chair and and and and told you that we'd know about it. We'd have it. And his his >> Well, don't you think that's what all the Tic Tac stuff is? You think that's like Do you think I think that's our stuff? Our our own anti-gravity stuff. That's I again >> they probably launch they probably launch it out of submarines. >> Is that is that true though? I don't have the evidence for that or is that >> Nobody does. This is all that they want us to believe. >> I wonder if that's just a scup they want us to believe because you look at you look at right now right now you got Ross Colart saying that he swears the Tic Tac is a Loheed Martin and that he's seen something that no one else has seen. And I know for a fact that Steven Greer showed him something that was given to him by Michael Strat, who's my, you know, one of my good friends. And and >> Michael Strat. >> Michael Strat. Um, >> that name sounds so familiar. >> Michael Strat is a UFO archivist and and a researcher. Um, he's got a huge collection of UFO documents. He he's c every every UFO library in the world. He has he has an a full copy of their entire library. He has he has more he has all the broad pluric blue book files and and plus more. >> Um this guy's got everything and uh he's got every single Area 51 patch that was ever issued on a on like four like he's got like five boards full of all the patches, man. This guy's got like every like the authentic real patches that that were given to people at Area 51 for every special project that ever happened out there and he can tell you every single one and and and and details about it. Bro, the guy's the guy is a um the guy's great. I mean, he's one of my he's he's one of my best uh friends and researchers in the in the UFO community um around around that issue. And uh I know for a fact that he's the one that dug up that 196 uh it was a 1967. When was the YC comb? It's it's WCOM. It's like WCOM with a B c e. um Pennsylvania sighting because he's got a tic tac sighting from >> Oh, really? >> from 1967. >> Oh, 67, >> bro. This thing was spotted. >> You don't think you don't you don't think the Tic Tacs were were our stuff? >> I don't know. I don't know. Um it's hard to say. >> What's your What's your best guess? >> If it could have been, you know, because aerogels go back a hundred years, right? So, you have super lightweight things. Then you have these surfaces which are you know you can get propulsion effects of ion propulsion off a surface with these propulsion effects. You could build a large aerogel aerostat craft with this these propulsive surfaces on it that could, you know, accelerate at ridiculous speeds because F equals MA. If you put your M really small, a tiny bit of force gives you a huge A, right? That's a huge acceleration. That's phys basic physics, right? So, you can go really really fast on a small amount of force if you weigh nothing, right? If you weigh as light as a feather and these aerogels weigh lighter than a feather. They're lighter than they're lighter than than water and stuff. Yeah. What are you talking about? >> Yeah, that's that's the one. It's the boiler the boiler uh ship UFO. It looks like it looks like a tic tac with the same kind of appendages hanging off of it. The same little antenna appendages >> in Lcomi, Pennsylvania, >> which is it's just weird, right? Cuz uh >> and this thing was described as flying. >> Yeah, it flew right out of a lake and over a lake. Um I don't know if it came out of the water and took off. That's um >> I I think that's what I thought. I thought it came out of the water and took off. Um, so something interesting there. Again, I don't I don't I don't it's hard to say what uh what they have without definite proof because they they've they kept the they kept certain projects secret for for for a very long time, you know, and then it's hard to say, man. It really is. But I I I I feel like a lot of it just from a standpoint of being involved in it and seeing so much overhype and and underdely, I feel like a lot of this stuff is scops to make people think, you know, it's like to make our enemies think we have a lot better stuff than we actually do. >> That's what I feel like some of it is, you know, but then again, it's it's like where's the you know, it's again, where's the proof? You need you need definite proof before I can say that uh we have the ability to teleport a plane for example. I have to show that I can teleport u a toothpick first right I have to show that experimentally that I can make a toothpick disappear and reappear over there and then I can teleport it with technology before before I'll believe that you can do it with an airplane or a person or anything else. Right? You have to show this physically. So there again, we've been we've had a lab. We've had um we've gotten tons of people working on this from all over the world. There's there's a massive team of like 30 or 40 people all working on different anti-gravity experiments around the clock and we've been working on this for five like five years with f with private funding and we haven't been able to crack this or figure it out. You know, like we've gotten the Bifeld Brown effect to work in the in the in the in the vacuum video. Remember the bubble the bell jar with the the the uh in fact when Jesse Michaels was on Joe Rogan, they were searching, you know, the Bifeld Brown in a vacuum and that that came up. That's our video. >> Oh, is it really? Yeah. >> Let's pull it up. >> How do we find it? >> Uh look up Bifel Brown effect in a vacuum. That's the >> And you guys did this in your lab. >> Mark did this down at his lab with a 15-inch bell jar down in um in uh in New Jersey at the Falcon Space Lab in New Jersey. So, and we did this be and um because Jesse Michaels had put together this video on Brown >> for a little bit >> and and in in just >> his documentary on Buffel Brown was amazing. >> Yeah, it was great. And in the end he said he offered a $50,000 prize to anyone who could, you know, show and demonstrate provably that this effect works in a vacuum. Right. >> Right. >> And so we said, "Yeah, we'll we'll take that challenge." >> And did you do it? >> Well, here it is, man. I haven't seen that 50 grand. What? I don't see what's happening here. >> It's moving. >> It's on a torsional balance. So, it's it's going to rotate when when the force is applied, you know. So, this is a this is a hard vacuum. This is negative 6 to Okay. It's hard vacuum. >> Okay. Expl you got you got to break this down for for a 5-year-old. >> So, if this is ell brown is purely ion wind like you know Martin Tajar of the ESA and and all the uh official authorities on on this say, right? If it's purely ion wind, then it shouldn't work in a vacuum. But it does. Why? >> So, you're saying that this thing in the middle is spinning, right? Or is moving >> because of the biffel brown effect. >> Those are little bifeld brown effect thrusters in there. >> Those little things. >> Those little tiny things. Those are little bifel brown thrusters. >> And how do they work? >> Well, they were made a specifically according to um Dr. Charles Buer's research who worked for NASA for like 30 years on electrostatics and he was an expert on the Bifll Brown effect. He did all he did all the Bifel Brown research for NASA on this. >> Okay. and he came forward um in 20 >> 23 at the end of 2023 on my podcast to um you know basically show the world that hey you know I've been working on all this stuff for 30 years and um they finally cleared me to be able to talk and tell talk about it and tell you all about it and uh he's was very u adamant that this you know this stuff actually is it's something it's some It's new physics. There's new physics here. It's >> Why is it going back and forth like that? >> It's on a torsional balance. So So it's um it's uh >> And why so slow? >> It's because it's it's uh it takes a very small amount. It's it's producing a very small amount of thrust, but it is producing some this. But if it produces any amount of thrust in a vacuum, it means it's not it's not pushing off air, >> right? And Nam Tran is is uh the name of um he's the person that built those thrusters. He's a he's a a physicist, an experimental uh researcher from our group. He lives in Vietnam. >> Okay. >> So yeah, this is uh this is all this is all new physics here, man. There's something there's something weird going on. And Biffield Brown working in a vacuum. It shouldn't. There's no mainstream explanation for why this is happening or what's going on there. And Epstein, of course, would probably have been interested in this. I don't know what he what he was I don't know how far he got or who else he was involved with with the groups. I mean, we have a list of the names of the scientists that were going to the you know, the island and stuff. And we have the fact that, you know, he's trying to get infiltrate other groups and other theoretical groups and stuff. what the reasons are all behind those. I I'm not sure. You know, Eric Weinstein seems to think that he was specifically targeted because of his his his research that he was doing. >> Yeah. We Weinstein explained being invited to his house, right, and going there and like waiting in the lobby and then being like really creepy. And he thought that >> he explains that he think Epstein was like playing a character. >> He didn't think he was like a real finance guy. >> Like he wasn't he wasn't a real >> investor, right? He was like uh someone that was playing a character who obviously had a ton of money, but he got most his money from Leslie Wexner. >> Yeah, Les Wexner. Yeah. >> When the Bronman family, I mean, I I I I feel like too because the the whole Bronman connection there. There's something there. Um Claire Bronman was connected to that whole Nexium sex cult in Albany, New York. You know about that, right? >> No, I know about Nexium, but I don't know who Claire is. >> Claire Bronman. Yeah, that's the Bronman daughter. The Aerys's daughter, man. She she was she got caught up in all that. And that's like bear that's the Bronman family. Bear Sterns. Those are the people that >> Oh, wow. >> Yeah. Really interesting connection. >> Well, I mean Epstein's origin origin is crazy because he got hired as a math teacher. Is that right? At the Dalton school. >> Yeah. Right. That's a teacher, right? >> And then he got fired allegedly for uh was it misconduct or I don't know what the official story was, but he got fired for that. And then one of the girls dads who was at the Dalton school was a the guy at Bear Sterns, right? >> Who then hired him and he had no training in this stuff, no college degree or anything like this. Just brought him into Bear Sterns. >> And then before you know it, he's connected to all these big shots, uh, Adnan Kosigible and like these this crazy world, and all of a sudden he's like he's living like the richest human on the planet. Yeah. Yeah. Overwealthy. >> Like unbelievable amount. Like his lifestyle was insane. >> It's just crazy that there is a group of people that are so wealthy, so well connected and um a private intelligence network that's able to operate and set up outside the CIA. After the CIA closed, the Safari Club with Adnan Kosogible and all them basically created their own CIA and to act in lie of of the CIA on these these foreign issues while the CIA was being, you know, um handcuffed by Carter, you know. So, so >> the whole Iran Contra network is exists around Epstein and is part of his his his um >> his rise to power. that those are the people that put him in power. And then the Iran Contra network is also the people I believe that are responsible for 911. I do not I believe that the hijackers that were were brought here that that hijacked those planes, right? 13 of them were given their visas to enter this country in Saudi Arabia, >> right, >> through through John Brennan. John Brennan was the guy directly responsible. >> How many of them were actual Saudis though? A huge number, right? Yeah. Like 15 of the 19 were were Saudis, >> right? >> Yeah. >> And there was also Saudi intelligence officers in California at one of those houses they were staying at. >> Right. Right. And >> where Muhammad Ata was and a lot of those other guys. >> When you look into the whole history of it, George Tenant and who held the spot at the at at Alex Station that was taken over by Brennan. when Brennan Brennan was basically put into the position at Alex Station after George Tennant left Alex Station to go become director of the CIA under Bush. Well, Brennan goes and takes his spot. His job is to give all the hijackers their visas and bring them to this country and then he gets rewarded by becoming director of the CIA later. Um, very interesting connections there. Uh, and again, I've I've talked about a lot of these these CIA directors like John Deutsch, for example, uh, you know, quit quit. He he left the CIA after that press conference in LA where Mike Roupert, you know, basically confronted him uh said, you know, where he basically all the LA everyone in LA is like, is the CIA dealing drugs? And he said, oh, if you have evidence of the CIA dealing drugs, you can bring it to the police department in LA, LAPD. And the guy gets up. He's like, "I was head of LAPD narcotics detective for I was shot at for for trying to bring and forced out of LAPD for trying to bring this up. So who who do I go to? So who do I go to?" And and he's like, "Uh, I don't I I I you can bring that to the police department or the FBI." And he's like, "No, all those people are corrupt. They're all involved in in running this whole drug operation. What do we do?" And the whole room erupts. You can you can go watch this uh this this video of John. Look up Mike Rupert Confronts John Deutsch. >> Oh my god. >> And John Deutsch. >> What year was this? >> This was 1993 or four. 1994 I believe. Yeah. And um Yeah. So John Deutsch quits as director of the CIA. He's like, I I I I can't I can't deal with this, man. Because because he's connected to this whole drug trafficking uh thing, which you know, Aldi North took the whole fall for that whole thing, but really it was so much deeper than that. >> We should have had, you know, um a church style committee hearings on that. We haven't had one of those uh those types of hearings. Yeah. >> How long is this? Five minutes. >> Yeah. This is nuts. narcotics detective that the agency has dealt drugs throughout this country for a long time. We'll refer you to three specific agency operations known as Amadeus, Pegasus, and Watchtower. I have Watchtower documents heavily redacted by the agency. I was personally exposed to CIA operations and recruited by CIA personnel who attempted to recruit me in the late 70s to become involved in protecting agency drug operations in this country. I have been trying to get this out for 18 years and I have the evidence. My question for you is very specific, sir. If in the course of the IG's investigations and Fred Hitz's work, you come across evidence of severely criminal activity, >> let him speak, >> and it's classified, will you use that classification to hide the criminal activity or will you tell the American people the truth? >> Everybody in the audience is black. >> All right. You want to hear the response first from Congressman Can you turn it down just a little bit? >> Wait, >> I want to see this guy's response. >> From York. From York. >> Fast forward a bit. She She talks a lot. >> Places. >> Oh, no. Go back. Go back. You missed it. >> About >> Here we go. There we go. If you have information about CIA illegal activity in drugs, you should immediately bring that information to wherever you want. But let me suggest three places. The Los Angeles Police Department. >> Look at his smile. Yeah. Yeah. >> Uh, please others want to hear. Is everybody blocking? >> It's South Central LA. >> Oh, >> I am sorry. Others want to hear this answer. >> It it it is your choice, the Los Angeles Police Department, the Inspector General or Office of One of your Congress uh persons from this, >> I'm surprised they didn't rush the desk and kill that guy. >> I really am. I really am shocked. I want to see the other guy's response. >> Sir, >> and sir, you have not gotten the mic. >> If this information >> turns up wrongdoing, if it turns up wrongdoing, we will bring the people to justice and make them accountable. >> Yeah. No, you won't. You You'll actually prosecute the people who blow the whistle because the only the only people that went to jail for torture um in the US were the people that exposed it. >> Yep. John Keryaku. Yeah. Yeah. You just had him on, man. >> Yeah. Also, uh, Thomas Drake. >> Thomas Drake. Yeah. >> NSA. His first day at NSA was 911. >> No way. >> His first day. >> But so that whole thing 911 could have been prevented if uh that thin thread software had been used and and worked, right? So the NSA spent it worked perfectly. They spent $3 million, a a nice budget on on on this software that that could identify and pinpoint all the terrorists and it and it had specific protections built in so that they wouldn't scoop up and any of the illegal spying on on on citizens and stuff, right? >> And they they shot that down. They they buried it and they replaced it with a a billion dollar contract given to SIC for essentially the same thing that basically took Thin Thread but just removed all the protections. Trailblazer. >> Yeah, the Trailblazer program. And that was run by SIC. Okay. >> John Deutsch did a lot of he did he did mergers and acquisitions for SIC. >> He worked for SIC. Really? That guy that guy in in the video we just watched, John Deutsch, the the CIA drug trafficking guy who quit over all those allegations and stuff. Um, so he's he's deeply involved in a lot of a lot of other people. Can you explain for people who don't know about SIC what are they >> and and first of all it's it's stands for >> Science Applications International Corporation >> the most bland mundane name you could have for a company it's like so boring it's like you don't want to pay attention to it. So what do they do and what and what have they been doing? Well, they started in like ' 68 and there's really no information on what their original contracts are, what they started with and and doing or around it. But sometime I know in the '9s they were hired by the CIA to actually study the as a second they brought in as like a third party to study the work that Hal Putoff was doing at at um the the like um what was it this the what was the the Stanford >> SRRI >> SRRI Stanford Research Institute. Yes. >> I just want to make sure I got that right. Stanford Research Institute was doing all that research into remote viewing with the the whole um and they brought in sic to basically confirm and try to verify reverify their results which I have a lot to say about that whole remote viewing stuff. I don't think it's real. I think what really >> I think it's I think that how put offs completely uh you know was either completely duped by this group. I think there was another group involved with all that right run by Puharik and and that was in you know connected to uh you know Yuri Geller and all that and they brought Yuri Geller in a lot of people were convinced that he was a real he had real powers and real abilities and stuff right >> well it turns out that um Puhurik had invented a radio transceiver small enough that could be fit inside of a filling of of a tooth. So you give someone you drill someone's tooth filling out. You you put this little radio chip receiver in and then you you do the filling on top of it and boom, they got a little radio chip in their tooth. And now you can it's it vibrates um the messages so that if you clench your teeth together, you can actually hear messages from this radio transceiver through your tooth. So you have a now a covert way to send your subject um the answers to the remote viewing questions uh without the interviewer knowing, right? So you can fool these interviewers into thinking this person actually has remote viewing powers when really he's just being transmitted the answers through a radio transceiver in his tooth. So I believe that was one method that they used to fool a lot of the researchers at SRRI into believing that these subjects actually had real remote viewing powers. Um, the other one is is that hell put off sites this oh this plane crashed somewhere in this thing and they they needed to find it right away and uh they didn't know where it was and so they came to our group and and and one of our remote viewers like this Pat Price guy was able to find the plane you know with his his magical powers and stuff. >> Funny thing about all this remote viewing things I don't mean to interrupt or ruin your train of thought but a lot of them were Scientologists >> right? Yes. and and a lot of them were involved in like the occult and and other stuff too. There's a lot of like weird Satanism stuff too. But the science search for Scientology is definitely an interesting connection. But but back to the whole issue that Hal Putoff brought this up on Joe Rogan. He said, "Oh well, you know, this this guy found the plane." But there's other explanations for that, right? And here's my explanation what I think could have happened. We have all these spy satellites set up by the recently created NRO and and the NSA that during that same time. Now, we have data on this plane. Say we were tracking that plane. We knew exactly where it crashed. >> What plane are you talking about? >> The plane that Hal Putoff says that that they found with remote viewing and that pro that proves remote viewing is real and that it works. That's his only proof that he he gives on Joe Rogan's show that remote viewing is real is that plane that this this one remote viewer found. That's like the biggest that's this big ultimate proof that this is this has got to be real. >> And if you have a classified program and you were able to track that plane, you knew exactly where that plane was >> and you need to go now get that plane. How do you how do you do that? How do you find a way to like, oh, we found the plane? Well, the remote viewing program is a perfect, you know, scapegoat cuz you can just say, "Oh, one of our remote viewers found the plane and that's where it was. Oh my god, that's where the plane was." But and that way you don't have to reveal your sources of your true intelligence of that you actually tracked the plane. You knew what it was and where it was and >> because of satellites. >> Because of satellites. Yeah, it makes perfect sense. >> Well, couldn't you also put the shoe on the other foot and make the make the exact opposite argument saying you don't want them to know about your remote viewing stuff. >> You want to hide the remote viewing technology because >> the NRO program was a billion dollar spy Canon spy satellites. We we sent tons of these things up in the air. have that capability and that's something real that we wouldn't want people to know about the whereas remote viewing is there's no proof that that that ever exists. We there's been tons of >> other countries find out that we have those satellites in in the atmosphere. Wouldn't they easily be able to detect those satellites? >> Yeah, they they they might know we have we have uh some of these capabilities and stuff, but but it it's a it's a way to get that information out that's classified. So, it's not proof that that that plane was found with remote viewing. the CIA could have pulled a move and is all I'm saying is all right. I don't know. You can do that with what you will and and people can believe what they want, but I've done my own studies into this remote viewing stuff and I think it's all it's all a bunch of hogwash and I think >> Yeah, but isn't there a ton of other evidence that the remote viewing stuff is real >> where >> there's been I don't know where like I don't know if there's hard >> name some show me. >> I don't know how you could do >> I would love to see it but I haven't seen it yet. >> Yeah. No, I've not seen it either. But I'm saying I'm just saying uh If you have any, please show me. And I and I would love to test one of these people. >> I'm just saying testimonials from people who were a part of the program who have talked about it and and corroborated stuff. Like you have you have witnesses with corroboration. I'm not saying they have like a you know, hardcore evidence. >> Yeah. They get a whole bunch of these people that say, "Oh, yeah, it's real. I swear by it." And and it's totally real and it's Yeah. Okay. Show prove it to me. All right. >> Yeah. I would love to see proof, too. Again, it's one of those things where I'm I'm a scientist and I'm a skeptic and I I just I think it's I think it's a whole bunch of nonsense to to convince people that they can get inside your head and get inside everything. And Steve, finally, ask Grock, has anybody ever proved remote viewing is real? >> Yeah, I wonder what Grock has to say because there was a whole bunch of studies that were done. Like I said, SRRI did the studies, then SIC was brought in as like this separate group. Um, so that we know that they were involved with the CIA through that, you know, at least that one classified thing. So, so it's it's quite >> Oh, yeah. We got off on a tangent, >> but also I know back to SIC. >> I know that Ed Fuche worked for SIC at one point, too. I know that that's in his history. Um, but also SIC uh is apparently connected to a whole bunch of the UFO stuff just, you know, tangentially. >> That's what Jesse Michaels talks about. Yeah. >> Yeah. Well, um the his uh the guy UAP Gerb and he's done a ton of research into you know >> Oh, he's great. >> both sic and Battel. So Battel is you know the those >> the progress reports that that show that they were working on the memory metals in 49 1949 uh with a specific interest in nickel titanium alloys which is nigh andol. >> Um there's like five pages with the the phase diagrams for nickel titanium alloy. they were super interested in this for some reason and I think it's because of the memory metals that were found at Roswell. Uh a lot of other researchers do uh feel that way as well. Um all right, here's our conclusion from Grock. Remote viewing has not been conclusively proven to be real in the sense of meeting rigorous scientific standards for a novel phenomenon. While some studies, particularly from the Stargate Project and recent metaanalysis, report statistically significant results, there they these are countered by methodological meth methol >> methodological, >> there you go, easy for you to say, critiques, inconsistent replication, and the absence of theoretical explanation. The mainstream scientific community, of course, leans heavily towards skepticism, classifying remote viewing as pseudocience, just like they do everything. uh through proponents argue though proponents argue it warrants further investigation due to persistent statistical anomalies. The debate remains open but the evidence is not sufficient to establish remote viewing as definitely a real phenomenon. >> Right? >> But here's the thing. We have proof that the CIA spent millions of dollars on Stargate. Why would they just waste millions of dollars if it wasn't if it didn't if it wasn't >> at least somewhat effective? I'm not saying like guaranteed, but say they say they tried remote viewing a thousand times and it happened five out of a thousand times. >> So there was a article that was published, I think it was in a French newspaper and it was about a a Russian remote viewing program and that got us interested in the idea and we said, "Are the Russians really doing this? Does this really work?" Well, we have to find out. We have to see, you know. >> Oh, okay. So, you know, they spend they spend they spend more than that trying to figure out a link between, you know, uh you know, you I can't even think of one off the top of my head, but there's some ridiculous >> and this was all during the Cold War, dude. The Cold War, some of the most insane was going on in our government during the Cold War. You got JFK, Watergate, MK Ultra, the Moon Landing, Stargate. It was that like the Cold War was like the twilight zone of just weird and wacky going on >> and most a lot of >> is really wild. >> Yeah, the moonlanding too is really wild. >> Yeah, I I don't want to get into that with you on this this podcast. That's just a whole another rabbit hole. We don't have enough time. We don't have enough time. I want to talk about a lot of other >> Let's get Let's get back on track here. >> The thing is there's too many conspiracy theories out there. I don't want more conspiracy theories. I don't like to deal in conspiracy theory. It's cool to speculate, you know. I did a little bit of that today, right? Did >> Did you see my part of the Rogan podcast where I showed him the picture of Jolly West on the set of of 2001 Space Odyssey? >> Yes. That was nuts, dude. >> That's him, bro. >> That's him. >> We verified it. That's him with Arthur Arthur C. Clark. >> And he's over there hanging around with all those guys. Yeah. And and the connection to the Yeah. the MK Ultra connection to the Manson murders and uh you know the murder of Sharon Tate and and then how >> Jack Ruby >> Yeah Ruby Jack Rubies Yeah. really uh another whole rabbit hole and anomaly in his >> he uh conveniently lost his mind right after Jolly West left his prison cell. >> Yeah. Yeah. It was his courtappointed psychiatrist. Well, that just that's the funny thing about our courts, man. And they they literally control the the the courts to such a degree where they if you're involved in any of this stuff, look up look up have you ever heard of a guy named Richard Case Nagel before? >> All right. This guy was good friends with Dave Ferry, Guy Banister, and and Klay Shaw down in New Orleans. >> No. >> All right. a day or like a a week may I think it was like a week before the assassination, he goes into a bank with a gun and like fires it into a couple shots into the ceiling and then wait goes out and waits in his car to go get arrested. And uh when they arrest him, he says, "I'm I'm I'm doing this and getting myself arrested so that I'm not implicated in the murder of President Kennedy." And they buried this guy in under like legal stuff for like years. Like >> is this online? >> Yeah, it's all online. You can look this up. Richard Case Nangle. Look him up. Read about it. >> Holy bro. They buried this They buried this case. They made they they wouldn't let him present any of his evidence to the they like suppressed all his evidence in court so that it couldn't be entered into the record. They buried him in a prison cell for like years uh and and wouldn't let the let out the light of day. The same thing they did with the uh Secret Service agent in Chicago who blew the whistle on the the Chicago plot to assassinate the president. Abraham Balden is his name. He's the first black secret service agent ever. They they arrested this guy on false charges and they put him in prison and kept him in prison so that he couldn't blow the whistle on the on the assassination plot. >> Well, also Oswald tried to blow the whistle on it, too. >> Right. Well, the guy who called the um the Chicago FBI and and said that there was going to be a plot there identified he said his name was Lee. >> Right. Right, bro. So there's some there's some stuff going on with all that. And then of course Chicago is where you know um Ruby came from. He had he had ties to the Chicago mob without like Al Capone and all this this stuff. Uh really interesting you know the Dallas how the Dallas mob you know gets involved in all this and comes together >> right. >> Um >> and what kind of position they put Ruby in. You know that's always always bothered me. It's like what did they this guy must have been at at his end's wit or some they must have had so something on this guy to make him do that. >> Mhm. >> But then also that after he shoots Oswald in the basement of the police department, he he he immediately drops the gun and says, "Where am I? What am I doing? Where am I?" >> Ruby did. >> Yeah. >> Ruby did. >> Is that on video? >> It's I don't think it's on video, but it's it's it's um that's in the I don't I don't know if it's on video. That's a good question. But this >> how did you find out about where did did you read about it? >> I read about it and learned about it. Yeah. I don't know if I've ever seen it. There's a video of him shooting and then like everything goes into chaos, you know. So I don't know what happens after that, but people said that he dropped the gun and was like, "Where am I? What am I doing?" >> So is the speculation that he was MK altered before that. >> Yeah. There's a lot of speculation about that that that Ruby was um being, you know, MK Ultra and he's living with a he Ruby was living in an apartment with another guy named another man named George Senator. Ruby, Jack Ruby is gay. He never slept with any of the strippers. He's he's a homosexual, you know. In fact, pretty much everyone involved in the JFK assassination is is gay. >> David Ferry was for >> David Ferry. Guy uh Klay Shaw definitely gay. He was, you know, have parties with, you know, uh 17-year-old boys like shoving wine bottles up at their asses in his backyard. >> Klay Shaw did >> really. >> Yeah. There's literally like this is in the history. He had parties at his house that he got the cops called on him cuz he had a bunch of black 17-year-old black kids out in the backyard with wine shoving wine bottles up their asses. >> Christ. >> And the neighbors called the cops cuz they're all running around naked doing this. And and uh so that Clay Shaw then Oswald's land lady Ruth Payne's lesbian. She had lesbian uh porn and literature um all in her possession. Yeah. And she supposedly had affair with um uh Alan Dulles's girlfriend. Right. So, the director of the CIA, a direct connection between the director of the CIA and and Oswald's landlady. Um, she vacationed on Nashon Island in the uh the summer before um before she picked up Oswald in in New Orleans and drove Marina and and gave them a home in a place in Dallas to stay. >> She was vacationing on Nashon Island, which is right near um Nantucket, Martha's Vineyard up up here up where I live in Mass. Mhm. >> And um they literally the the Nashon Island is a private island. It's owned by the Forbes family >> and um yeah, very interesting stuff. Alan Dulles was supposedly uh vacation. It was was very definitely vacationing there. They've proven this and they think that that's one of the locations where the whole JFK assassination was like, you know, at least the financial ends of it were were were talked about in Merches. >> This is Nagel. Well, why did Nagel walk into an El Paso? According to what he told the CIA, it was because he wanted to be in custody when the assassination took place in Dallas. According to the January 18th, 1968 CIA memorandum marketed quote secret that was released to the House Select Committee on Assassinations on August 23rd, 1978 during the Church Commission, right? Uh the CIA memorandum says that Neagle alleged he wanted to be in jail at the time of assassination. However, Negle says at the time of my arrest, I was operating in an undercover role, having become involved in a domestic inspired plot to assassinate President John F. Kennedy, uh, least wise, ostensibly other highly placed government officials. Wow, that's insane. Have you seen Have you heard that lady Judith Very Baker? >> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. >> I had her on here. >> Yeah, she's she's interesting. >> She's interesting. She's very odd. I've had I've had people, you know, I there's a lot >> I didn't know what to make of it. >> There's a lot of people I've um heard over the years say like bad things about her. So, and there's other people that have said good things about her. I'd really like to interview her myself and but I I really want to I don't know. It's cuz a lot of people have different things to say about her, but then they they say things about other people I don't agree with either. So, >> well, she claims she was having an affair with Oswald. Right. Right. She brought she brought in here the actual pay stubs from the place she was working and she was signing off on on Lee Harvey Oswald's uh what was it like when he clocked in to work in the morning or something like that. >> Yeah, she's basically doing it for him. >> She was she was doing it for him because he was gone and they were having an affair together. So, she was covering for him because he was showing up late or whatever and she brought all these in like the original ones with like the actual ink handwriting on it >> and it lined up perfectly. she was working at that coffee company the same exact time that he was. >> So that's >> definitely has a connection to him there. But but I've heard other people say I've I've heard other people say that she's like embellished or or like basically like added stuff onto the story over the years that that wasn't like she didn't come out right away at the beginning with all this stuff. She's kind of like and then so that makes her less credible to certain people heard. So, >> well, the whole story of Alton Ashner and the research that he was doing to create a boweapon with that lady, uh, Mary Sherman. >> Yeah. Mary Sherman's monkey. >> She was literally >> the cancer viruses that 40 and and all that. >> This goes back to the SV40 stuff. And they were using that lac machine that was in the basement of the New Orleans hospital >> to turbocharge this SV40 to try to make it more deadly. >> Yeah. And they had a secret lab that was in an apartment in New Orleans where they had all these rats they were doing this testing on. David Ferry was there, Mary Sherman was there, Oswald was in there. >> And basically how it when they eventually found Mary Sherman, they found her in the apartment. Uh basically stabbed to death. They had a bunch of knife wounds in her and they like lit her apartment on fire. >> Yeah. But then when they came in and actually did the forensic investigation, she had all these knife wounds, one in her heart, one in like her stomach, I think in her legs, and and half of her her entire arm and half of her body was missing, which wouldn't have happened in a typical fire. Like that doesn't it doesn't completely dissolve your body. M >> so they're saying what the speculation is or what the the point the book makes is that when she was in the basement of that hospital doing the testing on that LINK machine, it went off when she was still in there and basically like incinerated half of her body. So they had to figure out how to cover it up. So they put her in the apartment and then then they burned the apartment to try to cover the whole story up. >> Wow. Oh, that's interesting. Oswald. So Oswald was connected to it and they wanted Oswald to take this vial of SV40, this bioweapon that they had created and they wanted for him they wanted him to go to Cuba to kill Castro, >> right? >> And that's why he that's why he went to Mexico City and tried to defect to Cuba or try to defect back to the Soviet Union through Cuba. Um, but it ended up not happening. is a very convoluted story, but it's that whole story >> and the burillium dust stuff. And there's a number of like witnesses to the JFK assassination that died like they think that they they they basically cancered they uh cancered them, >> you know, they killed him with cancer like an induced cancer rapid uhly induced cancer. Yeah, that's an interesting side of the whole thing. And David Ferry um being interested in all that, he had like lab rats in his apartment and was doing a lot of weird experiments in his own >> uh and stuff. So that there's Yeah, there's a lot of interesting uh stuff there. Certainly with that uh that two-lane university, I think it was >> two lane. Yeah. >> Yeah. Yeah. Really um really crazy rabbit hole uh there to dig down. But um Oswald when he was in New Orleans there doing that stuff. He was also working out of uh 554 Camp Street, which is an office in uh next to Guy Banister's office. And Guy Banister was the FBI agent who created the X files, the file designation X for for all the UFO stuff. And he investigated like the Mory Island incident where he basically showed up to investigate this UFO incident. And there was this other group there of a guy saying that they were from the FBI and that they were there to investigate it. And and uh he's like, "Well, who are you and why are you here?" And and they found out this guy wasn't really from the FBI. He was from another agency >> and uh that guy's name was Fred Chrisman. Um and Fred Chrisman um has been accused of being one of the tramps in Dele Plaza. Of course, you know, people also say that's eh Howard Hunt or a guy named Chanty Hol, who uh Chanty Holt came out in like 94 and and laid out this whole story about how he was working for the uh uh Los Angeles Stamp and Stationer Company, which made all the badges for all the Dallas they made the Dallas Police Force badges. They made the Secret Service badges. They made like the CIA FBI badges and all that stuff. And uh he said that his job there was to make fake secret service credentials for uh for the um the people that were seen around the null that was identified themselves as secret service agents. And um he was sent there to Dy Plaza to deliver those p um >> you know to to the agents and stuff. So that you know and uh for the assassination plot and he says he also made the fake IDs the Ale J Al IDs for for Oswald and stuff and u a lot of interesting stuff. And then, yeah, so there's a lot of, you know, interesting stuff there in in the uh in the JFK assassin. >> You know, who's a an absolute mastermind in the whole history of this stuff is Danny Sheen. >> Danny. Yeah, Danny Sheen is is is I I met him um I met him out at uh in LA a couple months ago. >> He interviewed um he >> he's directly involved with like >> Oh, yeah. He was directly involved with a lot of people. He interviewed >> Yeah. Yeah. >> Trphocante about this. >> Yeah. and how that's all connected to the stuff at Watergate because they caught the dudes in that were in Watergate. >> Yes. >> Who had receipts to that bank in in Mexico City, >> which was the same >> bank they used to pay the Cuban assassins that Danny says were the ones that trained to kill the president. And um when >> Nixon was talking to Richard Helms, I believe or somebody close to Nixon, his adviser was on the phone with Richard Helms, >> Operation Mongoose. And then Operation Mongoose turned the interpen the head of the FBI was trying to investigate that receipt and investigate that bank in Mexico City. And then uh the Nixon's White Nixon's adviser, whoever the I forget, somebody basically got in touch with him, got on the phone with the FBI guy and Richard Helms at the same time and said, "Put the kibash on this investigation because if this comes out, if you guys peel back the skin on this, it's going to open up a hornets's nest of about JFK, so leave it alone." Well, well, I guess what they told him is that it was it was the Russians and that if this could basically open up the whole um open like nuclear war with Russia is basically if you come up with this, you're going to start a nuclear war with Russia. And and that's how they got that's how they got Warren uh Jur Judge Jer or Warren to get go along with the whole, you know, to basically go along with the cover up apparently. M >> that's uh that's that's one theory about why he he he was told to go along with all this is because he said if this stuff comes out about the Mexico City thing, you know, it's going to link back to the Russian embassy and and link to to to Russia. And then >> well, I think I think Nixon was also really worried that it was going to try to connect him to the JFK assassination because >> he was in Dallas. Nixon, he was at the bottlers convention, >> right? >> But Danny Sheen doesn't believe that he had anything to do with it. He thinks it was all He thinks it was all uh the joint chiefs of staff that were trying to they were literally trying to create a full full-on nuclear war. They wanted to nuke China and Russia. >> Yeah. >> Like all that was the one point in time where we had the most and they had the least as far as nuclear weapons. Like we had that was our peak of stockpile and that was when Russia had the the fewest amount. So the J the joint chiefs of staff had multiple meetings called SCOP meetings, not Psy, SOP. And they were uh Robert Kennedy was in these meetings and it was all about trying to basically nuke Russia and China. Kennedy wanted absolutely nothing to do with it. Neither did Robert Kennedy. >> Yeah. >> And he was trying to stop it and at the same time he was trying to pull everybody out of Vietnam >> and have talks with Kruev and and all that. >> Yeah. And that's where this guy John uh that's where this other guy John Newman who is like one of the most worldrenowned researchers on JFK. In fact, every book that's ever been written about JFK, all the top books, all the top authors, you can even talk to Oliver Stone. >> Yeah. >> They'll say all the number one sold books on JFK, they don't actually go back and read the JFK files. What they do is they research John Newman's work. >> Yeah. >> For this stuff. And John Newman was a consultant on the original JFK film with Oliver Stone. And uh he I did a bunch of podcasts with him. He is a freaking encyclop. It's a walking encyclopedia on all of this stuff, man. He's got it all documented. And he uh Yeah. Anyways, he basically his theory is that it was a a military coup. >> Well, how does it connect to the uh cuz there's this aerospace involved elements involved in both the JFK and the RFK assassination that was Eugene C. >> He doesn't know anything. He doesn't say anything about that. He doesn't say anything about because there's there's that's the thing about JFK. There's so many different flavors of JFK. People who think he was killed because of aliens, people who think he was killed because of Israelis, one of the nuke, there's people, there's so many different conspiracy theories about why JFK was killed. But John Newman, who is like the leading authority on the history of all this stuff, who's read every single page of every single document on JFK. >> Yeah. >> For what it's worth, I'm not saying he's right or wrong. I'm just saying based on that fact, his theory is it was a it was a military coup because the joint chiefs of staff wanted a fullout nuclear war and they wanted to continue the war in Vietnam. >> And they uh they hated Kennedy because of the whole Bay of Pigs invasion. They got a bunch of the people that were involved, the leftover from the the leftover soldiers from the Bay of Pigs, you know, formed the Operation Mongoose group and then that went into form Interpen. Yep. uh with Jerry Heming and uh and that other guy that trained them down I I I wish I I could remember these names right now, but um yeah, there's that's a whole another rabbit hole. And uh but I I really think that a lot of it's connected because DH Harold Bird worked for you know Dehold Burr owned the school book depository building. He's a oil millionaire, oil billionaire in Texas, connected with Howard, you know, the Clint Merchesen and the Hunts >> and also Jack Alustin Kiteon, who I talked about before. >> Um, >> these guys all all in the same kind of cabal and circle de Harold Bird took the window out of the schoolbook depository building that Oswald shot the president from and put it in his trophy room. He had a bunch of elephant he went elephant hunting right after the assassination. He went to Africa and shot a bunch of African elephants and and uh and and put hung their heads on his wall and his big trophy room that had all these, you know, p all these exotic animals that he had shot and killed and and taxiderermy and inside his trophy room with all those animals that he had killed is is this window from this Texas school book depository building. Isn't that a little weird? >> That's wild. That's really weird. >> That's really weird. and he also was uh an investor in a company called Ling Tmco VAT and VAT aircraft uh were the ones that built a lot of the flying saucers for Wright Patterson Air Force Base back in the 40s and 50s. So there is a strong aerospace and UFO element to the whole JFK story that very definitely exists and and and uh some researchers don't pay any attention to it. They they they won't talk about it. they won't make those connections or they they say that they're um it's not relevant or not important and you know they take their own flavor on the assassination everyone >> and and then there's the people that use the it all for their their grift or their political propaganda and stuff and have their own version of of of all that and that happens with all the conspiracy theories out there and uh that's one reason I think we we don't need any more conspiracy theories what we need is facts and we need like real investigations we need real um real serious investigators to dig through these things because we don't know what happened in on the JFK assassin. That was 60 years ago. We also don't know what happened with this Epstein uh thing and we don't know what happened on 9/11. >> Well, we here's the thing. We we don't know exactly what happened, >> but we know basically who was involved and we know that it was a conspiracy, >> right? >> People conspired to kill JFK. We know that. We know it. We know it wasn't the government narrative. We know one thing we do know about all these things is the government's lying about it. Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. And they covered it up and and and they called us conspiracy theorists for asking questions and said that we've >> That's why I think that term that term has run its course, I think. >> Yeah. Well, I think if you're not a conspiracy theorist by now, then then you're probably >> Exactly. >> just uh not paying attention. >> Exactly. >> You know, um Yeah. So, yeah. Yeah. This is just so much stuff. Um let's But I want to I want to get into a couple key points because we started off talking we we just kind of went all over the place here, man. >> Yeah. Let's actually I got to take a leak real quick. Let's take a quick break. >> Let's take a break and I want to come back to some stuff. >> Let's get right back on track. >> Yeah. >> All right. We'll be right back, folks. >> There's so much still to cover, man. And there's so much still to talk about with uh secret science, you know, space exploration, uh conspiracies, government accountability, the Department of Justice, you know, um you know, you know, that whole promise software thing was was originally developed um under a contract from the DOJ. The Department of Justice were the ones like that funded that whole >> um the creation of that software. Was it called prosecutor mana op uh manager management information system software right something like that is what promise stood for and it was for it was made for prosecutors to be able to like manage files and cases and all that >> court records and stuff right >> yeah cuz it's I mean that's how the CIA started Dulles and his brother uh ran a law firm before you know before they you know created and set up the whole CIA they were they were lawyers who ran a law firm >> so a lot of this stuff is is based around laws legality and you know, what you can do to get away and how to get away with and they knew a lot about laws about how you get away with stuff, you know, how you how you beat cases, how you can manipulate the law and how you can manipulate um the structure of the law. And a lot of the CIA's what it does is hire lawyers to research laws in other countries so they can find out what they can get away with and and and how to how to run these operations as best they can. And of course, you know, every once in a while you have to have agents that commit crimes in other countries and sometimes they get caught, you know. >> Mhm. >> That was weird. You're with the anti >> My pyramid just broke. >> It was doing anti-gravity until I >> Yeah, right. Is that Is that Is this the Biffield Brown effect? >> No, this is um >> Have you ever seen one of these? >> If you take a magnet and you rotate it fast enough, it doesn't have time to relax. I think there's a ro there's a spinning rotating magnet in the bottom base of that and it creates a uh a field where it never quite it can never quite stabilize itself. So so it never it just as soon as it recorrects it gets recorrected on the other side and that will happen if you if you spin magnets. Um >> oh so a magnetic effect >> with spinning magnets. Yeah. And it's it's to do with the the that relaxation time and not being able to correct itself. >> Right. >> Yeah. That's uh it's not true anti-gravity unfortunately. Um we've been on the hunt for that and uh for quite a long time and haven't been able to to to discover that and uh been real helpful if if Bob Lazar could give us some of that element 115. >> Yeah, we tal So we talked about Bob Lazar on your first podcast here and you basically pointed out all like the weird things about his past like his first wife committed suicide in her garage. >> That was awesome. You brought that up on Rogan and he was like talking about but and listening to his responses. I have everything I want to say in in in response to to everything he said because >> are so what is your position? Is your position still the same on Bob Lazar? >> Yeah, absolutely. I >> think you you think he never was at Area 51? >> He he was never at Area 51. He was at Los Alamos. He was at the um he was at the >> So you think he's making up all this stuff? It's a it's an elaborate lie that he's kept the same over all this over all these years. She was at the Mezzon physics facility. But his his first wife, I mean, you know, he he talks to he, you know, Rogan talks about his ex his his his ex-wife, but he he doesn't talk about that it was his second wife. He's talking about Tracy, and he's still buying into all of Jeremy Corbell's narrative on this stuff, which is uh, you know, >> well, my thing about I I've I've come around on Bazar now. I think that if the CIA wanted to find somebody to get into their program to or not even if it wasn't CIA, even it was like some secret secret locked or whatever, if they wanted to bring in people to sort of crack this problem or help them figure out how to fly these crafts that they've they're trying to reverse engineer, right? And you have this guy who is put strapping rockets to the back of cars, doing all this crazy stuff, really smart stuff, understands physics and all this crap. >> He he didn't strap the rocket to his he wasn't the first about the the rockets came from his neighbor Eugene Gluharf when he lived on Martha Street in Forest Hills, California, >> right? >> So the same time that was the same period he was allegedly taking courses at MIT and going to MIT as part of the secret program. But we've found through actual, you know, school records that he was taking physics courses from Dr. Bill Duxler at Pierce Junior College in Woodland Hills, California during the time he says he was going to MIT. You don't go to Pierce Junior College. If you can get it, you're going to MIT. It doesn't that doesn't add up. So, it's clear that >> Yeah. There was there was some weird college in California. >> Yes. Pierce Junior College. >> And what was the story with that college again? It was like they it was shut down because of some scheme or something. No, they were selling. No, that was on court records in his 1991 pandering case and out of Las Vegas. Okay, that was for the brothel that he set up. And by the way, I got this wrong on the last podcast. I want to correct myself. There were two brothel. There was a legal brothel called the Crystal Cove and there was an illegal brothel called the Honeysuckle Ranch. And the Honeysuckle Ranch was the one where he set up the CCTV cameras inside all the buildings were recording the the prostitutes having sex with the John's and then trying to use that sexual blackmail to blackmail the John's. Very similar to what Epstein did, right? So Bob, >> how do you know this? >> This it's all in his 1991 conviction. It's all in court documents. He's >> it's all documented in court records that he was >> all documented. George Knap talks about this. Honeysuckle Ranch was a legal brothel in Nevada in which Bob Lazar reportedly had partial ownership stake. >> Okay, I got them wrong. So, look up the Crystal Cove then. >> Crystal Cove. >> That was the other one. >> Cove. >> I got them mixed up. Yeah. So, there was two brothel that he ran. And uh these are all in the court documents. They have the name of the the mad. >> There's no mention of a Crystal Cove. >> I'll keep looking. >> It's in it's in the uh it's that was the name of it. I don't know if it's if it's in there, but I know that. Um, >> and he was it was it's in the court documents that he was recording it with camera, >> recording the prostitutes having sex with John's. >> Yes. In the 1991 conviction case. Okay. So, that's that. >> Okay. So, >> I don't have to speculate on whether he did this or that. I don't need to speculate. Danny, Joe Rogan, the proof that Joe Rogan showed to you that Bob Lazar was a scientist and and really knows science and he's not a liar. He said, "This is the proof that Bob Lazar is not a liar and that he he's a really smart guy who knows science." And he said, "Bring up that hydrogen car video, Jamie. Let's watch that hydrogen car video." And that's so funny that he brought that video up, but I really wish he had played the end of the video, the whole thing, and not just that beginning where he's showing off the hydrogen car, cuz Bazar actually lies twice, provably in that video. He lies once when he claims that metal hydride is not dangerous and that it's only regulated by the government because they don't want people get using hydrogen cars and stuff. Okay, you read the MSDS safe material safety data sheet on on lithium hydide. It's dangerous stuff, man. It's it's definitely dangerous and should be regulated. So, he lies about that. The second point he lies, he claims that he made all the lithium hydide in that car that he's driving in his particle accelerator to show and he shows up the particle accelerator. So if you have a particle accelerator and you you're creating, you know, you're smashing atoms, protons together one at a time, you're creating one atom of lithium, >> you need 10 to the 23 to have a mole, Avagadro's number to have a usable amount of this of to create a a usable amount of lithium in a particle accelerator, you would need 10 the 23 reactions. So if you had one reaction every millisecond, >> it would still take you 40,000 some years to to produce even just a gram of lithium. But he claims he made it all in his in his particle accelerator. That's a lie, bro. So, even if I if I'm if I'm the CIA or if I'm some secretive organization that wants to help crack this problem of anti-gravity and UFOs, wouldn't I want to find some guy who has the potential to help us with this problem, who also has this back, this super shady background of brothel, the wife who committed suicide, all this other stuff to if he ever spilled the beans, we could easily deny him because people would say using their logic, why would they ever hide this crazy guy doing all this wacky They would never do that. Of course, they wouldn't do that. >> Here's one reason or possibility of how and why they might do that. You look at the year before Bob Lazar came out in 1988, um there was a thing called UFO TV and this aviary group came out, this shady, it's called the UFO aviary, and you can look this up. This group came forward with all their faces blacked out. One, the top guy called himself Condor and Falcon and and Owl and Owl was supposedly Hal Putoff and Pelican. And uh they all had like nicknames of birds names and they called themselves the aviary and they were all coming out with UFO disclosure and they basically said a lot of the same stuff Bob Lazar was saying the year before. They talked about they they talked about um they talked about the UFOs in the government bible that well like that was the name of Bob Lazar's first documentary was UFOs in the government bible and that was literally like the UFO aviary group >> the government bible >> and um that was supposedly run by this you know a lot of people think that was um basically a disinformation op that was run by Richard Dodie you know you know who Richard Dodie is Mirage men right >> and Um, so other people have an idea that maybe Richard Dodie set up this little operation where they brought in this guy Bob Lazar. They knew they they were watching John Leer knew that John Leer they John Leer had gone out the year a couple years before when and taking pictures of a n a 50 like a a Russian MIG on the tarmac out there um on Area 51 and it had pictures of it and he so John Leer was you know this guy was t you know they knew he was too loud they knew he was a blabbermouth they John Lear went on the record with George Knap the year before like right before Bob Lazar came out with his story and and you can look up on the record with George Knap and John Lear. John Lear gives the whole Bob Lazar story a year before Bob ever he even met Bob. And this was this is like >> right >> Bob meets John Leer after that through Gene Huff who brings him to his house to do a appra house appraisal. They trade it. They they measure. You know, Bob Lazar is described as the guy there holding the tape measure, you know, measuring the house and uh taking the pictures and developing the the pictures with his photo processing lab uh for for Gene Huff who ran this um real estate business where he'd published the ads in the in the paper in Las Vegas. And they went to John Leer's house apparently and uh when he found out he started talking to him about UFOs and all this stuff and uh they traded him a a house appraisal for all his Billy Meyer stuff, all his Billy Meyer tapes. This is this is in the history. This is them talking about where they first met and how they all got together. And you know, it's it's possible that Bob Lazar, you know, meets John Larry. He's working as this photo processor guy. He he just came from Los Alamos. um was working at Los Alamos for a while and then had moved to Las Vegas where he he's he's just running this photo processing business and and uh trying to get started out and on his feet. He um it's an interesting story cuz he he's got the ex-wife. The ex-wife dies mysteriously. She she you know the the >> tailpipe in the garage, you know, the the espisc asphixxiation. >> Yeah. Yeah. >> And um then he marries uh um his other wife Tracy. >> He married her when they were still when she was still alive. >> Like when they were still alive and then it didn't get like it he like did like a pseudo marriage but then didn't actually put the paperwork and everything through till after his other wife was dead. So there's this whole >> weird disconnect there. And I don't believe his whole story that you know about him sneaking away in the middle of the night to go uh to go away and work on this thing. He was sneaking away because he's running a brothel and and he has to go away at hours of the night and and the Area 51 thing was the excuse he was giving to his wife at the time of where he had to go every night. >> Steve, did you find this stuff about the brothel? >> Oh, yeah. It's called Newport Cove prostitution. >> Okay. Bob Lazar, a figure known for his claims about alien spacecraft and his involvement in the US government, was also involved in a prostitution ring in Newport Cove, Las Vegas. According to court records, Lazar helped set up the business of a known of a known prostitute, Tony Bullock, and took at least 50% share of her fees. He also kept computer records of customers and was interested in recruiting other women in the operation. Lazar's involvement in this ring was part of a broader pattern of criminal activity, including an illegal prostitution ring and a criminal racket involving dangerous chemicals. The case against Lazar was a felony charge of pandering and eventually pleaded guilty. >> So, let me let's talk about the chemical the racket of the dangerous chemicals. So, he was ranny he he used to run a um a festival called Desert Blast out in Las Vegas where everyone would come together and blow off fireworks out in the this private event, invite only kind of uh festival event and uh everyone used to go out and blow off fireworks out in the desert. And um around that time is when they started cracking down on a lot of the explosives. You used to be able to buy like ammonium nitrate and and tons of fertilizer without you know any FBI record or any trail or paper trail. And then after a lot of these you know terrorist events and stuff um they started cracking down on the ability of you know regular people to buy these sorts of chemicals that could be used in the manufacturer of explosives or or bombs bomb making materials essentially. And so the only people that could buy those materials or chemicals from a chemical distribution company would be if you were another chemical distribution company or a school or a uh university someone with you know >> credentials to be able to buy these things. So what Bob did is he created a company called United Nuclear and uh that gave him a company where he could then order all these chemicals and then sell them to people and distribute them. And that's basically how he made a lot of his money. That's basically, you know, his his uh that was his big thing, you know, >> um was was uh supplying a lot of uh explo it started with just acquiring explosives materials for people for that desert blast festival and then grew into a much broader business, >> right? >> And he was busted and kicked out of Las Vegas. He had to move the operation to Michigan. >> They got kicked out of Michigan. They've been raided and and um so this whole FBI raided him and the his he's been raided so many times. United Nuclear has been raided multiple multiple times by the FBI or the ATF and the ATF uh for for violations of of laws with for the dangerous chemicals that he he distributes and and so it's and that that is again in listed >> and they claim it's because he has element 115 or something. Well, Jeremy Corbel tried to claim that in his documentary and that's why I just don't trust that guy. And I think that I think that him being on Rogan six times is and being so closely connected with counter intelligence agent Lou Alzando, I think that, you know, Jeremy Corbel was coached by Lou and whether he realizes or not, he he >> what >> he basically they controlled the narrative from Joe Rogan, man. They they they set Joe Rogan up um with the with all this stuff, man. I really feel like it because you look at you look at you look at >> I don't know >> how did Joe Rogan hasn't had anyone else in U for connected to any UFO stuff but but but but Bob Lazar >> what are you talking about bro he literally just had Jacqu Valet Jesse Michael me he has everybody on he had >> a lot of these guys on but yeah he's had he's had a lot of these guys on right >> to be fair when I watched the episode with him and and Lou Alzando I didn't get the sense Joe was buying a out of his >> Yeah. No, I know. I know he's not buying that stuff, but man, I just it bothers me that it that um I would just love the opportunity to debate Jeremy Corbel like, you know, he did he gave Flint Dibble the opportunity to come on and debate Graham Hancock, you know, on the show. I would love a chance to debate. >> We'll see if we can get Jeremy in here. We'll get him to debate you in here. >> He won't do it. He won't do it. I guarantee he won't. He'll run scared and he'll make up excuses. That dude is so afraid of me. >> Paid him on Bob Lazar. >> He wrote letter to Gan Huff and told Gene Huff not to talk to me and then to completely ghost me. And Gene Huff sent me the email. >> Well, we we got to get to the bottom of this. We got to we got to figure out what's going on. >> I really feel like he's I feel like Jeremy Corbel came from nowhere to being the this UFO authority with his own show. >> Everybody says about everybody though. Everybody, anybody who gets any sort of notoriety or sort of like spotlight in any topic, they get everyone, everybody. You have to, you have to, you have to step back from it for a second >> and just that's that's the way most people describe most pe most other folks who they think there's some sort of connection to intelligence or conspiracy behind it. Like they say, "Oh, you got you rise to prominence out of nowhere. That's really suspicious. I wonder how that happened." And like even it's the same thing with me with how everybody >> um everybody is accusing everybody online of being a CIA fed or something like that. >> That's what Kelly Chase just did with you, >> right? And I used to do that with people. I used to be like I used to think like certain podcasters or certain people like that guy's got to be funded by the MSAD or by CIA or whatever. And I see the same thing happening to me where all these people are claiming me. I'm like the cognitive dissonance is is insane. And it's if I was the intelligence community, >> it only benefits them if everybody's pointing fingers at everybody else because nobody knows what's real. >> Well, I'm not saying that he's the he's like he's an egoomaniac and a you know, a a a pompous ignoramus. Jeremy Corbel. Oh. Um, no, no, I was sorry. I wasn't No, I'm not talking about um I was talking about Jeremy Corbel like that. So, and that's why we really feel about like look, there's this guy Andrew Joe I have a lot of respect for. I have a lot of respect for Joe because he's spoke out against COVID and all that when everybody else wasn't. And man, he he's so he's he's one of the real ones for sure. Um, I don't, you know, and again, we we don't all have to agree with everything all the time. And you can't be like, "Oh, this guy doesn't agree with me on that, so therefore he must be an agent." Cuz I had the same thing the last time. I had a million views on the last podcast when I came on this podcast last. And half the comments are people, "This guy's definitely a fed." Oh, god. >> A lot of those people are probably bots. A lot of these people, they just are so out of touch with stuff. They just want to talk. Most people >> most people online just want to leave negative comments, bro. And And I see it all the time. Like if I didn't have personal experience with this stuff, I would probably be in that camp where it's like everything's evil. But there's this guy, Andrew Bamonte, who had on my podcast years ago. Everybody thinks that he's paid by the CIA to go on podcasts to promote the CIA narrative, right? And he and it's like >> that's super suspicious how he blew up like this. I think he was a plant. Let me tell you, >> I think the algorithms do it for you. >> Let me tell you the truth about how this happened. Yeah, my friend Matt Cox, who is a true crime writer who was in prison for mortgage fraud, >> he was trying to he wrote a book about some stuff and he used this guy Andrew Bamonte who lived in St. Pete as a source for his book. He asked him, he reached out to him and said, "Hey, can I meet you and get some uh corroboration on the story that I'm writing?" And Andrew Bamonte met with him, agreed to do it. And Matt kept coming to me saying, "Dude, you got to have this guy on your podcast. He's so interesting. He's handsome. He's smart. He used to be in the CIA. It'd be a great podcast for you, bro. And I was like, "What? Who?" I'm like, "I don't I don't give a about this. I don't want to talk to this guy. What do I care?" Yeah. And I wasn't interested in that stuff at the time. This was when I first started the podcast, right? >> A year later, he's like, "Dude, come on. Are you ready to have him on yet? I think it I think it'd be interesting. I think you'd like him." And I was like, "Eh, I I'll I'll think about it." I brushed it off forever. And then one week, 6 months later, a year and a half later, I was like, we had a guest schedule come in who had to reschedule last minute. I called up Matt. I'm like, "Hey, who's that guy? The CIA guy, the booant guy. >> Can you get him in here or whatever?" He's like, "Yeah, gave me his number." Called him up. He's like, "I'll be in there tomorrow." >> Came in. Episode blew up. Did a million views like a week. And then he started going on every single everyone started reaching out to him after he went on your podcast. >> He's got good takes so people wanted him on. He went he went on every podcast anyone ever asked him to go on and he blew up. >> That's crazy cuz like I went on your podcast and I'm like, "Where where are all the invites? How come I'm not here?" >> It was the most organic thing ever. But people, the narrative is that he was a plant. That he's a plant. >> Yeah. >> You know, and if I didn't have that, if I did wasn't me and I had didn't have like the real perspective of what actually happened, I would think he was a plant, too. >> You know who else really blew up because of your podcast and then accused you of being a CIA agent. Uh who and like it was Ashton Forbes. Man, that was crazy cuz he like >> he had posted a comment on Twitter like unhinged saying like >> oh these he was saying like I I I have the comment that I saved. This is like the last time I was like I'm like I'm done with this guy now. Like cuz he's he literally said that it must be the intelligence community you're working for that set him up on your podcast with the corridor crew guys, right? >> So let's set that for the record straight. Who who told you to have uh Ashton Forbes on your podcast with the Corridor crew >> and bring those guys on with him? >> That was you, right? >> It was me. Yes. I I contacted you and I asked you. I'm like, "Dude, I'm not an expert in CGI. I'm not an expert." >> Before he came in, I called you and I asked you your opinion on it. >> Yeah. And I said, >> for for the record, any UFO person I ever have on this podcast, I always call Jeremy >> to get his opinion and to get his feedback on it before I have the person in. >> Oh man. there. He just blew up. He just blew the >> like like like when I recently had um Greer on here, I called you first and I I wanted to >> I wish you had asked him because he he he his response to the 54 claim that they figured out anti-gravity in 54 and you pushed that a little bit and then he said, "Oh, it must be the Bifeld Brown effect." And then then then his he ended with it's classified. >> Yeah. >> Because it couldn't have been the Bifeld Brown effect in 54. And I want to point that out because 1956 to 1959 was Bonsson Labs was funding by Feld Brown's research. So if they had already cracked this in 54, why fund it in 56? >> Right. Right. >> It doesn't make sense. So his narrative falls apart right there. >> It's gone. John Leer's father was was in the videos of the Bonson Labs footage. He visited the lab. >> Uh saw those experiments. You can see Bryson Cecil duet from the 57 Chapel Hill conference. They're there. They show up at at Bonsson Labs and they're in the footage. It's in the archival footage from the 50s, man. Yeah. So, they couldn't have figured it out in 54, man. And but this is why I wish I wish you had that to to hit him with, but but you ah it's too bad. >> The strange thing about about Greer is his connection to Danny Sheh. How Danny Shehan I think represents him and Alzando. It's weird how a Jesuit priest, a high-ranking Jesuit priest is so embedded in >> he's a priest. He's not a priest. >> He's a high ranking Jesuit like lawyer and I don't know if he's a priest. >> He's not a Jesuit. He's not a priest. He's a lawyer. >> Yeah. So maybe he's a lawyer. I maybe I got that wrong, but he's that's >> it's very interesting like that whole connection and you know and I I can't wait. You know what? I'm going and the paradigm. >> He might be a priest. I don't know. Ask Grog. I thought I thought I'd heard that. But you know, he's doing good work with the Paradigm Research Institute and they're really trying to get this UAP disclosure stuff out because there's and and you know really need is the hearings on the science and stuff because you know sitting there and talking about these UFO videos and arrow and it's all the wrong approach to the topic. It's the if you want to get Congress interested in UFOs, >> you got to talk money, man. Let's let's talk dollar signs. Let's talk Let's talk technology. Let's talk future jobs. You know, what's in it for the American people? Is there an economy here? Can we declassify some of this stuff and and and and get some jobs going? Can we boost the economy, man? Cuz it groceries and and gas and everything out there. It's it's a weird it's a weird place right now to to try to work and stay afloat, man. Paying $3 for a soda at at the gas station now. >> It's everything's so so expensive. Well, did you see Trump's trying to get uh pure cane sugar back into Coke? >> Well, I just want my five grand that we were all promised like we were going to get five grand from the government. I still haven't seen that money, you know. So, I >> Five grand. >> Yeah, we were all supposed to get five grand from the government stuff >> just for for nothing for like as repay for CO or something, I thought. But anyways, the uh >> yeah, that whole sugar back and Coke, that's a good thing. You know, >> make America healthy again. >> Make America healthy again. We need that high that high fructose corn syrup's bad stuff. It's it's bad for your teeth. It's bad for your, you know, your heart and and liver. So, it's it's not good. It >> bro, did you hear about RFK's new pick for the head of the CDC? >> No, I have not seen this. What is >> She's a part of allegedly DARPA's health wing. >> Didn't DARPA create the COVID vaccine? >> Let me send you I got to send this thing to you, Steve. There's this whole thread on Twitter about this which is absolutely bananas. >> Yeah, there's a lot. >> This lady, just look her up. Look up um look up RFK's pick for head of CDC and it'll have this uh there should have her name. Let me see if I can find it. I thought I texted myself a link to this thread. Yeah, look I'll look that up later. my my my wife's more all interested in all that stuff uh too because we have a she has a a vaccine injured child and um so she's very outspoken on on all that stuff. >> Maybe I texted to you Steve. >> I'm looking I always text and I can never look into that and you know um Susan Monz look her up. Let me see a picture of her. >> Cuz I really thought we were going to get some um you know accountability for Fouchy and uh and Gates. >> Uh I don't know if that's her. Do you see the Peru mummies? The three-fingered mummies they found in Peru that with the one had a fetus inside of it. >> The Haime Mans stuff, man. You know, >> no, this I don't think this is Haime Mansan stuff. This is a new one. >> This is a different one. >> They found different one. They found uh they found these three-fingered pregnant mummies and it had 32 vertebrae. One had a fetus inside of it. It had big eye sockets. >> Well, cuz if if I if I had real mummies, >> the best thing I would do if if I had if I knew if they were if I knew someone had real mummies >> and um and I and I knew that they were going to come out, the the best thing you could do is create fake ones and give them to a guy like Jaime Msan to bring to a UFO uh hearing in Mexico. I don't think this one has anything to do with Haimey. >> Well, this is an interesting thing because this is this is a strategy I think I believe was used because that Wall Street Journal just came out with that article uh with that letter from Trump, right? >> Oh, yeah. >> And and that's You know what I mean? This is what I think this is what I really think happened and and this is an intelligence move that's brilliant and I think it's played over and over again and people aren't no one in the mainstream media has fought this or brought it up or been like nobody should be aware of this but there's if someone has compromat on you what you do is you create fake compromat that's the same exact thing you release it ahead of them and then you debunk it publicly so that way when the real stuff comes out everyone will be like oh I already heard this story it's already and debunked. It loses all its news value, >> right? >> It's done. >> So, the same thing you could have done with the the mummies, right? You could have if someone had real alien bodies, you you put a bunch of fake ones out and you hype people up like me with this fake stuff and and I got so fed up with the alien mummies that I won't even look at that stuff anymore, right? I won't even pay any attention to it anymore because those people harass me non-stop. You're the alien scientist. How can you not think these mummies real? Because they look fake as Because >> Well, pull up, Steve. pull up the video, the um the Instagram video, the alien mummies that I texted you earlier. >> So that's >> because this is super compelling to me. This is not the same that Jamie was doing. >> Oh, this is not the >> original investigators of the three-fingered mummies became visibly emotional when he saw it. A three-fingered being chiseled into the rock thousands of years ago. When I visited Maria, I saw no apparent signs of manipulation on the hands or the feet. One of the mummies has a fetus inside and rumors are starting to show the fetus to also have three fingers. I contacted the lawyer of the American science. >> That's way better than the other one I saw. >> Who told me that the current imaging isn't good enough to say either way whether or not the fetus has three fingers. Some notable oddities regarding the mummies. Maria has 32 vertebrae while most humans have 33. Not an impossible anomaly, but still notable. Maria has abnormally large eye sockets and a protruding mouth. Dr. Zuniga told me that the metal implants had organic tissue fused to them, indicating that they were alive whenever these were placed. This is a process called oio integration, and it takes about half a year to fully complete. If these are fake, then this would be one of the greatest hoaxes of all time. If they're real, this would be one of the greatest discoveries of all time. I'm an independent journalist. >> Allegedly, they think this is just like I was talking to Jesse Michaels about this and he I think he went down there to look at this stuff and he did a I think he did a whole documentary he's working on. >> Yeah. They had all those guys out at >> they think it's a uh just a there so there's 20 different species of hominids that have been discovered, right? Five of those have been discovered in the last 10 years. So they think this is a new species of homminid that's just being discovered possibly. Not necessarily. It might not be >> less. Yeah. It could be like a or aopithesine or homoerectus. >> Three fingers. Three fingers. >> Yeah. That's weird. Yeah. Tridactyl. >> Really strange, bro. >> Yeah. Yeah. I don't know, man. That's again, I'm more of into the physics than the biology kind of stuff, but uh that one looks much better than the the uh the ones we saw at the uh congressional hearing. >> Mexico hearing. Yeah. >> Yeah. So, for here's the Why are they always powdered? Here's the Mexico ones that they were turns out that they were uh fraud, right? >> Yeah. Yeah. They had the llama skull that they mutilated and turned around and yeah, there's a whole b bunch of people exposed to chicken. >> This thing I think it's very interesting because it's this first popped up in 2017 2018 and now we're talking about it again. >> Oh. >> Oh, that is interesting. >> So, this fits into my this fits into my thing. If you have a real thing you're worried about getting out, you scoop it with the fake one. So that way when people see the real stuff, they they think it's the fake thing and they don't even want to pay any attention to it. And I think that that that might be possibly what happened. This is exactly what Carl Rove did with uh George Bush's National Guard files during the the 2000 election that that he he he won, right? So they knew that those National Guard files from Texas were about to drop and a journalist was working on the story. They was about to drop it. So what Carl Ro did is he created a bunch of fake documents said and then released it in a big story. They came out and debunked that story and then when the real story hit it it it went nowhere and nobody paid attention to it and nobody cared because they were like, "Oh, this has been debunked already." >> So that would be a 4 D chess move by on Trump's part if he knew there in fact existed a letter between him and Epstein that was in compromising. This would be the best way to do it. And then you sue the reporter that oh I'm going to sue you but I'm paying you to do this anyway so we're it's all it's all for show. I I don't know. That's where I think happened. >> Here's an interesting thing about the whole Trump thing, right? Elon has been he was the first one to basically call him out, right? About he's in the Trump He's in the Epstein files and all this stuff >> and he's still doing it. He even said Bannon is in it. So, we know Trump sues anybody and everybody who talks about him. Yeah. >> Or says anything that's a lie about him in his eyes. >> Why didn't he sue Elon? >> Why didn't he sue Elon? >> Why didn't he sue Elon? Why is there that case uh that was thrown out with the 14-year-old girl uh Katie there with him and Epstein, the >> 2016 case? >> Nobody's really talking about that. So, >> I mean, is it possible? Yeah, it it makes a lot of sense that everyone in the whole system is compromised and and under the same kind of under the same kind of umbrella, this octopus. Um >> I think that's that's the most likely scenario. Yeah, I think it I think it it makes sense with what's >> possible that Trump called his lawyers when Epstein dropped all this and his lawyers said we can't do that because then they're going to call discovery and they're going to have to bring all this evidence into discovery and you don't want that. >> Is that possible or would it be sealed anyways? Again, I I don't I uh I don't know all the exact circumstances, but I I really think that there's much more going on there. Especially when Elon said that when Elon said it, I've been saying it first. I I said this back in right when Epstein killed himself. I was like, this is >> You think you think he killed himself? >> I actually when he first happened, I I was, you know, thinking that they they they snuck him out of there alive, right? And the way that that I would do it if if I was an intelligence operation is I would give him detrotoxin and then he would register as dead just like the v this is the this is the puffer fish chemical that that the voodoo people use. >> Oh yeah >> right where they put the goat to sleep and then it comes back from the dead the zombie goats. You >> ever paralyzes you. Yeah. >> It paralyzes your nervous system and then you but you're not dead. >> Exactly. >> And so they could have given him the detroto toxin um the puffer fish toxin and and then pronounced him dead at the hospital and then when he goes to the morg, they do a body switch and then boom, he goes to Israel in some secret bunker somewhere and and uh yeah, so he very well could still be alive. There's no proof of what happened to him and they covered up those two minutes of the tape. They proved that it was edited in Adobe Premiere and uh >> Oh yeah, they did. Did they actually Did they actually prove that, Steve? They found the metadata to show that I'll find the article, but basically it looked like it was not original. >> That's some crazy stuff, man. >> Uh, is it possible that he's still alive and living in Leslie Wexner's house in Ohio? >> Oh, I didn't I don't know. >> Have you seen a picture of Lesie Wexner's house in Ohio? It's the size of a city >> and he's got a pool that's the size of a small ocean. >> Look up a Yeah, find a photo of that. >> And where's all the photos from the inside of the I want I want to know about >> Also, I mean the photo that they released of his cell right after he allegedly killed himself >> is not the same cell that's in the video footage. It's a completely different part of the prison. >> H >> It's just so strange, bro. It's so strange. There's Wesley Wexler. >> Lesie Les Wexner. Les Sex Ner. >> Wexner. >> His first name is Lesie. Top left. Top left. That's it. >> Top left. That's it. >> Not Wes. Okay. Yeah, that's it. >> Blow that up. >> Why did it get c >> He's like Lex Luthther has what I call. >> That's his house in Ohio. >> It's like a convent. >> It's insane. So he could Epstein could totally be there, bro. And then there's also all these Israel brings in all these to escape perjury, to escape their convictions there. There's like all these articles of how Israel basically is sheltering people that uh have been convicted of crimes involving pedophilia. >> Just amazing that our our justice department's doing the same thing. And right after he got con right after he got convicted, >> he literally went to Israel. >> Yeah. >> He he was in Israel the whole time. And then he shuttled all of his money to Israel as well. >> Yeah. >> And then gave Leslie Wexner, he sent him like 54 million or something like this. How the hell did he get away with that dude? Is this the video about the stuff being modified? >> Well, it's not a video. It's just a showing that the metadata was definitely modified, >> right? >> Likely. Yeah. >> Yeah. Again, the that prison something happened then and when it happened I was like convinced that you know Trump was part of the whole Epstein thing and I was saying that you know that there's all these pictures of Trump with Epstein like I'm convinced that he's part of this that he's down with this and I had a bunch of close friends of mine they were like dude no Trump's good he kicked he kicked Epste out of Marilago. He didn't want nothing to do with Epstein or any of this stuff. I'm like, dude, he was at his house like three days a week like in New York and like yeah, >> you know what? Who do I believe? But I had all these people telling me, you know, good friends of mine and stuff, too, like telling me, don't don't pick that, you know, just stay away from that. And and I did. I did. I I backed off it. Maybe I shouldn't have, but no, people weren't ready to hear that back then either. So it's it it's uh >> yeah it's a catch 22 we're in because like I said in the beginning to Tim Dylan take that it's this country is basically pick your favorite. This aligns with my views. This is for stopping climate change. It's like would we be would the country be better if Camala won? I don't know. I don't think so. >> No >> I don't know. is Trump Trump's not doing anything that he said. I mean, he's continuing the wars, but the problem is is he is most it seems like, again, I'm not making any accusations, but it seems like he is just bending over backwards for Netanyahu >> and well, Wall Street too. He's got, you know, he's got >> Howard Lutnik on his right arm. >> If you want to, if you want to go by AAM's razor, we know Jeffrey Epste was an Israeli access agent. >> Yeah. And Trump's doing all of Israel's bidding. It's It's It's pretty out in the open. >> Yeah, it it I think you're right. You know, and when I first looked into whole the like the 9/11 stuff, there's I was just I thought that the Israel connection was like, you know, anti-semitic. I grew up right near Sharon Mass and I have a lot of Jewish friends, you know. >> I grew up among tons of Jewish people. I have tons of Jewish friends >> and I was just like this is all anti-semitism. I didn't, you know, >> was it anti- this is this is here's here's a great Julian Dory take. >> Yeah. >> Just you can't calling Jewish people or Israelis anti calling being called they don't they don't believe they're against everything Netanyahu and his government is doing. It's the same thing as saying that me and you are associated with Dick Cheney and George Bush, >> right? Me and you want nothing to do with those people. We're still Americans. Yeah, >> like Netanyahu is like he got like what 25% 30%. >> That's the thing is is because the the Jewish state of Israel it doesn't the corruption exists at the top of this this pyramid within this and and these groups that lit literally operate through blackmail networks. So it's in order to put people in power and everyone in power is is blackmailed and and and by these groups >> but then who's really controlling it behind the scenes? Is it is it really just these 13 banking families of the Illuminati that have been controlling all everything for the last 2,000 years through the Knights Templar and all the these secret societies? Or is it, you know, or is it um is it aliens? What is it? Who's controlling who's really controlling the government? Cuz I mean >> interdimensional child molesters. >> They're turning the frogs gay. >> It was true. you know, with the atrisisine, you know, >> how the hell did how the hell did Alex Jones predict 9/11? >> So, he was listening to Bill Cooper and Bill Cooper was predicted first, you know. Um, William Cooper uh knew all about this stuff. He was saying, you know, Osama bin Laden's going to hit this country and don't, you know, so I think that he he uh I think he might have got it from Bill Cooper. And uh also I know Ted I don't know Ted Gunderson was one of Alex Jones's big sources on a lot of the stuff for for a number of years too. Former FBI agent Ted Gunderson. I'm not sure where Alex got it from. I I would I would I'd be interested. Has anyone ever asked him that question where he where he got the foreign knowledge? >> Probably >> to predict that. >> The thing with Alex Jones is he just he throws so much at the wall like something's going bound to stick every once in a while. You know that was the >> I'm sure he got no one pays attention to the you know I'm sure he gets a ton of wrong but you only pay attention when he gets right right like he got the >> well look at Nostradamus he made a lot of lot of predictions you know but people like oh well he was made some right ones so it must be >> but um I think uh I think it's whiskey time >> you want some whiskey >> I think well dude it's it's time to it's time to uh >> it's time to like wine the Well I was saying you you offered to First, I'll go grab it. We'll wind this down. >> I'll go grab it. I'll be right back. >> All right, we're back, man. >> Here we go, sir. >> Yeah. Not too much. Not too much. Just a little. Just a taste, you know. I just want a little sip. We got to >> This is how Joe Rogan does it on on the show. And I'm >> Except he smokes cigars. We're not allowed to smoke cigars in here, >> you know. And that's too bad cuz I >> Are we allowed to in the new place? >> Well, you're going to have to have me on again, bro. >> Oh, of course. And I I brought you some of the uh I brought you some um bud from the best dispensary in Rhode Island. >> Did you really? Oh, wow. >> Mother Earth. >> Yeah. Thank you. >> Yeah. Mother Earth and Puckas. And uh I got I got you some real good buds. So we we'll we'll we'll enjoy indulge in that after the show. I wish we could uh now. But that's that's all right. We'll uh >> Cheers. >> Cheers. And um yeah, so man, >> I guess you're right. And and you know, I I've I've I've it is a little bit of jealousy, I think, when you see some of these other people get on these shows and you've been doing this so long and and you know so much more than these people and you're like, how the hell did this person like succeed and >> they're just, you know, they don't know what the hell they're talking about, >> right? um that that's uh an issue, but and then guys like we're saying about you know getting accused of yourselves being in I you people saying that you're a useful idiot or that I'm a useful idiot or that I'm a gatekeeper because I work with this engineering and physics group to to you know basically vet and verify exotic technologies or free energy devices. And I guess it's like, so I could see how some people could perceive it that way, but at the end of the day, you need real scientists to verify stuff because there's so many people making claims on the internet. How how can you know that what's real or what's not without without experimental verification and uh some sort of sounding board or authority to, >> you know, obviously there's problems with that. A lot of people have problems with the authorities in science. You know, it's it's uh the topic of many podcasts. All the scientists are lying to us. The government's lying to us, >> all this stuff. So, how do we find the truth in a in a world where everyone's lying to us, everyone's trying to deceive us, everyone's trying to give us bad information or lead us down a wrong path? M >> I think it's a very difficult place to be and especially when there are powerful people who pay you know entire organizations large amounts of money to cover up the truth is like that's what we saw happen with uh with Arrow what what um UAP Gurb uncovered with Arrow is that they gave like $30 million to a company called Sanorp which specializes in perception management and and running you know bot farms >> and stuff like that. So, >> wow, >> that was a really weird uh find in the contracts and I that was a real eye openener for me personally. And the other eye opener was that you know Arrow was set up, it was run by Kirk Patrick, but Kirk Patrick reported to Moltry, Ronald Moltry, who was that that was the the black guy from the first Pentagon uh hearing with Scott Bray, right? And turns out Moltry scrubbed his resume before that press conference and that that UAP hearing. And he what he removed from his resume was all his past work for Battel that he was, you know, an employee of Battel, a dire maybe even a director of Battel, I think. And um Battel of course is the legacy program that everyone accuses of being the the grandfather of the UFO cover up because you they made the most classified components of the atomic bomb, the the the demon cores, you know, the plutonium core at the center of the atomic bomb. They were the metallergists. They had the metallergy experts to do all that. and they're the company if you found UFO metals and or materials in 1947, uh they would be the ones you would call, right? It makes sense that it would go to Wright Patterson Air Force Base, the the the top of the command there and uh and then outsource it from Wright Patterson to nearby Dayton, Ohio at Patel uh with the metallurgy experts, the guys that were experts in the titanium alloys for tank armor. and you have this stuff that you don't know what it is. Well, they hired a scientist uh right in 19 right 49. It's all in the papers and he Elroy center and in the papers he creates a method for dissolving pieces of um in carbon tetrachloride um sorry yeah tetra carbon tetrachloride which is uh you know super powerful chlorine and um they'd only develop something like that if you had something that was indestructible that you wanted to to be able to identify because they basically you you dissolve it in this stuff and then you measure the off gases you burn and you measure the off gases and you can tell what it's made out of. >> And um that was in the papers in 49 of what Battel was developing uh for all this stuff. And Elroy Center told muon directors in like in the 80s that he was hired by Battel to work on UFO technology and given pieces of metals which he thought were not from this world which is crazy um to think that this is somewhere they're learning what they can from this stuff slowly through the scientists. They've figured out that, you know, metam materials. They figured out quasi crystals. A lot of this nanotechnology is based on the actual quantum structure of how these things are put together. And um they gain a lot of their properties for how they're put together. And um it a lot of the science we're under from what I understand how a lot of this more advanced physics works is is really understanding the n the true nature of of quantum entanglement. And that's something that you know Bryce Duet again with uh Dit and Wheeler John Archerold Wheeler who was metallergist did a lot of work for Battel during those times. These guys were the foundational in setting up a lot of the the framework of that early physics that they they came up with the idea uh to explain to explain uh quantum entanglement they came up with the idea of quantum non-locality and quantum non-locality says that in the quantum world there's no space. It's it's all just a it's all a function of the same stuff and that everything's connected on the quantum level over vast distances I mean across the universe. It's all connected and quantumly that we're all connected basically quantumly >> and that if you can entangle something it doesn't matter if it's dis uh separated by huge distances you could essentially create a wormhole through space this er equals EPR um entanglement Einstein Rosenbridge equals the Einstein podolski Rosen >> um paradox in physics which this EPR paradox >> and the solution to that is that you create an Einstein Rosen bridge And um then the idea is that if you can do that, you can you could potentially warp drive and teleport stuff. Um so the the there's definitely been scientists looking into this stuff and you know the locked matter wave patents, the uh that stuff is is all is all very real. I just don't know how deep it goes and and how much of it is is is out there to convince the public that we have stuff that we don't really have. But then then you look at that F47 with all the the metamaterial coatings and the the the >> the smooth surfaces and stuff and you got to wonder, man, they got to have some stuff, man. >> What do you think about uh Katherine Fitz? >> You know who she is? >> Yeah. She's like a a Bush economist or something, right? >> Yeah. is a Bush economist who basically said that all the missing money starting with Donald Rumseld talking about it before 9/11, the missing two trillion >> and now it's ballooned to 21 trillion. She's been trying to find what where that is. And she thinks she saw she noticed as soon as all that money started missing at the same time, all these offshore accounts started ballooning at the same time, >> right? >> So, she thinks that because that stuff's missing from the receipts, she doesn't think it's just missing. She thinks it's just not being accounted for because it's going to black projects. and she thinks that that could potentially be the money possibly went to some sort of like dark physics programs, anti-gravity stuff, UFOs. Um she, you know, her overarching theory on this is that the central bankers, the the people that run the globe basically, uh are using all this money to try to figure out how to create a um a breakaway civilization in case of like a cataclysm or something like this so they can escape the earth. And uh >> that's the thing that's dangerous, man. I I I was a little worried about coming on and talking about all this these 9/11 connections and all this stuff because if all this stuff comes out, these people have underground bunkers. They have railway systems. They have the Denver airport with all this underground stuff. They have a whole doomsday plan. They could just flip a switch and go into their bunkers, man, if really goes crazy and hits the fan. They think they're all going down. I I I don't know what these people are capable of. They've had billions of dollars untraced and unaccounted for for decades and they've been doing all the secret stuff they I mean goes back to this whole core government group. Peter Dale Scott wrote about it, the the the continuity of government program, >> right? >> And that group was in Dallas and and operate, you know, ready to go into action should should, you know, Johnson and Kennedy both go down, uh, they had a whole system ready to go up and in place to to, you know, to ensure there was a government. And who runs that government and who's in in charge of all that? And um and then a lot of that goes back again to to the 48 488th Intelligence Squadron and um Stratcom, which is, you know, and the and NORAD, >> right? >> Um Northcom, all that stuff. It's it's all connected to this network. They have all these secret places where they can fly the president to. And >> have you seen the doomsday plane? >> The doomsday planes. They were the doomsday planes were flying on 911. So, the people in charge of the money at the Pentagon are interesting because those >> Do you pull up the doomsday plane? >> The E4B and those planes were spotted over the Pentagon on 911. >> Were they >> the E4B and that doesn't take off unless you know >> they're shielded for nuclear blasts. They're they're uh able to with uh withstand a nuclear blast and all the radiation and stuff like this. They're like super shielded and they actually have these antennas that they can drop outside the plane that they can drag these antennas outside the plane so that in the case that all like satellites and there's like an EMP effect, these these uh lines that they drop out of the plane can somehow like tap into uh some sort of like radio frequency where they can actually communicate with the outside world and like broadcast stuff. >> Yeah. Yeah. It's crazy. So when you talk about the Pentagon and and the financial parts of all this because 9 911 was a financial crime. I'm absolutely con convinced with the 2.3 trillion that was missing that you just pointed out >> the the people in charge at the Pentagon. You have uh the comp patrol of the Pentagon, Dove Zachim, he ran a a company called Systems Planning Corporation International. Systems Planning Corporation International had a subsidiary called Trid Data Corporation. And if you look up the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, >> y >> the official report of the structural um the integrity of the building after the bombing took place, they had to engineers come in, assess all the damage that was done, figure out how big the bomb was, how much damage it did, and then they did assess the damage and then um modified the building and repaired the building. They repaired the building, right? Um, so in order to do that, they had to have gotten access to all the blueprints and all the engineering details of the buildings. So they knew exactly from 1993 how to build how to bring those those towers down. And that was the company uh, Trid Data Corp, which was a subsidiary of SBC, which the owner of that company was the comproll of the Pentagon on 911. So these connections are are very curious when you're looking at the financial crimes of 911. you're taking into account all the CEOs that worked in the towers that day that missed work. >> And there wasn't just it wasn't just Larry Silverstein and um Howard Lutnik. Yeah. >> You had Jim Pierce of AON Corporation. You had all three uh the leadership at at Marshia Mlennon, which was the big one cuz um Craig Stapleton is a uh the pre the vice president, the president of uh Marshia Mlennon. He's uh good uh friends with the Bush with George W. Bush. They were they were involved in the Texas Rangers deal together. Um they're very well connected. You also have El Paul Bremer who Mrs. work the day at 911 uh to go on MSNBC and tell everyone that Osama bin Laden was responsible and also pro possibly Iraq and Iran. Um very early on before anyone knew what was going on. He's like the guy telling the whole official narrative on mainstream TV. He goes on to become the Iraq war occupation governor. Okay. the tr um Bush had first picked um his first pick was going to be Bernard Carrick. Bernard Carrick was the New York City police commissioner on 911. So that that's a whole another interesting rabbit hole because Bernard Carrick is connected to um of course Rudy Giuliani. They're the guys that hyped up Trump for January 6. They're the ones that hyped up January 6. They were the the Carrick and and Rudy Rudy Giuliani were the two main cheerleaders for the whole January 6 thing. And then Rudy Giuliani's got all these weird connections because he started out as a New York City prosecutor. Okay. And the case, the last case that he prosecuted for the state of New York was the state case against BCCI, the Bank of Credit and Commerce International. >> Epstein's connected to them, >> which is of course the whole Iran Contra network. >> Yep. >> That Epstein was connected to. >> Yep. And then so who who's in charge of the prosecution against that case? Rudy Giuliani. That case fails. It doesn't go anywhere. Rudy Giuliani quits the prosecutorship and he goes to work for a law firm called White and Case. Now White and Casease was the law firm that represented BCCI during the hearings. Is that conflict of interest? If you're a prosecutor, you botch a case and then you go work for the people that on the other side. M >> I mean, isn't this the whole issue that lots of people had with Morin Comey being the prosecutor in both the Epstein cases and the Diddy cases? >> Didn't she just get fired? >> She should have been arrested. That's not enough. That's Fire her. She should be arrested and charged, man. >> This is conspiracy on the utmost level to cover up massive crimes, man. M it's it's it's so weird that the the whole connection to the diddy thing, you know, like cuz the diddy thing I I don't see any sort of um any sort of like benefit for intelligence. I mean, maybe I'm missing something, but the diddy thing is to me it seems like it was like a big distraction, you know, because almost the Epstein thing was legitimate underage kids. They're piles, right? like these these they were trafficking underage girls like in the 14 >> when I saw the big news article with the FBI raid where they had seized 40,000 bottles of baby oil from Diddy's I was like this is >> right and here's like the thing about the thing about the Diddy thing which is again so this is this is a Gavin McInness take which I fully agree with the whole thing about Diddy is they had parties and these girls were of age. They weren't underage girls and they were going there on their own. It's the same thing with Harvey Weinstein. It's like the guy the the they didn't ask girls like, "Okay, what kind of cage were you locked in?" "Oh, you weren't locked in a cage. You were going home every night." "Oh, that's interesting. Well, what did the what did the police say then?" "Oh, you didn't go to the police." Like, get the out of here. >> People looking for attention after Diddy was doing this I don't care what male prostitute you had to drink off his back. Like, I I assumed you were doing all that stuff. Like, show me an underage girl that is forced into having sex with somebody and then I'm pissed off. Then you murder them and bury them under the prison, right? >> Yeah. >> If it's some Jeffrey Epstein type but the Diddy parties, like, get the out of here. I don't want to hear about that. >> Yeah. if it's consensual and it's like >> these are people that are trying to get they're they're they're in Hollywood. They're trying to climb the ladder of wealth and fame. It's like the Harvey Weinstein thing. Another Gavin McInness take which I think is I think is unpopular but it's great. It's like it's like uh uh what was the the lady who accused Weinstein of uh making her blow him? She like he made me suck his cuz if I didn't I wouldn't get the role in the movie. Well, what would you do if Harvey Weinstein said, "Suck my I'll give you a role in the movie." Uh, well, I guess I'll find another trade. Guess I won't be in a bunch of movies. >> Yeah. >> You know, >> right? You have that choice, right? I guess, you know, I you could sell your soul, uh, sell your, you know, your body. Uh, but it again there prostitution is illegal and there is a certain aspect of like where it's almost like a modern day slavery. It's like they're taking these poor people that want to be part of this, you know, bigger group and and and and get out of that their situation and they they like they're taking advantage of those people >> um looking for an opportunity. It's it's not it's not the best thing, but it's not >> it's not as bad as blackmailing our politicians who write our laws and and you know run our country. That's that's a whole another level of um corruption and and evil. You know, that takes a whole another level to then use use that compromat to um manipulate, you know, politics and manipulate world affairs, >> you know. >> Yeah. and uh and and it it public opinion is not doing for for as as good as Israel is in espionage and the MSAD being the number one intelligence agency in the world and being so effective at doing everything they do. They really are bad at PR because the the public sentiment against Israel right now, the discourse online, it could never be it's never been worse in my opinion. Yeah. >> I don't know how much of it's bots. I don't know how much of it's organic. seem a lot of it does seem inorganic, but like people are more aware now than ever of all of the things, you know, every way that America is bending over for Israel, like sending them billions of dollars every year, not making them register as a foreign agent with their lobby in Congress and not telling them to stop blackmailing our politicians, you know. >> Yeah. >> And and Trump, he he is like it's so out of character for him because he's usually able to like take the temperature of the public and he can read the people and and on any issue, but it seems like with this Israel issue and this Epstein issue, he's like just deaf deaf, blind, and dumb to it. It's like he's not It seems maybe now he's like, "Okay, all the public pressure, we're finally going to release this stuff." I don't know what exactly he said, but I think he said they're finally going to try to release all he's going to ask Pam Bondi to release all this stuff. calling it a Democrat hoax. >> Oh, yeah. Yeah. It's a it's the Democrats, the liberal, the far left created the Epstein files. Yeah. >> Dividing people over the issue as much as he can to try to split people up on their but but really >> they're both they're both compromised. I'm sorry. The left and the right, everybody's compromised. It's a uni party and every everybody's on those Epstein files. Well, I come from, you know, demo hell up in in uh Rhode Island and I a lot of Democrats in my family are we're united on this whole issue of the Epstein files and getting the truth out about this is it's like a unifying issue for both parties. >> Um so the fact that he's >> trying to divide he's just divided his whole base up. Even Tim P and and and Alex Jones, they're all like >> Yep. They're all denouncing him and and uh >> Tucker who who who campaigned basically campaigned for him. Rogan Rogan endorsed him. Rogan's calling it out. Rogan's questioning it. I mean >> Tucker's doing great work uh with Kurt Weldon on and uh and having all these these >> You see the interview that he did with Ted Cruz? >> I didn't see that one yet. No, >> you got to watch that one. That was pretty pretty eye opening. >> Yeah. Huh. I have to check that out next. Yeah. >> Yeah. Ted Cruz basically said that like the his number one goal in Congress was to support and push forward the goals of Israel. >> Wow. Yeah. Well, it's it's sort of uh it's sort of crazy how where all this stuff ended up and and definitely Israel was involved with Robert Maxwell. He was they were, you know, key to his whole I mean, how did they get how did they steal the promise software and then get it to Robert Maxwell? And there's so many connections there. And then they're trying to, you know, cut all these threads and and blur all the lines um so that people can't make these connections and really put all this together and and then also really hit us hard with a bad economy so that everyone's, you know, struggling so bad they don't have time to to really look at anything else but, you know, their their own affairs. >> So, it's it's uh it's a really crazy time right now to be alive. Uh it's just nuts seeing all this come to a head and and I I just imagine what all these you know people of the past would think looking at this now you know like you know what I mean like the people that like oh this will never come out and now that they see they didn't predict the internet I don't even think that the uh the intelligence agencies really realized the power of the internet when they when they uh gave it to the public >> when they created it. Well, well, they created it. They didn't when they created it, certainly they didn't realize the power of it because they would never let it out to the public if they if they did, you know. They would have never let us have this, you know. They would it would have kept it just for themselves, you know. And now they're really trying to you create this internet too with the net neutrality, the the censorship stuff and um the algorithmic, you know, coraling and shadow banning of of of a lot of the uh the material. You know, it doesn't show up in the algorithm. certain keywords are censored as we talked about with the with the AI and you try to search certain stuff. It's like it won't connect those dots or it purposely severs those lines until you ask it specific questions and then it's like, "Oh yeah, I was wrong. I made a mistake. >> Oh, did you really make a mistake or did something or someone program you, you know, >> to do that?" Mhm. >> And that's uh that's that's certainly an interesting um question to look at and and something we should do more of in this uh in the future is is is finding those, you know, those threads that that the AI has been programmed to cut. Uh cuz it's there's going to be a lot of interesting connections there. But um man, what else uh what else what else uh should we get into? Man, we covered a lot of stuff. Uh, >> I think we covered a ton, bro. I I don't know what else there is. >> I um did want to talk a little bit about, you know, what happens if someone in my group, right, I I have all these engineers and physicists who working with private investors to try to produce anti-gravity or free energy devices. What would I do tomorrow if say, you know, someone in my group cracked this stuff and we're like, "Dude, we got it. We We figured this out." >> What do I do at that point? How How would I get that out to the public without it being suppressed or or whacked? >> Without getting whacked. Yeah. >> How That's what I want to know. >> Have you thought about it? >> Yeah, I've thought a lot about it cuz we've been working on this. This is what I've been working towards for the last like decade. >> What do you think you would do? Well, I'd have to like simultaneously release it through as many trusted podcasts and other contacts as possible. Like simultaneously, I I think I'd have to like give a copy to you, give a copy to, you know, um, everyone I know, you know, and and say, "Hey, you know, if anything happens to me, this is why, you know, or something, you know?" I >> I feel like >> I feel like it might happen. you know, what happens in the next, you know, couple of months if we get a successful experiment in one of these things, like how do I bring that out to to people and and show it? Um, >> isn't there some sort of law that exists to where like the government can claim ownership of like some sort of new discovery or like some sort of new scientific revelation? >> Yes. So um the trading in the under with the enemies act it's uh also the there's a a law called um sorry I'm I'm drawing a blank I need a I need another >> get some of that truth serum. All right. So, um there's the law is actually ITAR, international traffic and arms regulation, right? ITAR or ETAR >> and uh >> it's export control technology. You know, it's export control laws is what it's basically. It's like you're not allowed to export classified um details of of uh technical information and stuff. Of course, if if we found this in our labs and and created in our own lab, >> it wouldn't be classified, >> so to speak. Right. >> Right. >> But there are still laws that exist. they can come in and scoop in on on something like that and say, "No, no, no, no, no. This is this is too dangerous to let out. We're going to we're going to put the kibos on this." And actually, you know what's interesting is that all of our national labs have patent holding companies that operate. So, like if scientists working on our labs make a discovery, they can they can capture those discoveries or patents and and hold it inside these holding companies, >> right? And all of our national labs are managed by Battel Memorial Institute. They managed most all of our I think there's one um you know Lincoln Labs I don't think is managed by Battel. There's a couple others ones that aren't but um most all of our national labs like Oakidge, Los Alamos, Sandia, they're all managed by >> Battel. And so if someone discovers something remarkable or revolutionary at these labs, they're going to come in and and scoop that technology up and suppress it, >> right? >> And so that's why we've like, oh, we've created this independent group of scientists and we'll try to get, you know, figure out as much about these technologies as we can and see if we can't replicate this in the public domain and and and get it out to the public so that, you know, we can declassify, get the ball rolling on disclosure and declassification and stuff. Uh because man, I I really want to live in a future where my kids can go to other planets and and they don't have they have something more to look forward to than um you know living in this world where where where we treat children the way we do. >> Yeah. >> Uh it's if you think they're covering up all this secret stuff and they figured out a lot of it, why do you think they're still hiding it? What do you think they're trying to What do you think their goal is? Their goal is of course like from a strategic standpoint is you know the same reason that the Greeks didn't disclose the Byzantines didn't disclose uh the Greek fire right they didn't the Greek fire is still a secret we don't really understand or know >> what is the Greek fire >> Greek fire look it up uh it's it's this substance they think it was uh a refined petroleum oil like gasoline or kerosene mixed with some other some other things >> but they don't know the exact act recipe and um they were never able to figure it out. But the the Greek fire was the Greeks and the Byzantines used to have uh this flamethrowers, you know, ancient flamethrowers. >> Can you find a description, Steve? >> And I think it was it had very similar to gasoline because it like it would float it was it was very effective against ships at sea because the fire would float on top of the water and it would burn on top of water. M >> you know >> so the exact composition of Greek fire remains a mystery but it's known for its ability to burn on water and the resistance to extinguish uh with water. >> So that's an example of ancient technology. Yeah that was classified and is because it was so secretive it's still it's currently unknown >> right >> for war. >> It's for war purposes. Yeah it's for war man. It's this isn't Sunzu. This is the art of war man. You got to have you got to outsmart your enemy and you got to have better something they don't have. And it's all about the information control. >> But you don't think these things like the tic tac and these videos like these go fast videos and all these things. You don't think any of the stuff's military tech? >> The tic tac looks a lot like um I have two main hypothesis. My two primary hypotheses for the tic tac are uh number one spoofing technology like uh laser induced plasmas like the talking plasma balls, Pentagon talking plasma balls that I showed you about on the last time I was on the podcast, >> right? They can project and and do a lot of these spoofing because I asked the the top special projects manager out of Area 51 about this when he was on my show, TD Barnes. And uh TD Barnes said that this is all our spoofing stuff. It's all ECCMS, electronic counter counter measures, >> right? >> And this is this is what he worked on at Area 51. So he's an expert on it. He knows stuff that he couldn't even talk or tell me about about these these things. But he said, "We're really good." >> He said, "We're really good at spoofing this stuff. We're really good at this." So yeah, TD Theodore Barnes, he's head of the Roadrunners organization. He's legit legit worked at Area 51. >> I asked him about Bal Lazar, too. He said Baz Lazar never worked out there. But >> h >> it's in in my interview with him. Um but he thinks that they're plasma spoofing balls. That's what his but that's what he worked on. So that's why he'd think that because he has a you know that's what he worked on. He's biased towards. So I have other guys that worked on aerogel like my my friend uh Josh Bertrand who um thought that these were >> aerogel uh craft with the aerogels and the aerostats basically. >> Yeah. And the last time you were here, you also showed us the patent for the cube inside the sphere. >> That's project palladium. >> This is what Ryan Graves >> saw talked about seeing and flying next to, >> right, which is interesting. It was the east coast. >> He Yeah, he was on the east coast and he explained how him and his uh the guy he was flying with in a formation. And they were flying wing to wing and they flew right past this thing which was a cube with a sphere inside of it or a sphere with a cube inside of it >> and they went right past it and they didn't even see it. >> Interesting. You know, again they have spoofing and visibility technology and all that stuff. Um, the other option I have for like a similar shape to the air the and also the time period that the the tic tac was seen in the operating location, right? Look up the e-green technologies bullet. Type in e- green technologies bullet and you'll find a a craft that was built by a company called e-green technologies. It was flown in that area and tested out quite a bit in that area >> during the same exact years. >> Okay. >> Whoa. >> As this. >> What the >> So, if you get one of these things and and look at look at the look at the structural re go back to that last picture. Go back to that last picture. Look at the structural reinforcement on that nose cone. Just imagine how this thing attached this thing to a tether. how fast you could pull this thing on a tether, >> right? >> So, you get some rapid acceleration if you if you had one of these things pulled on a >> Remember that one where it's inside the stadium? >> Yeah, >> that's the size. Yes, you can get there's a couple different ones that they built of these aerostats and and these bullet airships, right? >> Wow. >> But that'll give you a size comparison of how big the thing is. That's like a a hockey rink, you know? That's like going to the >> Mhm. >> Boston Garden right there, right? >> That's nuts, dude. >> So, you could see how people might, you know, see this thing flying around and be like, "Oh, what the >> Yeah. You were also explaining to Brett Weinstein on his podcast that they have technology that they can put on the front of something like on the front of a uh like a missile, like some sort of like cavitational thing." >> Yep. that sort of like bends the air around it or something. >> Type blasting air hypersonics if you >> Have you seen the videos of those hypersonic missiles that Iran was using against Israel recently? I >> think it's the war zone the war zone article there in the top left. Yeah, >> top left. >> Yep. So, this article was by Brett Tingley, who honestly Brett Tingley should have got the interview on Tim P instead of me uh because he he was he wrote me afterwards. He's like, "I don't understand why they invited you on to talk about my my article and my research and stuff." But he's the one I credit with uh uncovering the stuff and bringing it to my attention because I I didn't know about a lot of this stuff before. >> Who is he? But, uh, Brett Tingley is the is a journalist who who works at the the war zone here and, uh, he he he digs into a lot of this stuff. He he's really knowledgeable about a It'd be great. I would love to see you get him on the podcast, bro. That would be great. >> Okay. >> Um, but this patent in the uh in the article is by a guy named Kevin Crema. And um, these guys worked with uh, Lake Maribou, Dr. Lake Maribou, who was the the guy from the Star Wars SDI program. He got recruited out of Renellor Polytech uh to work on some of the early um project sky vault stuff which was microwave uh propulsion that they would shoot mic they had these microwave lasers from that the Navy built and they didn't quite know what to do with them but he had come up with this idea of uh some tests to to and so Dr. Lake Maribou had started this whole company doing all this stuff and he worked with a a bunch of other people Kevin Crare and and uh also uh Dr. Franklin me who's you know heavily involved with a whole bunch of classified stuff with Hal Putoff and and all these other guys. So so there's you know these scientists are under NDA until 2027. They can't even talk >> wow >> about this stuff. Um, he published a a book in Canada called LTI Lightcraft. You can find the book if you look up LTI Lightcraft. The book came out in Canada and uh the DoD literally went and bought every single copy of the book. They just bought them all out. Like no, no one's buying like the same thing they did with Operation Darkheart with uh with um Anthony Schaefer's book, right? Anthony Schaefer had the had the book Operation Darkhot and the the DoD went and bought out every single publication copy of it and then then they made him republish it and redact everything. And the parts that they made him redact out of his book were were the part where he talks about how he briefed Philip Zelico on Able Danger. >> What's that? Able Danger was the uh terrorist tracking program that was spo what should have identified and that did that that did identify all the terrorists but and should have stopped all the 911 terrorists. It should have stopped 911 in its tracks was able danger program. So yeah, it's kind of crazy. I I sorry for for these side details while we're talking about other things, but uh it's just interesting. This is this is not out of out of um I mean you look surprised and you're like the DoD went and bought out every copy of this book. No, they've done it many times with classified stuff that they don't want getting out. >> Um, this technology was featured on a 1997 television program called Future Fantastic, which uh involved um Jillian, what's her name from the X-Files there? The the girl from the X-Files. >> Jillian Anderson. >> Jillian Anderson was in this and um they bought it. They they they took this off the air and they and they they bought it out. So, it's proprietary. So if you repost it on the internet, you'll get it taken down and flagged and like it's it's totally censored now. But from 97, they were like they they came up with this this show called Future Fantastic. And they were like, "These are the technologies of the future. We're going to be flying around on these light ships that are going to be pushed around by light and and light energy and it's all going to be light craft." And they were like, you know, basically saying that this was going to be the future. And then they're like, "No, wait a minute. We were we were we were just kidding. >> Wow. Here's your airplanes and here helicopters and >> yeah, >> you know, >> it is pretty crazy when you think about it. Like we're still flying around the same airplanes that we were flying around in in the ' 50s and we haven't we haven't improved these technologies at all. Like there's so many technologies like just like the idea of of propulsion like like sucking in air and then blowing it out the back. It's like all these years have gone by. Think, just think of how much we were able to advance since the Civil War to when we dropped the nukes on Hiroshima. We were firing musketss. We we went from firing musketss to dropping atomic bombs in less than a hundred years. >> And since then, >> we haven't figured out anything else. It seems like >> yeah, >> even like Apollo, like the Apollo program, we figured out how to get to the moon in the in the late60s, early '7s, and then that technology just vanished. >> So, back back in the '9s, um, this guy Canitz with a K came up with this concept called the Caneritz limit, and it was for the scramjet. You know, the scramjet was like going to be this super hypersonic like this was going to be the the best jet engine they could ever make, right? And this was like the ultimate in jet engine technology. this grant that and um Caneritz did all the calculations all the all the all the the technical data and crunched the numbers and he came up with this limit and he said you know we'll never get we'll never get above you know Mach Mach five maybe Mach 8 with uh with this um scramjet technology so you it forcing air through a jet and and pushing out the back it just it's not the way to go in the future and so they say well what is it it's these and it's these surfaces is if you can do that you don't have to worry about this and so that's when that was when I believe the uh the technology focus shifted away from away from the jet tech jet jets became >> the thing of the past and they were pursuing from that point on in secret a lot of these super surfaces which again the F-47s based on a lot of this this tech >> you know >> so that's where we're at um publicly. I know there's there's much much much much much much more going on in the private sector. There's even stuff that I've learned about. I I I just don't want to talk about >> why >> it's crazy stuff. >> Too crazy. >> Some of it's crazy. Some of it I have talked about and I'm like, you know, like the the halfnneium controversy is one thing that uh it blows my mind because the halfnam controversy, if you look that up, um it's this isomer that can uh basically it's a gammaray mirror. And if you can create a gammaray mirror, you can create a gammaray laser. And if you got a gammaray laser, you don't need nukes cuz I can just fry you through the earth with my gammaray laser. >> Through the earth? >> Yeah. Just point it at wherever I want, any any target, and it's just going to fry it completely. >> What do you mean through the earth? >> You know, the gamma rays go through everything. >> Oh, and they're shot out of satellites. They're shot out of this is the idea behind the This is again goes back to Wheeler's work and and Teller's work on the on the hydrogen bomb and also the project Excalibur idea like I remember I mentioned the project Excalibur. They had the nuke that would go off inside this thing that would basically take the energy and focus it and shoot it out of of a >> Yeah. >> You know, and that whole shell in inside there, that's the classified component of the the Excalibur. um uh weapon was that it was a gammaray mirror reflector would which would basically focus and and reflect all that energy and and and shoot it out through a point um through through using the the hapneium. >> Whoa. >> So that's a crazy thing. When I learned about that I was like yo this is nuts because that's like we don't need nukes. I'm not like when everyone's like a couple months ago when everyone's like oh my god like we could just die of nuclear war. We're almost going to go to we we thought we were going to go to war with Russia. Remember like a couple months ago with nucle it was like we thought we were on the verge of nuclear war. I'm like I'm not worried about it cuz we have stuff better than nukes, bro. Like we can we have technology that goes beyond this and the technology that's going to come out when they have that if they have teleportation or any of that stuff. I mean, they're going to it's it's there's going to have to be some sort of regulatory agency over who has, you know, access to certain technologies and stuff. Maybe >> we got to be worried about nukes, though, cuz the only countries we don't really with are the ones that have nukes. >> And the other thing I won't talk about is the um the Havana syndrome weapons. So the uh you know you know what I mean the uh how to actually build them and and how they work. So that remember that guy that was caught right here in Florida. >> That guy there's a Russian spy caught in Florida with one of these devices in his car. The Havana syndrome weapon. >> What? >> You didn't hear about this? >> When >> you didn't hear about this? Look up the Russian spy that was caught in in Florida with with the Havana syndrome weapon in his car. >> How long ago? >> Probably two years ago. Did you see the podcast I did with those dudes with the with the guy with the Russian guy and then the Harvard guy, Len Bear, Len Bear and Robert Duncan? >> Oh, >> it was a podcast with this dude who is experiencing Havana syndrome. Uh, a Russian spy Vitali Kovalev was arrested in Florida in 5 years ago 2020 after a high-speed car chase and during his interrogation FBI agent later suffered symptoms consistent with the Havana syndrome, a condition linked to potential directed energy weapons. Caval Cavalev, who was exposed as an undercover GRU officer, was found with devices that could erase a car's computer data, including GPS records, along with Russian Okay. along with a Russian passport and other suspicious items. The FBI agent, referred to as Carrie, described experiencing severe symptoms, including a high-pitched drilling noise in her ears, which she believed was caused by the weapon linked to Kavalov's alleged espionage activities. Yeah. >> Holy >> I'm surprised in Florida. >> I know you're right here. >> This was in the height of the pandemic. >> How'd I hear about this and not you, man? It's cuz I'm I'm tuned into this kind of stuff and a little bit more. >> Uh yeah, they buried that story. >> But uh >> yeah, >> scroll down 60 minutes. >> The original news article when it came out, it showed a picture of the weapon that >> Key West. >> Key West. >> Key West. They showed a They showed a picture of the thing, but it's since been censored, but I >> Let's see this guy's face. >> Yeah, >> he looks like a dope. Keep going. >> He looks like this dude I ripped me off for a job recently. >> Wow. What is this? Kovalev had a high level He was a highle chef in New York and had catered for the rich and famous all while being suspected of being a Russian spy. >> Wow. >> Yeah. Crazy, huh? Holy crap. That's nutty. >> I never heard about that. >> Well, I'm glad I can share something about your >> That's wild. >> And it happened right here in Florida, which is even crazier that you didn't hear about it. But uh yeah, so that stuff is probably the last thing I I'll leave off with is the Savannah Syndrome weapons stuff. Did you know that Lou Alzando um the the the people that were tortured by him under the torture program reported being tortured by an invisible weapon? >> No. They said like they this guy was not allowed to sleep. He said every time he would sleep he get he'd get hit with the Havana syndrome weapon that they have this invisible weapon that would mess with him. So look up microwave auditory effect. Microwave auditory effect. So this was discovered in the in 60s I think 68. They uh they found this they had this microwave dish and one of the soldiers was standing in front of it and was like I hear this clicking in my ear. Why why do I hear the clicking in my ear? But if I move, I don't hear it. And I stand in front of the dish now, I hear the clicking in my ear. What's going on? >> Voice to skull stuff. >> This is the voice to skull technology. >> Yes. This is when they figured it out. And and um a lot of those frequencies are basically resonant frequencies which resonate with biological structures within the body. So the the the microwave auditory effect, the fray microwave hearing effect >> is uh Yeah. Because it's the doctor was Yeah. This what we're looking for. the scientist. Yeah. Dr. Frey was the scientist. Yep. >> Cornell University. There it is. >> You know, when a video looks like this, it's legit. >> Yeah. Cornell University and a contractor for the Office of Naval Research discovered in 1958 that the auditory system responds to electromagnetic energy in a portion of the radio frequency spectrum at low power densities well below that necessary for biological damage. The human auditory system and a table radio, he said, may be one order of magnitude apart in sensitivity in a portion of the radio frequency spectrum. >> Fry proposed stimulating the nervous system without the damage caused by electrodes. He wrote two papers, microwave auditory effect and the applications and human auditory response to modulated electromagnetic energy. Dr. Fry's work had obvious implications for covert operations. He synchronized pulse microwaves with the mioardial rhythm of a frog's heart. The heart stopped beating. Dr. Fry had perfected the induction of heart seizures by beamed electromagnetics. He microwaved cats and found that stimulation of the hypothalammus had a powerful effect on emotions. Fry found that human expo human subjects exposed to 1310 MHz to 2982 MHz microwaves at average power densities of 0.4 4 to 2 m per cubic centimeter perceived auditory sounds. The peak power densities were on the order of 200 to 300 m per cubic cm and the pulse repetition frequencies varied from 200 to 400 hertz. Dr. Fry referred to this auditory phenomenon as RF or radio frequency sound. The sensation occurred instantaneously at average incident power densities well below that necessary for known biological damage and appeared to originate from within or near the back of the head. Fry was reluctant reluctant to experiment on humans, but others, particularly paperclip scientists, were not. Dr. Ross Eddie worked at UCLA and rigged the brains of lab animals to transmit to a radio receiver which shot back signals to a device that sparked any behavior desired by the researcher. Dr. Dr. Addie worked closely with immigrate Nazi scientists after World War II. Addie determined that emotional states and behavior can be remotely influenced merely by placing a subject in an electromagnetic field. By directing a carrier frequency to stimulate the brain and using amplitude modulation to shape the wave to mimic a desired EEG frequency, he was able to impose a 4.5 CPS theta rhythm on his subjects and put them to sleep. Dr. Joseph Sharp and Alan Fry experimented with microwaves seeking to transmit spoken words directly into the audio cortex via a pulsed microwave analog of the speaker's sound vibration. Indeed, Fry's work in this field dating back to 1960 gave rise to the so-called Fry effect, which is now more commonly referred to as microwave hearing. Within the Pentagon, this ability is known as artificial telepathy. Addie and others have compiled an entire library of frequencies and pulsation rates which can affect the mind and nervous system. >> This is the kind of that >> our CIA was doing out at Camp Hero in Montalk and this is like >> this is like >> Stranger Things. >> Yeah, Stranger Things, man. >> Crazy stuff, man. >> It's all real. >> It's crazy. What do you make of the that this Jake Barber guy is talking about? Have you heard of him? >> Jake Barber? Didn't he say he was originally hired to go to Steven Greer's conferences to try to intercept >> heard Michael Herrera and >> whistleblowers? Right. >> Yep. He went there to intercept whistleblowers. Yes. Exactly. And then he heard Michael Herrera's story on what happened with him and he said that he knew exactly about that operation and that's when he decided to flip and help those guys. >> Yeah. dude. I'm going to flip. I'm I'm going to come out and be a whistleblower now after I went to go hunt down whistleblowers. Now I'm going to be a whistleblower. But was he blowing the whistle on the psionics program? >> Psionics. What do you make of that stuff? >> I mean, that was like the they realized Lou Alzando had run out his usefulness in the in the UFO op. >> Uhhuh. >> Okay. Cuz he went to Congress. They finally got the UFO hearings. He finally gets in front of Congress and then he shows that crop circle photo. >> Remember the one? Did you see that? Like like this is the guy who's supposedly the Pentagon UFO expert. He's seen all the UFO videos, all the UFO files, and has all the pictures and all the stuff. And this is the best of the best of what this this guy can't even This guy's never flown in an airplane before over the Midwest. He's never has never seen one of an a circular pivot irrigation system before. And get the hell out of here. This guy's supposedly an an intelligence agent for our government, right? >> And he doesn't know what the hell that is, >> right? >> That's And so everyone like his gig was up at that point. And they all knew like this guy's been floated as the expert, but he's a counter intelligence guy who's just going to like >> bluff and bluff and bluff and use his bravado and and uh and >> and and military uh brass to to basically boss everyone around and convince some everyone that he's something he's not. >> But when it comes down to to it in front of Congress, this is what he produces. It it was it's such an obvious scop on the American public. I I I I I >> So you think this the idea of getting kids and using them to psychically control UFOs and take down UFOs is >> Well, this is all like the Puharic uh school of the the gifted. This goes back to the you know these these um these and these are MK Ultra operations like and they didn't stop then. They still go on now. We still have like this Monroe Institute where basically they there's people online that that they if you're a remote viewer or or you're involved in any of this um this crazy >> they basically like they'll approach you online. You have powers and we need to send you to the school so that you can you can um you know it's like you feel like you got a letter from the X-Men, >> you know, like oh you can go to Professor Xavier's School for the Gifted and then you're going to the school but it's not Professor Xavier. It's freaking Sydney Gotlib and uh a bunch of his buddies running MK Ultrah experiments on kids and and literally like lots of people get sucked into these cults and like these cults and and and it's all MK Ultra like 2.0. All these guys are attaching themselves to Chris Bledsoe like uh all all those uh who was the guy John Alexander and um the other guys they like befriended him and they're like talking to him inviting him to all these events and stuff like this telling him those orbs are like he's doing something for real. >> Yeah. What was weird with about that is like these guys supposedly they can summon UFOs on command with with these abilities but they >> you know someone pointed out they did an interview with you know >> Chris Bledsor the dad I don't know which one and in the G he's got a garage where he in in the interview you can see nine different remote control planes all in the background so this guy's a enthusiast for remote control aircraft and drones >> he brought me and Steve out to the beach across the street from here when he was Yeah. What's up with that? >> He showed us two two orbs popped out of the water and like started floating around >> like what what was that about, bro? You think he had someone else controlling that for you? >> Cuz I cuz I told him where we were going to dinner. I told him the location for our dinner spot like an hour before and we went and did this after dinner. >> Watch. >> Cuz that's what I was wondering. That's what this is what people have accused it of, right? >> Look. Look at that. Rewind it. >> There's something right on the wall. >> Watch this. Watch the thing out of the wall. No, it's not a plane. That thing on the top is a plane. The blinking one. >> Yeah, the blinking. >> Oh, >> there's something right on the water. Right on the water. >> Going up. >> Thank you. Thank you. >> That's what we're looking for. >> If you could flash for us and it >> I'm getting it. >> That's your orb there. >> Right there. >> Now watch it fizzle out. >> It's still in the camera. It's still in here. [Applause] There was a second one that went horizontal. >> Now watch that one going to the left. >> Oh, >> that's not a plane. We saw the one on top blinking is a plane. What about um >> Look at this. Look at this. >> Oh, you see it? It's right there. Do you see it? >> That is an orb. >> That is definitely an orb. I'm I'm tracking it here. >> Have you ever done >> and it fizzles out to nothing? >> Have you ever >> These things were coming off the horizon going in weird directions and then disappearing. There was plane traffic that was coming off the Gulf into Tampa airport. We saw the planes. There was tons of planes coming off. They were all blinking and they were all following the same path. These things were nothing like the planes. >> And there's no possible way he put a dude on a dinghy >> on a boat 100 miles offshore. No. >> With a paper lantern, a sky lantern or something. >> No way. I've never seen anything like it. I don't I don't know what it was. I don't know what it was. Do you think he really has the ability to like talk to this these beings and this power and summon these things? >> I don't >> That's wild. I don't know. I don't know. I don't know how to explain. >> That's weird cuz I can't That's the stuff I can't explain. That's the stuff that really interest >> I know for a fact those things aren't airplanes, >> right? And I know for a fact unless like this guy's super sophisticated and flew in like DARPA people to come with him and like pull this scop on me and Steve, but it took like an hour and a half before this thing showed up. We were sitting on the beach for like 2 hours. >> Really? >> Yeah. And after an hour and a half of him like meditating and praying to God for these things to show up, they showed up off the off the >> Maybe I just didn't do it long enough cuz I've tried this before, but I usually like give up after like a half hour. And we did the same thing. Uh we actually >> with him. No. Um, at the with the UAP hackathon on the USS uh on the USS Hornet >> out in Los An out in San Francisco. >> I was there a couple weeks ago with with Jesse Michaels and Danny Sheen. And >> were you really >> and everyone went up to the top deck of the aircraft carrier and we all tried to do the we all tried to do a C5 event. We all we all we all p we all tried to summon one of these things but nothing showed up and then people started flying their own drones around after a while cuz everyone was bored >> and then they eventually kicked us all off the ship at like late. >> Wow. >> But yeah, I did that like with um but but I've never seen one on his phone every day. He posts them on his own Instagram. I don't know what they are. It could be some DARPA satellites. Who know? >> Well, hey man, you know I listen. I'm a scientist. I and I'm an open-minded one. I try to keep an open mind to everything and but I'm really skeptical and I'm really like curious. So >> I would love to >> I would love to see this and and and bring some experts down if he if he'd be willing to do it for me. Man, I'm sure he would. >> Great. >> That's nuts, dude. I I've never seen I you know that I've never like really seen a a definitive thing where I'm like that's that's a UFO. And you know what? I'm so jealous because my family went down to this point and and they they go and see him down in Rhode Island. There's there's a spot down where they go and watch him. And um I got to go down there one one of these nights and go see it. But apparently they test them like Tuesday or Wednesdays. >> And um I got to go down there one night. I just haven't made it. But man, I you know, I say like we know a lot and and it's important to listen to the the scientists and I rely on a lot of other scientists for knowledge too because I I don't know the answer. I rely on subject matter experts that do. This is what the government does. This is what na this is what this is what DARPA does. DARPA will and our government the government the Pentagon's brain >> will literally use companies like MTSI. I don't know if you've heard of them. MTSI they they'll basically a collection of uh subject matter experts which they'll consult for you know if they don't know about this they'll get a bunch of they have this collection this database of all the subject matter expert scientists so they can go and call these people up and ask about and I kind of have the same thing if it's material science I I call my friend Michael if it's theoretical physics I call David Chester on the phone >> David Chester he I had him in he was great >> yeah so I have like this collection of of individuals that I've met that are just like the top of the their fields and stuff and um >> it's good to do. >> It's that's the way that the government does it. It's a good it's a good strategy because at the end of the day, you know, you have answers, but you could find the best in the world, they might have a better answer and then then when you put it on the internet and get everyone's opinion, you might find someone else is like, well, did you know about this? like, oh, you know, so man, so much information is is able to I I honestly I, you know, someone asked me, he's like, "Dude, you you you've been like doing all this work with these scientists and all this stuff. Why why haven't they killed you yet for?" >> And I honestly think that like I've opened up new doors for them. They're like, "Well, they're kind of like stonewalled and blocked from really getting deeper into this stuff." >> But I think that like they look at APE and the stuff that we do, they're with like great interest cuz they're like, "Oh, wow." uh you know like now you're getting fresh brains in on this stuff and and getting new ideas and getting more information and stuff and that's really all about and the end of the day it's going to help humanity. It's going to help us all and we all have to share this planet together and it's all about sustainability. Like we can't continue on this current path we're going of waste and and and and the way that we uh use energy and the way that we create energy cuz all our energy comes from dead plants from thousands of years ago from fossil fuels and stuff. So, we need different uh different um forms of energy. We need different forms of propulsion uh to get us off this planet because obviously, you know, rockets work cool, but they're they they're not getting us to Mars. I don't know if they're going to um Elon, you know, I've watched Elon Elon did a has commented on that leak maribou stuff that the the you know, someone asked him actually about that uh direct, you know, using the microwave propulsion stuff and he just said that they've looked into it and that the um the costs outweigh the benefits >> for right right now currently that that it's just cheaper, it's easier, it's more it's more economical and effective to just use chemical rockets and and with SpaceX and everything that that technology is not there yet. Doesn't know if it will be, >> but um at the point that it does change over and and does become economically and um you know, more bang for your buck viable, then SpaceX might actually look at it and stuff. So, >> um >> you know, I I would love to talk to Elon and pick his brain, man. That would be I would love to sit down and have a conversation with SpaceX about all this technology and and and invite them to APEC uh with with our scientists and stuff because my buddy he my buddy uh um my buddy Gerald uh said he flew on the plane to Florida from California with uh the the third in charge of SpaceX and and told him about all this stuff and he had no idea. So, >> wow. >> If that's really the case and and they're not like Elon, I you know, I know I my my account got censored on on um X, by the way. I my my my old Twitter account, Alien Scientists, got taken down off X >> for what? >> And I I got targeted by I was I was in a I was in going through a lot of the last two years, man. And and and uh I was in a I was pretty angry at a lot of stuff. And and I think that they had a lot of these AI bots that they targeted on me. And one of them was this one of them was this I don't know if it was a real person but this MMA fighter like threatened me and my family and all this stuff and I and I flipped out and I said a bunch of back. I was like I'll I'll I'll kick your ass and and then they reported me for violent speech and and immediately taken down >> and um I got my account back for like two days. I I appealed it. I appealed it. Appealed it. Appealed it and I got it back and then they took it down again because I had another account. They said that I had violated terms of service because I had created another account. Well, my account was suspended. But that's not true. I just used an old account that was not related that that I already created. >> But I don't know if anyone knows anyone at Twitter that can help me get that account reinstated. An X. Yeah, that can help me get my alien underbar size. >> You gotta be careful, bro. You got can't engage with people on Twitter, bro. On X. I know. You can't engage. You just got to disengage. just post it and then ignore >> I know >> ignore all the bullshittery >> you know what and it I should have you know it's these people aren't weren't worth my time and I shouldn't I shouldn't have done that but you know it's it's sort of my fault but again I I used to have 44,000 subscribers followers and I had a massive reach and all that's gone now so it's like you know and I don't know what happened to my YouTube channel because I have 115 119,000 subscribers on Alien Scientist on my YouTube channel, but like I used to post videos and I get 150,000 views like in the first couple hours, man. I just get millions of views and stuff and and now like I just >> but again I've been doing a lot of long form content where it's just big interviews, long form rants and 4hour stuff and a lot of people don't have time for that stuff except for the real hardcores which is the only people I really care about anyways the people that are really into this and really and you know it's crazy because we we've done a lot of the pioneering work and and in and breaking a lot of this stuff out and now I see a lot of these other big channels like Joe Scott and uh and and um uh tech files and even even Y files recycling stuff that we've done like like topics that we've covered. They're able to like create these really nice well packaged videos. I I don't have the capability to I don't know how to do all that stuff, man. I'm not I'm not like that's not my wheelhouse, you know? >> Yeah. So, I've seen the people that do have that ability take a lot of my content and a lot of my research and materials, repackage it, and then they get millions of views on their channel with it, which, you know, that's I don't care about my recognition. That's not what I'm do this for. I care about the information and getting, you know, good information out there and battling the bad information and disinformation so that people can have uh better information. >> This is your channel, Alien Scientist on YouTube. >> Yeah. Yeah. That's what I'm about. That's the TD Barnes interview right there. The last one. >> Cool. >> That one right there. That's That's Theodore Barnes, man. That guy is the head of the Road Runners organization. Like, >> who is Is that Is that That's not you on the left, is it? >> That's me on the left. >> That's you. >> Yep. >> It's like a couple years ago, man. >> Like a like you got like a you had like a crazy tan going on. >> Well, we'll link this below. And uh anything else other than your YouTube channel? We should link >> uh altpropulsion.com. That's those are my buddies uh Tim Venturid and Jared Yates uh doing good research and and and work on the APEC community with uh all bringing all the science together on this and and the and if you are interested in getting involved in the discussions we have the APEC conference we have the APEC open mic where anyone can join and just throw whatever you want against the wall you go ahead that's what that we created that for because we had too many interruptions in the conference prints with just nonsense stuff. So, we created another space just for that stuff. >> And um for the more wild ideas and then we have the uh the um yeah, the all propulsion stuff is is that's that's our that's our baby right now is is just trying to get it go after the technologies. If there's classified if there's classified technologies that can benefit all of humanity, >> then um we don't want them in the hands of a couple elite pediles, >> you know? I want I want you and me to be flying around in this bro. Like, you know, >> I need my own UFO, >> right? Why Why does just Jeffrey Epstein get to have >> Jeremy, thanks for coming, bro. This has been an amazing 4hour conversation. We've covered every conspiracy under the sun. >> Almost. Almost. >> Um, we'll link it all below. And, uh, thanks again, bro. This has been amazing. Thanks for making the trip down. I really appreciate it. Enjoy talking to you. >> It's great to be on again and yeah. >> Good night everybody. >> Hell yeah.