Joe Roman fine. The Joe Rogan experience. Train my day Joe Rogan podcast by night. All day. All right. What a day to have you in here, buddy. Yeah. Hit in a candy shop. We hacked the government. We hacked the government's files. I mean, this is we have three and a half million files that it feels like we should not have. It would have been great to have had seven years ago in 2019 when this was being litigated. But it's an incredible moment of transparency for how the world works, how governments interact with the private sector and funds. And it's just really cool to be a part of it. What was the hold up? What was the, because it seemed like there was a lot of people that did not want these files released? Yeah. I thought about this a lot. What we have access to now are internal documents from the Justice Department and the FBI that are normally, even though they're not classified, they are part of a criminal investigation. And so they're not normally disposable to the public. It could be the case that it kind of required a congressional bill to force this out. Like when you, if there's a internal investigation and it's not a part of a court document that's entered into evidence, you can't just FOIA the Justice Department to get dirt on your political enemies because you think that they might be involved in something. Now, I don't know if it could have been done through an executive order around Epstein transparency, around the time of the first binders. Certainly it looked like there was friction between the president and Thomas Massey over this issue. But I don't know the details of what went down there. But the fact is the bill passed 421 in the house. Who's the one? My recollection is that it was ran defined, but I might be wrong on that so I don't want to smear. There was one person playing anything on doing one at release because they thought it would compromise the victims, right? At one point in time, at least. Yeah, I don't know what the rationale is. And because I don't recall offhand who the one is, I don't want to lean on that too much, but the fact is there's nobody who wanted to be on the other side of this. I can't think of anything that both Republicans and Democrats voted on 421 and, oh, sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, apologies to Randy Fine. Yeah, so there was the, I mean, there was obviously friction because this implicates everybody, Republicans and Democrats, Americans and a dozen different foreign countries, heads of major hedge funds and multinational corporations, donors to all political parties, major university and science institutions. I mean, almost every major player in world affairs was in some way either involved in or adjacent to this network or the network tried to reach out to them because they were influential. And so, you know, there was kind of a mutually sure destruction around the Epstein-Hoppetato for a decade now, which is that, you know, out of power, the Republicans said, oh, the Democrats are don't want to disclose this because of the Clintons. And then the Trump administration gets into power and there's a very slow, you know, reaction to the kind of disclosures that culminated in what happened this week. And so you had the Democrats saying, oh, they're not disclosing it because of, you know, Trump world and his associates. Meanwhile, they controlled the Justice Department and the FBI for four years and didn't release any. So, you know, it took a moment like this. And what's really interesting about it is this bill only compelled the disclosure, this law that passed in Congress only compelled the disclosure of Justice Department originated files, Justice Department by extension, FBI is the investigative arm of the Justice Department. It does not compel CIA originated files. And one of the coolest moments of transparency we had last year in 2025 was when Tulsi Gabbard has the, you know, ODNI is the head of director of Senate of national intelligence and charge of the whole intelligence community spearheaded the JFK files release. And we got basically fully unredacted documents. Now I know there's a contest over how complete they are. But the fact is, as it was hundreds of thousands of files that had never been seen before, or unredacted versions of documents that had been fully or partially redacted for decades. The only reason that we have JFK files at all is because in 1992, Congress passed a bill to force the CIA to start turning over documents. The law, I believe, was called the JFK Records Collection Act. And it forced by law the CIA to establish this independent presidential assassination review board that would review documents for declassification and compel, you know, on the basis of that independent body, given all of the intelligence intrigue around Epstein. And the fact that it is, in my view, physically impossible over Epstein's 40 year career in intelligence adjacent work that there was, that there's not Epstein files that are CIA originated. And we actually, you know, I saw this in the files that were just released. Jeffrey Epstein himself twice for you. That's the Freedom of Information Act, which is a law that I think came around in 1966, which allows any US citizen to ask any government agency for all public records that it has about anything. There are certain things that get blocked in that. This is, there were a lot of FOIA fights about COVID, you know, Fauci famously, there's this exchange where, you know, one of the folks in Fauci world says that they learned cool tricks from the FOIA lady about how to get around requests. But the fact is you can FOIA the CIA for records, because that FOIA forces the CIA to give you declassified or unclassified records. And if it's classified, it'll issue a glow mara. We cannot confirm or deny the, you know, in the existence or non-existence of classified information. Can we before we get any further? The JFK stuff. I never heard anything about it. I mean, I know the files came out, but there was no big revelations. There was no was was there anything that came out of that that was significant? I thought it was huge. I learned it. I guess people are looking at the JFK files. Most people are looking at it for clues as to who killed JFK. Right. And I know that there are many researchers who specialize in the JFK assassination that have sharpened their theories, I suppose, on the basis of it in a useful way for, for whatever it's worth. For me, I, you know, was never expecting to see a CIA document saying, you know, I James Jesus Angleton authorized the assassination of, of course, the United States. But the fact is is what it revealed were all of these tangential and ancillary documents that showed the structure of intelligence work at a very fine and detailed level. The kind of revelations that really only come around once in a generation. There's a, there's a video online by Michael Parente who was a CIA whistleblower around the time of the Iran country hearings in the 1980s. And he says, pay attention to these hearings. This may be the last time for another 20, 30, 40 years that you ever get an inside look at the, at the detailed, minutiae of a covert operation because all of this was being blasted on a congressional jumbo-tron with hearings and formal congressional investigations and public testimony. And there's, I sort of look at the JFK files released like that. We got a very detailed look at everything that was happening around effectively operation mongoose because, do you refresh my memory? Was it mongoose again? Yeah. So, so we had, so there was operation mongoose and operation condor, which were, which were related to the nominally, what you'll read is that they were related to the attempts by the CIA to for mongoose, for example, to destabilize the government of Cuba in order to induce a regime change. But because those efforts proved unsuccessful, they regionalized the conflict to, uh, do counter-communism work effectively throughout all of Latin America, the Caribbean South America. And, uh, operation condor was effectively a kind of counter, counterinsurgency strategy to stop the rise of left wing Marxist groups. We're trying to throw off the yoke of American imperialism, so to speak, as they put it. And so you had a massive CIA operation to try to tilt the internal politics of basically every country south of the border. And we got incredibly just detail, you know, I'll give you an example of one declassified document that's really wild. There's one document that is a CIA file with instructions to delete all physical copies of the document at the end that describes how the agency had internally authorized an attempt to assassinate, you know, Castro by working through the Meyer Lansky syndicate and hiring two hit men, uh, that were in Miami. And then, but had contacts with the Cuban exile community, liaisons within Cuba. And so this was a, this was a formal agency file that described how a CIA case officer made contact with people from the mob organized crime, uh, with offers of pay, payoffs with very detailed logistics. You can find this. I did hold video on it on my, the like X subscriber thing. I'll, I'll, you know, put it on top of my social media. But the, but it also describes a really interesting Jeffrey Epstein, like, uh, figure Robert Meihu was a CIA asset, the J, the JFK files. They describe how they got, uh, the sponsor to a movie to simulate, I believe it was the president of Indonesia, uh, having an affair with a blonde woman. They filmed a, basically like a porno that would, uh, and create and, to create a tape and they had very, they describe how they set up the, the room to make it look like it was, I think in the presidential palace or some hotel room that was, would have been in, in, uh, in that country in order to create what's effectively a sexual blackmail tape that could then be, uh, leaked to the press in order to discredit the president. And, you know, you look at these informal agency files. And on the one hand, you go, okay, that was the 1960s. That was the, that was the early 1960s. That was before there was any oversight on the CIA at all. There wasn't until the church committee hearings in 1975, 1976 that we even had congressional oversight of the CIA. There was no Senate intelligence committee. There was no House Intelligence Committee at the time. And at that point, assassinations had not been outlawed. I mean, the CIA was allowed to assassinate people. That there's since been a ban on that. So you go, okay, that's 60 years ago. Uh, but the fact is they did it. The fact is is that is within the array of options that folks in covert operations saw as on the table working with the mom, working with the mob. Now, but that goes back a long time. I, I found it totally unsurprising. It's one of these things. This is kind of the general theme. It's shocked, but not surprised. You know, it's like Holy crap. They, they put this on writing. Well, what are we doing here, guys? And then, but you're like, but I'm not surprised they did it because I know they were doing all these other things. The fact is is the CIA was working with the mob before there was CIA. Before it was done by the CIA, uh, work with, for example, the, the Italian mob was, was done through the Department of War in the night, really starting in the 1930s and then, especially in the 1940s, because they were the central intelligence agency. What the time it was the OSS and the 1940s, but it would become the CIA. They're one of their main logistical points of contact and allies for the resistance against Mussolini in Italy. Mussolini was cracking down both on the Vatican church and on the Italian mafia. And so that the restraint bedfell is. There's a great book on this by Paul Williams. I think it was published in 2017. It's called Operation Gladio, the CIA, the Vatican and the mob. And it's, I recommend this book to everyone because it's a really, really detailed academic deep dive on this nexus between a religious institution and intelligence agency, uh, an illegal, organized crime syndicate that does all manner of black ops and it especially focuses on the funding relationship. In fact, this just came out and this sort of gets the utility of these documents. There's an incredible document that just was released this week where Larry Summers, who was the head of the US treasury. So not only was he the head of Harvard University and the head of the American money system, but he, he says to, he's trying to explain to Jeffrey Epstein, kind of the, the politics of what's happening in the Vatican. And what he says to him is that what's, what's actually most important going on right now is what's happening with the Vatican bank, which is kind of the, uh, the deep politics of the Vatican. And I, you know, I saw this email and I just, you know, laughed and did a little, you know, twirling thing in my, in my chair because it's, it's totally unsurprising. If you read, you know, that book Operation Gladio that I, that I mentioned, it, it traces 80 years of this because the, the Vatican bank was the first offshore bank before offshore banking even existed. It was, you know, there was an alliance with the Vatican bank during World War II itself with our Department of War and with organized crime outfits, at least according to the evidence that I find persuasive in this book and that, uh, appears to be validated by Italian court documents in the 1990s when all of this was litigated. Incidentally, that was when the mob was really prosecuted for the first time. But effectively what happened was is you had strange bedfellows. You had the United States who wanted to get rid of Mussolini. You had the Vatican who wanted to get rid of Mussolini and you would organize crime. We wanted to get rid of Mussolini. And because organized crime is very deep in the logistics and unions, they control the ports. They control the streets. They control safe houses. Um, and if they have allies in a bank, they are able to launder money, effectively in order to do black market, you know, type trade. And if you have, for example, the support of the US government to facilitate that, that and there's protection offered to those organized crime groups, what you end up having is effectively state sponsored, a state sponsored mafia with an untouchable bank. And at the time, the Vatican, because an Larry Summers explains this to, to Jeffrey Epstein in very simple terms, which is, which is, yeah, here you go. The most important change in the Vatican may not be Pope Benedict son retirement, but change in leadership of the Institute for Works of Religion, the bank, the Vatican's bank. Because of the Vatican's status as a sovereign country, it's exempt from transparency rules of not only Italy, but of the European union. This status allows its elite clients to evade any scrutiny in their money transfers. Last May, Vatican Bank president has fired after Italian authorities open investigation into a far-flung bribery scheme. And he goes through this, but what's important here is the British, when we think of offshore banking now, it's, it's usually associated with came in islands, came in islands, you know, Jersey, man, Panama, you know, but Panama, sort of a different story, but it's usually associated with these kind of small island countries that are formerly, you know, kind of their own territory, their own sort of sovereign territory. You also see this within the United States in Indian Native American reservations with these kind of autonomous zones that can be shielded from certain kinds of, you know, public disclosures that a typical finance institution. That's going on with Native American banks. Well, yeah, this, this was actually part of, is that connected to the casinos? Because they have a lot of money from the casinos. Yeah. Super Bowl 60 deserves a sports book built for the moment. Draft King Sportsbook and official sports betting partner of Super Bowl 60 puts you right in the center of the biggest game of the year. Anything can happen during the Super Bowl and Draft Kings has your back with early exit. If your player goes down in the first half, you still get paid in cash when you're bet settles. No bonus bets, no waiting. While other sports books don't offer injury protection, draft Kings, covers the entire first half, even the second quarter. An early exit works on live bets to pre game or in game. Draft Kings has got you covered. New to draft Kings, new customers can bet just $5 to get 300 in bonus bets. If your bet wins, download the Draft Kings Sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan that's code Rogan to turn five bucks into 300 in bonus bets. If your bet wins in partnership with Draft Kings, the crown is yours. Gambling problem called 1 800 gambler in New York called 877-8 open wire. Text hope in Y 467-369 in Connecticut called 888-7897777 or visit ccpg.org on behalf of Budhill Casino when resorting Kansas passed through if per wage or tax may apply in Illinois, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction void in Ontario restrictions apply. That must win to receive bonus bets which expire in seven days. Minimum odds required for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio limited time offer. Yeah. Yeah. In fact, if you watched the octopus murders, which I think was HBO or Netflix or one of them. That is great. I haven't seen it, but it's awesome. It's fantastic. And you know, it goes through how this was used effectively by the NSA during the promised software scandal and the Iran-Contra scandal of the 1980s where you had basically the NSA and then the US government running money laundering, effectively through casinos on Native American sovereign territory. But the fact is, in the 1940s, the Vatican Bank was really the only game in town. This traces back at the CIA level to a lawyer named Paul Hellowell, who was kind of the architect of money laundering for the CIA. And it didn't even start, it really started with the attempt to try to stop Mao in the 1930s and 1940s. There was the European wars in the 1830s where effectively the British Empire and the East India trading company were making ungodly amounts of money by selling opium to China. They would grow the opium on the Golden Crescent, India, and then they would sell it to China with a huge customer base, which would bring in huge amounts of revenues to the British crown. And then there were two opium wars that were fought in the 1830s and 50s, I believe, around the Internet. And the opium wars were China's attempt to stop the import of opium into China because it had a huge, by that point, opium addiction problem. Opium dens in China were a massive issue within the country. They tried to ban it. And the British crown pride open the narcotics market through a military conquest of parts of China. That's how Britain got control of Hong Kong, which remains a major narco-trafficking site connected to Jeffrey Epstein in very weird ways. I'll just sidebar that. But Mao rose to power in the name of his public campaign was about rejecting the century of humiliation between the 1830s and the 1930s to support Shanghai Shek and the Quomentang, the Chinese nationalist against the Chinese Communist. The war department couldn't get enough congressional allocations, taxpayer money to support that. So they had to find some way to finance the forces that are now effectively Taiwan because when they ultimately lost, they fled to the island of Formosa, which is now Taiwan. But they financed that initially the war department, the Chinese nationalist, through the narcotics trade, through the basically the narcotics cultivated in the Golden Triangle. And these operations continued in Cambodia and Laos and were a big part of the JFK expansion of covert operations to this day and Fort Bragg, the special operations training centers called the JFK. This was a massive expansion of small wars, covert action instead of big military action. So it was mostly spearheaded by CIA rather than DOD or Department of War. What happened was is Paul Hellowell, in order to be able to traffic illegal narcotics, created a bunch of these CIA banking structures, once called Castle Bank and Trust in the Cayman Islands, another one, Nuggen Hand in Australia. And when you have that friendly bank that's protected, then you can move drugs. This is this overworld underworld alliance between intelligence and organized crime because basically every intelligence operation is a, I want to say every, but at the operational level, it's a crime. It's an active sabotage. It's an active subversion. It's an active obstruction. It's an active illegal surveillance. So in order to do a illegal crime, you don't want to do it yourself because then your fingerprints are on the gun. But if you know people who do illegal crimes for a living in an organized way and have experience in doing it, that allows you to be a very useful extension and it gets justified in the name of national security. The illegal narcotics trade set up by Paul Hellwell who would go on to be the main lawyer for Disney and set up Disney World in Orlando. If you can look off this up, you can pull up Paul Hellwell's Wikipedia or you can look at the history of Disney or you can pull up Castle Bank and Trust. You can put any one of these up on screen. This is all fully declassified. And so they then took that model to South America and Latin America and the Caribbean during Operation Condor Operation Mongous. And this is part of what gave rise to the Iran Contra that spawned Jeffrey Epstein, which was the CIA got busted running. The same thing it did in 1940s China, which was a drugs for cash for guns operation. You can't get enough money in USAID. And then 1940s USAID didn't even exist. You can't get enough money from US taxpayer dollars. You can't get enough money from private donors who will draft off of the regime change for their own profit. So how do you get how do you get your resistance rebels enough money? It's that usually comes down to black market trade, whether that's diamonds in Africa, whether that's illegal mining activities in South America or whether that's narcotics. It's the best things to use for this kind of covert financing are small, fungible, physical materials that can be converted into large sums of cash. For example, like a truck full of cocaine can fund an army, a truck full of copper can't. And so you had this state sanctioned drug trade, this state sanctioned illegal weapons, logistics apparatus, and the state sanctioned money laundering apparatus that started in the 1940s and was utilized throughout the entirety of the Cold War. On the mafia side, Operation Gladio was this stay behind network is what they said. Basically these were right wing groups, many or some of which were kind of Nazi adjacent who hated communism. And so even though we fought against the Nazis in Mussolini and Hitler and World War II, there was a utility to preserving a certain homegrown domestic network that really hated communism to assist us on the ground in the war against communism. And what you saw was in Operation Gladio, this was a NATO-wide covert network, alliance of networks, a network of networks that in basically every one of the NATO countries, there was a cell or a number of cluster cells that were set up in order to covertly influence the domestic politics of the country. If you look at the members of these cluster cells, there's some of the, like Silvio Berlusconi was a part of the so-called P2 Lounge that came up in the Operation Gladio files when the Italian government basically put all this on trial in the 1990s. And that structure is still used by intelligence today. If you go to my X-feed and you look up, for example, Ann Applebaum and the thread that I did on the Integrity Initiative, if you just put Integrity Initiative and I can show you what these cluster cells look like. And it's fascinating to look at the organizational structure of it. But I guess what I'm getting to here is with the mob and the Vatican at that time, that was the only game in town for offshore banking if you wanted to have a bank that had no oversight whatsoever. And the Vatican at that time that was the only game in town for offshore banking if you want to have a bank that had no oversight whatsoever When the British lost the Suez Canal in 1957 and basically had to give up their empire with this is going decolonization The British Empire transitioned from a physical empire to a financial empire and moved heavily into offshore banking That's how you got these kind of, you know, BVI British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, you know, Jersey, man, all these kind of British offshore banking hubs And with London as the capital of international finance, you will, the British Empire was effectively able to maintain a comparable level of imperial vassal state control Without having physical troops or physical territorial control and so the Vatican Bank has lost a lot of its rank I would say in the international finance system since the 1940s because the market's so saturated now with offshore banking hubs But that explains what's happening in this Larry Summers Jeffrey Epstein exchange One of the weirder things about these files is there's some stuff in there that you go, okay? One thing that we know happens is when something is true, a bunch of stuff gets attached to it That's both not true and also preposterous that allows you to sort of dismiss all of it together There's a lot of people thought about that with Pete's Gate and there's some stuff that I saw online that was like George W. Bush was like involved in ritual sacrifice or You know things things along those lines like killing babies and eating people and wild shit. Yeah, what do you think that stuff is? I don't know. I don't think it really occurs What I'll say is this is a bad week to be a total Pizza gate denialist you had you would feel a lot more comfortable about it a week ago than you would this week I don't particularly focus or I don't want to say care. I don't I don't my knowledge set on it is a lot more limited on it because I don't think it's a central crux of political influence. I don't know if it's kind of almost a inside joke in a certain way. Jeffrey Epstein himself in these emails is unbelievably trolley. He'll say things that are the kind of shitpost you say to a buddy or your brother or something that you don't mean You know it's kind of cheek but you if you were a cynical out to get you person who somehow obtained that text message You'd say oh look he said it and so so there's a lot of that going on but the fact is is I have seen some I've seen a lot of images shared around The time period of when pizza gate was popping off in 2016 that all say is it doesn't it doesn't look good or easily explainable at the same time a lot of those screenshots I have not you know for for most of these for the things I've posted about her that I'm talking about here I've gone to the Justice Department file I've looked at the file number confirmed whether or not the screenshot is actually what it is for those I have not yet but I would not I wouldn't feel totally confident saying there's no there there but that's that's about as far as is I can go on that when you say images what you're talking well there's a lot of you know if you look up pizza for example that's just as a keyword search you'll see or cheese or something it looks like in the in the DOJ database for these new files I don't see a lot of things of people talking about pizza in a way that it seems like it's kind of impossible to to imagine it's actually a big pizza what's about okay you know I mean but I don't to me there's so much real world provable things in there and also so many kind of more real world implications of allegations that are made in the files that kind of you know should be explained like a common mistake that I see going around social media this week is people it kind of gets the reason that the FBI and the president was arguing that these files should be released in the first place which is that people would take things out of context and wildly you know and think things are true that are not because they're baseless allegations made by you know some anonymous tipster and but because it's in an FBI file people will think it's true now I don't think that's a reason not to release these I'm extremely glad these were released what I'm saying is I've seen that phenomenon you know run away and and some of this I know is kind of of baseless in terms of the factual evidence because some of the people one of the confidential human sources for example that is cited the first day the drop there's this kind of bombshell claim the the surprise was viral post the first day of the DOJ release which was a confidential human source CHS means of FBI informant who the FBI internal memo describes how this confidential human source reported that Alan Derschvitz was a massage agent after every meeting he goes back and tells his F is a massage handlers you know what what they talked about and you go oh my god it's an FBI confidential human source I the FBI wouldn't you know pay an informant unless they found them credible for this sort of thing on the very next page of the files it says President Trump I'm paraphrasing you can pull this up if you if you want and you know President Trump is controlled by the government of Israel and they have I forget the says they black man or something to this effect now I don't know whether either those things are true or not I don't know what any more than anybody else who's done research on this certainly there's a lot of overlap between Derschvitz and the is really government and high level is really official so in that sense if that were to be reported I don't know that it would be the who knows about whether that's true and it's but it plays into a kind of confirmation bias that a lot of people have and so when you see that in an FBI file the first thing you're instinct is if you're you know if that's your journalism beat is to is to write all about it and get millions of views and same thing there's a maggos of a war right now that's happening over issues around Israel it's you know you say oh my god it's been proven the FBI knows that well can Silva who's a journalist shortly after that published a tweet containing a file that had much less engagement where he said actually I actually have a copy of this document again I'm paraphrasing here where it matches that document file number it's got the same text and it looks like the that confidential human sources Chuck Johnson now I saw that and I went oh my god because one morning I woke up to a text from that very person saying this is about two years ago I'd never met him never talked to him don't have his number somehow he got mine and message me on signal to turn myself in because I'm going to prison he then proceeded to look up my ex wife and make allegations that I was a massad agent because she was a she was a prostitute from a from a foreign country and involved in all these you know Mossad black ops type things now he didn't get the name right he founded a different person with a similar spelling that you know was I guess busted for prostitution or something and then makes these giant claims on social media that I you know I have been like married to a foreign spy prostitute or something and then he goes on to message someone he thinks is my donor and threaten them to cut off funds because if he doesn't then I've made the intelligence community very angry and they have deputized him to tell the person he thought was my donor that the intelligence services of the United States of America will crush the businesses of someone he thought was my donor if he doesn't cut off the funds he thought that person was giving to me okay this is that confidential human source or at least according to the reporting of Ken Silva that the level of things that are untrue about that combined with the fact that this very person is going around saying that not just an FBI informant but that he actually can direct the intelligence agencies of the United States to crush someone's private practice if they don't change the you know their discretionary donations to someone like that's the person you're saying that person's you know comments to a FBI officer you know task force prove these claims about Dersubitz and Trump I mean that's that's ridiculous I know firsthand that there's zero credibility to those claims now they may be true or not but the fact is is you know there's there's a lot of context to all of these what is just because it's said in an FBI file does not make a true we learn that lesson in Russi gate we learn that lesson with the steel dossier but you know that I think that same sort of caution and prudence should be applied with these and I think ultimately the truth wins out on these things it just you know takes longer than you might want to it's so tangled you know the whole thing is just I think everybody who looks at it realizes this is a rabbit hole that just goes to the center of the earth and there's so many people involved in that what do you here's here's the big question that people ask if there was a Jeffrey Epstein and it seems like all these things he is involved in is there a Jeffrey Epstein right now that we don't know about there's a million of a million of I mean this is why this is why I I find the con this you know this is not the core of what I focus on but I find it really really interesting field of study because it helps understand so many other U.S. government institutions in the relationship between government and private business Jeffrey Epstein is part of a class of what are effectively professional fixers and this is a kind of class of professional who sits not really within a particular government or private sector institution but in the kind of sticky layer between them that connects them all and I would say that for example people like Mark Rich Bruce Rappaport and I can go through all these figures and who they are Robert may you in these types are just good case studies in how the intelligence world the business community you use it's like taking example of Bruce Rappaport and this is a you can pull up on screen if if you want there's a great article I think it's called I think it's from 1988 or 1991 it's called the Intrigon High Places oil pipeline Iraq and then just Bruce Rappaport and it's our APP yeah here you go pipeline deal Intrigon High Places and I'll describe what happens here in a second fact there's a great YouTube video on this as well if you look up Bruce just on YouTube Bruce Rappaport 1988 this is a great kind of couple minute summary of all this but effectively what happened was and let me start this by just Jeffrey Epstein got to bear stones in 1966 I'm sorry 1976 and then work there until 1980 so just because you have on screen maybe maybe I'll go through this first and then I'll do the Jeff reaction connections so what happened here was you had the Irani Rock War from 1980 to 1988 and Henry Kissinger had a really great quote about this because he asked what is the US government strategy on this because it's very convoluted and why are we why are we giving weapons to Iran when the Iranian revolution just happened in 1979 that overthrew what was a US government friendly government that was partially installed by the CIA in 1953 we've now declared international arms embargo on them where we're basically at war with the I told us why are we why are we giving them weapons and helping them defeat Iraq and the issue was we were also in a kind of war over regional hegemony and oil with with Iraq and so Henry Kissinger's quote was I only wishes that both sides would lose could lose and so what happened was is because we didn't want Iraq to take over Iran and become effectively bigger than Saudi Arabia in the region that we were we were funding the and giving weapons to Iran to try to fend off the much bigger Iraqi army and then at a certain point in this we began to back Iraq we went back and forth the supporting Iran Iraq and so that this Iraq because of the in in part goes on it wanted to build a pipeline to get its oil out and it was going to pass through Jordan and it was going to a but against the border of Israel and a major CIA contractor and CIA connected private business called Bechtel highly highly influential company there's been many many many books written on Bechtel some and Bechtel is alive and well today if there was a saga for example around the Stanford airnet observatory if around the censorship industrial complex when I when I visited the Stanford airnet observatory and I went to the courtyard courtyard is sponsored by Bechtel it's I think it's called the Bechtel courtyard and but but what happened was is the Bechtel was promised by Iraq a billion dollar contract in in 1980 and the central intelligence agency and the White House National Security Council both for geostrategic reasons wanted this pipeline built the problem was is they were afraid the Israeli government was going to sabotage the pipeline because Iraq was very hostile to Israel and there was a lot of tension between the Iraqi government and the Israeli government and they were afraid that if Bechtel got this contract. And built this pipeline that Israel would some sat you know these pipelines are very fragile and all it because it passes close to it. It's very possible that that would happen it would destroy both the CIA's goal and the private profit here Bechtel's goal so how do you solve that problem well what what the CIA did is what the what the national security council which is the interagency that the CIA reports do did is they engaged a. They engaged a private fixer named Bruce Rappaport who was a Swiss billionaire with close ties to the Israeli government to back channel with the Israeli government some sort of secret agreement that would guarantee that they would not sabotage the pipeline and because the attorney general the United States again think about this as well. as I'm saying this think about Jeffrey Epstein and think about the character of bill bar for example who started his career for seven years at the CIA. It was highly involved in the sea eyes Iran Contra and then was attorney general both in the 1990s during the. Epstein connected BCCI scandal and the. Yeah when Jeffrey Epstein kills up or whatever happened to him. What so what what happens is is is. Bruce Rappaport does indeed use his contacts with the Israeli government to strike in agreement that then allows. the product would allow the project to be green lit but it triggers a special prosecutor's investigation of the attorney general himself. At me because he one of his friends was alleged to be in on the deal so they they argued that effectively there were that they that through Bruce Rappaport the attorney general was striking a secret agreement with Israel to profit himself. A massive conflict of interest and what would ended up happening is Bruce Rappaport Rappaport step forward and said no no no it wasn't to profit. The terms weren't to profit the friend. It was the the terms we secretly reach with Israel's that they were going to get like a 30% cut on the revenue of the pipeline and that's what secured. The buy in but the fact is is. Bruce Rappaport was not. The now the other part of this is that the national security council. Told the basically overseas development arm of of the US government formal US. Government agency. To put American taxpayer funds to help subsidize. The pipeline that the back tell pipeline. And that government agency did not want to put up something like $400 million of taxpayer funds on it because they thought Bruce Rappaport was a very shady Epstein like figure who had all sorts of sorted you know details about his own past. So that government agency queried the CIA for all records about Bruce Rappaport. And the CIA gave them a limited hangout they said oh you know we only have a few documents are responsive to it. And no red flags as it turned out with the special prosecutor. Compelled from the CIA is that they had a whole dirty dossier on Bruce Rappaport. And if they had given that to the US government agency. There wouldn't there could have been support for the pipeline now after all the scandal the pipeline ended up not being built but the point is is. Here you have the same type of person as Jeffrey Epstein. The same regions and countries that are you know involved in a significant part of the Epstein saga. You have the same structure of the intelligence community private businesses and you know back channel deals with government officials. But because there was no 201 file on Bruce Rappaport he was not formally a CIA asset he was he was you know what's called a liaison a contact a facilitator a friend of the station. Doesn't work for the CIA's got his own hedge fund he's got his own you know basically finance you know he'll invest in commodities or foreign exchange or private portfolio companies. But sometimes he'll work with the CIA sometimes he won't depends on whether it's good for him. And in this case he thought it was good for him to take this who knows what cut he himself got it on it. But the fact is is here you have the same type of opera you have every layer of this from the Justice Department to the CIA to the private finance years to the private companies to real world geopolitical action. And this appears in my view of it to be exactly the model that Jeffrey Epstein himself replicated and was on parallel track with for his whole career. And I can get into that but does that make sense in terms of like this type of figure exists in basically in every country in every industry. And you know they're not all as prominent as Epstein but I would argue people like Mark Rich and at the time Bruce Rappaport kind of were. They don't all have you know these child sex trafficking type things. This is the thing is like what he was connected with what makes me wonder like if he didn't have that sick thing where he liked underage girls like if he'd never gotten arrested which was what 2008 or something but when did he initially get arrested. 2006 but 2006 but he was a the plea deal was 2008. So if that hadn't happened like if you just got a guy who's getting of age prostitutes we probably never hear about this. Yeah. And this episode is brought to you by Squarespace to level up your business you got to level up your website and Squarespace does the heavy lifting for you. Even I use it to power my website Joe Rogan dot com is powered by Squarespace. Squarespace gives you everything you need to claim your domain professionally showcase your offerings grow your brand and get paid all in one place. Head to squarespace dot com slash Rogan for a free trial and when you're ready to launch use the offer code Rogan to save 10% off your first purchase of a website or domain. But that's crazy and you can imagine very easily why because Epstein was involved in fraudulent financial activities his entire career. He was under SEC investigation at Bear Stearns in 1980 when he was involved in a deal I think was St. Joe's mineral company which is owned by Seagram's which is you know by the the profit family. He he got in trouble with the SEC at that time he then as soon as he got in trouble he left Bear Stearns and went on on his own but then worked effectively at Bear Stearns off the book for the next decade according to his own testimony he had a continuous relationship with Bear Stearns for. I think he said 31 years I was basically from the moment you know from the 1970s 1976 until 2007 2008 when Bear Stearns collapsed while Jeffrey Epstein was in jail. But then Jeffrey Epstein in it appears to me almost impossible that Jeffrey Epstein was not working on BCCI pipeline deals while he was at Bear Stearns BC the Bear Stearns was one of the was one of the three biggest. Clearing houses for for BCCI transactions BCCI is the Bank of Credit Commerce International sometimes people call it the Bank of Crooks and Criminals International. It's it's it's a incredible saga of CIA banking gone wrong. It's it's a bank that was started in Pakistan in 1972 and then grew to be the CIA's main way to covertly back the Mujahideen against the Russians during the Cold War so we backed Osama bin Laden the CIA we backed the Islamic Mujahideen the the radicals who became al Qaeda and ISIS with billions of dollars of CIA and MI6 and Israeli and Saudi facilitated. You know, co support and financial funds in order to do a Cold War operation just like we talked about with strange bedfellows you know get backing right wing organized. Crime to stop left wing communism we did the same thing in Afghanistan. Through you know these the Pakistan Afghanistan border to run covertly run guns to the Mujahideen in fact you can this a great YouTube video that I always like to play so that you can see it for yourself. It's it's really short you can look up 1979's a big new Brzezinski dropping out of a helicopter to tell the Mujahideen that both God and the United States government is on their side. And the reason this clip I always think is so fun to play is because this was the very moment in 1979 that Jeffrey Epstein appears to have been involved in the BCCI financing of this very operation. So if you turn the volume up and you start at the beginning. US National Security Advisor Brzezinski flew to Pakistan to set about rallying resistance. He wanted to arm the Mujahideen without revealing America's role. On the Afghan border near the Kaiba Pass he urged the soldiers of God to redouble their efforts. We know of their deep belief in God. We are confident that their struggle will succeed. That land over there is yours. You'll go back to it one day because your fight will prevail and you'll have your homes and your mosques back again because your cause is right and God is on your side. Now that is the National Security Advisor of the United States of America. The National Security Advisor is the highest post in the cabinet. It is the person the president talks to every day. All intelligence, military and statecraft goes through the National Security Advisor. That is the numero uno. And he personally in 1979, this didn't come out until years later, but we were covertly doing this. So to do a covert operation, and this is why I focus on the money side of Epstein from the 1970s to present. Because the money in any covert operation is the most essential part. It's the only thing that is irreplaceable and that if you don't have it, everything goes away. You lose one person, find another one. You lose one, you know, logistics hub can create another one with money. You lose money, you lose everything. You lose your ability to pay your informants. You lose your ability to bribe government officials. You lose your ability to win the support of local institutions. We lost Vietnam, not really so much because we lost, you know, at the kinetic war level, because we lost the ability to fund it because they got defunded. So we literally couldn't do it anymore. And there's another great clip just to show how sophisticated CI money was. ability to fund it because they got defunded. So we literally couldn't do it anymore. And the, there's another great clip just to show how sophisticated CI money laundering was even by the 1960s. So I'll stop doing this after, you know, run around, clip clip after this or I'll chill on it. But if you go to my ex count, you can also find this on YouTube. There's a great, I believe it was CBS in the 1960s. It's called In the Pay. I think it's called In the Pay of the CIA or in the, it's, but if you type in CI money laundering, you'll see this, this great clip about how sophisticated CI money laundering was already by the 1950s and 60s. And the, that, because everything the CI does has to be laundered, it's a spy agency. If it writes a check, if it doesn't conceal the origins of the money gigs up. So everything that is CI has to move through some sort of money laundering mechanism. Well, you know, to kind of, I guess, borrow a phrase from, from the president, somebody's doing the money laundering. You need a, you need outside contacts who do not work at the agency or necessarily for the agency to facilitate that money laundering. And that was done through, for example, the Pakistanis with BCCI as well as contacts in, in London. That is what I believe Jeffrey Epstein was doing his entire career after that from towers financial to his tenure with Leslie Wexner to kind of the way I think that he helped model the Clinton Foundation itself with the Clintons in the early 2000s. And his expertise in that I think is, is what made him useful. Really not, well, it's more of the, the connections of, I guess, donors and billionaires around him that made him the most useful. But the fact is, he specialized when he went out on his own, formerly he leaves Bear Starns in 1981 and starts a one man group called Intercontinental Assets Group out of his New York City apartment. He's not even 30 years old. Right away, he gets big level clients like Adnan Kishogi, who is the, at the time was alleged to be the world's richest man. He was the Saudi arms dealer and to give an impression of how significant this figure was in the weapons trade. He was, he, he earned more in commissions from Lockheed Martin, Boeing, and I think one of the other big military contractors than every other commission's agent in the entire world combined. That's why, you know, the rumors that he was the world's rich man. He, in fact, we actually had legislation passed because of how influential he was. he was the one who in 1983 flew to the National Security Council, to the White House, to orchestrate the Iran Contra affair. He was the Saudi middleman that was part of this operation where the United States used the Saudi middleman's Adnan Kishogi to run guns to Israeli contacts to smuggle into Iran to fight off the Iraqis. You know, it's a bit of a long sequence, but effectively, you can think of it as the United States and Israel, Saudi Arabia in the middle. Now, Adnan Kishogi was one of the major clients of the CIA's BCCI Bank, and he was the host of the CIA's offshore operation that was created in 1976 called the Safari Club. In 1975, 1976, when the CIA started getting handcuffs put on it with the church committee hearings. Jeffrey Epstein starts his career at Bearstearns in 1976, the very moment of the biggest shakeup of the CIA and CIA history. At that moment, the church committee hearings were ongoing, and the public was seeing Colby and Angleton holding up a heart attack gun, you know, how the CIA can kill someone and make it look like they died organically of a heart attack. Operation chaos had just broke about the CIA funding student groups on American college campuses. Colin Tellbroke and K. Oltra broke. It was one house of horrors after another on everybody's TV that only had three news stations. And so Democrats were completely fired up about getting rid of the CIA or putting massive handcuffs on it, which is what they did. They created effectively what's now the Senate and House Intelligence Committee. So there's oversight of the CIA by the people's representatives. The first year Carter was in office in 1977, went through the what was called the Halloween massacre fired 30% of all CIA operations personnel. They massively cut funding. And so in response to this, you had a set of stakeholders who wanted that CIA dirty work to still be doable, but they didn't have the legal authorization to run it out of the CIA. So what they did is they took the same group of international partners that they had been that the CIA had been working with that includes Saudi Arabia, Israel, the UK, France at the time Iran because this was before the 1979 Iranian revolution. They were all part of this thing called the Safari Club, which got its name from the Mount Safari. It was basically a resort club in Kenya, which was the main hub. Just like Colombia, for example, is kind of the main, was the main US government hub for logistics. It was kind of a foothold for our ability to do work in Venezuela or Guatemala or Nicaragua or Brazil. In Africa, Kenya was our main stronghold. And so, but I don't like to show you, ran that. This was basically a seven, eight country joint covert operations intelligence network. And it was informal. It wasn't technically the CIA. And it was set up. And you can pull the Wikipedia for this actually. It just so you don't need to take my word for it. Like literally the sanitized Wikipedia will tell you everything that I'm saying here. And it ended up, that network ended up becoming one of the main, yeah. So if you start at the top, you'll see that there it is on the right, the Far car. These were all these different countries attempt to offset the restrictions that the Democrats had put on the CIA. When Reagan gets back to power in 1981, you still have these handcuffs on the CIA. You still have the Democrats controlling the House of Representatives. The Democrats did, you know, so there was international arms embargo. First of all, of 1979, Iranian revolution happens and it's blamed on the CIA being cut back. The CIA helped install the shop in 1953. They argued that if Jimmy Carter hadn't destroyed the CIA, we would still have Iran as a friendly country. We could have stopped this. We could have nipped it in the bud. We could have had people on the ground. It's Jimmy Carter's fault that he that he cut the CIA that were in this disaster with the world's third largest reserve of oil and gas. And this hugely geostrategic country now being an enemy of America rather than a friend. The, the, so an international arms embargo was put on Iran, but then Iraq threatened to invade it. And we didn't want Iraq to take it over. So we had to get, we had to do something illegal if we wanted to help Iran. And it was against international law to give them weapons. But if we didn't give them weapons, it was perceived massive geostrategic geopolitical earthquake that we live with for centuries. So you had to do one illegal action with, with the gun running. And then there was a inner party dispute. The Democrats at that time, the majority did not want to do intervention in Nicaragua. There was a party power called the, the Sandinista government. And there was a, a rebel faction called the Contras. And Republican donors and stakeholders had had interests in Nicaragua and wanted to help the Contras overthrow the Sandinista government. But there was a party dispute. Democrat donors didn't profit from that. And they at the time had a fairly robust anti-imperialism kind of mindset. And we're sick of CIA regime change. And by the early 1980s after everything that came, it was disclosed in just the previous years. So Republicans wanted to overthrow the Nicaragua governments. Democrats didn't. Democrats had a house majority. And they passed something that called the Bolin Amendment, which forbade any US government funds from going to support the Contras. So this put the Republicans in a pickle. By the way, this is what's happening kind of today around Ukraine. If you flip the parties, 100% of Democrats vote for Ukraine funding, the Republican party is split about it. This is the inverse of that was happening in the early 1980s. 100% of Republicans wanted to fund the Contras against what they called the Soviet aligned Sandinistas. And the Democrats were split. But they successfully passed the Bolin Amendment. So the CIA was in a pickle. How do you run guns to Iran when it's against international law? And how do you fund the Contras when it's illegal to spend US government money to fund them? And so what they came up with is effectively the structure, I think it's the most useful structure for understanding American statecraft and intelligence activity to this day. What they came up with is what they called a structure called the enterprise, which the CIA director Bill Casey referred to as a private self-sustained off the shelf standalone entity that did not exist within the US government. But it was instead it comprised the money came from outside fixers who would then effectively channel donor money and black market trade to fund the Contras. So the money didn't come from US taxpayers. It didn't come from USAID. It didn't come from an allocation from the US Department of War or foreign assistance from the Department of State. As it turned out, the money came from cocaine and a couple of other things. But this was the famous Fruh, Gary Webb, John Kerry. And this was the soup that Jeffrey Epstein was coming up in. A funny story related to this is that the main airline used to transport the drugs and guns in the drugs for cash for guns operation was a CI proprietary airline called Southern Air Transport. Southern Air Transport was the proprietary CI airline, meaning it was owned and operated exclusively by the Central Intelligence Agency. And it was the, you know, the airline that all these aircraft went moved through. In Ron Contra was basically the early 1980s up until like the mid late 1980s. In 19, it was based in Miami. In 1994, Southern Air Transport, the CIA proprietary airline, which in the interviewing time was spun out to not be owned by the CIA, but rather to be owned by someone who had worked for the CIA at the time it was owned by the CIA. So, you know, pretty thin layer there. But it moved from Miami to Columbus, Ohio primarily to service the limited. Oh, I know all about this, Joe. I have a video on this. And then COVID, Jay, because he's obsessed. Yeah. And it kind of says with Patel. Yeah, probably talking about this five years ago. Yeah. Yeah. Well, there's a great article. I think, uh, spook air and, um, you know, on this, but many roads lead back to Ohio. Most most if not, what is, what is this connection with Ohio? Well, Ohio was, you know, if you you remember kind of the origins of, of organized crime in the United States really goes back to the prohibition era when you had this Midwestern mafia syndicate around Cincinnati and then it moved into Dayton and Columbus and adjacent to Chicago and this whole sort of hub around prohibition. And then prohibition was 1920 to 1933 when prohibition ended all these networks went from black market alcohol to black market drugs because it was no longer black market. They no longer had a business smuggling alcohol. So they, they moved into the narcotics space, which, which, which narcotics? Well, uh, it was primarily opium in the 1930s. This was part of opium. Well, yeah, if you, because in the 1930s was when you had this, you know, as we discussed the Department of Wars Alliance with the Shanghai Shek and the, and the Quomentang, the Chinese nationalists, the supply for, you know, the supply for heroin, for example, or, you know, opium, it comes from Asia comes from the Golden Crescent, the Golden Triangle. And the way this logistics chain moved was our CIA War Department backed rebel groups in Asia. They sat territory on the Golden Triangle. They would cultivate the opium. They would basically fly it out on military aircraft. It went to Europe for processing in, you know, France was one of the main, is this kind of French connection saga, which again, Jeffrey Epstein is weirdly connected to. And I can tell you about that if you're interested. And then it would go to the basically Italian mafia folks for the transshipment. And you had Italian mafia controlled docks and ports in the United States and New York and New Jersey. And you had, you know, CIA protected Italian mafia groups in southern Italy, which at the time were national security protected because they were our allies against the communists. And so you had this, this drug trade to support foreign policy imperatives. And you can do that. You can run that exercise with pretty much every drug on planet earth at this point. And it makes it very difficult to stop the drug trade because by stopping the drug trade, you are, you're running up against something that your own government considers a perhaps unfortunate, but necessary logistics hub. Do you think that's happening right now with Mexico? Yeah. Whoa. Well, I mean, think about this, fast and furious. Yeah, that long ago. The fast and furious story is fucking bananas, tell it to people that don't know because just the idea that they propose this and implement that it is so fucking crazy. Yeah. Well, so this was a scandal during the Obama administration, Eric Holder was the attorney, John, the United States. He had to step down because he was held in contempt of Congress for jumping on the grenade and not turning over the fast and furious files. Um, earth, the Congress, note to Congress who wants to be a hero by the way. Um, you can do the same thing with the Epstein bill with the fast and furious files. Uh, I think everybody in this war on drugs that, you know, we're so gung-hull about we just captured the president of Venezuela over drugs. It would be awfully nice if you compelled the Justice Department of N FBI to turn over the Justice Department of N FBI run fast and furious files. But what happened was is, and I believe this had inner agency approval, meaning the White House signed off on it, the Central Intelligence Agency signed off on it, the Department of Defense signed off on it, the State Department signed off on it, the FBI and ATF signed off on it. This was a gun running operation to send guns to the Sinaloa Cartel to, uh, to have them be able to successfully win a NARCO drug war against the Los Zedas Cartel. The Los Zedas Cartel was pilfering oil pipelines. But remember, Mexico, the oil wealth of the United States is vastly disproportionately concentrated in Texas in West Texas and southern Texas where it shares oil fields with Mexico. In fact, those, those oil fields go into Mexico is replete with oil. And there are many partnerships between United States oil companies and the Mexican government, uh, PEMEX and, and all the different, you know, kind of private, private lines. And this is a big point of geopolitical contention. But the fact is, one of the things that organized crime groups do in order to get money for their own syndicate, because they've got effectively military control of a territory is if a pipeline runs through that territory, they can simply cut open the pipeline and steal the oil. This is, for example, what, you know, was happening with our CIA backed, uh, rebel groups in Syria. We're taking the oil. I mean, we would literally, you know, our, our spunky moderate rebels would, you know, literally cut open Syrian pipelines and take the oil. And this was one of the ways to support, you know, you can support it with drugs. You can support it with black market oil. And by the way, while I'm on the topic, if you, if you pull up and I had this on my, my ex, if you type in, uh, institute, uh, institute for peace or it's, uh, just type in institute piece, drugs. The, the, the US government, the US institute for peace, told the Taliban not to shut down the drug trade after they took power in 2022. They said it would have a devastating, uh, you know, negative impact on the, you know, the, the local economy, if they didn't keep growing, what was then, you know, 90, 95% of the, well, yeah, if you, well, I think click the next image, wait, next image. Yeah, here you go. So this is, this is a, you know, we give the US institute piece at the time we gave them $55 million a year. The US institute piece was created by active congress. The headline is wild. The Taliban successful opium ban is bad for Afghans and the world. Yes. Right. Right. So wow. Remember, just about, you know, um, the Taliban had just taken back power that happened in the, you know, in the early Biden administration, the Taliban, if folks were call cut. So we, the CIA was helped and, and the US military, as well as their allies and with regional allies were cultivating the opium on the golden crescent for a noble cause to win the Cold War against the evil Soviets. This was a big part of the funding for the mojahadin. And this was one of the big scandals that ended up enveloping BCCI, the CI is bank because it was the way, because it was non compliant with any banking regulations. It all moved offshore. The drug money, the drug logistics chain that the CI built for the mojahadin then moved through the drugs money laundering chain at the CI bank. And this apparatus had scaled for 20 years by the, by the late 1990s. When the Taliban, like the Chinese wanted to shut it down when the Taliban took power in the 1990s. And they did that. They cut the opium down to effectively zero in 1999. And this is all open source in tooth. And then, you know, we, we invade Afghanistan and, you know, 2001, 2003, it becomes a US military occupied zone and it goes from zero percent of the world's heroin to 95 percent of the of the world's heroin all under US military occupation. In fact, we installed their dictator, you know, who, whose brother was, was the main kingpin of the whole country. It's, and some of this move through, some of this move through the Cold War CIA backed Turkish gray wolves outfit. And there's a funny quote, I think in the Michael Hastings article on Stanley McChrystal where Stanley McChrystal's team refers to Hamid Karzai's funny little hat that he wore. Hamid Karzai was the CI installed, you know, strong man after we, we took our Afghanistan. He referred to as hat as the gray wolves vagina. I mean, they're basically saying like this is the, you know, the drug logistics orifice. But leaving that aside, what I'm, what I'm getting to is is you have this, this banking network. You have all these logistics chains. Jeffrey Epstein, his first 10, when his come up is made through this, through this whole network, it turns out that Bear Stearns, you know, opened a trading desk with to, to clear BCCI transactions in 1978. Jeffrey Epstein's mentor, the person who actually recruited him to apply to Bear Stearns was a guy named Ace Greenberg, Ace Greenberg, then was a senior executive at the time. And then I think in 1978 or 1979, he becomes CEO. So the head of Bear Stearns. So Jeff, and he sets Jeffrey Epstein up with his daughter. So Jeffrey Epstein is a, as a young kid, people wonder how did Jeffrey Epstein make partner at Bear Stearns so fast? Well, there's a couple explanations. You know, one is the guy who brought him into the firm quickly became CEO thereafter. And Jeffrey Epstein was dating his daughter, the New York Times actually reported this about a month and a half ago by getting the insider testimony of a dozen people who worked at, who worked at Bear Stearns at the time. And so, you know, he's dating the boss's daughter, but also Ace Greenberg is the CEO. We'd have to approve all of these transactions. And it looks like was involved in, you know, these these clearinghouse activities. What happened was is Bear Stearns cleared about $13 billion worth of BCCI transactions. And it looks like these transactions were involved in the very same Adnon Koshogi society and Doug Lease, who was a British arms dealer that Jeffrey Epstein was flying to London to meet with and working with all those years. And Bear Stearns was doing it through this entity called CAPCOM, which was what the Senate report on the BCCI scandal referred to as the bank within the bank of BCCI. So kind of the inner sanctum of now that CAPCOM was was owned by Kamal Adam, who was the head of, he was the chief spy for Saudi Arabia. So he was, so Bear Stearns, the New York Times reports based on a dozen of these, you know, insider, you know, testimonies. They got like three of Epstein's bosses on the record to talk about, you know, what he was doing there. Amazingly, the New York Times does not mention a single deal name in the entire 20,000 word report. It might not be news fit to print. Also, they just, I'll, I can be charitable and say they might, they just might not know. They might think that, you know, I don't think that the New York Times has a pinky of the specialization in Jeffrey Epstein, cinematic universe knowledge that your random anonymous egg account on X has. So they might not know about Bear Stearns doing BCCI transactions. They might not know what, you know, if you don't know the material, you don't necessarily know what to ask. That's me being charitable. Also, you know, some of the witnesses may have said that they don't want to talk about specific deal names because that would tarnish, you know, the folks involved in that deal for association with Jeffrey Epstein. There could be a lot of reasons. I'm trying to be charitable here. But, but the fact is, is they all said Jeffrey Epstein moved up so fast because he was dating the boss's daughter and he was put on the biggest and most lucrative deals very quickly within the firm. And given the incredible volume that Bear Stearns has appeared to have been moving through BCCI and BCCI being, you know, the hottest ticket in town then in the late 1970s. It was literally the main vehicle for the US government to covertly launder funds. Capcom, according to the Senate Intelligence Report and the Justice Department investigations, was the main vehicle for funding the Mujahideen 50% of those trades. And they they laundered illegally, which requires a brokerage, you know, a clearinghouse to prove it. You know, the way this is set up is you have a bank, you've got a money launder and you've got a clearinghouse. The bank was the CIA bank BCCI. The money launder was, you know, the CIA's literal direct partner in this, the Saudis. Capcom was run by the chief Saudi spy master. And then in 1982, Jeffrey Epstein obtained a fake Saudi passport of, sorry, it was a fake Austrian passport because that was a big loophole passport during the Cold War for spies. But said his residence was Saudi Arabia. We didn't find this out until 2019 when his safe was raided. But the exact time Jeffrey Epstein has this fake Saudi passport. And it's it's being done to support the CIA backed rebel group, the Mujahideen in Afghanistan. But that requires a clearinghouse to clear those money laundering trades that were using these mirrored commodities trades, which is this, you know, technique of basically, you know, selling to yourself to make money look clean so that it looks like you know, profit and you know, it looks like you, you know, one or lost it in a market trade rather than through drug money. And then they were then sending that on, you know, to the Mujahideen. But the fact is is at the same time that that was happening on non-Kashogi who had become Jeffrey Epstein's client in the 1980s when he to the lose hunting, but the fact is at the same time that that was happening on Anakashogi who had become Jeffrey Epstein's client in the 1980s when he went on his own, was the one facilitating the weapons, you know, of this drugs for cash for guns, the person, so the bank that's moving, that's turning the drugs into clean cash, that the head of the, you know, the Saudi spy master is running that part of the, you know, banking side. And then you've got the Saudi, Saudi arms dealer who is moving it illegally into Iran, working hand in glove with the CIA and the National Security Council the whole time. You have a, you have a illegal financial enterprise protected at the highest level by the United States government, the US intelligence services. And by proxy, the Justice Department itself, can you imagine the Justice Department prosecuting it while that operation was ongoing? Any defendant, you know, here's, you asked what are the, what are the great reveals in, in the JFK files? And I'd be remiss if I didn't bring up the case of Rolando Massfer. There's an incredible document in the JFK files that, that Tulsi Gabbard released last year, which is a CIA document that describes, I think the quote is massive damage, if the, if the Justice Department pursues a criminal case against the guy named Rolando Massfer. If you just type in Rolando Massfer JFK files 2025 release, or like massive damage or something like that, you'll, you'll see this. It's an unbelievably incredible document. What it documents is that there was a dispute between the CIA and the State Department, State Department sets foreign policy. The CIA is not, is supposed to serve covertly the, the, the state department. The, the CIA is the junior seat at the table. Nobody ever goes from being, you know, ahead of the State Department, ahead of the CIA. That's a, that's a demotion. The CIA is supposed to be kind of the, I use like the, you know, Sopranos reference, you know, Silvio comes in and, and, you know, shakes down the hairdresser shop or whatever for the money. It owes the family. If you are that hairdresser, it's easy to think that Silvio runs them off. Because he's the one who shows up at your house, breaks your windows, breaks your nost, your knuckles and takes your money. But Silvio's not doing that because he runs it. He's doing it because the person setting the policy of the enterprise, Tony, is the boss of it. The way it's supposed to work is the State Department sets policy. And the CIA does, or organizes, the plausibly diable dirty work to achieve it. If that is necessary to achieve that foreign policy. This is why there was a lot of debate in 1948 about whether the CIA should even take on this role. This is this great 1948, George Kenan memo that says maybe we should do have a office within the State Department called the, you know, Bureau of Organized Political Warfare. And then two months later, they decided the CIA would, you know, would take that. But the fact is, it's basically a State Department function, but CIA is supposed to defer to State. But what happened was, there was a faction of dispute between State and CIA over Cuba policy. The State Department wanted thought that the CIA backed rebel groups in Miami were being too aggressive. And two provocative, too hot-headed, you know, doing acts of terrorism and sorts of things that looked bad at the international community, JFK was trying to rein them in. But the CIA, the careers and folks there, wanted to take a more aggressive posture. And so one of the CIA's key assets and ringleaders had a logistics hub with a massive CIA backed Cuban exile community network at that time in the early 1960s in Miami. Wanted, thought that JFK was being too impatient, too cautious. They wanted to invade basically a section of Haiti, departing from Miami to use that as a base to then do Connecticut tax against Cuba. The State Department learned that this CIA backed network led by the land of mass for was going to do this and stopped it. They had a customs importer agent, basically, who was like manning the docks and caught them as like 300 of them were, you know, departing to try to take over a part of Haiti to do this. And then the State Department directed the Justice Department to pursue criminal charges against Orlando Massford in steps the CIA. And, you know, if you if you can find this memo, you know, it's M.A.S. You know, for I think it's F.E.R.R.R. you are Orlando Massford. It's a if you if the title of it is is like massive damage that would that would accrue. You can probably also just find on or just yes, would just get massive damage. There you go. Estimate of damage, which could accrue to CIA Miami through prosecution of the Orlando Massford Haitian invasion group. Again, we just learned the existence of this document last year. This is from 19 the 1960s. Now it says the decision by the Justice Department to seek a grand jury indictment against Orlando Massford and certain of his associates is a potentially explosive matter which could result in extensive damage to CIA activities of Miami. Recent adverse publicity on the national scene and in the Miami area have added substantially to the already sizable embarrassment potential. Can you imagine what these memos look like for Jeffrey Epstein? Some of the main sectors of danger to CIA equities are described below. Basic national publicity regarding student and foundation topics have already attracted attention of the local press to the CIA in general. Usually any reference to CIA covert activities leads leads pressed as check files for references of any such activities locally. However, before this action can be taken, the story regarding and then he goes over the Pan Am Foundation, the University of Miami, which was what hosted Jam Wave, the University of Miami, then the CIA's largest station house in the world, it was called Jam Wave, was hosted in a facility off of the University of Miami campus. Again, it's the biggest CIA station house in the entire world. The CIA, so it goes on to say that they're in all these. The top paragraph is saying we're under a lot of pressure justice department. The public is already losing support for the CIA because of all these other disclosures and it will be disastrous if you pursue the prosecution of him because Relanto master is going to squeal. So I think if you go down to the next page, he says, as has been the case for the past six years and he says basically the CIA has been working with the head, the president and treasurer of the University of Miami. They're extending the cooperation in all this. So basically all these touch points that Relanto masters network connects to will be exposed and they go over all these what were previously redacted CIA cutouts in the area. And then he goes on the memo says even if the above circumstances don't exist, we would remain concerned regarding the possible effects of the prosecution of the Massburg group, although no station agents or persons with whom the Miami station has contractual arrangements are among the persons arrested or those who will be prosecuted. It will be very easy for the defense to drag CIA Miami into the case. The defense has only to obtain testimony, true or perjured. They can see it will be true. From one of the defendants or summon as defense witnesses, one or more disaffected former agents of the CIA station in order to begin a chain reaction, surfacing such detail and rumor concerning CIA operations against the Cuban target, given the sizable reduction of infiltration and a jail filling of frustration and lack of support for Cuban freedom, attributed to passive U.S. policy, basically saying it would undermine our entire operation against Cuba and the American people support for it. If the Justice Department indites these people who just committed this crime because they can vary the whole network of CIA and they can just call to the stand that their friends and associates had been talking with the CIA about this well before they'd done it and that would be a massive scandal. Now that's just one example here. And what goes on to happen is there's a negotiation between the State Department CIA about whether to bring the case, how to bring the case, how to shape. There's a follow up memo on this which is totally incredible. I think is more the logistics on this. The agreement they reach is that the State Department wins nominally. They do bring the prosecution, but they bring it in a highly limited and tepid way and they agree to the CIA's demands to limit lines of inquiry, to file motions against entering anything into discovery that might basically reveal the CIA networks in this. And they agree to have CIA general counsel person on the prosecution team in order to personally make sure that the Justice Department stays in line. And if something looks like if the the judge grants discovery for something that might reveal the CIA's role in it, drop that line of prosecution so that it can't be entered into evidence. And this is what you see time and again is how these networks get protected, whether it's drug cases, whether it's foreign policy scandal cases, whether it's money laundering cases. I believe in the Mark Rich case, part of I think is lawyer cited at one point or maybe it was in his pardon application, the work that he had done for for US intelligence services is part of the reason that he should be granted leniency. But the point I'm getting to here is given Jeffrey Epstein's involvement in the BCCI network. Given Jeffrey's involvement in the 1990s with all the foreign policy activities happening in the Middle East at that time, given Jeffrey Epstein's involvement through the early 2000s Clinton era and everything, given his involvement in everything from Israeli to Saudi to British to French high level government officials. Can you Jeffrey Epstein was investigated by the SEC in the 1980s? He was one of the two people who ran the biggest Ponzi scheme in history at the time in the United States. The towers financial collapse. Epstein's business partner goes to jail for like 30 years or 20 years or whatever. But Epstein's skates completely free. Epstein gets involved in this huge fraud in the US Virgin Islands with this, you know, like billion dollar fraud case in the US Virgin Islands never prosecuted for any of it. Why is that? Well, one is, you know, he may have we know in the US Virgin Islands case. He was sponsoring the campaigns basically the politicians there. The prosecutor's answer to the politicians could be that. But it I would be shocked if they're in 40 years of this. Where's Waldo? Forrest Gump. He's always in the room in 40 years of American foreign policy and intelligence activity, you know, money sourcing for that for all the crimes that Epstein committed, the concern was the same one they had with Orlando Massford. Don't bring the case. And if you do bring it in a highly limited way. And that's exactly what happened in 2006, the first time he was indicted. Everybody was up in arms that it was a sweetheart plea deal. It limited. It gave protection to all co-conspirators known and unknown. And it was swooped in quickly before, you know, there was a trial and full. So that lines of evidence couldn't be opened about the network. It's just crazy that statutory rape is what took it all down. Right? Because it's it's underage hand jobs. Right. That's what took it all down. Yeah. I mean, I it's well, it seems to be what took Jeffrey Epstein down kind of crazy. Even that is has a really interesting geopolitical history. There was a similar scandal in the early 2000s with a private military contractor called Dine Corp, which again runs through this Adnan Koshogi kind of Middle Eastern network. Dine Corp got in trouble for trafficking, facilitating the the traffic is a, you know, major US military and CIA contractor for logistics and the institutional support and military assistance on the ground for the US military all over the world. They got in trouble moving basically trafficking underage kids to Middle Eastern shakes. And I believe the in the early 2000s. And I believe the reason that was alleged by Congress that they did that was to juice the deals with them that basically, you know, these, these people who were critical. It's you know, if you're operating on the ground in Kuwait or, you know, pick your Middle Eastern, you know, country in order to serve your purpose for the US government to be this outside plausibly deniable, but extensively infrastructured professional support outfit on the ground. You need the support of the local government. You need the support of the local high level officials. They need to be happy. And there's several currencies for that. There's financial payoffs and there's other things they might like like parties and young women, you know, especially in places where, you know, being with the very young female is not illegal. And so what Dine Corp, I believe got busted doing and you can look at the Dine Corp scandal here was was doing this. And I believe their argument was, well, you wanted us to do this thing on the ground. You wanted us to help the US military and, you know, kind of covert support nodes that were ever happening here. We had to do it somehow. You know, this is part of what helped us do that. I would not be surprised at the Epstein trafficking apparatus started with similar motivations. Not, you know, that's not for necessarily for blackmail, but because it makes clients or customers or, you know, VIP people happy. It makes them, oh, you something, it makes them want to get involved in a deal you do, even if the deal is not one they would ordinarily do because they just want to stay close to you because you're their supplier of the thing, you know, of their vice of the thing that they, you know, want but can't get, you know, if you're, if you're a 70 year old billionaire, you can't walk into a bar and let leave aside the underage thing. You can't walk into a bar, you know, in, you know, meet an 18 year old who's, you know, I'm present. I'm present. You know, these things are facilitated that at private parties and it needs to, you know, for a lot of these guys, it has to be discreet. You know, they've got wives, they've got reputations. And, you know, there's an aspect of this that plays out at every institution. I worked at a New York law firm and, you know, there's, there's ways that you can make partner, you know, at least this was kind of the vibe that I felt like some people make partner because they're really good technically what they do. They're just amazing. They're just technical wizzes on the minutia of how to structure a merger or acquisition. They, you know, they're just really great at structuring an offshore banking transaction or they're really, they just know absolutely everything about tax law. There's some people who move up because of nepotism, you know, they're the brother and the son-in-law of a major partner. There's some people who make partner because they know one, they brought in one client who's just a really big main, uh, rainmaker. And there's some people who move up because they open doors to partners while they're associates. They introduce them to someone. They host events. They've got, you know, tickets to exclusive things. And the partners just like being around that person because they get access to that person in a currency that they can't get on their own. And that includes hosting, you know, cool, exotic parties, having, you know, attractive women. I, I've never been convinced that the central role of the Epstein young girl, uh, in my view sidebar of the Epstein money laundering story is, is that it was for blackmail. I, and part of this is because the moment Jeffrey Epstein formally officially threatened somebody with blackmail. And that person tells his wife, and that wife tells her friends and that gets out to somebody else that knows Jeffrey Epstein. Jeffrey Epstein's access goes away overnight. That's the sort of thing that even a rumor of that spreading and nobody else is going to want to do business with them. So you think people just assume it's blackmail because that is how you would blackmail someone, especially underage girls. I think it is very possible that there could have been in direct blackmail, meaning Epstein passes it on to an intelligent service to, uh, you know, to a corporate espionage client or something. And they use that for their own purposes. But even then, I mean, imagine, for example, if, you know, like on the Bill Gates thing, like there was an e, you know, Bill Gates gets an email, I have a video of you sleeping with this person. And, you know, or somebody much lower level, the moment they send that to the press, if, you know, in order to, they figure they have nothing to lose. There's not been anybody in the seven years that's transpired who said I've been, I was personally blackmailed by Jeff Rips. I think, because the moment you do that, nobody comes to your parties anymore. No, but you lose all the access. You lose all the deal flow. You lose all the good will that you've generated because this rumor, people are very risk averse, especially at that level. Right. But just to have it over their head and never use it though. Right. Well, I think that what you could have is because he does his own nefarious stuff. He could compile it so that if they ever threaten him with something, he's now got something on them. And I've seen some correspondence that, you know, in the files that, that, that looks like that might not be an impossible scenario. Do you think that's how Jeffrey Epstein got in that position in the first place that they knew he had this kink? No, not at all. I mean, Anna Koshogi had the same thing. Anna Koshogi was run around with dozens of young and apparently underage girls. The whole time, I think that Jeffrey Epstein probably learned, you know, how powerful that can be through, through that network. Seeing that, that's what powerful people do, that gives them something that gets them a lot of local influence and gets wins them a lot of favor. That's a very specific illicit desire to want underage people. Well, I'm very, how do you even find out that someone's into that? Well, I don't think that the majority or anything close to it of the women were technically. I mean, I think it was largely, you know, very young, you know, barely legal, so to speak. And I know that there were cases of underage, but I think most of it was just very, very young, but not not like 20 year old, not like 13 year old type thing. And then yeah, remember, because this is an international enterprise and many of the clients are like, you know, in countries that don't necessarily have the same norms about that that we do, you can very easily see someone getting involved in that just because girls juice deals. And so I don't think that Epstein, I've not seen evidence, and in my view, you don't need any of that to understand the core part of the Epstein story that is relevancy to your life today in terms of your own government and the workings of power and corporate finance and the like. But I do think that girls juice deals and the fact that he had the coolest parties on a private island with the hottest girls. And so they've got a lot of intellectuals, stimulating conversation, scientists, all these very interesting people. So that was part of the thing. Right. That was the draw. Try hosting a cool party as a guy with that with a bad ratio, so to speak. So I was with a party with a sausage party. And when you develop a reputation for having attractive women at the parties you host, you become an important person to know in the network because basically every male has that has a desire for attractive women not saying under age, obviously. But that is like a universal biological desire for men to be want to be around attractive women. And what did they do for gay guys? I have no idea. Is that a part of the file or the the lore? I've not seen evidence of it. I or if I have, I can't recall it offhand. But again, to point is he's throwing these very attractive cool parties to get all these people together. But that's what juice is deals. Right. If you take this scenario, Epstein's running a fund, a donor, a colleague, someone that he'd like to do a favor for or an intelligence service says, hey, we're trying to get a pipeline built in the Middle East. We need a, you know, a facilitator to help arrange private outside funding for it. So this thing can be constructed. And it doesn't look like it's coming from the US government or just, but you know, we'll, uh, the US government will provide some sort of lone guarantee or something on it. But we can't raise enough money to do this. It needs to come from the outside. But it would really help American national security. And there's probably something in it for you if you can get this done. Epstein then goes out and says to, um, then puts out basically, uh, tries to make contact with people in his network who might be interested in that deal. And then goes and that, see, goes out to five people. Two of them are, uh, you know, in the space locally, the, the deal terms look good. They want to do it 100%, no hesitation. Um, and then two people say, well, listen, it's a good idea in concept. But I don't know the risk profile on it looks a little high. This normally is not, would not be something that my team would clear. We, uh, you know, it's interesting, but you know, I, it's just, it's a little rich from my blood in terms of the risk profile. But Jeffrey Epstein asked them to do it. And Jeffrey Epstein, you know, for the past three years of their lives has been the best weekend they've ever had has, uh, you know, was made them feel alive again in their, you know, mid 50s or 60s, has, uh, you know, has opened all sorts of other deals for you know, for them. And this deal might work out. So, uh, if I, I'm afraid that if I say no to Jeffrey Epstein on this deal, I'm not going to get an invite to the next party. I'm not going to be able to get laid again with like, you know, a girl that I, with, you know, women I find attractive or that, you know, yada, yada. And Epstein hopes those up. Uh, I will do, I'll get in on this deal just because I want to be in the good races of Jeffrey Epstein, not, you know, because this, the deal as a standalone thing, it's because it's juiced by the girls, the parties, the lifestyle that Epstein allows you to have access to. But in the public, the narrative is underage girls. And this is the thing that makes it so disgusting when people talk about it, everyone says fuck kids on the island. This is the, this is the, the, the big conspiracy about it. And this is the reason why people are so outraged about it. My concern with the runaway train on that is that, um, it's a massive manhunt for something that it may be true. To me, it's, it's an, needle in the haystack. It might be true. Good luck looking for it. And when, when I, when I think about it logically with the role that Epstein played between BCCI, Iran, Contra, uh, Latin American politics, African politics, Asian politics, major, you know, world foundations on, you don't need, it would seem ludicrous to me that Epstein doesn't mean it's impossible. But logistically, if Epstein ever directly threatened someone, um, proactively, that is if the person tries to blackmail Epstein, Epstein could, you know, reactively say, well, I've got, I've got shit on you too. But proactively and really, really do someone in like that. And word gets around, that that happens. Everything, everything he built goes at the whole rolladex finds out. And then even if the rumor's not, even if that rumor isn't, even, even if he didn't, if that rumor existed, people aren't going to want to go to the parties because, uh, now that's not like an unfettered good time. That is like, oh, he did this to this guy. I know. Right. And, uh, so in the fact that, you know, these sorts of things, they have a value that, well, way beyond blackmail, they have, they have a value in terms of bringing people in network and keeping clients and customers happy and providing access. And I think, I think that the, the focus on that, listen, if there were, if there were any sort of receipts whatsoever on that, after all these years, if there was like something really good to chew on, on that, on that thread, I'm, I'm, I'm very, I'm open-minded about it. But my concern is the fixation on this. If you think about the sort of pie chart of what the Epstein-Cinemac Universe can tell you about the world, even if it's true, it's a very, very, very small fraction of that. And this gets back to, in 1999, I mentioned, Jeffrey Epstein, Foyard, the Central Intelligence Agency in 1999, for all records about himself. And then he did it again in 2011. Now, Jeffrey Epstein was not a public figure at all in 1999. He didn't come into public awareness, public attention until 2001, 2002, when he started flying Jeffrey Epstein was not a public figure at all in 1999. He didn't come into public awareness, public attention until 2001, 2002, when he flew Bill Clinton around post-presidency, Bill Clinton around, on his Africa tour around the time of the Clinton Foundation, and everyone was wondering, who's this eccentric billionaire who is personally flying around on his private jet, the president of the age for the past eight years. And that's when the Jeffrey Epstein celebrity story started, but he was a private figure in 1999 when he foiled the Central Intelligence Agency for records. And we just learned this in the files this week. The response, we don't actually have the underlying what's in the files is a 2011 FOIA response to Jeffrey Epstein's lawyer. Jeffrey Epstein did this through his lawyer using the Privacy Act. This is a way to basically kind of anonymously FOIA the CIA to basically keep communications between the CIA and your lawyer for information you're entitled to under the Privacy Act about yourself. And we don't have the underlying letter in the files, tragically, and for whatever reason. But what we do have, because I would expect that to be an enclosure to the CIA response. But the fact is, is anybody who wants to be a hero right now, and I have it up on my ex-account, I have in the thread that I did on this, the reference, the file reference numbers. These are not classified documents. FOIA responses are not classified. So anybody right now can FOIA the Central Intelligence Agency for all records and communications related to the CIA's written communications with Jeffrey Epstein via his lawyer, both in 1999-2011. But the 2011, what it says is, we have received your request for your client Jeffrey Epstein's records search under the Three Women Information Act. We've granted the request to search for all open and acknowledged agency affiliations between Jeffrey Epstein and the CIA. We have run that search and the answer is no documents are responsive to the request. And that says in the next paragraph, with respect to your request that touches on classified, classified documents, we can neither confirm nor deny the existence or non-existence of any such documents, so you can consider this a partial denial of your FOIA request. Now what's so interesting about that is you may think if you read that Jeffrey Epstein just requested any public facing links between him and the CIA, or just a general, what do you have on me that the public can search? Just to see, first of all, the fact they did that alone twice in 1999-2011 says something. You might think, okay, well, he just wants to know if other people might think that he's CIA. He's moving up in the world in 1990s about to be a mass of public figure. He wants to know if other people FOIA, the CIA, for records on him, what they will see. And but that turns out that response to a FOIA, partial granting of the FOIA to look for open and acknowledged agency links and partial glowmar can neither confirm nor deny existence, non-existence. He's a stock CIA FOIA response whenever you FOIA the CIA for someone's personnel files, which leads to the question because the fact that the CIA says we are, consider this a denial of your request for classified, for things that touch on classified matters means that he asked, he didn't just ask for all open and in acknowledged links between the CIA and himself. He asked for something and whatever that thing was, it touched on something classified. There would have been no glowmar if there would have been nothing to deny about the request if it had only been limited to open and acknowledged links. To me, this is a bombshell and should prompt Rokana and Thomas Massie in the 427 members of the House of Representatives and 100% of the U.S. Senate to pass at the same bill that the United States Congress did in 1992 for all for the JFK Records Collection Act when the CIA was forced by law to stand up an independent auditing body to review all classified records relating to the JFK assassination for the first time ever and then declassify them over months and years through the work of that independent board. The existence of this correspondence we just learned about this week alone should prompt a 421 and 100% Senate to do the same thing they just did with the OJ files for CIA originated files. That's actionable immediately. Who's going to want to be on the other side of that in Congress? No, the CIA's records about Jeffrey Epstein, prolific child sex trap, whatever you want, whatever you see in the Roshok inkplot test of the Epstein universe. I think it would be very hard to be if that bill gets introduced for a sitting member of Congress to be on the other side of it. I think it would pass and it would legally compel the CIA to turn over what I think are quite possibly arguably very likely 40 years of CIA documents referencing Epstein. The CIA would not be doing its job if it didn't have records about Jeffrey Epstein. Jeffrey Epstein was a counter intelligence threat with all the foreign countries that he was dealing with if he had been a double agent sort of thing. The CIA would not be doing its job if it was not keeping tap. Epstein's network was a key financial logistics hubs in highly geopolitical sensitive areas of operation of the CIA. The economics division of the CIA let alone the operations division is going to have to keep analysts informed about money flows in those countries. When you add in the fact that he represented on on Kishogi's money who was the CIA's main point person for 10 years, the literal central lynch pin and his money is being had, there's no way. You now have a legal mechanism to enforce CIA declassification. If Congress forces it now the other part of it is, okay, why is it the CIA turned this over before? You could argue it's a real anti-master case. It would embarrass the agency. It would mean in Congress their funding is going to get decimated because their toxic. You can argue it's foreign governments that don't want the, but part of it is the CIA is not allowed to do this unless the Congress forces them. These are classified documents. I mean, it could, you know, charitably volunteer to ODNI by conducting, you know, an internal task force that voluntarily, you know, ass, Tulsi-gabbard to declassify these. I wouldn't hold your breath on that. But this is immediately actionable and it would solve the mystery. All we need is one brave member of Congress to get the ball rolling and stand up that bill. And you can just copy paste the 1992 JFK Records Collection Act and just substitute JFK for Jeffrey Epstein. What's your take on the circumstances around his death? I don't know. I, it's weird that they took a guy who is one of those high-profile defendants ever and you put him in jail with a mass murder. Yeah. Kind of crazy. You put him in jail with a cop who had killed drug dealers, a juice dump gigantic cop. Yeah. Who was obviously a psychopath. And then 18 days before he died, he complained that that guy tried to kill him. Yeah. Uh, I mean, it, it doesn't look good. It's just crazy that this guy wasn't in protective custody. It's crazy that the cameras go down. It's crazy that the footage that they released is weird because it's missing. It's missing time. And it's crazy that it happened under the watch of an attorney general who himself was so deeply embedded in the Epstein network his whole life. I mean, from the weird kind of coincidence of Bill Barr's father, Donald Barr and Jeffrey Epstein's Dalton school to the fact that Bill Barr started his career in the CIA during the Iran Contra operation that Jeffrey Epstein was, here's still been doing the covert money laundering for it. And Jeffrey at the Bill Barr was like seven years. He went to the night law school trying to be a lawyer while he was at the CIA. And then his, you know, main job was being the CIA's blocker and tackler to obstruct. He was the, he was the CIA's point of contact to Congress during the Iran Contra scandal that Jeffrey Epstein was so deeply involved in. And was blamed in the press at the time for being the person at CIA blocking Congress from seeing the CIA's scant documents that were so central to the scandal. Then he becomes the attorney general of the United States and he writes the pardons of the BCCI officials who was co-leading that investigation Robert Mueller at the time. This is the early 1990s the first time Bill Barr. So you have the BCCI Bear Stearns multi-billion dollar operation that appears to me that Jeffrey Epstein was working on and then got, took the clients from that deal as his own personal clients when he went private on his own. And Bill Barr is who lets the people from the crooked CIA bank off the hook. And then he becomes attorney general again, you know, and in 2019 it's he's the one in charge of the FBI. The FBI answers to the Justice Department. The FBI is the same relationship with justice that the CIA has with state. They're the investigative arm of the Justice Department. So you know, I think if he, I think it's hard to trust anyone on this. And I don't know, you know, what kind of file set the Trump FBI inherited after all this time. It's hard to make heads or tails of it. To me, I think getting answers on the things that are immediately actionable. Getting the CIA's direct correspondence with Jeffrey Epstein, you know, that I mentioned, a congressional bill that forces that because if it comes out that there are effectively in an entire avalanche of classified Epstein files dating back 40 years. And then you've got the CIA attorney, it puts these things in a very different light depending on whether the thing that is generated so much smoke this whole time, the allegation of protection by US government intelligence and however many others to know that on physical paper, like we know that the CIA interfered in the Orlando Mass for a trial, like we know that the CIA contracted out to Mafia hitmen and attempt to kill a foreign president, like we know that MKL-TRO actually was real. I mean, these things, you can't scale, you know, I think if things like a, like a jangitower, if a foundational piece is not solid, you can scale a whole architecture of BS on top of it. And if that assumption falls away, this majestic looking, you know, tapestry of just years and years of effort collapses because the thing you assume to be true because it looked like there was so much smoke to know it to be true that that is a solid piece that you can put the next piece on top of, you know, it's, there's that quote, 99% is a bitch, 100% is a breeze. What does that mean? It means when you're only 99% sure of something, you always have to agonize. Well, what if it's not true and it, and I think it is and I build all this stuff on top of it, the 1% chance that that's not true means it would be a real bitch for this, me to spend years of effort on this thing for me to spend thousands, you know, millions of dollars, you know, on this thing when it's based on assumption that was only 99% likely to be true, but 1% it may have been structured some way different. There might be something I missed in this. Whereas 100% is a breeze. Okay. It's automatic. You can end things like this is why document drops like this are so vital, not even necessarily because they have some single smoking gun that tells you who killed JFK or, you know, what client Jeffrey Epstein, trafficked women to, but because it allows you to put down real genger pieces about what actually happened and that process itself allows you to ask the questions that might get you to those answers. That makes law sense. Is there anything else you want to add to this? I mean, we can kind of go on for days. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, you spend so much time on this stuff. How do you have that kind of an attention span? It's kind of nuts. I mean, I follow some of your live streams. I'm like, first of all, your recall is insane. You know, I heard something once, which I think is really helpful. I don't think I'm special in any way like this. I think literally anyone can do this if you just kind of apply this kind of trick. I heard this once, it which is that if you read a history book, don't just read it agnostically, have a theory in mind about what you think this is and how it worked. Even if you are wrong about that theory, what you will find is that names, dates, locations, your brain will remember them forever because they're not, you know, if I'm thinking about something that happened in, you know, I don't know, like November 11, 1983. Okay. If I see like that date on a driver's license card or something and I have no theory of mind when I see that, I'm not going to remember that five minutes from then. It's something like remembering, trying to remember a 11 string, you know, number or like someone's cell phone or something when you don't really know the person or you've never, you know, you haven't dialed in a million times. But if you have a theory of mind that you are indexing those things in relation to what you find is that your brain keeps those in that index. So like I've joked like because we've talked about this Iran-Contra affair, which was really the creation of this apparatus that we live under today where because the CI got handcuffs put on it, everything had to become CIA to get around those handcuffs. The universities had to be the foundations, the private philanthropic donors, you know, and this is what happened in the censorship industrial complex. It was all wrapped around this. But what you find is like those dates mean something to you because they're placed in relation to something else that happens. You know, I joke that like I index things by, you know, Iran-Contra often, like for example, if there's, when I was, you know, studying about BCCI and I learned, okay, this happened in 1984, I don't just think about 1984 as an abstract thing. I think, okay, well, that means it happened after the meeting between Robert McFarland and Anand Kashoggi, but before the oil pipeline scandal of edames. And then so I remember that this thing happened on this date because I placed it into that index and anyone, I think it's a, I think it's something that anyone, you know, I think people organically do it when they're really passionate about something. And, you know, this is an easy thing to be passionate about because it gets to the heart of networks that are the determining power structures of your life. When you look up and then you look up at the thing that you're looking at that and you look up at the thing, you know, above that, this is the network you say, whether it's an intelligence, military, statecraft, high finance, private philanthropies, universities, labor unions, scientific research, it doesn't mean it's, you know, the Epstein network so to speak, but it's this, this layer of interconnected human networks. And I think it's an important history for the American people to have access to so that they can make informed decisions about how they want to change that world, how they can make informed decisions about what to vote for, they can make informed decisions about what kind of, you know, industries that they're participating in that they might want to see reformed. And it's, so it makes it easy to be passionate about because if we can, if we can get a win here, it'll really change the world. Well, I think you do a great service and I think your abilities are exceptional. I think you're selling yourself short a little bit. You're being a little self deprecating because it's very unusual what you're able to do. And I think the just a sheer amount of time that you've invested in this stuff is kind of mind-boggling. Well, what would you like to see in this? Like if you had a wish list, what are the things that are open threads or? Well, the real concern with me is that it's unfixable and that this is just a standard way that our government has operated since the 1950s or whenever and it can't be fixed and that they'll just gloss over it. A new person will get into office and promise that they're going to implement some reform and it never happens and that we just accept that over and over and over again. That's the real fear. The real fear is that there's a slow capture of our democracy to the point where it's just a mere illusion. That's the real fear and I think a lot of people think that we've already passed the point of no return on that. That's what scares the shit out of a lot of people. And then when you see things that are happening in other countries, particularly England, which is just rampant crackdown on free speech and what the arrests from people that are posting things on social media sites and the implementations of there's a new thing that they tried to do or I think they are doing this concept of having a limited amount of times you can drive outside of a zone and after that you have to pay for it. That's a new thing, right? Yeah. I can send these to you, James, because I just sent it to Constantine because it appears to be real and it's terrifying. Your carbon budget. Yeah, that's nuts. Well, look at what California is doing right now. And California is doing is they are taking or they're moving forward with this. The idea that you have a tax on the amount of miles that you drive now. So instead of just taxing gas like they've always done, now they're taxing you on the amount of miles that you drive. We're already getting tax on that. If you're driving more miles you're spending more money on gas. So you're spending more money on tax. Now they're taxing on top of that, which is essentially they're stealing money. Yeah. Why can't I find it forward here? Here you go. It's like Jamie, you're on signal, right? It is really interesting how that whole thing is starting out. The whole put, but it's crazy that the California thing is bananas. It just says, wow. That's it. Oh, it doesn't have the link. Okay. Hold on. Oh, maybe this is it. Hold on. Sorry. I think there's a really interesting underdeveloped history around the origins of the climate 2006, 2005, 2006, 2007 really global warming climate kind of policy push from the US government that became a runaway train as investor money rushed in. It's my opinion and I'm open minded about it, but it appears to be the case in my view after a study of this that the US government together with foreign allies pursued this kind of demonization of carbon at a real policy level or hydrocarbon based fuels as a kind of geopolitical battering ram against newly resurgent Russia in the mid 2000s as Putin was getting power back over a bunch of post Soviet Eastern satellite countries through basically pipeline exploiting his leverage around pipelines and the fact that you have this is like the John McCain type quote, right? Russia is a gas station with a military right here that a lot. You know, gas problem, the state sponsored oil company was like effectively the biggest oil company in gas problem was for gas, but it was Ross NAFTA. Roy Russia had at one point the largest oil exports in the world. It was the motor engine of their economy oil and gas and the the relationship between Russian oligarchs and businessmen and Eastern European Russian oligarchs and businessmen allowed that hydrocarbon based dependency and financial opportunity to let Putin reassert Russian control over central and Eastern European countries that that NATO was trying to you know, turn into you know Western vassal states essentially see had this in the 1990s. This wasn't an issue because Boris Yeltsin was the president and he was effectively an adjunct of the US government incidentally through Larry Summers and the Jeffrey Epstein Harvard network. So they became this push after Russia's interventions in Georgia and the like and a big attack on on a lot of you know high level Republican and well, well basically I think this push to try to create a shift in the types of energy. The world uses was a way to kneecap Russia's main source of revenue to ensure that the Eurasia that the plan to seize political or vassal state control over Eurasia would continue against Putin's new nationalist and global resurgence and some includes a bunch of crap that in 2004. But effectively then you start to see the US government champion these hydrocarbon policies and you started to see all of these international forums, journals, regulators openly talking in this mid-awats period as Russia was starting to reclaim political influence that these climate policies would be a way to stop Russian power and influence because it would cripple them economically. They'd have there'd be no business you know between oligarchs and the different countries for them to even leverage it would effectively allow us to continue the golden age of the uni party 1990s moment and then you saw all these government subsidies to it you know tax benefits like you know free money basically and then it became a runaway as the market saw that this was a highly protected incentivized space by the US government. They all flooded it or now they've got a sunk cost if those policies change you've got trillions of dollars in climate finance globally. And then these started becoming part of like IMF loan you know requirements and but now it's like even if the science is completely wrong what started arguably is a kind of you know national security based way to force energy diversification this is what we put Europe through the United States with the sanctions against Russia we force them to you know divest of oil the gas and invest in a basket of you know alternative energy clean energy supplies but now it's and they and that could be justified at the national security level with the science of this actually being the case so you could sell it to the whole world even if even if you prove that false at this point there's so much infrastructure built up that you know you have this network you have the hedge funds you know you got any Bill Gates has a climate fund Al Gore is a billionaire from from this on Tom Steyer one of the biggest investors in D.N.C. the climate impact fund Michael Bill's who funded the CIA Governor Virginia Abigail Spandbergler and and then the momentum of the it's sort of an unstoppable social narrative now right well and it's and the thing that's terrifying about it is that it has conjoined the diplomatic muscle of of the American government and whatever allies abroad with private finance like for example like we overthrew the governor Bangladesh in 2020 for the Biden administration did they ran this whole coup they did it through the national down for democracy CIA cut out and a million other orgs on the ground it was a color revolution street protest you know I think we may have talked about this last time where literally the CIA sock puppet National Down for Democracy sponsored like rap music videos and you know produce them and put them on YouTube and and then worked with the unions you know set up like transgender dance festivals to try to get the you know the LGBT community you know on board against the government and you know giant rides they install you know it's effectively a but part of the the thing that they they leaned on in the post-transition government is to you know agree to these you know basically basically like climate finance reforms and you can just like the CIA and the oil industry became completely inseparable completely inseparable I mean George Bush for example Zapada energy offshore and the whole Texas oil thing and you know to then becoming the central intelligence agency right I mean Trump's first sector state was Rex Tillerson Rex Tillerson never worked in government the secretary of state overseas the CIA he's got the whole CIA portfolio as you know well he was a chairman and CEO of ExxonMobil you can't the CIA and the US military creates the market for oil companies you can't get access to the oil unless you either overthrow a government or support against of insurgency political movement one that will guarantee you favorable terms you know access to the oil unless you either overthrow a government or support against of insurgency political movement one that will guarantee you favorable terms uh... you know access yachtya the whole market and then the c-i-a and d-o-d people will rotate a board seats on those oil companies and so it becomes inseparable in my fear about this is that over the past ten years the same thing started to happen with the client that the sort of you know clean energy side of the uh... you know uh... of big energy companies like in big oil and see it big oil and c-i-a for a century now you have like big climate and c-i-a because there's so much money it's energy is the master resource and so now you've got it you know what appears to me c-i-a intervention in part some of these things you have to wonder why did the bine c-i-a try to overthrow the bull sennaro government in brazil this was a pro u-s political party it was a uh... the the person you know lula was tied at the hip with china digested from all these u-s contracts you know massively reduced the you know the footprint of u-s aligned policies in second biggest country country in our hemisphere and well you know brazil just announced like this one point three trillion dollar climate finance initiative and you know all of these people are all these new york hedge funds and london banks who've skated towards this are are in on that you have and this is a crazy case you know one of the biggest beneficiaries of the post-cougar blue-low government in brazil uh... were all of the clean ethanol george sores is the longest standing equity investment at that point was country company called add a coagra which did a clean ethanol uh... fuel uh... alternatives the problem is is this is you know part of its business part of it is not competitive on price with you know diesel based fuels so the only way to you know compete and win that market make millions of dollars is if the government imposes mandate a quota that forces people to buy your product well towards sores co-sponsored those ci a jason national democracy operations all over brazil well he's you know holding an equity interest in the thing that day one there's an imposed mandate to use those clinton those climate products it's the same thing in africa you have like ci regime change to force clean energy companies so that the people who sponsor the donors who sponsored the politicians who picked the staff of the ci a in acts policies that makes money for those hedge funds invested in in climate finance so fucked up i think that's what's happening in california without the regime change element i think it the kind of you know i think you have investors who profit from this in the only way those investments can be profitable is if government imposes mandates quotas and bands on the on the alternatives that product and that's kind of the way the vaccine market works to that link yet to play they just that up there little fifteen minutes city and they are now charging people for leaving the city you get a hundred free days they call to free day you get a free pass to leave the fifteen minutes and if you exceed your hundred free days you have to pay the u.s dollar equivalent of ninety three dollars per day and if you live outside of the fifteen minutes city and you want to travel into the fifteen minutes city you get twenty five free passes free move all their the government's giving you free movement capability you get twenty five free passes and if you exceed those twenty five days it's ninety three dollars a day and how are they tracking all this all there's not a man at the gate they're not writing up tickets or having police officers that'll know they are monitoring you with digital a i surveillance and cameras and then they're automatically finding you this is why we have to be against the flaunt cameras and united states they're not just speed trap cameras this is why we have to be against the palance here whole government database this is why we have to stand up and raise awareness and bring attention to these matters instead of arguing with each other and npc's on the internet over left versus right issues are my side your side they're keeping us artificially divided because they're setting up this infrastructure in the united states right now divide and conquer we're in the division part of the divide and conquer agenda conquer is next you think it's bad now we see you have to pay hundred dollars a day to leave your fifteen minute city and seriously so only rich people are going to be able to afford that's just like the meat thing rights like you know the irony of australia being a prison colony and now you've got to now it's like the homeland in the uk but i mean look the the uk just got rid of like jury trials for a lot of cases and uh... you know as twelve thousand speech arrest a year and some people arrested for what seems like even holding up their own countries flag at an opt-in moment or silently prank and uh... you know we we need to liberate the British people i mean it's it's it's unbelievable that i mean they call it a profidious albion right British statecraft has been so pernicious to the american people in the past decade it was russia gate the the entire three years special prosecutor saga was because of a British by christopher's deal and and uh... in iran contra veteran steffen hanelper residing abroad at camberage to kick that off and then the British government conspired with the bine administration to create uh... to to can join the u.s. uk censorship industrial complex uh... america first legal steffen miller and jean hamilton's non-profit law firm they started obtained these incredible documents uh... showed up a planning meeting between the British government and the bine administration attended by the c.i.a. the national security council us a i.d. hosted the white house and it was the British the u.k. digital commission they brought a huge slide deck of all the ways that their new censorship law what's today called the online service online safety act the o.s.a would effectively help throttle misinformation in the united states like basically it was like you scratch your back our back will scratch yours and it was this u.s. democrat party u.k. labor party alliance meanwhile the bine government was paying British sensors the global disinformation index which killed like the ad you know revenue for like they went after daily wire federalist a million conservative new sites and social media accounts you know went after the social media platforms in the united states they're British black ops by their own language that the uh... world c c d a choose but they were funded by our government to censor our voices but laundered out to the u.k and i think we need to fundamentally uh... restructure that special relationship we've had that relationship for a long time totally unquestioned uh... i we can't farm that out weekend if if that's not if that's not addressed and we don't fix that relationship uh... i think you can't really fix our own system unless we cut out some of the poison that we inject from the outside might we give people a lot to go or almost too much but you uh... if anybody wants more uh... your ex count is amazing uh... your your tireless i don't know how you do it but uh... thank you for doing it uh... i really appreciate you and appreciate coming on here uh... thanks so much for having me nothing but fun from here i mean look it's fun i mean uh... guys or the world is opening up and we are seeing behind a looking glass where there has been a veil of secrecy for sixty years about some of these things for ten years about some of these things so don't get too black pill this is something has happened that has never happened before and you are alive to experience it so you know try to enjoy the ride