Go run by the Joe Rogan experience Join my day Joe Rogan podcast by night all day What's happening? How much good to see you again man good as you two Joe thanks for you, buddy Oh my pleasure. Thanks for coming on here, man I really enjoy your videos yet. You're um your website your channel rather on YouTube de-dunking is It's it's really great because it's so obvious like it's one of those things where you don't need Like some big crazy set or high production values to make something interesting is just you with a bookshelf behind you Talking about stuff and it's great. Well, thanks. I appreciate that Joe. Yeah, I'm very passionate about this stuff So it's I'm glad that people are taking notice and that I'm sitting here talking to you right now, but it's crazy to me Well, you were one of the you like me We're one of the early readers of fingerprints of the gods and that's sort of how you got into this whole subject, right? Yes I actually had that one pre-ordered from Hastings because I've read the sign in the seal and So I was already like Graham Hancock's pretty cool. I like the way he's coming at these things and I Saw that there was a thing at Hastings a sort of pre-order finger prints of the gods for like 25 bucks or something You got like three dollars off and so I did and was reading it covered to cover when I had great I'm signing it and him and something both were just looking at how beat the hell it is, right? It's been in the construction truck where we're going job sites for like 20 years, but that's awesome So the sign in the seal was that about Ethiopia and the dark of the covenant. Yeah, what's your take on? It's interesting at any time they won't let you see the evidence I get like all of my alarm bills go off right But I understand why they wouldn't want you to see it if it really is the art I'd like to see I guess the best thing we could do to test it without seeing the arc would be to look into the Diclaims that these guys go blind and they show signs of release explain to everybody what the claim that they believe that this one Church in Ethiopia actually possesses the arc of the covenant and that these priests that are supposedly guarding this They all exhibit signs of radiation poisoning Yes, they all just exhibit signs of radiation poisoning they go blind They die quickly and then somebody else and one priest at a time is allowed to be like the caretaker of the arc and how long do they live? They want to say like a couple years. Something like that. I can't remember really. It's been without very long. Yeah They die pretty quick imagine that job. Yeah, you get that call Yeah, like how much do I love Jesus? I love radiation poisoning. This is kind of fucking crazy. Yeah, and it's uh, but there's a lot of evidence in that book that was really interesting like the tonight's Templar statues and stuff and in old old Paris cathedrals that would led Graham to to Ethiopia just all kinds of weird stuff that made it really interesting little Indiana Jones man as it's like real-life kind of Indiana Jones shit And so I was just anxious for that fingerprints and I was something that has that much radiation that kills people so quickly Wouldn't that be something that you could measure from outside of the church? You would think that you would think that our boys would be all over that shit with the satellites It'd be like yeah, that's a spot to watch out Right, right, right because that was one of the speculations about the New Jersey drones Which was really weird was that there was a? Allegedly this is a part of speculation allegedly there was a warhead that was missing from when What was it from Ukraine? I think it was from like quite a while ago So there was a warhead that was not accounted for a nuclear warhead and The thought was that somehow or another it had gotten snuck into the United States and These drones had the capability to scan for gamma radiation And that they were looking for access access gamma radiation which would indicate that this thing was there That would make sense. I saw that on Twitter. I saw if you guys talking about it It would definitely make sense. It's weird that the drones just kind of stopped around Christmas time But not only do they stop but there was also this This I don't even I hesitate to even talk about this because it's so much of this is horseshit But there was a lot of speculation on Twitter that there was something that broke up in the atmosphere and that the Conspiracy was that this was a Chinese satellite that was controlling those drones and then the Trump administration recently said no, there are drones I mean Okay, why wouldn't you fucking tell us that there were our drones? You just flying a bunch of SUV-sized drones over New Jersey for weeks at a time. They had to be some reason. Yeah, what was going on and how you know I get You know, I get you can't tell us everything. I get it It was weird. Yeah, they do they just stopped at the Christmas time I was kind of worried about that because I went to see Mark Agnon in Brooklyn I just was there last week and I was like, man I hope I don't see a bunch of dang drones in the sky and stuff still But because I've had that book down for a couple of months Yeah, my friend Mark saw one Mark Norman. He saw one. He said it was huge really he said it was really big and it moved really fast And he said it had propellers, but it didn't sound like a regular like helicopter It was real weird. I saw a lot of videos of them and I saw a few guys talking about them that seemed somewhat credible on Twitter But I didn't see that like guys it had talked about being weapons developers and stuff like that, but Yeah, it's so easy nowadays. It just bullshit your way through things and there's money in it, right? You get clicks so it's like there's the days of it needing to be a government conspiracy in my mind Or will like way long gone. There's I can if I pretend I see bigfoot and I fake it good enough to get a bunch of to Joe Rogan well, man, I'm doing pretty fucking good. No, I know yeah, you can make some money exactly so as a real problem I'm really skeptical of like everybody. Yeah, it's like treat them all like crackheads I am too And I like that about your channel that you are quite skeptical about a lot of things Even things that the people that are you know heretics of the archaea or archaeological world They subscribe to and you're like yeah, and that's so fast. Which I think is great Well, thanks. I think it's very important But getting back to the Ethiopian thing if they we have this capability Supposedly to scan for gamma radiation from the sky. Why wouldn't someone fly over that church and go You know, there's a crazy hotspot here. You would think probably somebody has if not like Like I would say with the satellites and a lot of the the feds monitor that kind of shit like heavily So I mean if it's possible that it wouldn't be you know any kind of weapons-grady stuff So they might just not be looking for that particularly can they monitor for gamma radiation from satellites I'm sure I know that they can look for I know they can look for I'm not sure how they detect and not sure what they use to detect it But I know that they can look for radioactive material from space so the thought is that if this arc of the covenant is there and Whatever it is is somehow radioactive is there any sort of theory as to how they develop some sort of radioactive thing like what what is it supposed to be? I mean it's it's not a reactor It's something it's in a box right like what it what is it? Well This episode is brought to you by better help people like to throw around all these red flags You know things someone says or does that you don't like which is fine But instead of focusing on the negative all the time Why don't we focus on the positive if you're looking for a romantic partner? Think about what traits you like to see in a person if you like to work out in stain shape You might want to find someone who's also health conscious or if you like to travel you probably want to find someone who's just as adventurous Now once you're in a relationship It's a whole different ballgame and things aren't always going to be perfect But that's what therapy is for therapy is an excellent way to work through any problems even the small ones like say you and a love one I've been fighting a lot lately, but you still really want to make things work therapy can serve as a mediator It can help you identify the problem and teach you positive ways to address it if you're new to therapy or Want to try something different better help is a great place to start it's convenient and affordable since everything is done online It's already helped over five million people worldwide connect with a credentialed therapist Discover your relationship green flags with better help visit better help.com JRE to get 10% off your first month. That's better help H E L P dot com slash JRE The theory that a lot of people have is that it's a weapon that Like in the Bible is described like shooting lightning and things like that right and what Graham mentions in the book It's an interesting point is The Bible records Moses going up to Mount Sinai coming down with to 10 commandments Getting mad at the Israelites worshipping a golden calf and he breaks the 10 commandments and then goes back up the mountain and comes back down after another week or so with the 10 commandments again And Graham points out that this could be a memory of him going up and getting the wrong stone and then Smashes it goes back and finds the right stone that he's looking for that it had the proper You know uranium rich or whatever speculative radiation stuff so But inside of the box a popular theory is you know what you got metalwood metal like a transformer And so the popular theory is it's a way to generate electricity and it would also describe like the way that guys in the Bible Or if they if they touch it They have to carry it with sticks and if they touch it even to steady it they get killed and stuff But I honestly I don't see it being a transformer that wood metal or metalwood metal thing has to be stacked You're not just getting it with one layer like the Bible describes but It's an interesting thing when you say it has to be stacked you mean spaced in between each layer Yeah, like um if you've ever seen a doorbell transformer. No, okay Transformers at the bottom of it will have multiple plates It'll be like a plate of metal and then a plate of a silicone or something like that to that's conductive non conductive conductive non conductive And there'll be multiples of those and this is part of the electromagnetic Changing of the because what a transformer does it steps electricity up or down and swaps voltage for amperage basically um So the metal the metal plates are part of it so The idea is does that this thing would collect electricity inside the box and then you do your lights would use it to throw lightning at the enemies Now there's still a lot of speculation as to how the box would work but Moses was also said to after Going up and seeing God he was said to have had to recover his face with the cloth for the rest of his life Because it would shown and Graham speculated in that book that it might be because of your radiation sickness or something His face was covered in source for the rest of his life. Hmm. So it is interesting so if this thing Is radioactive like how would that conduct electricity? No idea it would probably be if it was It maybe it's the power source like we have radioactive batteries on satellites and shit right and They convert that radiation into electricity so it's possible I mean that's I'm you know, I'm not really too like big on the ancient height technology But I'm always willing to speculate and look at the angles on it and that's That's basically where they come from one of the guys that are really big into the yark Some guys even will will claim that it's a capacitor like full on capacitor which a capacitor stores and discharges electricity. It's why we were told not to When you don't touch the tube on your TV when we were kids right because it'll zap you the capacity Remember teams on TVs I watched a friend of my working on our cage machine once and one of the leads popped off of the thing And he was bald and it tapped into a top and he can lay it his ass right out. Wow straight to the ground. Oh shit Okay, wow, but anyway Yeah, that's what a capacitor is so Some guys believe like Billy Carson would say that the yark of the covenant would fit inside of the sarcophagus of the keens chamber Which it doesn't and that it's a Capacitor to power the pyramid So so it doesn't how do you know that it doesn't but the bible has the specifications for the size of the yark of the covenant And they're not the same as how different are they considerably Is it larger or smaller the arc is larger? Oh, it's larger than large. Oh really well done the inside of the sarcophagus Have you ever seen the one that Donald Trump has at Mar-a-Lago? No, he has a Recreation of the arc of the covenant at Mar-a-Lago. No shit. Yeah. Yeah, yeah It doesn't look bigger than the reason why I said it doesn't look bigger than the sarcophagus Maybe I need to look at it and I there's a possibility that I'm wrong there But I know I know that the measurements are off by enough that it was like this isn't just a little Mix and match. This is it's way off. I feel like we should have a recreation of the arc of the covenant here You probably should I probably should. No reason Jamie. Can you pull up that one? It was it visiting? the Mar-a-Lago It's pretty dope man. It's like Indiana Jones type dope nice. It's really cool It looks awesome But if that's real and these guys are just guarding it and dying of radiation poison like hey get some fucking better leadership What the world know? I mean if you really want people to believe in God in the Bible What better way than to say? Not only is the arc of the covenant real, but we have it here at this church in Ethiopia and we've been suffering for the past Exhundred years. I mean how many priests have died? I don't know. I have no idea. That would be a lot. That would be a good thing to know well, this would be that we just was supposed the arc was supposed to have been brought there by Sheba the queen of sheep is son mental leg. So in your talking it'll thousands of years, right? So Ethiopia has a lot of Here it goes. That's it. Oh damn place That's the one that was a trouble. Oh, that's not the one. No. No. It is it is the one. How well? Who knows right no one's seen it right? But that's what I mean That's what I meant The one that sat Mar-a-Lago there's photos of it at Mar-a-Lago This is the one that was at Mar-a-Lago See that looks like that would fit inside the sarcophagus doesn't it? Scroll up a little suck as you know. Yeah, maybe maybe I was wrong about that, but I do know for the handles I do know that the measurements are off Dressedically. It's not it's not just a denture to it's enough that you're not Sliding one. Can you show a photo of it at Mar-a-Lago? I know we pulled it up at one point time Because when these folks are standing around next to it. Yeah, they're far left. Yeah, see yeah see that looks like it would fit in there It does look like it would But yeah, if you look up the measurements, I wish I don't don't have them on the top of the head right But yeah, they're they are that the kings chamber if the the sarcophagus in the kings chamber and the Ark of the Covenant are Yeah, I mean I feel like we should send the greenberries into that church. Oh, yeah, they're right. Tell us the fuck Enough of this enough hiding you this is like if you have that That is That's something for the whole human race to know that's not something for you to hide that's not yours to to cove it It's wrong. No, but but if they've been hiding it forever and it's a religious Icon and it's and they are like they keepers of it or whatever and kind of make the sarcophagus isn't the kings chamber thing That's that that's crazy The kings chamber itself is so bananas the whole thing like why? What did you do? Why'd you do it this way? How did you have the resources? How'd you get those stones that are that big up so high? Well, man, there's so much there's so much about the pyramids in general that are just so hard to even like the Like I'd mentioned a little bit last time we talked the squaring now that is so It's like 756 feet long and there's like two to three inch variation on on at the most So you're you're talking like thousands of a percent on this massive Thing and then if you just stretch a rope from one into this table to the other and pulled it tight It's gonna sag a little you're 756 feet. You're not getting a two inch accurate measurement with a rope What the rope you have to use something different? Yeah, so what are you using? Yeah, exactly What are you using? How are you using it? How do you get two million three hundred thousand stones all placed within 20 years? The 20 year thing is not that throw that one out because that's that's that's that's the cynical side of things That's where they are we have to stick to what we know what we believe It's like the just a couple of barrels before that guy built three pyramids So you can't just say well this guys were only building them each generation for tombs It seems to me like it's a multi-generational project if that's if these guys were the ones that built them like like the history and say it seems to me like Every generation was working on three. I'm I break ground on my grandson's Getting my sons going and I'm finishing mine every generation was probably doing that because he's in front took a hundred years to build Man they're huge you'd the only explanation outside of that it was some lost technology. Yes That's the only explanation the problem with the lost technology thing is where's the tools like what would you use? There there is some evidence that there's some sophisticated cutting methods the corering The drills that indicate like a very high-speed drill which is interesting so it's not just as simple as You know getting some tube and slowly working its way through The way it's cut into some of the granite indicates that it was done at a high speed So the question is like how what what was the material? Where is it what happened to it and you like the the argument of course would be This is the kind of stuff that we get looted right away, right? If you write watch Mad Max and they're not running around picking up bottle caps or picking up the stuff you can use but On the flip side of that The you know the evidence You know if you look at any one of your videos or mind that are about the pyramid You're gonna have thousands of comments of people that are like here's my theory on the The pyramid and most of these are pretty mundane most of these are I think they might have used water to I see We kind of need to exhaust in my mind We kind of need to exhaust all that mundane shit that the people can throw at this problem before we release can start saying okay Now let's let's let's just step outside of history and speculate harder I mean I'm willing to entertain the things But if you really want to find out what happened in my mind you kind of have to be more more grounded with it That's all I look at it Well, I think if we're looking at a linear timeline between the technology that was available to people say 15,000 years ago and today then yeah, then you have to look at it in a more mundane way because Obviously they didn't have electricity then you're thinking obviously they didn't have Diamond tip cutting tools that were made out of like some super titanium or whatever the fuck the alloy was But if we're looking at lost technology and if we're looking at the possibility of you know when you get in the Graham Hancock stuff specifically the younger drives impact theory which I'm always fascinated by both the people that fully supported and the people that fully dismiss it Both of those things are interesting to me because you don't know just stop they just stop checking that you're whole So accurate right? Sure. We're all just guessing yeah, we're guessing but we're all looking at some really interesting stuff, right? We're looking at the iridium We're we're looking at the micro diamonds the nano diamonds. We're looking at the black man. Yeah Do you know about my friend John Reeves up in Alaska the the the bone yard in Alaska? John Reeves heat actually this he found this This was actually sawed this isn't that's an ancient mammoth bone The cut the piece that was cut out was how it was carbon dated and I forget what the carbon dated was it wasn't that extraordinary Hundreds of years. I think right was only hundreds of years, right? Or maybe a couple thousand I forget what it was but the fact that it was sawed at the top was very interesting Because they were trying to some of the bones they've dated to tens of thousands of years Including animals that they found that they found bones of that weren't even supposed to be in this area So he has a very small piece of we as an enormous piece of land but a small piece of it I think it's only about six acres where they're finding an enormous number of willy mammoth bones Short-faced bear All these different lions and all these different animals That some of them they didn't even think we're in Alaska 10 15,000 years ago and there's also a thick layer of dark carbon that indicates that like something happened like there was some sort of massive burn and The theory is that there was an enormous flood and that this was a basin where a lot of these animals that died got washed into and then covered So they have this wall that is essentially permafrost and they hose it down They do it all the time and then they see a mammoth tusk and then it's slowly work it their way out But he has where go to this go to his Instagram page John was about he's every year. He's our last guest but this year he got pneumonia. So we had a Delaymental recently, but this is all stuff that they find he's a gold miner So this is all stuff that they find On his property what started out incidentally and now they search for it, but That's John right there in the middle of the baseball hat on because they eat the big guy right there He's a giant human. I see so I mean you got to see him in real life. It's huge But this area that he has is extraordinary because he's got enormous see that's how they hose it all down So he's set up this multi-million dollar research facility out there. He's got huge warehouses store It thousands and thousands of these bones Wow, and it's just in a six acre area And then there's another additional area that's a similar size so that you can see one of the bones one of the tusks sticking out but he gave us that Step bison skull that's in the lobby. I don't know if you saw that. That's 10,000 years old. Wow Yeah, and so he's got a bunch of him. He pulls them out left and right see if you can find like some of the bins that he has He's got these enormous Like look look at all those mammoth tusks. Holy just stacks of them. Yeah a ton of them And they're all over the place. I mean his his property is Really really extraordinary Wow, but it's all his yeah, so he's like hey fuck off Yeah, I'm I'm just gonna dig this stuff up myself I don't want anybody coming in Wiring and bullshitting and controlling the area. It's on all on private land So I'm just gonna keep pulling this stuff out of there and hiring people to come in and do some research on it Yeah, there's all these bones. I found and then saying that's that's wild So the that's the theory the theory is that this was an area Where a lot of these animals that died probably instantaneously by the impact got washed into and okay I could see that I mean he does a lot of fucking bones You're only getting a tiny fraction of it if you actually see it See Jamie see if you could find one of the images of his warehouses like from like a there's some overhead views of the warehouses They're huge and they're just filled with bones And he pulls them out every day like whenever they want they go down the hose down the permafrost and because it's in the permafrost It's all preserved. Yeah Wow. I was just thinking it's permafrost has preserved real well. Yeah. Yeah, so these geez are just Yeah, but these are all storage bins. Yeah, they have filled with bones. I mean it's pretty extraordinary That is wild. Yeah, that's sad that he doesn't want to bring the scientists in but I can understand why it's you know The way that things are nowadays it's he doesn't trust them exactly a lot of people don't and he wanted to come on here to like Spread it out to the world one of the things that he found out was that they dumped the previous owners of his property before he owned it The what what what museum was it again Jamie? American National History Museum in New York City had acquired some of the bones They had so much of them that they dumped some of them in the East River now They denied it so he sent divers out to the exact spot in East River and they started pulling up step by some bones and all these different Like wow ancient ancient animal bones from this exact area where they said to look for it So it's pretty much been confirmed that it's true and they he does know that they have some of them still and they won't release them to him So until they release the bones to him that rightfully his he's like fuck off Yeah, you can't come here. I could understand that but his spot in my opinion is one of the best indicators that there was a Mass casualty event there was some sort of a huge catastrophe that took place that killed all of these animals Now we know that humans were all around back then the question was How sophisticated were they and this is where it all gets so weird? You know because I've been following this forever and ever and ever and I was following it long before they discovered go back ly-tappy and so the question was that the archaeologist would always the really arrogant archaeologist would always throw in the faces of these heretics they would say well if this is true Where's the evidence of this ancient civilization that was so sophisticated that can make massive stone structures? 10,000 years ago there is no evidence. Yep. Well now there is yeah So now they have to kind of look at it and go well, okay, we're wrong about that But we're still we know 2500 BC maximum that's how old the pyramids are they don't they don't It a lot of the scientists most of the scientists are actually scientists But the ones that we end up seeing are the ones that are invested in Creating a narrative they're the ones that they want to make sure that pseudo-archology and pseudo-science is always on its backfoot It never gets a fair day in court. Vla blah blah These guys they don't they don't give us any real Accurate interpretation of the data. They'll step way outside of their lane to tell you what's going on. It's I mean like flat devil I mean I feel like Well, you were the guy that broke down What he was inaccurate about when he was having that air quotes debate with Graham Hancock Well, yeah, it's all very unfortunate because what he does know is really interesting all its stuff about ancient seeds and stuff and how they they change over the time And you know how you can tell whether or see his domesticated versus whether it's feral. Yeah. Oh, yeah He's he's he's good at what he does As well, he's as far as that stuff goes, but like Like there was another there's a guy that's a trained anthropologist that made a couple of videos about him Sam urban from illegitimate scholar and he I think Graham mentioned him here before he's a he specialized in Underwater ship racks and he just blasted the stuff that Flint said not just the three million ship right He just blasted on a scientific level. This is wrong. This is wrong. This is wrong. This is wrong. This is wrong Yeah, he got way out of his lane with that. Yeah, and that's you know I That's I guess one of the biggest things here though I'll those guys right now are laughable You're an electrician Dan. You're outside of your lane every time you talk about this shit, but You're outside of your lane. I'm outside of my lane, but People getting beat up or cracking jokes. Yeah Well, only you would have a painting of you bust and shank jealous is that I didn't make that every time he posts that pictures like I had a great time on GRE I'm like, man, I seem not a that's a beautiful work of art Pretty very good thing Yeah, so we're all out of our lanes. Yeah with something every person who's an expert is out of their lanes with a lot of things But there's a difference and this is like what you alluded to a minute ago where it's like there's a difference between saying we know for a fact and we're not sure Yeah, and you know a common atheist argument you took like Richard Dawkins You'll say the minute the scientist says God did it There were not worth a fuck to me in the lab because they're not working anymore They're like I've got the answer. That's the same thing as the science has settled If you say the science is done, we know for a fact you're not saying that. Yeah, you're no longer worth the fuck to me in the Last science is not settled when you don't have all the information in the universe. Hey, we exactly had since we never will. Yeah Well, maybe we will It's a big weekend get in on the action of the big game and UFC 312 at draft king sportsbook the official sports betting partner of the UFC The men's middleweight and women's straw weight titles will be on the line in the co main events of UFC 312 and of course pro football is crowning a champion at the big game Just getting started pick a fighter or a team to win this weekend go to draft kings app and make your pick That's all there is to it and if you're new to draft kings Listen up new customers can bet five dollars to get two hundred dollars in bonus bets Instantly download the draft king sportsbook app now and use the code Rogan That's code Rogan for new customers to get two hundred dollars in bonus bets when you bet just five bucks It's a big weekend only on draft kings the crown is yours gambling problem call 1 800 gambler in New York call 877 8 open wire text Hope in Y 4 6 7 3 6 9 in Connecticut help is available for problem gambling call 888 7 8 9 7 7 7 7 or visit ccpg Dot org please play responsibly on behalf of boot hill casino when resorting in Connecticut help is available for problem gambling call 888-789-7777 or visit ccpg.org. Please play responsibly. On behalf of Budhill Casino and Resorting Kansas, 21 and over age and eligibility varies by jurisdiction. Void and Ontario. New customers only bonus bets expire 168 hours after issuance for additional terms and responsible gaming resources cdkng.co slash audio. Yeah, we won't, but maybe our future people will. Future sells. Yeah, I mean, what we're looking at is a mystery. And Egypt to me is one of the most phenomenal of all the mysteries, the one the most fascinating because whatever happened, however long ago those people in Africa did something that no one's been able to do since. Yeah, and they did it in a way that defies our understanding not just of what they could do back then, but of what people could ever do, including right now. Yeah. And there's a lot to be said like that you can't see about an ancient Egypt that's amazing like, you know, the Bronze Age collapse. You've heard of that right then in the sea peoples. Egypt was like the big power that survived like all these other big powers they were destroyed. They were crushed. They lost everything. Now Egypt got smaller, but it survived. It wasn't until the Greeks came along that there was, I mean, they've been conquered off and on, but it wasn't until the Greeks came along that they were truly subjugated. And that's thousands and thousands and thousands of years. And by the time the Greeks showed up, that shit was so old that you look on the Eusserian, they say that there's graffiti that's like the sacred geometry shit that was her medicine that was popular in Greece. So they're seeing her medicine stuff when the sacred geometry on it. And that's like, you know, thousands of years later, there's their minds are blown the same as their arts are today. Wow. And that's that's really fucked when you think about Alexander the Great going there in tripping balls. That's the same shit we do right. So that's crazy, man. One of my favorite quotes is that Cleopatra was born closer to the age of the iPhone than she was to the construction of the pyramids. Yes. And that's when you think about it that way, you're like, wait, what? What? For real? Like that's just the conventional dating of the age of the pyramid, which is much discussed in debate of very much. And probably should be. It really probably should be. You know, I know people want to point to carbon dating, but the problem with that is that we know that people resurface things and they do touch ups. In fact, they're doing touch ups right now ill advised in my opinion on the base of this finks where they've covered the feet. I think that's horrible. It's terrible. I should have air dropped this to Jamie also in two seconds. There's a image that I've got of that I was just sent to me that's pretty amazing. The there's a wall of one of the magazines in one of the pyramids that has a bunch of those vases in it. And this wall is like the collapsed and the magazine is the name for a room. Anyway, they reconstructed this room. They reconstructed the wall. And it's got a piece of one of those vases in the fucking wall. Like right in the rubble that makes up the wall. And I could not. I just, I should not even have it saved. I'm sorry. Let me grab it real. Sorry. I should have done this. You're one of those dudes use that tiny little phone. Look at that little thing. Is that the iPhone mini? Is that what it is? Or is that the SE here? Oh, yeah, the SE I think something like that. How long is the battery left with that 20 minutes? 14. 20 minutes is a is about 30 extra. My son actually, he wanted an iPhone so bad. I got him an iPhone, had it for two years. And he's like, can I please have an Android? I'm so tired of having to charge my phone twice a day. It's well, the new iPhones last forever. The new iPhones, well, I think the Samsung Galaxy S25 Ultra and the X24 Ultra have the longest battery life in comparison to the iPhone. Like, you know, they do those tests where they play like the Avengers and they'll play it like nonstop on a loop to see which battery dies out quicker. Oh, yeah, the Android's last longer. But it's not by much. Like you have to be a total psycho to go. I haven't I haven't enjoyed the Galaxy S24 Ultra and I have an iPhone. I've never had one of them run out of batteries. If you charge it in the morning, you have to be a total psycho to have it have no battery life at the end of the day. You should go to a doctor. Real phone addiction. The only time I ever had that problem recently was when I went to the I went to the Met Museum in New York and that was I burnt. I was blown away by the artifacts and stuff it ended up like basically burning my phone into the ground. It'll just take it pictures. Yeah, you got a dead battery son. Yeah. It's kind of amazing that batteries work at all, which one of the things I wanted to bring up to you is the Baghdad battery. Yeah. Do you think that's real? Is that was that what that was or is there some debate? Let's let's tell people what it what it is. It's a clay pot. There's a number of them. The clay vessels, they have a copper and lead inside of them. And the way that the cap is and stuff, you could potentially fill them with orange juice or something like that, a minor acid and get an electric charge from it. Now, it wouldn't be much of one, but you could do it. And that's someone's worth noting right there is that you can, this has been archaeologists have determined that, well, yeah, I mean, we don't like to admit it, but yes, these potentially could have been batteries. So like there is a guy that do a debunking on it that's an archopopular YouTuber and another archaeologist came around and then kind of slapped him around a little bit and he had to admit he's like, okay, yeah, I didn't do my research good. So this is the Baghdad battery. Yes. What is the conventional explanation for what these things are? The conventional explanation is that they're pots. They really don't have like a good solid debunking of it, like despite what it says there on the screen. But because of what, I mean, this is not speculative, right? Because of what the actual materials are, if you filled it with a minor acid, it would conduct electricity. Yes, it does work. Yeah, it wouldn't make a lot, but it would make a little, like how much is a little, like enough to power toothbrush? I don't think that much, but I know that the reports anyway was that a guy was able to make a very minor electroplating with it, and that would be the kind of thing that would most lack applications because other stuff requires serious. Right. So like plating things with gold and stuff like that. Interesting. So the real, the craziest theory of all for sure is the Christopher Don, the Christopher Don theory about the actual pyramid itself. He believes it's a massive power plant. And he believed that they were using some sort of chemicals and a certain frequency, like vibration to generate hydrogen with all the chambers and all. And you know, the way he describes it, it sounds very compelling because there's, I don't know what he's talking about. He might be making it all up, right? So the way he's saying it sounds so interesting. I've never heard anybody try to break down whether or not what he's saying makes sense though. Well, I like Chris. I get along with him well. I do. I talk to him on the phone probably a couple times a month. He's, and he knows that I disagree with him. The thing that right off the bat as an electrician, the first thing that, what stands out to me is the claim of getting pysoelectricity from the blocks, which pysoelectricity is the electricity you get from like a quartz crystal when you stress it. So like your watch or a charcoal igniter for a grill, right? You just, there's the igniter is just a piece of quartz that they pop it with a little spring and a stick when you pop it. And it's got a piece of metal on each side and wires and that harnesses the charge. That's the first thing is each one of the quartz crystals in those big limestone blocks would have to have a piece of metal around it. And wires coming off of it or some way of harnessing the electricity. There's tons of natural electricity happens all the time, right? Tons of it, but you have to harness it in order to do something with is this just our understanding of how to use electricity and could there potentially be something that we missed? Well, there's definitely stuff we don't know about electricity. I mean, we'll start there. There's clearly things we don't know about where we still have guys working on the shit all the time and they're making better and better semiconductors and whatnot all the time. But having said that, maybe, but at that point it's we're kind of like, my thinking on that is, if we're going to say this is a technological thing and here's the way we get there and then it's like, well, but we can't really do this. Well, couldn't it be something else? Well at that point, why say that this is why build a technological story from what we have, why not just make shit up? Also, it's like what came first the chicken or the egg? Because if you have the technology to turn that thing into a gigantic electrical generator, where did you get the technology to build it? What do you use if this is the first one if you figured and so that means you made more of these to make electricity or some or other form of power, you did something and that's what to me is so amazing about this that no one can really look at and go, oh, this is simple. No, no, even even if you just it's a tomb, it's a tomb alone, even those guys have to admit that it's not simple. But when you look at it from a potentially technological angle, I mean, there's a Chris, I put a lot of work into his theory. It's not it is intricate and he's a very intelligent person. Yeah, he is really he's so smart that when I talk to him, I feel like I feel like I'm talking a guy bit smarter than me, right? Yeah, he's intelligent. But I don't want to agree with you on some of these things and that's really I think that's one of the reasons he likes me is because I'll be chill about it just be like, yeah, you're fucking charlotte. Yeah, that's a really important point and that's one of the things that I really do enjoy about your videos. When you disagree about something, you're very cordial about it. I think that's important because you know, I've talked about this many times, but it's a real flaw with human beings. We attach ourselves to ideas and we defend those ideas as if we're defending our worth as people and it's stupid. And if you're wrong about something, it's just information. It should just be an idea. It shows far more about your flaws if you're willing to defend ideas that are clearly inaccurate. I couldn't agree with you more there that thanks for the compliment by the way, but yeah, I couldn't agree with you more there. It's a complete mess and especially when it's science. That's where it's where archeology really can piss me off because these guys, there's a lot of it that's just made up stuff, right? It's one thing to say, we know for a fact this was carbon dated to X and Blah. So that's the thing to say this looks like that. Therefore, it's this. That's the same, the guys say that about all kinds of shit, right? Oh, here's these stones look like pillows, ergo, they must be concrete. Well, it's like Jamie, could you show that stupid image what the anime face on it? I'm using this one to drive that point home that the paradolia is not just because it looks like something does not fucking mean the paradolia. Yeah, it's paradolias when you see see something in the clouds or whatever. Oh, okay. Just because something looks like something doesn't mean that this is a way to suss what a fucking ancient artifact is. Oh, this one is the image of the the eyes of the eyes of horrors. Is that what that is? Yeah. And then so there's a lot of weird speculation as to what that means, right? And some people people just think it means the pineal gland. Yeah, there's a lot of of of speculation about that agreed. But we by point is obviously we can't just assume that oh, well, because it looks like some anime girl, it's David H. knee, jips, of course. But that's one of the best ones is that the image of someone holding up something that either is a basket or looks like some sort of frequencies are emanating from some device. Yeah, that was interesting. Yeah, like maybe it's a basket. It doesn't look like a basket though. It looks looks like some you're trying to indicate something. Yeah, it does it does look like they're trying to at the very least. I say other ones with it is long phallus looking tubes that's that seem to be some sort of energy source or something. Well, a lot of a lot of them have that like pyramid shape on their on their crotch, right? Yeah, they're just like this big straight. And it's not it doesn't look phallic, but it mean it kind of implies it, but it almost like it's like a symbolism for something, right? Those long two ones, see if you could find those. How would you describe that? Like if he's going to search for it? Energy emanating from the day. Yeah, that's yes. This is one of the hardest things about this is trying to find bam, he found it. Oh, damn. Oh, then they're alike. That's yes, they're. Yeah. So like what the hell is that? That's yeah, they're they some people think it's that then that's an actual light bulb. That's a bomb to the left. Some people think that's a light bulb. Well, like what is that supposed to be? What the hell is that supposed to be? It looks like a serpent inside of it. Yeah, it's there. The mainstream thing is that it's like a symbol of life and like that's the I forget which plant that is, but what's that thing above? What are those little? That yeah, what the hell is that? Wow, it looks like writing of some sort, but I'm not sure what it says. That's one of the my main hopes for AI that AI will get so sophisticated that can start deciphering these things in a more meaningful way in a way where you could use, you know, these large language models, like if we get like some, you know, like they have the Rosetta stone, the Rosetta stone allowed them to decipher a lot of the ancient hieroglyphs. If they could get some sort of much more comprehensive analysis of what they were trying to say with this stuff. That would be nice. Yeah. If it's even possible, I mean, I'm just guessing. Well, it's in Derellite. It might be something that they can pull off. It's you know, AI is a tough one. You don't have to ask Elon. That's more his neck of the woods in mind. But so it's part of the reference is part of the Egyptian creation myth. Yes, the the water lily or the the lotus flower was it came out. Hmm. It's so weird. It is there, there are iconographies weird. That's one of the reasons I was taking so many pictures at the at the mat. It was just like there's just so many things just weird just fucking weird. You just look at it like this does not. It's so old. So old and so weird. It's like we don't even know what their language sounded like, which is also amazing. That is. It's like I just have all the places in the world where I could go back in time and observe, you know, just somehow undetected. You know, if you get a like a some sort of a sphere of time that could place you in a place where you wouldn't disturb anything, but you could observe. That's what I was like what was going on? Yeah, well, how they do that. What did it look like? What did their culture look like? What did the people look like when they were going about their daily tasks? You know, we used to think it was slaves that built the pyramid. Now they think no, they were skilled workers. Yeah. And they think that based on what their diet was and they were eating good food. And these these people were well taken care of that were involved in working around that area. So like, who were they? What was it? What was it all about? Yeah, that's one of the things that they when they say that it's not slaves that built it, that kind of makes me chuckle because yeah, we know that they had, you know, well fed people that worked there, but that doesn't necessarily mean that there were the only people that worked there. I mean, if you go, right, you know, on a jam that construction over here, you're going to have a guy that's eating it zit or eating it freaking Burger King or whatever. And you're going to have another guy who's eating a $300 lunch and they're going to be working the same job site. Right. But also, probably a lot of them didn't want to work there. They were forced to know which makes you slaves. If your place, slaves, well, they're still slaves. They kill them when they leave. They're slaves. It's like you have a job to do no matter what you want to do. Oh, you want to become a musician, fuck off. Push them rock. Push them rock. Push them more. You know what? That one is another. We're never going to stop being fascinated by the people of the past that we don't understand. And I think again, the best example that is Egypt. Yeah. And that's where like we were talking about how the archaeology and the archaeologists and pseudo guys will argue with each other so much about and it gets so bad blooded about it. It's like, I talked about this a little bit last time, but there's really, I see it as two distinct like halves of the human psyche at work in this and in this regard, you can almost see it the distinction in the way that scientists tend to be antisocial. They're they're not. And maybe I'm the antisocial might not be the right word, but they're just a little fucking weird man. They're the kind of guys that they dress weird. They talk weird. They act weird. They just come across fucking weird. You're talking about fun, definitely. I'm about all scientists in general. But yes, he would be one of them, but he's not the only one. Like John Hoops is a great example of this too. If you watch him in the way he carries himself, the way he talks, he's just fucking weird. And look at Einstein. Did you watch that guy? He carried himself fucking weird. Yeah. But my friend Chris Williamson has a very interesting take on that. I think it's very accurate. He said, if you expect regular people to get extraordinary results, you're being silly. You're going to get weird people to get weird results. That's exactly right. I agree with you. Now I more scientifically literate, I think that in most of the people that I know. So, and I kind of feel like like Shane Gillis jokes about being nicked by the down syndrome thing. I feel like I was nicked by that any social thing. I walk into a bar. And if I don't know anybody, my first instinct is just to go sit in the corner and watch. That's part of the problem with being intelligent. You're worried that you're going to get dragged into a dumbass conversation. But if you go stimulating, it's the opposite of stimulating. Oh, it's terrible. Yeah. But if you sit in the corner and watch, well, Daniel, look like the weird old guy creepier and from the fucking corner. So you just go sit at the bar and talk to people. But I'm aware that I can be a little off that way. But these guys, every now and again, one of them will show up. It's like Carl Sagan. Now this guy, he's just a regular Joe. He could talk to everybody and he happens to be a fucking great scientist. And you know, he got a lot of shit from his colleagues for that. He got a lot of shit from his colleagues for taking the time to talk to the peasants. But in the way he did, it wasn't abrasive. If somebody asked him about aliens, if they were like, man, you know, what do you think was the aliens were up to over on Alpha Centauri? What kind of technologies do you think they have? That's almost his initial response to be like, you know, you know, we think how the fuck am I supposed to do? But then he, well, you know, Alpha Centauri is about a billion years older than our star. And so if you were to assume that they were around for a billion years longer than us and had the same stuff. And so he would entertain them. And then he would do things he would interject a little bit of science when they would ask a question. He would answer it and make sure that there was a little science in that so that people that really didn't give a fuck about learning about the science. They just want to talk about UFOs. Yeah. Spoonful of sugar and the fucking medicine went down. You're walking out with some science in your head. Like it or not. Yeah, that's being a science educator, right? Which is very important and very rare to be good. That's very rare for them to be good. Yeah. The, um, have you seen the recent images that they got from Mars that big square? What the fuck is that? I, it's one of those things where I was talking to Jamie just before the show. It's a bad day to be a professional skeptic. I'm telling you what, if you've been making the last, you're living the last 20 years, poo-pooing all the aliens and UFO shit and whatnot, man. Oh man, is it a rough day for you? Because that same shit was LIDAR from the South American forest. You'd be like, yeah, it was probably a village there. It makes sense. This is even more clear than live. Yeah, I know. It's super rare. Yeah, Jamie pull photo of it up. This is super recent, right? Yeah, I've just a few days ago. Yeah, this, this found it recently. I think it's been online for a while. Oh, really? Yeah, yeah, that's why I was reading. Oh, so there's, there's a, there's a massive data that they scanned from the surface. And then someone just detected this recently. I think someone just found it on the website. It might be one of those things. It's like who is going to go by hand over each one of these images and I mean, you're dealing with the entire surface of a planet. That's, what is it like three cores of the size of Earth? I think it might even be a little smaller than that. I think it's a little larger, but I could be wrong. Well, so something smaller than Earth, but bigger than the moon, and you're going to go over the entire surface of it. A lot. Yeah, and this, I think they think the rough estimates of this square are between 300 kilometers, 300 meters and multiple kilometers. They don't know how big it is. You know, it's because it's like, it's hard to get a reference. Yeah. So I think the estimate is at the very smallest, it's several hundred meters across. So this thing, this square, it's really crazy because it's right angle, right angle, right angle, right angle. Yeah. And doesn't look to be very asymmetrical. This one says like they added that square. So you see it better. That's like superimposed on that one. Yeah. But this is the original image. Yeah. Just this alone. Yeah. Like what the fuck. I said, if you were to tell me that was a light art picture from South America, I'd be like, oh, yeah, it's just too convenient that it makes a square. It just seems so weird. It is. And then there's another image that goes along with this, it's even more bizarre. Maybe not even more bizarre. But it's like almost looks like a cone, like a cone structure that's emanating from the surface, like surrounded by a circle. Yeah. Have you seen that one? I've seen people talking about that one. Jamie. Yeah. It's, um, it's real weird stuff. And no one has like the face on Mars was real interesting. I got really into Richard Holglin and all his Sidonia stuff for a while. But he was making some very bizarre measurements. Like if you go one half of the distance between this and three quarters of the way between that's exact number that takes a like, what do you, but don't do that. How about don't do that? Don't do that. Don't just fucking arbitrarily look for some sort of, I did that in a video once kind of being a dick making fun of the idea that there's all this data encoded in the vases. I have no problem with the idea of the vases being like, you know, proof that these guys were, they're definitely fucking exacting in whatnot. But the idea that they've like hidden dad, is that the Sidonia face? I guess it's right by the square. What really? Wow. I guess right. Some of that saying. I don't know. Yeah. Oh my god. It says the giant square structure just a short hike from the legendary face on Mars. Holy shit. That's crazy. How do they miss that? They're cuts. Shoot on the face, which is like my BFA's my knob. To me, the original images. Yeah, look really wild. But then the images afterwards were like, Oh, no, it's just the weird light hitting it in a certain way. And you can find plenty of structures on earth that will do a similar thing. But I saw this too. Why is that? This weird shit. They're fine. Stick it out. Yeah. You find weird shit in nature. That that's not as compelling as the other one. There was something that looked like a cone. So the actual image when they got, what is that dirty stuff? Hardable to feel that you I just typed in Mark. Yeah. Time for a bathroom. Brink. It's not what it was. What's wrong with fireworks? And I just kind of wild a Twitter has like hardcore porn. Yeah. Now always has. Yeah. Very weird. I'm not complaining. Do whatever you want. I'm all for doing whatever you want. But this original tract of images, it's a long one. And if you scroll through it, one of them is some very bizarre looking cone-like structure. That's it. That's it. Oh, okay. Yeah. That is weird. Very weird. Like what's that? I mean, it could be just a mountain. But it looks like a zit. It does. It is. And the fact that it's so close to that other thing, that's what screw. The faces in there. They're all yeah. So it's all this one area that's been studied for a long time as being that there's a bunch of different things there that you can interpret as being some sort of a structure. Well, Jimmy was sharing that video in response to this, the Buzz Aldrin saying that there's like a monolith on the moon. Yeah. I hadn't seen that before. I mean, I'd embarrassingly hadn't. I've always been a little out of the UFO side of things. I've always watched it, but always, you know, just a little bit. I'm usually looking at peer images. Wouldn't you like to feed Buzz Aldrin some mushrooms and say, tell me what you know? Dude. Tell me what you really know. I like what you know. Did you really go? I like to clip when he punches that fucking dude. It causes. Yeah. Wow. Yeah. That guy. You're a lot. Yeah. Needs to work on his punch. Yeah. A clean shot and didn't do anything. A zero gravity training. It's bones of deteriorated. It's been spaced for so long. That is a wild thing that doesn't happen to them. It takes forever for your body to get back to normal. Yeah. It's when you're crazy. Wow. It's crazy to think that like that stress is needed. Like you, you don't have those kinds of stresses in your life that like your body just yeah, which fucks up the whole Superman myth. The Superman came over here. His body would deteriorate. Yeah. After a while, you'd be just like us poor guy. Right? Wouldn't work. We can't just fly. But obviously cartoons. No x-ray comic books. Yeah. All those things. The ability to go so fast. You could spend time backwards memory. I think I have to say it was lame. Water goes up to hill. Yeah. If you could somehow or another make sense out of the possibility that a civilization existed on Mars and was wiped out millions and millions of years ago, that would change the way we think about everything. And I feel like that square is one step closer to like really needing a comprehensive analysis of what's there. Yeah. Because before it was just like, oh, it's a lifeless planet. But at one time it had an atmosphere. Interesting. Oh, they found frozen water. Oh, interesting. Well, they actually found liquid water now. Yeah. More interesting. Now they found a big square. Okay. What's that? Yeah. That one to me is the what's that? And this is where it by mind the this is where the that skeptics versus dreamers thing. It's really fucked because the answer should be the same for everybody. Let's just next expedition. Let's poke her out a little up there. Right? Yeah. Let's let's find out the evidence. But the answer is always from one side. It's definitely this from the other side. It's definitely not not completely, but that to the point where we don't get to draw a parallel without John Agunie, the site underwater site, the Graham Hancock likes to talk about the skeptics are certain that is a geological formation. Most of the other people are not. We need work done. That's the clear fucking answer is just put some money at it. Put some bodies on it and tell them the answer in my mind is when somebody asks me, what do I think about John Agunie? I say, well, it's interesting that you know, it probably been eroded for a long time. So it might be man made and just looks naturally. It might be natural. We need more evidence before I'm going to hang my hat anywhere. Right. And that's which is very reasonable. And in all honesty, it should be the scientific position. They should be the position that the scientists are espousing. If they wanted to have credibility in the sphere, they should be the ones towing that line and then let the pyramids all be certain. And this is how we know it was. And the scientists can look, but instead they're getting the mud, not just like everybody else. They also stall progress with their arrogance. They stall progress by dismissing any possibility. Like, what are those ones? Is it near the Bahamas? Those enormous stones that are on the floor, the surface of the ocean. The bimini road? That's right. Yeah. That one's weird. Yeah. Like if you don't think that's weird, like come on. And they're right. I would agree with a geologist that there's a really good chance that it's just beach rock. However, we can do work. Yeah. And this is the stuff. It's like other people that, you know, if you say that the rocks or geopolymers and sex say who am on or whatever, it's like, there's no reason for us to argue about this man. We just fucking do some work. Right. The bimini road really interesting. There's a lot of really interesting stuff that they find under the under the water that makes you think, okay, what is this? And the yoniguni thing? Like if that's the case, see that to me, that could easily be natural. Yeah. When I'm looking at it right there, that easily could be natural. They're not uniform enough for bells to go off. You know, but that one lower right, that one right below that Jamie right below your cursor to the right. That one. Yes, me. Not a little. That seems like those were stacked. Yeah, it does. It seems very much like that. And when you're dealing with, if you want to go really crazy with like the John Anthony West version of it, which is like 30,000 plus years. That's probably what you would have left over. Yeah. That's your accurate there. That's there's a thought tool that archaeologists use called the solar solarian hypothesis. And solarians like this doctor who bad guy that was went into hibernation. They were lizards. They went into hibernation like before. The solarian hypothesis. And solarians like as Dr. Hubad guy that was, went into hibernation, there were lizards. They went into hibernation like before the dinosaurs died out and then they wake up one day and there's all these monkeys running around on their planet and so. But that's the Dr. Hu thing, right? But the solarian hypothesis is basically a thought tool for archaeologists and historians to say, well, if there was an advanced civilization on earth 10 million years ago, what will we need to find in order for it to exist? And what would we find now 10 million years later? And the answer is usually like radioactive material. That's like 10 million years man. You might find a couple of bones, but the odds of finding anything that's actually prove that they had technology. And not much. That's also the problem with the idea of this very sophisticated construction methods of the pyramids that were using some sort of advanced technology. What would, if John Anthony West is correct, and he's talking about 30 plus thousand years, what would be left after 30,000 years? Well, certainly not much metal. No, oh, no, that stuff would be looted right away. And even if it wasn't, what would be actually left of it? If it was just like sitting on the ground, be rotted and melted to nothing. The video that you sent me yesterday, the one with the stone nubs, they talked about holes. All those, I can't say for all the sites, but like the Colosseum and stuff, they used metal to bond the bricks together and the concrete together in places. So years later, when the city's under attack and they need metal to make swords, they looted it. That's what country courted. That makes sense. And it happened a lot in the Roman world. I'm glad you brought up the nubs. Because the nubs, that was one of the videos that I watched of yours yesterday. Where we're talking about folks is there's many places like Machu Picchu, there's, what other places have nubs all over the place. Even that Montana thing, even that's weird. You'll see them on Egyptian sarcophagi. You'll see them on the casings, unfinished casings stones at the bottom of the mine car is pyramid. You'll see them basically almost every megalithic site on the planet has some nubs somewhere. All the ones, as they're finished blocks, you'll usually find nubs somewhere. And do you think that it's possible that those nubs, those nubs were used to hoist things up and move them into place? Oh yeah, absolutely. I mean, there's a technique called a lifting boss that's used to lift big things like that. But there's a couple of other issues with that being the only reason that they're used. For one, a lot of times they're small like that and they wouldn't really do you much good. For two, a lot of times we see them like on the lids of a coffin, for example, which you wouldn't want to leave it there afterwards because you don't want to facilitate them. You've got to be able to pop the coffin lid, right? So you say that they're small, but if you were trying to place something exactly and you were lifting it up from the bottom, the only way you would be able to do that is if you had something like a nub sticking on the outside of it in order to catch a rope or keep it from walking or whatever it is, boards or whatever you're using to lift that and place it into position. Yeah, oh yeah, there's, like I say, there's, they are lifting bosses are a thing. They're not, it's not unknown. There's a good possibility, I mean, there's not a good possibility, quite certainly, quite frequently, these were used for that. And interesting also that the bottom stones don't have them. That's, the fact, a lot of people do bring up a good point. I didn't talk about it in my video, but it's interesting point is why did they get left? Now, like that one around the windows there, like to me, that's pretty clearly to the left Jamie. So what I've got there, yeah, the one's got, that one's pretty clearly to me, like that's functional, right? I mean, they're, they're right. That looks like maybe like stopped, had an iron gate attached or something. Or a rander or some shim, smoking balcony. But some of them, on the other hand, they look a lot more questionable. Okay, like like, those are odd. Yeah, thank you. They're just fucking weird. And sometimes you see them on things that don't like the stone was carved in the ground. And they let these on. Sorry, Jamie, to the one a little bit higher with the red tint to it, put right hand side, upper right, right above that. Yeah, click on that. I think that is so strange. You see, and now like stones like these, you don't really need a lifting boss. Okay, you got like that, look at that stone, it's on the right there that's all, one to the left of that guy there. You could just use that lip on the corner, right, right above, right below the cursor. You could use that lip for a lifting boss. You could tie a rope around that thing and push it wherever the fuck you want it. Right, but if you wanted to get it to sit down without having to pull out whatever's underneath it or whatever underneath it getting crushed, wouldn't you want something to assist you like that little nub? No, yeah, but again, you could just pop it into the corner on the side and do the same thing. Right, but if you were doing that as a method for each individual stone and some of you couldn't pop in like that, I'm saying it would be a technique that you would use to hoist these things into position. Does anybody have an explanation of what these things are? No, yeah, I mean, that's the lifting bosses, what the mainstream explanation is, they're all of them were for that. And there's, again, it's the ubiquity that really makes it different to me. It's like, and it popping up on different sides of the ocean and that's where it just seems kind of weird. It's like, for it to show up, that's looking so similar, to use so similar all over the place left behind when they're done, that's kind of weird too. Right, it impossumed down. Impossumed down, yeah. The rest of the walls, a lot of times, I mean, the stones are fitted so well together, clearly they knew how to make these stones flat as fuck. Why is this part still got this big to hang it off of it? It's just, it's weird. Despite the title of my video saying the true purpose, that's just clickbait, nobody knows. There's the best mainstream explanation that would be lifting bosses. The most common alternate history explanation is usually like, it's like a leftover from the concrete being pulled out, like the guy on the video was saying, or it's like, if you have a bag of concrete and it's just like the one little spot that kind of seeps out. I don't think that they're from geo-polymers, but that's- You have heard the concrete explanation too, as far as the stones in the great pyramid, but. Yeah, I know. We can test, again, we can test these things. That's where some of the guys that claim that they're all everything's geo-polymers will pretend that we can't test things, but the reality is we absolutely can test that for that kind of shit. I mean, that's not difficult at all actually. So the problem is, and this is where it gets, like you said, the archeologist stand between things. The problem is it's certain places in the world like Peru, for example, in Bolivia. It's fucking hard to get. Look at those alien bodies right down in Peru, oh, we've been looking at them. Oh, I'm sure you have, and the scientists keep saying, they're real, but the only fucking scientist I ever see weighing in on them are Peruvian scientists. It's like, okay, let some people from around the world, oh no, no, fuck you guys, is there us? All right, man, that's- The hyper- But is that like a hyper-exaggerated version of the bone yard? It could be deeper implications. It could be, but we've seen a lot of the same kind of stuff with them with, they have a problem in Peru with archeology and corruption with the money. Like, I don't know if you saw my video on the elongated skulls, but that video, I just cover basically how, those things came in these big bundles, they get these grave bags, and there'd be a body in there. And so they harvested a couple, at least like 600 of these bundles. And they just get opened and willy-nilly shit get moved around, Rockefeller ends up trading for a few of them and to finance, because they didn't have finance, to store these things properly. So Rockefeller got some of those heads. Oh, yeah. And we don't know how many exactly, he reportedly just for, but like he gives the money to these people to like restore all these mummies. And the first thing that they do is they restore a bunch of textiles at other mummies that they don't have anymore, or like packed in and shit. It's just, even all the way up into the 60s, an anthropologist opened like 70 some odd bundles, recorded what he found in four of them and put the rest back on the fucking shelf. They've been stealing artifacts and selling them on the open market. And it's all about money. The so really rich people, like some billionaire guy goes, I don't want them, mommy. What do I got to get to, I want a money room in my castle. I went with a really weird head, which once got the best head, it was open 60. Okay. And that's just the Cusco tunnels. They just, this would so fuck. They just announced this January, archaeologists have discovered that there are tunnels, running under Cusco and Peru. They connect the temple of the sun to the fortress of Saksai, who amon and some other places around there. Oh, this is crazy. It's gonna be great, man. We did all this light arts. It's gonna be amazing, amazing discovery. Well, in Brian Forrester uploaded video, like 11 years ago, if him going on tour of those tunnels, you could pay a guide 20 years ago to go on a tour of those tunnels. They fucking were, the Spanish were riding and route them in the 1600s and the late 1500s. The only reason that we didn't investigate these tunnels is because in the 30s was when archeology started becoming a thing and going down there and checking out those skulls and shit. And that's the exact same time Madame Blavatsky and Edgar Casey was like, you know, those tunnels that are supposed to be down there. I bet they were built by the Atlanians. And so ever since then, archeologists of Pupu, there was a guy in the 2000s that he's in Atlanta's Hunter. He did ground penetrating radar in early 2000s, found those tunnels. They rejected his work. He had a priest that witnessed those tunnels has been down in them. He was rejected out of hand. Although, but that's okay, because 25 years later we found it. I promise they didn't steal or sell anything in the last 100 years that the world knew that these things existed. Rich people were going down there and throwing money around and there was zero safeguards. It's just like, so to circle back to the UFO, there's the aliens there, it's like, I have a real problem with that shit in Peru, because I can't, it's just so tainted. It's so corrupt. It's so weird too. I mean, I love looking at it. I wish it was real, but that to me is always the problem whenever it comes to alien stuff. I want it to be real. So that part of my brand, I have to go, hey, stupid. Let's just, because this is an X-ray, doesn't mean this is legit. By the way, I can make you a fake X-ray, pretty easy online these days. It wouldn't be hard at all. But these X-rays are so compelling that if they are legitimate X-rays, if someone really did just piece this together with a bunch of random bones, what a fantastic job they did, because it doesn't look awkward at all. It looks real. The thing about them that looks the fakeest is just a photograph of the bodies themselves. Everything else looks fucking pretty legit. Right, if the X-rays are real. Yes. And that's, this is part of the problem. But the X-rays that they show, that they say are real, God, they look so cool. I mean, you see the three-fingered hands. You see the bones look similar to ours, but different. There's enough of it that's similar to a human beings, and it is some sort of bipedal, homoted-like creature, whatever it is. And we know, I mean, we know that humans existed with a bunch of other homies on this planet for a long time. So it wouldn't be, like, for us to discover a new species of even if they weren't aliens, would be much crazy. If they were way more advanced than us, but they got wiped out, that's, you know, there's versions of us that aren't as good as us, that aren't here anymore. Right? So we have Homo sapiens, Denisovans that didn't discover until Decatur's so ago. Right? So then there's a bunch of different versions of human beings that weren't as good as us, and we're the ones that maybe ones were better. And maybe the ones that were better didn't make it. Because we almost didn't make it a ton of times. Yeah. And a lot of, it doesn't, it's, we're not, you could say that, well, why did we, some people would think at that point, why did we make it in the ones that were better not, if that's the case. But we're not in direct competition with each other to survive necessarily. It's also with Mother Nature and all these other things. Sure. So like, you just wrong place, wrong time, species gets wiped out. Sorry. What is this, Jamie? It's about the, I'm reading an article about the mummies right now on this popped up. Metallic plates have been found throughout other areas of the mummy's bodies from the interior covering some of the bones to external attachments on the skin, forming a bifunctional implant with no signs of rejection. These polymetallic plates have been analyzed using a light-based measurement, revealing an alloy compound of copper, cadmium, osmium, aluminum gold and silver, he added. Notably, the silver has a purity of over 95%, which is rare in nature. Additionally, cadmium and osmium, relatively recent discoveries are currently used in satellite communication and satellite structures. This is what there's telling us though. One of them was found. This is a Daily Mail article? Yeah. Right now. This is a Daily Mail article. It is a Daily Mail article. It's like one was pregnant. I think that's the one. Yeah. You can't get them all better. They still fuck. That's kind of crazy. They don't have dicks. How's it pregnant? Right. Shouldn't they be farming that off to a test tube if they've gotten past intercourse? Like octopies. The really weird ones were the x-rays of the body in that position, where you see all the skull and the way the skull was formed, the way the fingers are formed. It's very weird stuff. Three degree construction of one hand. Yeah. Well, super weird stuff. Yeah, it is pretty wild. If it's real, but if it's just somebody's art project, you fuckers. So the art project was the little small ones. Yeah, the small ones supposedly been debunked, so they have hundreds of them, apparently. What? Yeah. OK. What do we have to give you? Trump, get on it. Trump, get on it. Scrap that, scrap that. Turns out there, aliens. We no longer won an expedition to Ethiopia. Scrap that one. Yeah. What the body's imagine. Well, we need a bunch of expeditions. We need answers. We need someone who is at a high position of the White House that's interested in the stuff. That would be very nice, I honestly. Like, find one of them things. Bring it to America. And let's do a live stream of scientists actually analyzing it. So it doesn't get gate-keeped at all. We just get a chance to see, like, show the whole world what this is. They did that with a couple of the bundles. They tried to with a couple of the bundles in the 50s. There was an anthropologist that opened up two of them on video. And when I was researching for my video, I found that those movie reels are lost. Nobody knows where they want to. They're just a spirit. Big fucking shock. There's a newspaper article that recorded what she found in one of them. That newspaper article is not in their archives. It's a stinks. It just stinks. It's like I am not a conspiratorial type of person, but I'm not stupid either. Pretty clear if fucking conspiracy there. So what was supposedly the synopsis of her article? She was just talking about what she found inside of one of those mummy bundles in elongated skulls and the artifacts that would be under the grave goods and stuff. The thing about the elongated skulls is that some have a larger capacity, which is interesting. So it's not simply, like, we know that there's a technique that they do with young children, where they put boards on the side of their heads and they flatten their head. You can actually form someone's head. But that's not necessarily what was being done here. No, there's the kind of nuanced argument is that some of them were legitimate aliens or other species or whatever. And then some of them were people trying to emulate that with their own kids. Right. Like that it was a status symbol to have that elongated head so people try to fake it and pretend. Maybe it was just a genetic anomaly, right? Like some sort of bizarre, we talked about this, the people that are born, there's a certain tribe in Africa where a bunch of them have only two toes. And they look like ostrich feet. No, no, I haven't. That's crazy. Jamie could find it. It's real weird. So it's some genetic anomaly that a lot of people have there. It's not really, it's not rare. There's a photo of a bunch of them sitting there with their feet up. That's what their toes look. Yeah. And so there's quite a few people that have this genetic anomaly with their toes. Yeah. Very strange. So they have two enormous toes. So their feet are completely different than ours. Wow. Yeah. And there's quite a few people that have that. Now you could imagine that a similar genetic anomaly could take place with the shape of the skull. Absolutely. If you could develop people that were a bunch of them where it's a gene that can spread, like you can pass it on, that you could have something where people had a larger head and a weird shape to head. Yeah. That would, if it offered any sort of advantage at all, you know, you might think, well, how could that be? It's, you know, obviously a problem. But if it offered any sort of advantage, like the, you know, the Galapagos Islands, right? The iguan is there that go down and swim in the water and eat moss off the bottom. Y'all got webbed feet. So it stands to reason to me that whatever happened that isolated Galapagos and made it a shitty place to try to find food for an iguana, you got one of these iguan as it's a little mute and McNugget running around and he's got webbed toes already. And he's like, fuck man, nobody wants to hang out with me because I look all weird. But then this happens and all of a sudden he's the only guy that can consistently get food. It's, you know, that kind of disadvantage turns advantage overnight kind of things. So those are those weird adaptations take place quicker than they thought. And a good example that is the Congo. You know, there's parts of the Congo where there's an amazing BBC documentary about it. It was a multiple disc CD, DVD rather thing that I had back in the day. And this Congo documentary, one of the things they found was there's a lot of planes animals that got trapped in the Congo. So the Congo, because of the change of the climate there, at one point in time, it was planes. So it was grasslands. So you have all these antelope and all these different animals that normally exist in these open wide areas, but they're jammed into a rainforest now and they've adapted. And one of the animals that adapted is the diker. So the diker is a small antelope that can swim underwater for as much as 100 yards and eats fish. Jesus. Yeah. Wow. So this thing that lived out in the plains, like all the other little antelopes, now can fucking swim and dives underwater and can swim 100 yards underwater. It's insane. And eats fish. That's insane. So this weird adaptation that takes place just in the Congo, which is this incredibly vital environment that's so much diversity of life exists in. That's weird. It's weird, but it's crazy how ubiquitous those things can be. You don't matter, gas car and the lemurs. Lemurs basically have all these evolutionary niches in that a gas car are filled in. Instead of a woodpecker, there's a lemur with a big ass fucking finger. And he tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap, tap. Yeah. If we even looked that guy up, if you want, Jamie, that's the baddestgar. It's almost every major evolutionary niche is filled by a lemur. It's really, yeah. It's a fucking lemur island, man. It's just like the different kind of lemurs on Madagascar all over the place. It's not every single one, but like woodpeckers. There's no fucking woodpeckers there. The insect eating birds are not birds, they're lemurs. Whoa. The whole island is, that's it. Look at that. Look at those fucking claws. How weird. That looks fake. The eye eye. The finger of death, the world's most demonic lemur is also its most endangered. Meet the creature with the ugliest finger on the planet. What does it look like the full version of it? Whoa, whoa. Whoa, whoa. What a cool looking creature. Wow, that's a lemur. Yeah. Something from like Lord of the Rings. That does not even look at a real creature. Yeah, it's evolution is crazy that way. And it's like, wow, look at that little fucker. You get a great example of like, like you probably heard them say that, like the dinosaurs get wiped out and allowed mammals the opportunity to take over the planet. Like otherwise, mammals would have just been a bunch of shrews running around and depressed. And that's that exact kind of thing. It's like that lemur ain't gonna out compete woodpeckers, but he don't have to. So he gets to take off and do his thing. Because there are no woodpeckers there. Yeah, so something fills that and he's exactly. So it's that same kind of thing we get to see it. And you know, you were talking about the, what was that name of that deer thing? You were talking about the diker. Diker. It's mantle of the eye and it's a little bit. Yes. But it's become a underwater meat or that's quite a jump. But there's probably not many alligators down there doing that exact same job. I mean, not many things taking it's spot. Otherwise it wouldn't have been able to find a niche there. It wouldn't have been a good food. Right. Yeah. There's just, it's really interesting. There's herds of antelope running through dense rain forest, running through puddles in the water and everything. Really crazy. Because they just sort of got trapped there. Wow. Wow. That's so insane. That's like the mountains that they have in the South America where they've got basically, it's like the same as an island where it's like nothing can go down from a certain elevation. So like there's a bunch of things that live up in the mountains that are basically evolutionary isolated and have been for 10,000, 20,000 years. And so you got a bunch of goofy species that are only, if next mountain over there a little bit different, next mountain over there, a little bit different. It's the finches that Darwin was chasing around nearly days. Yeah. Pretty interesting stuff. I can nerd out on all that shit for a long time. I love it. Which is the sheer variety, the sheer variety of life forms that we know are real. And what's interesting is like things that are cryptic, or you know, cryptozoology type deals. People are so dismissive of them. But I'm like, by God, there's so much that's real. There's so much that's real. Like one of my favorites is the little Hobbit man, from the island of Flores. Because that was dismissed forever. That was just nonsense. Until a couple decades ago they're like, oh, hey, OK. We just found something. It's like a little tiny person, a little three-foot person that's not us. But it's bipedal. And it seems to have worked with tools and hunted. It's funny how skeptical they get with this stuff. It's not even skeptical. It's cynical. I mean, clearly, we know that island dwarfism exists, which is where things get smaller or bigger on islands depending. You might have some big ass swans and some small elephants on an island. Yeah, lizards get bigger, right? Exactly. Smaller things can get bigger than bigger things tend to get smaller. So we know that's a thing. Why is it a problem to assume what that would happen with humans or with hominids? Right. We know it happens with elephants. Yeah. Dwarf elephants in these islands. It's for, and that's the kind of thing, honestly, it almost sounds like religious thinking, not scientific thinking. It's like we're better. And we're immune to all the same forces of nature. It's like a scientist would just be like, OK, man, it could be. It's just ego. It's ego. ego works with everything in the wrong direction and including science. And well, that's to me, that's kind of fucked, because even though I know that those guys, like I was saying earlier, are socially awkward and probably emotionally stunted quite frequently, can't even suss their own feelings. But at the same time, it's like science is the whole fucking expedition, the whole undertaking. The whole reason you do it is to see clearly. And when trying to get rid of Joe has an opinion, Jamie has an opinion, Dan's has an opinion. They're all different. But if we all see the same thing, we can be pretty sure that this is real. But if I see it different than you, then Jamie will now. Yeah. And so when they inject their ego heavily into it, political quite frequently nowadays, it's not fucking science anymore. You are defiling the thing that you set out to do. And you know you're doing it. So I get kind of, let's just call it truth. Like truth is the most valuable thing if you're speaking openly about something. If you're talking about something publicly, truth is the most important thing. As soon as you are willing to violate truth to preserve something else, like your status, your ego, your place in the hierarchy of information, well, now I can't listen to you anymore. And I know you're willing to lie. You're a grifter. Yeah, and obviously politics is the best example of that. I mean, especially today. I guess it's probably a good time to talk about this. There was a thing that came out recently. There was a book. There was some book about the Kamala Harris campaign where they talked about her getting on the show. And they said a bunch of things that weren't true. They talked to supposedly talked to like 150 different people about her and what happened with her coming on the show. I don't know if it's 150, a lot of people. They didn't talk to us. And which is kind of crazy. And it was just like, they didn't even ask. But they said things that just weren't true. One of the things that said that weren't true was that we lied about the day that Trump was coming on. Now, we just didn't tell you that Trump was coming on. He was already booked a long time ago. This is how it worked. Trump was really easy to book, like super easy. We offered one day, he said yes, that was it. There was no, what are we going to talk about? How long is it going to be? Is it going to be edited? There was nothing. What's the waiver here? Give me that waiver. Sign it. It was so easy. So he was already booked. They never committed to doing the show. So all this talk, there was nothing. They said that the reason why they did the Beyonce thing, the Beyonce event in Houston, was so that they could be in Texas to do my show. They never agreed to do the show. None of that's true. They never agreed. That's fucked. They also said that they sent someone down here to the studio to do a walkthrough of the set. That's not true. The Trump administration did. I mean, if they are trying to say that they, as in the entire federal government, well, I don't think the Trump, well, I guess the Secret Service is a part of the federal government. Maybe you can kind of get away with saying that because the Secret Service came down here for Trump and looked around that we sent someone down, but it was not. It was the Trump administration sent it down, because they're the only ones that had a date to do the show. These people didn't have a date to do. They never agreed to do the show. This was really important. Even after Trump went on, they offered for me to come to DC and do a show with Kamala. But even then, it was the same deal. It was only like 45 minutes to an hour. And it was not on my set. And I said that, look, he did it here. We should probably do it here. Like, if it's possible to do it here, obviously, when he did it, it had an enormous result. I'm willing to do the same thing for her. I wanted to release both of them on the same day. This was my goal. I was even trying to figure out if there was a way that I could do it. And I even offered to do it late that night. So the night that Trump came on, I'm like, what if we do her? Like, when she's done in Texas, if she came here, but no one ever committed to doing it. This is really important, because they keep pretending that I lied or I did this or I did that. No one, they never committed to doing it. We offer it. We went through. I've got a whole, we have all the receipts, by the way. Of course. I have a whole list of conversations that took place. They never said she was going to do it. So this whole idea that we fucked her over and then we fucked her over for Trump. Incorrect. Just not true. And she, you know, but I think it's someone trying to cover the rass for the fact that she never did it. And if she did do it, it might have had a positive effect. Yeah. It's her and I had a good time. And we got along gray and she won over, you know, the air quote, young male vote. Things could have been different. So this guy's probably trying to cover his ass. That's what I'm thinking too is because the reaction to her not coming was like pretty big. But they didn't commit to doing it. This is the thing. While this guy's saying, like that we were difficult to deal with, not true. We were super easy. We made it real clear. But also, it's got to be the actual real show. It shouldn't be some fake version of it where I'm sitting in a conference room. Oh, they also, they wanted a stenographer in the room. They wanted staff in the room. They wanted some, I'm, Trump is just in here by himself. Yeah. Just me, him and Jamie, that's it for three hours. Like they wanted to do everything. They wanted it very controlled and they were really concerned that it wasn't going to be edited. So I don't think they ever really were sure they wanted to do it. Then once Trump did it and it had this huge response, I said, I said, I said, I said, I said, very controlled and they were really concerned that it wasn't going to be edited so i don't think they ever really were sure they wanted to do it then once trump did it and had this huge response i think that it was like what the fuck what are we doing he just did it's got fifty fucking million views is so stupid why didn't we do it and then there was even then when they offered to do it in dc my manager asked is she committed to doing this when i bring if i bring this to joe no she hasn't committed to doing this have you brought this to her they wouldn't even say whether or not she had expressed willingness to do it or whether they were trying to convince her to do it there was we know for sure there were some people that were supposedly on her staff that were against her doing it they thought it was about because you know it's a bunch of woksters they're basically in a cult you're you have a distribute like if you're willing to go on fox news you talked to what's that guy's name britt brier uh... yeah where they cut that off after twenty minutes when they did that that's when i was like look it's got to be in the studio it's got to be in the studio and it's got to be real it's got to be a real conversation i had entertained a couple of times going to a but i'm like twenty five minutes is just not enough you know you and i've been talking an hour and a half already yeah it's just like it's not enough time you need more time you need more time to find out what makes someone ticked and that's uh... i'd probably what she was afraid probably what they were afraid of maybe not her i think it should have been i think we would have had a good old time no you're you're a good guy i think we would have had fun i think it was a huge huge mistake on her part let's be honest like it's the kind of thing that it's reminiscent of the forget the congressman that asked mark sucker berg how how facebook makes money it's just like this so so detached from the modern world it's like you you spend millions of dollars on all your ad campaign all across you to whether you could just go sit in the room with joe for three hours on it i'll tell you which one's gonna do better for you lady but she picked the ad campaigns on youtube for a while the problem is that i think that the people that saw it is that they thought they were going to win anyway apparently and the people that saw it as a negative thought like there's been a few blunders where things didn't go well but i think a lot of those blunders are i was listening to this woman on the tuck across and cut show and she was talking about um... what biden was like during the presidency and one of the things that she said i thought that was very interesting was that there's many people that work with biden that said there were moments um... in his first couple of years where he was very lucid and that he would be actually running the meetings and he had talking points on that it were written down but he was having these lucid conversations and then he would do these public things and he would have blunders i think a lot of it is just the pressure of performing publicly under intense scrutiny like if you have to do a live set like say if you have to do saturday live or something like that you're going to do a monologue the pressure of doing that monologue is so much different in the pressure of just going up at a local comedy club no sure it seems to say insane and i think that pressure joe biden as much as you know i'm sure he has a high self-opinion clearly when he is confronted by the reality half the country hates him and thinks he's doing a terrible job and then he has to talk publicly live then i think those cognitive problems were sort of elevated that makes sense i think that's the same with her so i think that's the same with her when she's on fox with brat brire i think it's hostile environments i think it's large crowds i think it's a lot of things where you don't get to see the real person so that was my goal my goal was to try to meet the real person just like i did with trump just try to meet and talk with the real person and my goal was what i really wanted to do which we talked about this quite a bit me and my manager of doing it on the same day and my manager she agreed she liked this would be the perfect way to set it up like we both agree put them both out at the same time you know go watch them all see what you think that would be the ultimate way to do it but they didn't ever they never agreed to do it so all this shit that's in that book that they never talked to us just not true maybe it's someone's trying to preserve their job maybe someone's trying to say hey it wasn't my fault you know they they became difficult no we didn't become difficult the other thing was like they wanted to do it that Saturday the day after trump and i said i'll do it but it has to be at eight thirty a.m the reason why was i had a podcast already scheduled that was alive ufc podcast so we do this thing called fight companion so there's this title fight that was happening in i think was it Saudi Arabia or was it do by or obitabi some somewhere in the middle east i believe if i remember correctly see if you can find out what that was just so just we we're clear i have friends i flew in three of my buddies from cal fornia and we were all going to do this podcast together like we had committed to doing this like they were already in town like i can't just say no guys i can't do this awesome thing because i have to interview common harris seems like i should to some people but that's because you're in the politics business i'm an m a commentator this is part of my job and i said i would do it i said i'll do it but it has to be like eight thirty in the morning because i have to be done by the time the fight start that's reasonable they didn't do that either so it this idea that i sabotage her as a bunch of people say i i fucked her over whatever that's not true you can think whatever you want but it was obitabi so that was elia to pour your versus max halloween so for ufc fans just so it would just you know for people listening that aren't ufc fans that was a huge fight those a gigantic fight max halloween just be just engaging like literally the knockout of all time and elia to pour you as one of the absolute best fighters on planet earth if not number one pound for pounds certainly number two certain or number three season in the top five of the absolute best athletes in any way class so this was a clash of the titans the greatest featherweight champion of all time versus the current featherweight champion so i'm not gonna miss that yeah i is me i i understand i'm i work around you i said i would do it at night i'll come back i'll do it at midnight i don't give a fuck i'll do it so it wasn't me fucking someone over and so just whoever's in charge of spreading that narrative you that's deceptive yeah and she she missed out man she could have sat in the same chair that she can give us that in right yes he's one of the that one that's all i just think or could have been a wreck but it could have been a record trump too you know like there is there is a moment where me and trump were i was saying tell me how the 2020 election was stolen like and i feel like if you're for the last four years have been telling everybody that they robbed you you should be able to tell people how you know they robbed you and you should be able to say particularly yes clearly clearly i don't i don't so i don't know what that's about i don't know if he has other people that tell him that is to be compartmentalized like look you do hey Rudy jilliana you deal with that i got other shit to deal with i'm gonna deal with this you tell me they robbed me i'm gonna say they robbed me if that could be it i don't know i don't know but so that could have gone sideways but it didn't yeah it didn't it goes back to that how you disagree with people thing yeah you don't have to be an asshole about it right you should be able to communicate with people in a way that it's just about what you're talking about it's not it's a shitty tactic to try to break a person down as a human being because you want to enforce your argument or say their argument sucks because they suck as a human being too like come on we're we're big grown-ups here we can just talk about the actual ideas i mean we actually get to where we're trying to get to right we're trying to figure out the other side of this so seems kind of cut and dry but a lot of people miss that the egos are egos a powerful fucking thing it really is and it i mean i'm glad we took that little side trip because i had to explain that but but the the thing is that that little monster rears its ugly head in everything it doesn't just rear it's ugly head in politics it rears it's like you had in archaeology in religion in culture and everything we do okay it just it's a lot of it is i have said this for so long i don't want to ever say i was wrong and i will i will somehow or another derail any arguments against me i will call those people racist i will call those people say i was watching one of your videos where there's this person who listen to what flint dibble said about gram hankock and it's lantis and connecting it lantis to white supremacy and she made the most distorted statement that saying that people of color we're not capable that this is the argument of the people that support it lantis people of color we're not capable of that sort of civilization which literally no one is ever said because everybody especially the pleat people that believe that that area of sub-Saharan africa the uh... right chart right shot yeah right shot i think i think it's right shot right shot structure that that is that that is egypt or that is rather it lantis that is literally in africa so who the fuck do you think built it if you're talking about the pyramids no one is saying europeans came to africa and built appearance of the the pyramids so it not of this white supremacy thing makes any sense because all these people are saying was i think that this city in africa was it lantis i think which what that's a kind of find an ancient civilization that is super advanced wouldn't you think maybe it would be in an area around where there's fucking for sure ancient advanced civilizations that made pyramids yeah i mean it's kind of a no brainer it's kind of a no brainer what they what they do is they this is where flint is especially in cities you know i got a lot i got a long well with flint and a bunch of other archaeologists for a long time um... but i made a video that went into the details of how agnacious donnily was not the guy who founded modern day at lantis honey uh... and he he did believe in some kind of area in first things and it was he didn't he believed that other races weren't capable of of innovating and he but that's just one douchebag he was popular but the thing is is people that came before they tried to make it out like the guy's the only chance and the guy's it came before him both believe the mia were the they found it one of the mia fucking what the ass all the way over in indian shit he believed that the mia were the Egyptians what yeah uh... Augustus lepline young is the one that believe the mia whoop ass all over the world and the other one was uh... with a mia supposedly see fairing no this is this is his this is a wacky idea called uh... trials attained they're busy at a boobold these are the two guys that they they were the first ones to find like that chalk wool statue with the weird and the heart and the plate oh yeah looks at you know the ones that started seeing they're the first ones to see the similarities between these things and so they believe that you know ancient egypt is this technologically superior place and here we see the same thing here with similar iconography so i made the video explaining that this is the essay that the letter that the society for american archaeology wrote to netflix to call gram hankaka racist basically not call him a racist fuck you guys um... is uh... it was wrong there was a ronius it contained false information and i pointed that out and eventually flint's addressed it his argument was it doesn't really matter it's not a big deal we use the word comment and and and grand talks about a comment these this other guy didn't and and it doesn't really matter because so many white supremacists believe this shit anyway and it was just like at that point i i was kind of like okay this isn't science anymore and then i watched him do that waffle and bullshit here where he did it with great when you were pushing him on it and he's like no i didn't say that well yeah i said well no i didn't say that i was just already no i'm gonna drag you for this just too many people that are used to being in a position of authority where they're never questioned like that and they can say that in front of a class or they can say that in front of colleagues and nobody pushes back and then there's also this problem with leftist ideology where um... if someone if there is some sort of uh... history at any point in time of white supremacy like that it ignacious donally guy like you have to connect even everything attached to the theories of this advanced city this the advanced law civilization you have to attach it to white supremacy or you are a racist or you're enabling or you're a dog whistling which is my favorite dog whistling's my since it's it's saying high erase it's not here i said hahaha got a good linch and it's just like it's so dumb because listen if you have a place like Egypt that's way crazier than it land us you already have a place that's fucking insane yes that's way crazier because whatever it land has had it didn't survive whatever that it if that ryshot structure if that's really where it is and it was impacted by the great flood by the end of the younger dryest the impact theory the the water from all the polar caps rushes through and destroys everything in giants who not me everywhere because of the global cataclysm okay it's well it wasn't as good because if that's the pyramids are still standing so that all that should happen the same time the pyramids too yeah so that you what you're saying if you really believe all that is that the pyramids were way more advanced than it land us and believing it land us is crazy yeah help me out and it's white supremacy even though it's in the same part of the fucking world it's it help me out yeah it's always always always served basically no matter what they're always going to find a way to not just just miss it they're a poopoo it they're gonna that that that's not that's not it that's not it under water money that doesn't look like a tool to me yeah it's just this this poo-poo attitude that really it it does them a huge disservice because ultimately the most interested amateurs on the planet would be pyramids guys that are into that kind of goofy shit we're the most interested just like Carl Sagan knew his audience the most interested people in space where the UFO crowd the most interested people in archaeology are not archaeology students that's their nine to five i'm the one that's reading a shit at two o'clock in the morning with the beer in my hand i love this shit but i don't want to what you're gonna bore me if you talk about stratigraphy and we're gonna want a story we're gonna want you gonna want something next time from history yeah to dig into it so when they literally deliberately piss on the mysteries it's like oh there's nothing there's nothing to see it nothing to see here nothing to see here nothing to see here nothing to see here nothing to see here i'd swag talk about Carl Sagan all the time he might have laughed in their face you know but he never tell them or nothing to see here well you know why Carl Sagan smoked a lot of weed he did he smoked a lot of weed that's very uncomfortable for a lot of people that don't like weed oh makes you lazy nope you were already lazy yeah we just got there while you were lazy there's nothing to do with weed stop it you know it's true i get what you say it it's uh people like to blame things for blame say that drugs are all just bad but i forget the dude's name uh that like was the guy that discerned the DNA like the human DNA right yeah and uh kerry moles did it well in the list yeah i like to make crack the code on LSD or whatever i mean that's shit's you know it's it's part of our brains man it's there um and as a tribe i think there's some controversy about the Francis quick thing all right isn't there a controversy about whether Francis kirk was on i'm pretty sure kerry moles was open when he was talking about um the pc arm effort that he devised that when he was on acid which is also also he was a huge critic of using that stuff for detecting diseases he's like this is so fucking stupid like you don't know like he was so angry and then he ever seen a video where he's angry about anthony fauci saying he does not know what he's doing he's not a scientist he's a bureaucrat see if you find that video because it's fascinating because he's literally talking about this is pre-covid by the way okay he's took because he died like right or right before covid happened but he was talking about how pc r should never be used to detect diseases because you could find these tiny fragments of a disease but it doesn't even mean that someone's infected especially when you're ramping it up to x amount of cycles like they have so many cycles you had so many false positives that maybe someone had encountered this thing at one point in time but it was dormant in their body and dead but yet you're still you're you're looking at such minute particles that you can't use it to detect whether or not someone's sick and that's what we're using during the pandemic to detect whether or not so you got so many false positives you know some estimates were higher than 50 percent false positives that's insane insane see you find karaamalis on anthony fauci he's like sitting at a desk at his kitchen table or he's sitting at his kitchen table a guy he's talking to and he's just breaking down the difference between the actual science have you found it i know it's available i've seen it i'm just look i'm you're timing it's i'm stuck in the no i understand the preview site no i gotta find another one i'm just i'm finding okay you'll find it i'm sure i got a double check and make sure to this is not what you want but that's it right there second one down 10 seconds it's oh really just rush i'm not going there is this russia is yandex dot our you're gonna get a fucking virus is today there it is change the computer to Russian script first yeah i think that's it you see this is karaamalis uh one of nobel prize for his PCR technique while employing employed by uh Emoryville biotech firm is humanity that that that it wants to go to all the details and stuff and listen you know these guys like thought you get up there and start talking you know he didn't do anything really about anything and i'd say that to his face nothing the man thinks you can take a blood sample and stick it in electron microscope and if it's got a virus in there you'll know it he doesn't understand electron microscopy he doesn't understand medicine he doesn't he should not be in a position like he's in most of those guys if they're on the top or just total administrative people and they don't know anything about what's going on the bottom you know those guys have got an agenda which is not what we would like them to have being that we pay for them to take care of our health in some way they've got a personal kind of agenda they make up their own rules as they go they change them when they want to and they smuggle it like tony fauci does not mind going on television in front of the people who pay a sowing in line directly into the camera you can't expect the sheep what is it yeah so this was pre-pandemic yeah 96 it says yeah brutal yeah so he's what he's talking about I think back then was also the AIDS crisis which that's a whole another bawwax and if you want to get into that in another time folks just please go read Bobby Kennedy's book the real Anthony fauci it's incredible but so this is another thing this is more gatekeeping it's the same kind of thing this maybe in a different way maybe not to protect the ego or protect money yeah one of the things with COVID that always always tickles me on that is the way that they threw the I feel up to me I feel like they threw the red herring of a mask at us I feel like the I feel like the mask was a bull fighters cape I feel like you've only got so many hours in a day you got to pick your battles and you've got the mask is an easy symbol it's everybody can complain about it because it affects everybody it's an easy touch stone you can see it you can it's it's but while you everybody's fighting that it really is effectively you just have to fucking wear a hat for a few months or a few years they're closing down our stores and taking the kids it's I got two more years of wrestling yeah fuck you you're not ever going to make state fuck you you just law that's the people that's the stuff that was getting lost the masks I will wear fucking masks over my face today if it'll bring back white elephant shit there's also no logical explanation if the vaccine worked give it to the people that are vulnerable let everybody else live their life that makes the most sense but they couldn't do that they had it pretend that the other people were vulnerable they had to pretend the children were dying of it they talked about it all the time no healthy children died of it it's not true they tried to pretend that it was really dangerous for young people it wasn't unless they were already really sick what it exposed in this country is that there are a lot of people that are completely full of shit that are in charge of telling us what the truth is and that also we're really vulnerable in terms of our health our health is very vulnerable our economy is very vulnerable we can't just shut the country down for a year and a half it doesn't work like that we're vulnerable it destroyed a lot of businesses destroyed people's lives caused so many people to become drug addicts so many people to commit suicide with there's a loss of life and a loss of hope and who knows what it's going to do to these young children that had to wear masks when they're in preschool who knows what the fuck that does to you learning how to talk with a mask on you're not reading mouths and lips and you're not getting a full facial feature to read off like children need for their development we've found out that there's a lot of people that just aren't telling you the fucking truth and the crazy thing is they were doing it in the age of the internet because they had been used to doing it for so long they they didn't develop the thing that people have now like now like especially someone like you or I who does stuff on YouTube you know that if you say something and it's not true you got to go back and say hey this is what I thought this is why I thought it but now I know that this isn't true because if you don't do that no one's ever going to fucking trust you again Anthony Fauci in the beginning of the pandemic like don't wear a mask it doesn't do anything it's just if anything it's gonna smuts with it and then later he's saying where I'm asked I wear two I wear two masks like what the fuck we have video man this is this is a different time this is in 1986 you can't just go and tell us some shit and we don't know whether or not you said something completely contrary to that just a month ago you know I think that might be part of why Kamala was so worried about the unedited thing you know the when Hillary fainted a few election cycles ago that video would have never made the news in the 90s they've just got bought right right right it's fucking before they nobody knew it existed before it was posted it was just like the dude and bam and now the internet has it has two fucking late so I think the real thing that did her in was combi oh yeah I think the investigation into the emails I think that like in the middle of the that was brutal that was crazy but what I'm getting at is that I think that that's especially for an older politician somebody like Biden how many decades of his life was he able to buy any video footage that was going to cause him any problems he just fucking squashed that two or three and now it's like they you didn't know nothing dude you just slip and follow you go and viral buddy and yam thing you could do about it also who's letting him walk up that fucking stair without having a catcher behind that come on I would have some giant dudes big old fucking lineman because if he's going down the stairs you got slippery shoes on that's a fucking precarious catch yeah and you know you got a hundred eighty pound man who stumbles and he falls backwards like yay no this is that's the fucking president don't just let him walk up that thing I was on with slippery shoes on he after he fell the third time why did they let him keep doing that I think maybe it was some of Gerald Ford's family was hoping he bricked a record people don't know giving away age here yeah oh the old girl's words where that's old I did it's next you're gonna do a nixon impression oh god yeah I'm not a croak yeah it's um it's all the whole thing was very eye-opening I think and I think that also led to Trump you know destroying in the election that that's probably has a lot to do with it I mean I mentioned before like they closed that white elephant store but like they closed so many bars in the town like I was thrilled that my favorite bar mutesies is still around but I had a close sign on it when apparently like the plumbing above it leaked and I thought they were gone too because it was closed down for them to fix that in the middle of COVID and it was just like god damn it it's like we lost so many things in that town that were just little mom and pop out fit yeah and just comes in and gets replaced with like target yeah and like you come to a city like this and you still got little shops that do well little cafes and whatnot but I live out in in this I live in a city but around it's a bunch of farm farm country and there's like the place in davenport that had these great milk shakes you can't fucking go there no more they're close gone and it's a bunch of places like did I better run for generation and it didn't have to happen that way then if you want to be real cynical the people that are the real progressive leftist that you should be cynical about that because it was the biggest transfer of wealth in the history of the United States the lower class lower and middle class lost 3.9 billion dollars or trillion was it trillion was the transfer it might have been trillion I think it was like 3.9 trillion dollars over the over the course of the pandemic and then that money was transferred to the the wealthiest people gained that money how what happened stocks mutual funds what what what what what what what magic are you doing you basically still money like something happened and through your policies you enabled the wealthiest people to get way wealthier in the poorer people to get way poorer it's like 3.9 trillion is that correct the transfer of wealth I'm looking at order from 2022 I didn't see anything nowhere yeah it's a newer one they they were talking about it really recently they were talking about it it like mirrors exactly trillion something in our two trillion I see hmm what year is that point two trillion two years uh let's say six I don't know I'm seeing the numbers let's just let's be conservative and say it's three trillion that's a crazy amount of money that gets transferred and no one is like freaked out that this was by policies and this is by keeping everybody's business shut down you could basically just take over because people still need to buy stuff and then these big companies that people have stock in did they the stock goes way up and then everybody gets wealthier this is kind of nuts well that the progressives are outraged that in this idea that it was protecting your health but how are you sure did you look at the data because it doesn't seem like it was over a several decades this is it was 50 trillion cheese from during the pandemic though cheese this 50 trillion from the bottom 90 percent and that's made the u.s. less secure yeah for fucking for sure it does but the problem is yachts aren't cheap bro no no no no no I'm not looking at them yet but maybe next we want to put in order for them super sonic jets you gotta have some chatter might time to take over a small country or two yeah or two yeah and it's it's it's pretty wild the the things that were lost during covid were in my mind one of the biggest things was the trust in the scientific community that they're being honest and I I you know I like science I like science a lot and I don't I think that just like most activists and most anything like when you look online and you see a transgender person is making a complete ass of themselves that's generally speaking not indicative of the way transgender people are even on the fucking internet man otherwise you wouldn't be seeing that person right but uh and everything with everything with cops with teachers with and with some crazy teachers saying nutty things from the class that's a small percentage a tiny yeah it's a problem it's a problem but it's not all teachers no but when when it's science the the deal is is that science fact checks itself like these guys all throw rocks at each other they write a paper and other guys are trying to rip it apart and prove them wrong and okay so in that environment it requires an acceptance for this kind of shit to fly for it for them to be able to repeatedly lie in peer-reviewed journals requires their peers to not review the fucking papers that's really the only only way that can happen and that happens so much like it's it's still the medical office first thing the club is first thing which was another thing that um Flint pushed back against and but obviously there's a lot of receipts like that guy almost lost his career was shunned by science and he was right yeah and our mainstream archaeologists tore that guy apart with personal attacks they tried to destroy his reputation destroy his career because they didn't want to be proven wrong great tried Tom Dilla hay was the guy who explained the whole thing to people so okay absolutely uh Clovis first is the theory that the first people in the first people in the Americas came over the barine land bridge like 14 15 000 years ago and they were used the Clovis points and this was the first American humans before that there were no people here now they started finding sites with 30 000 years old 25 000 years old and they started fucking with that narrative and archaeologists were for the most part pushing heavily against it there were a few scientists that would make the fines and that they would fight for them the one eventually it's been overturned now the Clovis first is not the narrative anymore and they're not really sure exactly who got here first they know the barine land bridge was part of it but they also think there was some people from that probably from the ocean in South America and who knows for sure it's up in the air they're not so certain anymore but uh the Clovis first debate it was so bad that the guy that uh won it basically a site in Chile called a Monte Verde was the site that eventually debate. It was so bad that the guy that won it basically a site in Chile called a Monte Verde was the site that eventually he had a bunch of people there. They looked at the site and when they left they were convinced that that was the end of the debate for all intensive purposes. There's still a few holdouts. How old was Monte Verde estimated? Yeah, 30,000 years of think, 27,000, like right in there. The guy that discovered that site and was excavating it, Tom Dillahay, was living in Chile under the time of Pinochet was in charge of Chile. One of his colleagues, there's video of this. I use this clip frequently. One of his colleagues called the state newspaper and said Monte Verde's CIA planted site in order to get him down into Chile. His wife and kids are there. The fucking threatened his life over this is the archaeologist version of swatting. Yeah, the video is all over the way. I use this clip frequently. He basically threatened his life straight up. He got letters to people saying that he wasn't a real scientist, that he did it. Is this Dillahay explaining this? Tom Dillahay explaining this. If Jamie could find it, what would the villi-video be? If you had to go on Google, Tom Dillahay interview will probably do D-I-L-L-E-H-A-Y. Sorry, I should have had that one pegged because I use this clip. I probably use it 10 times. It's not one of those, maybe our archaeology with it because he's talking to another archaeologist. Challenging clothes first here. Our calculus threatened archaeologist threatened one of their own over Clovis first. Is that it? No, it's on a, uh, yeah, there's me. That would actually have to play that. Archaeologist Tom Dillahay was instrumental in overturning Clovis first, with his excavations at Monte Verde. But this caused him to have his life threatened by his own colleagues. His excavations were done in Chile during the reign of the ruthless dictator Pinochet. Clovis first was hotly debated amongst archaeologists at the time, and one of them decided to use Pinochet as a means to silence Tom. Moved down to Chile during the dictator ship here as a Pinochet. So I was opening up anthropology department. So politically, it was difficult at that time. In another colleague who sent a letter to the newspaper in Chile on the major newspapers saying that Monte Verde was creation of the CIA. He couldn't plant me down there. And, you know, that puts you and your family in a dangerous situation in a country like that at that time seems to me like the archaeologist version of swatting someone. There's a small minority of people who would do anything in their power to defend their paradigm. Yeah. That's that's fucking wild. That's crazy. That's what I got murdered. Would they be happy? Would it with a guy and publicly executed him? Because they said he was a CIA spy. I'd like to say no. But I mean, would they be happy? That's such a psychotic thing to do to someone just because, but you know, these people, like everything that they identify as is the expert in this particular field. And they'll try to pretend Flint tried to pretend that that was a one off, you know, scientific debates happen. And a lot of guys will say, Oh, you know, that clovis first, it was bad, but we don't usually do that. Before Clovis first, there was the Folsom first debate, the idea that the Folsom people were the first ones here. And if you found anything older than I think 7,000 years or 3,000 years, whatever it was, anything older than a Folsom culture thing, it was bullshit. And you couldn't have a feel it you could it's on Wikipedia still. You could read about there's a couple of guys that basically formed a guard and didn't let anything get passed that point until eventually the Clovis first thing is it's not the first time. This is standard operating procedure created paradigm, defend it with life and death. There's a guy named Max Plank, he was a Nobel prize winning physicist. And he has Plank's principle, it's known as and it is science does not progress one discovery at a time. It progresses one funeral at a time. And this is a Nobel prize was in physicist physicist that said that not Graham Hancock. So I had fucking pretty hefty to think about that. That's just people are people, man. Yeah, put us on the moon. You're going to have people on the moon. Same fucking problems people on Mars. Someone's going to make a sex cult on Mars. It'll be good. First people will be like, look, I'm the fucking king of Mars, bitch. I'm running now. It's just it's just humans. And unfortunately, even humans that are attached to what we think of as these egoless pursuits like science. Yeah, that's the ego fucks up even science. But that's where it does frustrate me because if you take that job, it's like, okay, anytime you mean you're getting a fight, it's going to be aggressive and you get worked up and you get emotional. But if you become a cop, I expect you to fucking know that and roll that shit back. And it's the same thing with the scientists. I expect you to recognize that and roll that shit back. Yeah, roll that shit back. That's your job. That's your job. Tell us what the truth is. And if you lie, it doesn't mean that all that truth that you told in the past is now accurate. It just means you suck. That's all it means. So if you're a really good scientist, you say, this is what we thought. This is what we know now. And this is really amazing. And so I was wrong. All these books that I wrote stop buying them, folks. I'm going to have to write a new book. They don't ever want to say that. They never want to think that those lectures taught that those were inaccurate and that they're whole lot. They would be a mockery. They really would because those scientists are fucking vicious. They're so vicious after each other. They attack each other because they all want to be the fucking smartest guy in the room. And when anybody, oh, Mike, Mike's a fucking moron. Mike thinks that you heard him talk about Fauci the way Kerry Mullis talked about that. That's how they talk about that. He doesn't know anything. I'd say it right. It's just natural human aggression that's transferred into this field that we think of purely academic and quite frequently, these people are like I said earlier, a little emotionally off, a little socially. Sure. And so they just bullied their whole life now. So then they get to be the bully, which is one of the things that does happen. It's the revenge of the nerds. Really? Yes. You're right. That's the revenge of the nerds is. It is. It's like finally we get our turn to be mean. Didn't we not learn anything? This is how wars get started, people. This is how people wind up killing people because you're other the other. By the way, when I drew the parallel about us five, you know, I don't want a picture of me next to Shane Gillis. Don't need that. The whole idea of the truth is what we all should be pursuing. And it's just really unfortunate that people are attached to these things that they've said for so long. So much they're willing to go out of their way to prove someone inaccurate when they are accurate. And the clove is first thing is one of the better examples of that. And now that there's irrefutable evidence like the footprints that they found in New Mexico that have seeds in them, they're 22 plus thousand years old. Yes. Yes. Okay. It's out the window now. You don't know. How about now? We don't know. We don't know how people got here. We don't know how long they've been here. Quit trying to find a clear answer and like keep investigating. Right. Especially when we know South America had life, had all these humans living in South America. Like why wouldn't they move up to North America? Like why would that be weird? Like what's the oldest known people in South America? What's the oldest? I'm not to be honest with you. I'm not sure. The whole Amazon thing's got to throw that a big old monkey wrench of that. Well, they recently, you know who Thor hair it all was, the guy that did like the comteque voyage to prove that you could cross the ocean in a raft. Right. Okay. Yeah. He's an archaeologist. And now he pointed out that on Easter Island that the platform that the biggest oldest whatever moi or whatever they're called, that platform, the pulag at all, masonry, really strongly resembled what he saw in Peru to the point where he hypothesized that these were connected. And this was just mocked by archaeologists for a longest time. Now, not only do they have genetic evidence in the form of human DNA with a solid genetic drift from South America had not into Polynesia as well. But Easter Island has breadfruit, has ginger, and a couple of sweet potato. It's got food from both Asia and South America and the oldest habited layers that they found. So like they've very, and that's scientifically what is the oldest habited layers. I just like, I want to say like 1200 or 1800 years ago, it's not real real old, but it's old enough that like the oldest place that they've excavated and found that the first people, it looks like the first people showed up there came there from Asia and South America already. They've been connected to both. What was the evidence of cocaine and mummies? Was that bullshit? I'm not sure about that. I've, it's one of the things that every time I look into it, the data is kind of threadbare and as a skeptical guy and a guy who's had his share of time in bars and bathrooms, you have a lot stronger feeling that there was some anthropologist in the 70s who was just doing a fucking bomb. I'm sorry. It's way smoking a cigarette and doing a bump on the sarcophagus is way more likely than that just to me, but I could be wrong. And if you do on Coke, you might put a little Coke on the mummy. I'm going to do a Coke off this fucking. You know, you're a Coke daddy of mine. And you're doing archaeology and it's the 70s. And no one know it is like looking over your shoulder. You're a wild fucking Indiana Jones type Coke head. Fuck, there's already people with a, a, a, I fucking artwork out trying to make this Coke was the evidence. See if you can find what the evidence for Coke cane in Egyptian Mummy's was. The Russian scientist had said he found some in 1992. 90s. Look, I found Coke. He's doing blood. He's doing blood. They bossed him. I found Coke cane. He was in the mummy. I don't know. Yeah. It's good line. is definitely looking with my Coke cane. Cocaine hashesh and nicotine in the hair of henut tau, tau, tau. Well, um, cocaine hashesh. Okay. German talks called just svetlana bala banova discovered traces of cocaine hashesh and nicotine on her new toy. How do you say his name? Her new toiwi, tau is here as well as in the hair of several other mummies of the museum, which is significant in the only source for cocaine and nicotine had at that time been considered to be the cocoa and tobacco plants native to America. The Americas. And we're not thought to have been present in Africa until after Columbus voyage to the Americas. The result was interpreted by theorists and supporters of contacts between pre-Columbian people and ancient Egyptians as a proof for their claims. The findings are controversial because while other researchers have also detected the presence of cocaine and nicotine-de-d Egyptian mummies, two successive analysis of the other groups of Egyptian mummies and human remains failed to fully reproduced bala banova's results and some showing positive results only for nicotine. But even that is interesting, right? Well, yeah. And then the next line actually basically says what I just did after these experiments, even assuming that cocaine was actually found on the mummies, it is possible it just could be contamination. Yeah, it says that. It says even assuming that cocaine, which actually found in the mummies, could be contamination, which occurred after discovery of the mummies. The same argument could be applied to nicotine, but in addition various plants other than tobacco, our source of nicotine, and two of these, uh, withinia, some nithira and apium gravilins, sorry, were known to be used by the ancient Egyptians. Okay, so they did have some sort of nicotine plant. That was 92, 2007 researchers in Peru may have also found some. Oh, and inking mummies. But inking mummies are that's, um, that's there. That's where cocaine is. If it was actual cocaine, that would be crazy if there was like, if it was not just coca plant, but actually a little baggie for the future for your travels. Come in, please come back. We'll vial. They tucked away with him and his grave. We've done everything we could to get the aliens back. We're going to process some of that shit. Come on, boys. It would be fascinating if we actually could prove that somehow and other people from South America had made their way to Egypt and back and forth. And another interesting argument for that was always the old mix. Like what they looked Polynesian or African. They don't necessarily look like they're from South America. Yeah. And there's a, uh, there's a lot of the arguments that were made by those guys I brought up earlier that were back in the 1860s. They were, one of them was big into linguists and linguistics. And he made all these language models and stuff as to why that Maya was the first or proto language that was all these other ones were built on. The other dude was really into iconography. I'm sure you've seen some of the symbols that like you see around the world, like the, that girl that's sitting on the lions and the master of beasts. Yeah. Yeah. Things like that. You know, it's, it's not these aren't. It's aiming to pull that up. Oh, sorry. Yeah. I look up a master of beasts. Um, like, I guess, sorry. Uh, you're going to find some cartoon. Yeah. A couple of crosshops. I'm not says that. But the more testing that says that they might have been cocaine and up to eight bodies. Whoa. Whoa. It did multiple testing. Yeah. If you're living in Egypt, you're going to get some Coke if you got that kind of cheddar. You know what I mean? If you got like gold headdresses and what's the ultimate thing to have Coke, you know, clear. Yeah. Yeah. You're trying to get more women. So you got some guy who's coming over from South America. They're bringing Coke. And the wake of controversies radio and Munasi, gas chromatography, a master of spectrometry and all of those got the same results. All bone soft tissue and hair contain traces of the drug ruling. I'll possibly have external. Oh, okay. So they did have cocaine. Okay. There you go. Now you got some weird shit. Yeah. I look into this. Yeah. I'll put just slam the book and say it's accurate. Yeah. Master of beast. Yeah. Master of beast. If you look up like ancient symbol or hopefully that'll bring it up, I forget. Master of universe. I have the power. God damn, we're getting old today with the references. Sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm sorry. I'm mean man. Yeah. That's it. Yeah. That's it. So that exists all over the world. Yeah. That's that type of iconography of usually a woman, but sometimes a man all the way back into like Cara, Hayek, Turkey, like one of those go backly, Pepe type of sites has has this symbol and that type of symbol. You look at that master of animals one, the Wikipedia one in the middle, the gray one. Yeah, right there where your curse just was, Jamie. No, the one with your curse or what? Sorry, above that, that's cool too. But above that, that one. What's that one from? I don't know. Wild. I know. It is crazy. Because it looks like it's got two monsters next to her. The image that we were just looking on. There it is. There it is right there. What the fuck is that? What are those things next to her? They look like some kind of lion lizard hybrid, but look, they have like, desert tongues, snake. Yeah, it's tough to say. I mean, obviously, I say, I'm a tail in wings. Yeah, they have wings. What the fuck is that? And why does that exist all over the world? That's that's really where like, it's an interesting thing that when you see that kind of iconography, it's not the argument of well, a nail looks like a nail anywhere because you invented a nail, that falls apart because you're this is just symbols, right? This is just symbolism. So that was implies some contact, right? Why do we show some way long ago? Yeah. And why? How is that getting all around the world? Clearly people are bringing it. Now, see, that's what there's one place just because I don't necessarily ascribe to lost technology or ancient high technology. I don't get me wrong when it comes to like a lost civilization. I'm very much of the opinion that there was a civilization from before 12,000 years ago. They got wiped out by some sort of cataclysm. I don't think that it was I don't think that they had like real high technology, but they wouldn't have taken much technology for them to appear better than their contemporaries. If just we see evidence for that today too, which is a really good point, people say how is it possible that the rest of the world could have been so far behind? Well, they were. Okay. First of all, with the Egyptians, they definitely were exactly definitely proven everybody else's way far behind them. But even today, my friend Paul Rosalie, he lives in the Amazon. He's like, he protects rainforest and hires these people that used to be loggers to now protect the rainforest and amazing guy. He just filmed the other day and uncontact tribe. Just the other day, there's uncontact to tribes all throughout there. They they're completely naked and they're living as an assistant's lifestyle in the Amazon forest. Who knows what their fucking language is? Who knows what their culture is about? But this is a completely uncontacted tribe that exists today, along with us with AI on our smartphones. Yeah. Same time period. Right. So the idea that this couldn't exist at other parts of the world in the past. No, yeah, fucking for sure could. By the way, it fucking did in the 1800s when settlers were making their way across the United States. Dude, what their son never sets on the British Empire was because Europe was hop skip and a jump ahead of the rest of the world when it came to sailing and conquering people. And that's, you mean, are you about whether that's good or bad or whatever? But it just existed. It existed. We're talking about the abilities. They were bet they were better at it. And in the United States, it's the best example. And in what was going on when settlers came from Europe and making their way across the country, they were encountering stone age tribes. Yeah, effectively. Yes, 100% stone age. They were using stone tools. They were using flint arrowheads. There was a couple of people that had copper, but they weren't being, they weren't making weapons by a large government. Right. They were making jewelry and stuff. Yeah. It's pretty crazy. It's pretty crazy, but it's just a natural function of how human beings adapt to their environment. And it seems that the Nile Valley in Egypt was an abundant rich environment that had so much resources that allowed those people to stay there and thrive for thousands of years. And if you think of the area being a green Sahara, and then it slowly gets smaller, that Nile Delta would explain that concentration of people and ideas and stuff. Because you've got what would once spread out across a large area being all shoved together and making it almost a proto city type of thing or whatever. Yeah, I'm like the opinion that the whatever the loss civilization was, I'm of the opinion that they were really good at seafaring, which made it that they were really good astronomy. And I have put myself, I think that that handbag symbol. I think that that's a symbol of their ability to I think like that it is a symbol for a day. Like we were talking about before on that pillar, go back, let's say there's three of those handbags and he says each one is actually a sunrise. It's a why? Why is the handbag a sunrise? It's a the ground and it's a sun. It's not an actual handbag. It's a it's a ground and it's a could you look up go back like a pillar 43 sorry Jamie thank you. The in that case it looks less like a handbag because there's nobody holding it. But in this case, Dr. Martin Sweptman's on the work and looks like it's three different days he hasn't symbolized that. So going with that, instead of that three handbags there, each one with an animal next to it, he believes it that's denoting to so not a handbag, but the arc of the sun over the earth. Yes. So when somebody's holding one of those, I think that it's a symbol for a knowledge of astro of astronomy that most people don't have. So the astronomers with the people holding the handbags that's what I want to explain to you the cycles of time and they're the ones that were capable of seafarers. They were the ones that when they would show up, they would have the the same teamwork, the same ability to work with ropes and all that shit they could use to move megalis, the same mathematics or extension of it. It's the kind of thing that would be easier for them to move a big rock with a team of guys that have worked together working on boats, then it would be for them to move a big rock with a team of people who'd never done anything like that before. And that would also explain why a lot of times these are lined up with stars and shit like that because astronomy would be very important to them. So that's I do think that there was a lot of civilization. I mean, even simple shit like the bow and arrow and all of it. If you think about how complicated that would be to effectively create all the way, it's like it's easy for a dude to figure out the tension, but building a flight in an arrow that's like weighted this it's way different than a spear, it's being launched from the back, not the center. So you can't just transfer it over. Is it requiring multiple people over multiple generations in my opinion? I think that the fact that we see it all over the fucking planet says some, that probably people were traveling. Yeah, it's not something that people would figure out on their own everywhere. Now we have a lot of bottles too, right? Yeah, and people figured those ones out. So that seems like a more simple. Yeah, a lot simpler. Why isn't that everywhere? So the bow and arrow probably was, but the bow and arrow supplanted it and it was only kept where you really needed to penetrating power of the out of battle. Right. So that's again, this is all just spitballing, but we don't know for sure. I could say that I do, but I don't. So it's just so it's so interesting. Really so interesting because the concept of if these mummies that choke cocaine really are proof that somehow or another, someone came from the Americas with cocaine and made their way to Egypt, boy, that throws the whole thing throws a monkey wrench into the whole gears of our timeline of civilization. Oh man, how are they doing that? How did they get over there? And it's so fucking far and a knocky taxi cabster. What's your, sorry, this is a big based off of what you're saying with like it's a time measuring tool. I'm looking for more examples of it. This is a very interesting explanation. I don't know if it's accurate. Hopefully you can shed some light on it. Does this make any sense? What it's saying about a water clock? Yeah, so baboon, because there's a dammit. I can pull it up. No, it's just reading this. What is this from? What is this? We get this Reddit Reddit. I'm explaining what this is. The hieroglyph depicts one form of something called a water clock or say that word. Club side, draw, high draw, high draw, high draw, which was used to tell the time by the drainage of water through a small hole. The item associated with thoth due to its use as a measuring tool and thus miniature versions or models made of, how's that? What's that word? Finance. What's that word? I don't know. Finance. Sorry. Often had baboons incorporated into the structure. It said that horror, horror polo in hieroglyphica that it was traditional to allow water to drain out of a hole in the baboon's genitalia because the baboon apparently cries and urinates 12 times a day on the equinoxes. So you just like force feed water into a baboon to figure out what time it is? Take a nice clock. It's just how it's time to go to eat. Monkey's howling. It's not the exact reason. The hole was indeed sometimes placed at the end of the baboon's penis. Model, non-functional versions of the water clock often mimic the shape of the hieroglyph itself similar to the mawt figurine and may have been used in offering rituals. See if you can find one of those figurines. So that's a water clock built on the idea and the water clock, the water comes out of the baboon's penis. I know that the ancient Egyptians like would measure time during the evening hours with water clocks like that. They would have people tasked with keeping time for the area. Oh, look at that. It's a baboon water clock. The water comes, it drips out of his dick and when all the water, so it's like a sort of like an hour clock. Yeah, but it's the baboon's dick. That's crazy. That's impressive. I found out something new today. Yeah, that makes it worth it. A couple of that pillar there's shown. I think someone else has explained to us that those are like, they could think that's the time like calendar, those are days or months or something like that. Yes. All of this is time. Yes, that's, so he went, Dr. Martin's equipment thinks is those three handbags there are three of the cardinal points like two equinoxes and one solstice, I think, and then the condor down there holding the sun is what he believes. He believes that's Sagittarius and that it's do you know, basically denoting that the fourth cardinal point of the year and that all those other marks add up to the squares are a month, the V's are days. And at the end of it, according to his interpretation, it's where he thinks that it's a recording of the time that the asteroid hit, the younger dryest impact. Wow. And his, he's wrote two scientific papers on it. He's come under a a lot of fire for it. But the majority of the fire is really funny. It's like, okay, he's, he's a chemical engineer. And so he's a mathematician by trade. He's a number cruncher. And so the first thing everybody says, ah, days is not an archaeology. You got a fucking number cruncher in here. It's like the field of archiostronomy, as it's called, was first officially recognized because of the work of a guy named Alexander Tom. He's the one that was like plot, not a bunch of shit in England whatnot. Right. And seeing that this lines up with that, it looks like this, the ancient would stand here to look there. He predicted that they would find a viewing platform and it was at a certain site. He's like, they stood up on the side of that hill. I bet you find a platform there. They found that platform. And now it was, he's starting to do some science here. He's making predictions and they're coming true. This guy was an engineer, not a chemical engineer, he used a construction engineer, but he had fuck all to do with archaeology. This is very common. If you look at the teams that make up archae astronomy expeditions, it's usually an astronomer, an archaeologist, and then somebody who's just a math with, he's really, really, he's way above the pay grade on either one of these guys when it comes to number cruncher. And that's generally speaking the teams that make these things up. So when they go beaten at this guy, right, that betrays, they don't even know what this fucking field. And of course, these are all scientists and historians by and large that are doing that. So it's really hilarious. It's like you guys are, you don't even look, you don't even open the goddamn book. One of them famously or infamously to me because I drag him for it frequently said if it looks like a duck, if it walks like a duck, well, I hope you understand. And it's like, well, I understand between us talking, but I do not fucking understand that for a scientist. Fuck you on that. If your job is to test chemicals to figure out which one does what you don't say, well, it kind of looks like this and so I'll skip it. You fucking test each one. Same thing here. Hypothesis comes at you. You don't get to be like, well, it kind of resembles the one that that one cooke came up with. We'll reject it. You test it or you don't call it science. You call it guesswork. Well, it's also really interesting with when in regards to go backly, tepi that they've essentially put a giant halt on the amount of excavations being done there. And they've even planted trees over the areas that have not been excavated yet. Yeah, they've done. Yeah, some of the trees footage that I've seen is just abhorrent. And isn't that aren't the trees a protected species of tree? Yep. So you can't cut them down. Can't cut them down. And I know why would you do that? Well, why would you do that over one of the most important historical sites in human history? Well, the guy that did it, like he owns the site, right? And then they find it and now he's trying to sell it or not trying to still excuse me. The government comes like 10 years later and tells them that they're going to buy it. And it's just like if you're like, if the government's going to build a highway, it doesn't matter how much you're paid for your home. It doesn't matter what you go on your property. They're going to come and look at it and they have an equation form. And that's all that matters. The swing pool's not on that form. Fuckin swing pool doesn't get paid for. Well, on this farmland, adding all of trees made that an orchard instead of basically arid farmland. It's made it more valuable. But what's funny about this is like we talk about the arguments against this stuff and how stupid it is. Okay, Jim points out that it's a, these trees are a problem. It's sensitive. What's funny about this is like we talk about the the arguments against this stuff and how stupid it is okay Jim points out that it's a there's trees are a problem and since it's Jim and Jim is fucking public enemy number one to archaeologist But I'm coming to get you Jim. It's gonna be my spot soon Anyway Since since Jim is fucking hated by these guys. It doesn't matter it There is tons of documentation on with a problem with having tree roots above a site all the way from a Contamination with different microbes to they use a certain species of snail in Europe to determine certain dates and tree roots that punch right through that shit and Introduce that snail the places it shouldn't be right Tree roots will if if that one of those enclosures that go backly tempeh is filled with water or have had a well in it All those roots are screaming down that thing and just blowing it to shit. It's gone So it's there's a number of things archaeologist and everything I just told you that's shit Archaeologists say I learned all that from reading papers about what the problem the tree roots can cause to Archaeological sites because everybody knows they caused at least all the construction guys know they caused problems with foundations But they don't care. They'll are you all the all those tree roots are so bad That's a protective. It's not such a big as all because Jim mentioned it had Flint mentioned it first They would be all up in arms about taking that taking care of those trees. It's it's it's so clearly Red rover red rover. It's all about teams. It's just it's just stupid at that point where it's just it's reprehensible in times to be honest with you It's just shocking that Steps haven't been taken to mitigate that when you consider that this is one of the most important Archaeological sites ever so it's through the monkey wrench into the whole idea that people were capable of Building stuff like that only around six thousand years ago. Yeah It blasted that on its ear like you were saying earlier. I remember I Drive me nuts because I can't find the Clip but I remember seeing it years ago of Graham talking to somebody and the guy saying wheeled that that Show me the civilization that was with Zawie, who was and there was another archaeologist the guy with glasses Yeah, that's what he was saying openly dismissive in the most disgusting way. Where's the evidence? Yeah, but yeah Then they find it back in those days the standard operating model for humans Becoming from hunter-gatherer hunter-gatherers to civilization was you were Had to start farming and then you created a surplus of food and once you had enough of a surplus of food for long enough You started to have these ruling classes emerge you get your astronomers and your priests and your shamans and all these guys don't want to work And so pretty soon you get these cities going and shit but This can only happen we have a huge surplus of food because that's obviously just wasted labor Will go backly type a really through that on its ear because there ain't no goddamn farming right then there's the beginnings of it Ain't no there ain't no surplus of food there. There's I mean there's no surplus of human created food You might be finding lots of animal bones and shit, but it wasn't like they grew a bunch of food So it completely destroyed that entire narrative and that's the part that because it's a Graham Hancock site They will they're slow to really admit that but Go buy a book from the 90s and read about how how humans progressed from And by an anthropology book and you'll see it very clear that that they completely had to rewrite shit because they go backly type it Yeah, and it's also it's a weird one too because they know it was intentionally covered up 11,000 years ago. That's not that that one's wild. That's wild. That's one thing It's been pushed back on a lot But it does look like that's there's papers published both ways, but it does look like last I saw it does look like the consensus is it was buried What's the pushback? The sides of the hill would like collapse Into the thing and so that they would just eventually Just kind of push some more of it in there and just leveled it out so they could use the area because it was a bunch of holes in the ground You couldn't walk your donkeys over or anything. I know it's a little bit of a lot of work There's a lot of areas around it. You can walk your donkeys Yeah, it's not like the whole area. Yeah, I agree. I I think they go backly toppy like any of those I don't think I'm well aware just like the Because Jimi's involved with it anything Graham Hancock touches those guys they They're they're gonna poop it just gonna dismiss it and It's sad because like he is Them hitting him with the racist thing in particular. That's good. You know Graham. That's that hits him He at fucking hurts. He's very sensitive. He doesn't and that that kind of shit man There are people in that that are Atlantis hunters today. There's the guy Roberts the fear I hate to say his name even But I will because he needs to be put on blast a bit. This guy is he's an Atlantis bro He he thinks it the DNA story that we've been told out of Africa's wrong. Okay fine, whatever Where the rubber hits the road is when he starts seeing hills show like pictures of like old-school anthropological models proto humans that are Guild dark skin and big hair coming out and looking half monkey half man and then He'll say there's no way that this could come from the same stock and then show the like a little six-year-old Danish girl with perfect Fucking big blue eyes and and and this is this kind of constant constant digs at At Africans not out of Africa, but at Africa they will all these different species Bread with different hominids and these guys bred with the stupid ones and these other guys bred with smart ones and these guys bred with strong ones And it's like it's very It's racist for lack of a better term. It might not even be what you consider white supremacist, but it's definitely It when you're done with if you were to take everything he said and accept it you would walk away thinking that different Groups of humans are clearly better than each other genetically Fucking hands down and you can judge it based on skin So that is racist right? What does that have to do with landness? Well, he's believes that Atlantis was like the people that spread the ideas around and stuff kind of the same stuff I was saying earlier about that Ignatius Donnelly guy. Oh, okay, so he it so he is what you would think he's got 300,000 subscribers You're so on YouTube. He's not a nobody So you would think he's the guy that these guys will be poking at for being a fucking racist But they don't and there's a real big reason why they almost never do like two people with any following at all That have letters next to their name to taking shots at this guy on YouTube and the reason is it's He's he is What they actually claim Graham is so it's it's like If if you have somebody that's complaining about a trans activist The one that screaming call me ma'am That's what they're trying to say Graham is but actually that's what Robert is and then Graham's just would be standing there being like hey, how's it going? So the problem is if you pay attention to that guy and you see the real racist then it doesn't work when you call Grammar race that you can't call him a racist anymore. Yeah, and so they all they probably don't want to give him any attention Well, they don't they gave him a tent they talk about him. They do they just Like I said, I didn't want to mention his name and I know I'm going to get people yelling at me about Saying that but it's the stuff that he puts out is very clearly If you were like if you take it all on board it would be very you would be a racist if you were to just accept it All you'd be like me. Well that guy's black. He's just not smart. Me. Sorry Fuck there's a clip for you Flint have fun with that so they the One of the things that I saw on your channel in regards to Atlantis was this alloy That they found these ingots. They found this I'm having trouble also Oh Collion something like that something like and it's a combination of volume zinc and what is it's in can copper and Silver I think it was like it's in can mostly zinc and copper Maybe it was a tiny bit of silver and it might have just been zinc and copper and they they have found Shephercks that have this stuff in it and it was written about before to like Like it wasn't just written about with Atlantis like they'd written about it. It was metal that the Greeks used it was Basically from one from one little mountain region and I have one of your videos. I was watching yesterday I didn't send it to Jamie Did you find a Jamie? Yes, that's it That's the word yep. How do you say that word or a Collion or a Collion metal in this? Calicum maybe I don't know covered from shipwreck off Sicily yep That's it so this was an early Version of a metal that they had created yeah, well they think that they might be an alloy that was found but they That it was like a naturally occurring copper that way They're not a hundred percent. I believe But you can make it we could yes as an alloy we could yes What's interesting is it does talk about that in it and could scroll up at the camera? It says today most scholars agree that or Calium is a brass-like alloy which was made in antiquity by Seamentation the process was achieved with the reaction of zinc or charcoal and copper metal in a crucible Analyzed by x-ray Has a fluorescence With x-ray fluorescence fluorescence fluorescence. Oh, do or by dario Panetta of teacute technologies for quality the 39 ingots Turned to be an alloy made with 75 to 80 percent copper 15 20 percent zinc and small percentages of nickel lead in iron What would be the benefit of that alloy? It was considered like beautiful like gold but cheaper easier to get And second only to golden value was found in and mined in many parts of legendary Atlantis nation times Yeah, they said that they temple walls in Atlanta as we're supposed to have been covered with that stuff But that's where you know myself and I know this I think that there's a really good chance that a lot of the evidence that we have a lot of the Written records the myths and stuff of of Atlanta. So I think a lot of that's going to have a cultural infusion So heavy into it that a lot of the details that get lost and you could almost just be like there was a civilization that was More advanced than the people that wrote about them, and that's almost all you could take away sometimes like like the Greeks Atlantis happened to be a democratic society. Well, no shit the Greeks they valued that democracy It was something they were real proud of so of course this great place was democratic and of course they had the same There that rich ass metal on the fucking they covered their temples that ship, huh? It's to me. You know what I mean It's just like that a lot of people say that the whole thing You know that Plato just used Atlantis as an allegory or a myth. What is this Jamie? brass Let's say the chemical analysis the ingots found in 2015 shipwrecked high-quality brass brass is an alley of copper and zinc While the ancient Greeks did not know metallic zinc they knew zinc coating ores and the description That or Calium has similar color and shine as gold fits well with the properties of brass Well brass is not exactly a precious metal. It does not corrode and it's widely used on jewelry marine instruments and medical instruments Goldsmiths and jewelers describe brass as mahogany of metals wasn't that That that device. I don't remember how to say the word A ticker anti-kith room. Yeah. Wasn't that made out of brass as well part of it was brass. Yes. Yeah That's crazy. That's insane. That thing is insane. It's just some serious linking going on serious planning and Um, as I said numerous times I think that if it didn't look so clunky when they found it I don't think that we'd have it. I think it ended up on some rich guys shelf because it's way too fucking cool They looked at it. I'm just like, yeah, there's like a massive metal with like some gear frozen to it I don't know it's all corroded shit and then they bring it up and handed off me Oh, fuck me look what we got here. Yeah, I mean, that's you know that looks kind of cool But it doesn't look nearly as it just looks like a wheel and it was found next to a bunch of statues, right? So they had to have stuff of real value as far as they were concerned But what's really fascinating is the 3D analysis of what it was and how it worked See if you can find that when they show like a and that's it right there This is the depiction of what it looked like when it was actually functional. Yeah, it's insane. It's like what the fuck is that thing? And this was some sort of super sophisticated calendar, right? Yeah, basically. It's a Then all that thing it's school where you would thought it was how they traveled No, it gives weather patterns and stuff. Well, it doesn't weather patterns phases and weather patterns Right that it's you know those things that you in a in high school or college where you turn a crank and The sun and all the planets go around it, right? Corresponding that's what star phases you can correspond weather with star phases I guess if you're doing a calendar, right? So if you're looking at when when is it gonna be winter? Yeah, exactly Oh, fucking cool. Yeah, it's pretty impressive. It's like way early than anybody thought anybody had a mechanical clock Well, yeah, there's That stuff. I haven't researched for a long time, but I remember that's what it looks like so it's separated Everything oh Yeah, I always say it's effectively that's the same kind of thing basics. So that's what it's based on all those little Well, no, it's it's that's those are based on it or The a kids are making of those way before that right like yeah, so what year was this supposedly? I want to say like 1500 BC or something as what us but I might be 500 okay, yeah, is that what it said Jim? Second century BC oh, so okay 200 BC, but There was definitely more than one of those. Oh god. That's what's crazy So this is the whole thing when you're talking about ancient technology if this is only 2200 years ago 15,000 years ago you're gonna find shit like that is so much longer And if you think about how eroded that is if that thing was still in the ocean 10,000 years from now there'd be nothing left. Yeah, that's the other thing that's really gross about the whole shipwreck dismissal Is that these ships are made out of wood? The wood would be gone This idea that would all be preserved because a cold water. There's no evidence of that There's evidence of things that are like 600 years old a thousand years old as soon as you get older than that You get nothing but the pottery and the jewelry on the floor of the ocean, right? That's yeah, absolutely right. It's yeah, we don't we don't we don't have Fuck off for shipwrecks way back in those days and and those ships that are preserved from Even close to like 10,000 years ago. Aren't ships at all fucking canoes that are found in bogs and places right if it's in the ocean It's not it's Swiss cheese after a few a few thousand years and you can have nothing left. Yeah um One of the things that really is sad about that whole deal is it's You know that there was a potential for a real good discussion to be had there Flint does know a lot about archaeology and He could have sat down with Graham and had a good conversation about this stuff, but If you in order to do that he would have had to have not Construted as a debate in his mind. I mean, I'm quite early was just still going to get labeled as such, but By cons my making a debate in his head. It's like you have to win You have to win and how do you have to so shut holes that can't be so in shut if we're talking about Like that with those other shipwrecks. Oh, well, they've got to make sure that there's no shipwrecks You got to make sure that there's no place for him to speculate whatsoever because And that's just like that dude So you end up with Rebekah's he's still right in one way right in the way he's right is there's no evidence of a 10,000 year old shipwreck No, there is no evidence of a that's true That's all you have to say and you have to say well We have to make a giant leap if you want to assume that people were seafarers, but it is possible And if it's possible that two thousand years ago like what we do We really know for absolute certainty what year the boat was invented. Thank you But I'll tell you something that's it's kind of painful and hilarious But sad about this you know Flint they're closing the as a anthropology department at this university Flint teaches there right now um They're closing down another anthropology departments and archaeology departments across the world right now across the country There's I've just posted what a couple days ago um Flint was sitting here with Graham talking to you and There was the opportunity for him to say We do need to do more investigation Graham I completely agree with you Which is why I think we need to get some people out there to do some underwater archaeology. Where do you think Graham? We don't sort of fear to play Droming that fucking business what and and then the two it then it's a very least even if Even if he looked down his nose at everything Graham had to say The cheddar comes in the investigations happen and everybody's happy Instead When they're closing his fucking department. I mean dude It's to me. It's just such a I mean they're not might not necessarily be directly related But he had an opportunity that he completely didn't just piss it away. He just drove it into the ground Did the opposite of what he should have done with it and they do that as a matter of course? Jimmy Corsetti brought up once about a year ago on Twitter. He's like oh, yeah, you know I think the Nephilim in the Bible it talks about the Giants and Nephilim I think maybe that might be an extinct species of hominid and Maybe Denise Evans maybe Neanderthal so instead of being like hey, that's interesting man But you know what Denise and Evans and Ann Neanderthaler thought are both the wrong size for they would neither one of them Were bigger than humans so they couldn't be giants you need to look into gigantic Epithecus or maybe some other and sent Jim on On to go learn about science instead. They said not fucking stupid both of these are smaller than that God this Jimmy Corsetti guys a fucking grifter god he's stupid and then I Come a long and point out that you had a you missed opportunity here guys Why are you doing it like this? You why are you being dicks instead of trying you're trying to be a science educator, right? He has a bigger platform than you right Giant thing is always weird to me because there's so many people that believe in cookie shit that want to believe there was giants Hmm, and that there's the they hit him Smithsonian. They've got to talk to away like hi Why would they hide giants like what would society fall apart if we knew that at one point time there were 11 foot men running around And what happened to them and maybe they're just like a lot of other large animals that just like they need too many resources Yeah, you ate it all and that's why they're gone. Yeah But maybe they're just dumb as shit We ate them and we Killed them. Maybe we got tired of them rating our villages They couldn't figure out weapons because they were so big they never had to if we do know that they're just tiny Hobbit people Why wouldn't we assume that look if the tallest humans are like what's the tallest guy ever? He's like nine feet tall at three. Okay. We're waddling. I grew up near him. So let's imagine something two feet bigger than that That's not so hard to believe There was a bunch of them. Is that hard to believe if we find out that there was a little hobbit people and if we find out there was Dennis ovans and What's those big-headed people that they found we were talking about it? They found in China the extra large skulls We were it's a very recent discovery. We were just talking about it So they thought in one point time they were Dennis ovans and now they think it's a completely separate chain No, yeah, they're always hiding these new little weird humans, but these big-headed people they had like large brows and they're Skalls were much larger than ours They were yeah, and they we just had we pulled images of them the other day remember they look giant They look they we had jacked versions of it Columns just a large-head people. Yeah Fuck they didn't a big-head people discovered. I did it. There's a wet the literally the website says large-head people Yeah, I don't have a better name for it, but remember we did find a better name the other day That's it. Those are the people. That's the article. So this is December 2024. So it was really recent Provocative new piece of nature proposed a whole new group of ancient Humans cousins of the Dennis ovans and Neanderthals Then once lived alongside homo sapiens in eastern Asia more than a hundred thousand years ago The brains of these extinct humans who probably hunted horses and small groups were much bigger than any other hominin Other time including our own species Wow. Yeah, what bigger brain things like what is this thing? Jula-ren yeah large Google jularen images. There's some cool fucking CGI versions. What they think this thing looks like good images Damn There's one where he's like super jacked. Oh, that's like that one over there far like look at that Super jacked Primate that stands upright. Here's a weird one. How come all the intelligent things stand upright? Is it because you need your hands free? Because if you're walking on four legs you never figure anything out because you're always using your hands to walk with that might be part of it Like you need to become bipedal Like a opposable thumb. Yeah, so you can pull the aliens don't though They gave up on that they would just want three digits Well, that's because they all just do tablets now. Yeah, they're so advanced. They're just scrolling. Yeah, you're seeing a little kid take a magazine and try to like I saw this today. This is the world's all of some of me in the world's smallest woman. Wow. Yeah Right look how that's insane and those are both human beings. Yep, right at the same time Well one of the things that's interesting to me about the giant bones like the reports that they go the things that they use to really They're smoking gun is like there's a few reports from like the west coast and like Grand Canyon and shit and they would send these letters back. We have like Or the real a newspaper that this guy discovered these big giant bones into there bringing them back and right I'm of the opinion being the skeptical person I'm of the opinion that this was more of an announcement to the people back east that hey If these things happen to get stolen along the way and I happen to find a bunch of money along the way Now's your chance because once they get to the Smithsonian boys, they're theirs So I don't think any of them made it if these exist if they were giant bones at all I don't think a damn one of them made the Smithsonian. I think they got bought up Let me fuck come on these guys have their fingers have Bezos type character from 18 to Declare in his house archaeology became a field You go over some skull and bone type do's house Jesus Christ he's all the giants go in metal metal plates on his face How many people have those little alien babies? Those little alien skeletons? How many people I mean people find out about that some crazy Chinese billionaire? They get me a little alien come on I want it for my my study Yeah, and that's basically how that's you know, they'll probably happens a lot right because these archaeologists aren't making much money No, and of course it happens like especially in the third world and shit. Oh, yeah I mean and that's where all the not all but that's where a lot of the cool stuff is but you go to a place like that It's like yeah your boy up in Alaska finds a spot and he because it's not human remains You can do over the fuck you was right those were native remains would be a different story, but and Like he he's pulling cash out of that but Guys in other countries where they don't even get having enough defeat me look at how the dead sea scrolls were found Right they buy them off of fucking little kids and shit right If people had no money like the kids throw rocks up there and then they find them and then the dudes The guys buys it the first ones were bought from the kids that found them. They're crazy It's insane for nothing of course Imagine if they were just burned somewhere. Imagine someone said this is a heresy in the little modifier Like we would have lost it all like library of Alexandria like all that Well that shit that ISIS blew up all right right fuck. Yeah. Oh crazy that hurt I see those videos was like bad right that about the mummy that's how they found them the nazcom Mummies there were grave robbers because there was found in a cemetery area Someone found some weird ones, I guess amongst the bodies Which ones do you think of them? Which ones do you think they took first? Yeah, you walk in there and there's all these One of them's really extra crazy look at us. Give me that one. Give me the alien I want the giant head that the reports that with I told you Rockefeller got those big skulls the reports say that they gave him three or four bundles That were in desperate need of repair I call bullshit of that. I think he got the four best motherfucking bundles they had problem laying probably got him set up with like a UFO in the Backround in his house. You're gonna go to a secret room Visitors be been here forever But one of the things I did want to ask you is one of the wacky or theories that I read online was that there was a discovery of Some sort of an Egyptian temple in the Grand Canyon. Yes, I've heard this. Yeah, that's a place though one guy's story It's cool I want to believe too. That's the problem. I want to believe too. Why would they hide that from us? Well The only reason that there's a part of the Grand Canyon you can't go with you. That is true There's where this can't go was the rule. I think it's we have to do with Native American stuff But I haven't dug too terribly into this to be honest with him have a casino and let us go there It might even be as be because they're worried about people falling off the side of a cliff or something in dying But they die every day Not every day, but like every year someone dies at the Grand Canyon But this is supposed to be that cave was supposed to be in that area And it's supposed to be like pretty hard to find pretty inaccessible But yeah, I was supposed to have all kinds of Egyptian relics and stuff in there. You imagine the government's been hiding that from us and UFOs You guys found an Egyptian temple in the Grand Canyon You hit it for so long. You had to keep hiding it otherwise you would have been an asshole five years ago You know, it's like we don't ever ever admit we were assholes So we'll just like keep it hidden forever and ever. We'll know who killed JFK before we get to see what's in that cave Allegedly allegedly. Yeah. I'm not buying anything. No What's gonna release the documents sure what once yeah once the One say something we're gonna release documents. I was like sweet I'm gonna go look into it and they're like oh, I was just gonna take a couple three out of fuck you Well, they have to go through it all You know because they haven't done that yet Well, I get I just it's If the family you know the maybe you could be the grandson of one of the people involved has got power or something Nowadays it doesn't really matter a whole lot right like just if there's power involved They're just gonna kick that especially if somehow or another You could show that those people profited from that power and then that family's inherited that money and it'd be held liable Yeah, listen Dan. I really enjoy your videos. They're great. It's great channel de-dunking It's awesome. It's on YouTube always great to talk to you I'm glad you came back here to do it again, and let's do it in a time. Yeah, I would love to have you so much I would love down here. We'll decipher it Thanks for the invite you I really appreciate my great conversation. I enjoy it. All right, bye everybody