The general gonna experience... Did you read the email leaks? The emails from Peter Sethick? Yeah, all the different discussions that they had about their concerns that they were responsible for this through gain of function research. They applied for a grant to specifically do a... To insert a fear and cleavage site, which is that particular part of the virus that raised so much concern. Yeah, I mean, look, the thing is like, this gets back to the same thing I think we're dancing around a little bit, which is I don't know sometimes what to do with this. It's highly suspicious. I think of this in some times the way I think about my teenage kids. They're not telling me everything here. And I do I automatically assume they're totally guilty of everything I think they're guilty of, or is there something else going on here, you know? I think China has not... Part of being prepared in my World War C book is that... We have to have a world health organization that's actually empowered to be able to do things. It's just... It's to behold, and I think, to China. And there was a letter that came out from Peter Dashingon February of last year that he wrote in the Lancet, along with a bunch of other people saying this thing, you know, this is ridiculous to suggest that this is somehow been bio-engineered at a lab. Meanwhile, the internal emails suggested that he had very different concerns. That's worrisome. And I said that to Peter, this is not making sense. And what did he say? He said, hey, there's no evidence that the virus ever existed in this lab. There's no evidence that it leaked out well. Well, that's because they destroyed a lot of evidence. This is concerning. They deleted how many... How much evidence did they delete in 2019? I mean, some stunning amount. Well, the entire database went down. Exactly. And I said to him, you were part of the WHO investigation. Did you see the database? Now, it's been over a year later. He said, no. When I said, is that not of concern to you? He said, look, he goes, it was a public database. They were worried about hacking. And so that's why they took it down. I said, if it was a public database, why were they worried about hacking? You know, where were they trying to hide? You know, so I don't... I don't know, Joe, what to make of it. There's clearly, as you said earlier, I think he said, were there smoke, there's fire probably? But can I say conclusively? No. And part of me thinks we may never know. We don't have a system in place at a sort of global level to mandate that these things actually come to light. Yeah. We don't treat this like we treat Department of Defense issues. We don't treat, you know, we should be thinking about this more from a defense standpoint rather than a public health preventive standpoint. That's interesting. Yeah. Yeah. When you see Fauci being grilled by Rand Paul, and he denies that they were doing gain of function research, what are your thoughts on that? Because by any definition that was gain of function research, right? Gain of function research is taking a virus... We should probably Google the exact definition, but what my impression is that gain of function means you are imparting new ability to this virus to infect humans, right? The idea is that you're juicing it up and making it more contagious, right? And that type of research has been done. And in fact, I think it wasn't 2015, I think in the Netherlands somewhere. But if the NIH was giving funding to eco-health alliance, and eco-health alliance was funding that kind of research. And then the Fauci is not being honest about that. I think the NIH is clearly funding eco-health alliance, and eco-health alliance is clearly giving grants to women in the Institute of Erology. Here's how they answer the question when I asked them, including Francis Collins, who's the head of the NIH. They define gain of function research as this. You have a known, bad, contagious pathogen, and you're going to essentially use the backbone of another known, bad pathogen, and you're going to splice them together essentially. You're taking one thing that you know to be bad, and contagious, and splicing it with something else that you know to be bad. That is, you're expecting this to be worse than what you started with. If you're taking a novel virus, and you don't know how contagious this is, and you're basically saying, look, I want to isolate the spike protein on this new virus, I'm going to put it on the backbone of something I do know. And make it contagious to humans. We'll see how it behaves at that point. Does this actually start to behave as something super contagious or not? The possibility is that it could, but they're not sure. So this is nuanced, and you know, a lot of people have taken issue with an including scientist who work in the field. But the strict definition is that you've got to know for gain of function research, you know that it's going to lead to gain of function. So maybe the problem is using the term gain of function. Yeah. If we instead abandon any sort of nomenclature that might be problematic and say, were they doing experiments to make viruses more contagious to people? The answer would be yes. Yeah. Were they doing experiments that could lead to viruses being more contagious? Yes. I think that that's right. That is research that is done to try and figure out. And it's a lot of these pathogens they examine. They're not contagious. They put the spike protein and they put some component of the virus onto the backbone of a known thing, and it doesn't do much. So they say, we're not to worry about this. But it could turn into a situation where you take a component of a new virus. You put it on the backbone of a known virus and it does lead to something much more contagious. And that's what a lot of people are concerned about here. I mean, you know, there was part of those emails as you know, Joe, where emails that were sent to Fauci January of last year were Christian Anderson raised this concern. He subsequently wrote a paper saying, hey, those changes that we saw, I thought that that was clear evidence of bioengineering. But now I've seen evidence of those same abnormalities in existing naturally occurring viruses. So now I don't think that's the problem. But it's just, it's going back and forth. And, you know, frankly, we may never know for sure. Watch the entire episode for free only on Spotify.