Jadie Vance, thank you for this. We're on the road. You're in Phoenix. Yep So where is the race right now? I mean sincerely to the best of well for sure before we start who is that? This is Atlas. Atlas come back. Atlas come What's up, buddy? So this is Atlas which I found out on the internet a few weeks ago that he's actually a rent a dog It was given to me by the campaign to make me seem Like I'm a dog fan And it's actually hysterical to hear these love to be like oh that dog that's that's totally not his dog and You know, of course we got him when he was like an eight-week-old puppy and we've been you know We love dogs and he's he's been our little guy But he's like so well trained and so normal It's like shocking to me that anybody would think that he's not our puppy, but On the road with you he's on the road with us. Yes, we have our whole family up here My kids are like you know two two stories above And of course they woke up at like four thirty the ass crack of dawn because they're on like East Coast time Yes, I have time and here we are in Arizona So we've been up for a long time. I appreciate you doing this, but I'm gonna drink a lot of coffee during our Dinner anyway you asked you asked how is the race? Yes, so what is it? I mean, what is your sincere belief about how this plays out? I mean look I think we're gonna win and I think we're gonna win I wouldn't say Comfortable but I don't think it's gonna be the sort of thing where you know three days later We don't know the results of the election who knows of course. I've been wrong before But I mean look the basic fundamentals of the race are 65% Americans give or take or unhappy with direction of the country They're unhappy with the foreign policy chaos They're unhappy with the fact that can't afford groceries or housing and they're unhappy just generally with the fact that Kamala Harris is you know not a real person who's running for president She clearly doesn't have her own ideas about how to advance the country forward so I think that we're in a good spot now There was of course the switcher roof from by Biden to Harris and even though a lot of Americans don't like Kamala Harris Like you know she's younger and she's not as infirm as Joe Biden is and so that's sort of invigorated The Democratic base a little bit and you see that sugar high in a little bit of the public polling I mean we're about eight weeks to go before election day and The public polls have shifted a little bit in their direction But what we're seeing both when we talked to the Kamala Harris like the journalists that are close to the Kamala Harris campaign I mean you know how this goes right you sort of give journalism information they give you some information you yourself are a journalist or at least you once were and So our numbers their numbers very clearly show that she's not doing very well in the states that she needs to win Yeah, but a lot could change and we have to get out the vote And there are of course are all of these ways in which Democrats have been become very good at Using both big tech but also the sort of ballot harvesting operation to try to squeeze out as many votes as possible in particular Areas so we have to do that ourselves and I think that we were much better positioned to do it in 2024 than we were in 2020 There's a lot of catching up to do but on balance man When the country's not going in the right direction and people finally remember the presidency of Donald Trump Because the take-home pay was going up. I think that puts us in a good position But we still have to run our race, but you know my prediction 60 40 Is that we have a relatively early night on Tuesday night And I think the 40% is it's probably tight, but we still win and you think they'll accept that Well, yeah, it's a good question I mean we call this race for Donald Trump, but I'll be like you know, I'm here to president I invite for him to be out so good. Well, I think that Look There's only so much they can do right they've already switched out their candidate six weeks before their convention They've already sort of marshaled the ballot harvesting operation, which of course is the story of 2020 It's not like you know, it's it's not ballot machines were hacked into the story of 2020 is that they really You know turned on this ballot harvesting machine and they used of course big tech to silence stories that were negative about Joe Biden there's certainly going to do that again They're already seeing that right the technology sector is already fully in the tank For for Kamala Harris. They've obviously switched out their candidate so all the negative feelings that people had about Joe Biden Don't necessarily get translated on to Kamala Harris. They have different negative feelings, but it is different So yeah, I think they're doing everything that they can to ensure that Donald Trump is an elected president again But there is only so much they can do and I think it's important You know if those of us who think like you and I do there's this big question right about like how What's actually going on with the people who run the country? Are they evil geniuses or are they incompetence and the more that I get to know these people and the more that I sort of spend time around them the more I think that they're much more incompetent than they are evil geniuses and so that makes me think What they're doing we can see it's all out in the open and We just have to push back against it as well as we can but not assume that these people can like I mean look I just don't see any evidence that these people are like controlling the puppet strings and they're gonna do Everything that they can they are gonna do everything that they can, but it's not that much So right now. Yeah, I think Donald Trump's gonna be an expressant and if he gets elected president once again Do you think they will accept that so that you concern and yeah, so this is they spent the last 10 years Taking full control of the was military. Yeah, which is it I mean, I'm sorry to even talk like that, but they think that way so it's worth saying it. Yeah So that's what worries me We're sorry. So you hear all this talk about threats to democracy, right? And the biggest threat to democracy in this country is not like Donald Trump using legal maneuvers to challenge the 2020 election The biggest threat to democracy is that the bureaucracy in Washington DC is fundamentally misaligned with at least half the country, right? So what I worry less about is like do are they gonna let Trump win? Well, it's not gonna be easy But I actually do sitting here right now Maybe I'm wrong, but I do feel very confident that Trump's gonna be elected president that he will be president I think the real fight is gonna be when he becomes president and he tries to do things They're gonna take him down and try to take him down in a very big way and that's where the real fight is gonna be in it And I think it's gonna look like a few different things So number one I really worry about the minute we start doing anything on the deportation front like you have 25 million Legleons you and I've talked about I think it's the biggest threat to our country You have got to get these people out of the country you are gonna have a reaction from the media from the tech sector That's unlike anything that we've ever seen it is fascism come to America When we sell people who've come here illegally you have to go back home, right? That that is gonna be a major major focal point I think the other thing that I really worry about Tucker is bond markets, right? Because the country is deeply in debt Atlas come here Come here buddy. Hey Sit sit You're okay. Just chill out. I know you don't have your bed here He's used to a nice plush pillow here, and he's like what the hell none of my stuff is He's a very good dog So the thing I really worry about on bond markets is okay We have call it 1.6 to $2 trillion in debt every single year in this country getting added to the national debt and The only thing that really makes that serviceable is the interest rates are still pretty low right? They're about four and a half percent right now if interest rates go to eight percent and you're actually spending way more to Service the debt than you are on actual like good services and infrastructure for your country Like that can become a huge spiral that could take down the finances of this country We've never had that in 200 plus years of being an American Republic We've never had a true debt spiral in this country. So I really worry about Do the bond markets do the international investors the people who are getting rich off of globalization? The people who've gotten rich from shipping our manufacturing based to China the people who've gotten rich from a lot of wars Do they try to take down the Trump presidency by spiking bond rates? And one of the things that I think a lot about and I talked to the president about this a lot is When we think about who we're choosing as treasury secretary one of the things that president of course It's his choice Ultimately is we've got to find the guy who's gonna make sure that we can manage this country through a real time of crisis Where we get the country's finances back on track that is one of the ways they could take down Donald Trump You have to ask yourself the tools that they're disposal They're doing everything that they can to manipulate voters. I don't think it's gonna work But if Trump wins it's not just gonna be smooth sailing for four years They're gonna do everything that they can to take down the numbers that interest rate I think that's probably the most the most important in the most impactful way They could try to take down this presidency is by spiking the interest rates You saw this by the way, you stuck her Liz trust in Britain. Yeah, okay, which by the way like I like Liz trust I disagree with her on a lot of issues But like so I'm not I'm not trying to stand up or say Liz trust is my person But look she came in she had a plan and the Bank of England. I think it made a lot of mistakes Maybe intentional interest rates shot through the roof and it took down her government in a matter of days Of course, we don't have the same style of government But it would be devastating to the president if you had this bond market death spiral and that's one of the things We're gonna have to fight against when we win again. I think we're gonna win Yeah, I think I think so too And I think if you don't win barring some dramatic unforeseen development It'll be hard for people to believe he didn't win because who would vote for more of this but How do you prevent Your opponents from spiking those rates? Well, I think one is you have to get I mean look you have to have actual smart people in government and You mean this It sounds so simple and it sounds so obvious, but one of the things that I think we have done wrong on the Republican side is You know we don't like the government generally, right? There are things that we think the government should do But we want the government to be smaller than the Democrats want the government to be in so I think that that actually creates a blind spot where The things the government does you actually want them to be done very well And you want them done by very smart people and so I think you have to staff the Treasury Department with the right kind of people who Could manage various fiscal problems and then I also think that you have to be willing to actually pursue Whether you call it the Trump agenda the America first agenda You actually have to be willing to do this stuff even when the media and even when frankly some Republicans howlin protest, right? So one thing the president has talked a lot about By the way, it's not just smart policy. It's also very smart politics is you need to penalize companies that are shipping America's Industrial base overseas and you need to reward companies that are hiring and building in the United States America, right? One of the ways you do that is through tariffs you say if you're gonna manufacture all your stuff in China We're gonna penalize you for trying to access American markets with goods that are made by slaves in China or some other country now you do that You both create more prosperity at home You also raise some revenue from the companies that are just gonna say we're staying in China You know, you're economic policy be damned But that actually stabilizes in a lot of ways the fiscal situation in this country You've also got to tackle some of the big spending items. I mean we still have let me give you crazy statistic So in 2019 Total federal spending in this country was 4.5 trillion dollars in 2024. It will be north of six and a half trillion dollars Okay, where's that two trillion dollar difference come from Tucker now people will say and I think they're being dishonest and they're being even malicious They'll say well that's Social Security Medicare you have to fix Social Security Medicare well of that Delta man Of that difference you're talking about maybe a hundred billion dollars additional per year on social security Maybe a hundred billion dollars in Medicare So there's still two trillion dollars that were spending and what happened in 2020 COVID right COVID blew up the American federal debt and the American federal budget deficit and we've got to get back to like some basic Common sense is some basic sanity there and I think if we do that you have smart people managing the bond markets of treasury and how We're auctioning off treasury bonds and you actually have a president. I know Trump is committed to this who's committed to steering us through these very troubling financial times Finally, you unleash America's energy markets because that drives down the cost of goods You do all those things in tandem and you actually get America on a much more sustainable fiscal situation But that's a lot and you have to have a very strong president You have to have Republicans who are willing to go along with it and I think that we have that Tucker But it's not easy right? This is the basic we have to be good at government Even though we want the government to be smaller than the Democrats We have to be good at government and I think President Trump is very committed to that We're gonna have to see how much we can bring our fellow Republicans along so two pretty easy very popular ways to save money would be one No more subsidizing illegal immigrants. Oh, that's exactly right. We're not gonna pay people to break our laws We're not gonna pay them to rob liquor stores You know or come into this country. We're not gonna give free cell phones or free airplane tickets Or housing vouchers. We're not gonna stop doing that and the second is we're gonna stop sending billions of dollars around the world to Exactly people who hate us who you know when it doesn't serve our interest. Yeah, why can't we do those things? Well, it's very important Right so this is one of the reasons why I'm instinctively skeptical and look I want to say I want social security Medicare to be financially Sustainable for the long term. They're very important programs for our elderly Americans But when people say the reason why we can't have reasonable spending policies is because of social security Medicare. I'm like whoa That's a distraction you're distracting from the reason that we actually have an out of control budgetary picture. That's why I just gave you the six and a half versus four and a half trillion dollar number What are we really spending money on that is unsustainable? It's worse right? It's foreign conflicts and you're right It's hundreds of billions of dollars per year That we're spending on illegal aliens now. Here's a crazy thing. I've been in the Senate for not even two years When I ask people how much money? Okay talk about health care for illegals talk about social security fraud talk about Medicare fraud Talk about housing vouchers because even though illegal aliens aren't entitled to section eight There's fraud in the program and also their children are entitled to section eight So of course that money flows to the illegal aliens add all this up and then take probably 25 30 million people who are here Legally and maybe that undercounts it how much are we actually spending per year on illegal aliens in this country no one in our government knows okay? I've heard estimates that it's a hundred billion dollars a year I've heard estimates that it's six hundred billion dollars a year I've heard estimates that it's even higher There are ways to estimate it, but we don't actually have good good ways to track this stuff because a lot of the money Tugger think about this a lot of the money is spent at the local level right? So if you're an illegal alien you commit a crime and you're you know You're in a local jail cell like we're not really counting that money from Into the cost of having illegal aliens But of course if you're immunosapality and you're spending $40,000 a year to house some criminal who should go back to where he came from That's real money right or let's take this example Where do most illegal aliens get their health care? Emergency room emergency rooms exactly right so what is though? You can't go to an emergency room now Wait get sick the wait time an emergency rooms has nearly doubled over the last few years because we have all these illegal aliens Who are getting hospital services at emergency rooms? Well, obviously they're not paying the bill when they get it who pays the bill the American taxpayer You add up all these costs and I think it's hundreds of billions of dollars that we're spending on illegal aliens And this is why I think it's ridiculous for people to say well Well, we can't get America's fiscal picture under control unless we we cut you know social security from American citizens who have paid into it for 45 years my response is why don't we start with the wars and why don't we start with Not giving illegal aliens a ton of benefits and then see where our fiscal situation is after that We haven't done that those are wildly popular ideas. I can't imagine that they're below Yeah, 65, 70% in the polls if you were to pose that question probably higher. Yeah, yeah probably higher But there's no sense that any of those things are gonna happen because there's so much money behind Keeping them in place. Yeah. What do you do about that? Well, I think what you have to do is First of all, yeah, you have to go at the heart of the people who actually drive public opinion and drive the decisions that are made in this country We don't took her the reason why all these popular things don't happen like why aren't we supporting illegal aliens? Why aren't we cutting off the money spigot that goes to illegal aliens? Why aren't we stopping sending thousands of American kids to die overseas in some pointless war? It's because in reality right now we don't live in a real democracy in this country, right? The people who call the shots in this country have further and further divorced themselves from any kind of real Democratic accountability, right? So ask yourself in 2008 did America have a real choice between the foreign policy of John McCain and the foreign policy of Barack Obama? Of course we did right there were they were saying in effect the exact same thing for the first time in 2016 we had a real choice between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton, okay? Of course the American people chose Donald Trump despite every Every incentive in every pressure to not choose Donald Trump the American people still chose Donald Trump Of course what did they do? They split the next four years trying to destroy them the questions like how do we do these things? You have to make the actual levers of government power Accountable to the American people and that means you've got to be able to fire bureaucrats Who don't do their job or this is a common sense. I mean it may be particularly a very isolated example if you were to pull What percentage of Americans think that the VA should be more responsive to the health care concerns of American veterans? That's probably a 95% issue, okay, and I you know, I'm a veteran myself. I served in the Marine Corps I went to Iraq. I have gone through the VA health care system and by the way 92% 95% of the people who work in the VA are great But as you know in any organization if you have five percent of people who refuse to do their job And you can't get rid of them They make it impossible for the 95% of people who are trying to do their job And of course the veteran suffered because of it So why does the VA not work as well as the American people want it to because the five percent who don't do their job With the VA are calling the shots and making it harder on everybody else and that basic story is true in our entire government The Joint Chiefs of Staff Donald Trump orders the Joint Chiefs of Staff to do a troop rotation in Syria The Joint Chiefs of Staff lied to him They actually stagger the troop redeployments in a way where it looks like they're obeying his orders when in actuality They're actually disobeying his orders. Okay every single person who is involved in that decision should be fired You have to make the government how can the military and the democracy act You know the commander in chief the commander she tells you to do something in control the military That's the nightmare scenario. Yeah, that's right But that but that that is part and parcel of the broader problem Which is you don't have real democratic accountability in our government and to get it back The people who call the shots have to be responsive to the elected president and this is one of you know Trump's main campaign platforms one of the main things that he talks about and of course I think he learned in some ways the hard way during his first four years in office is The president recognizes that if you have people in your government who you tell to do something and they disobey you That's not like checks and balances. They're part of your government The check and balances the House of the Senate the judiciary right if the people in your own government are obeying you You have got to get rid of them and replace them with people who are responsive to what the president is trying to do If you don't have that you don't have a real democratic guy It'll not cut her because that that's the system at stake. That's right. That's democratic control How do voters have any control over their government if the people they elect have no control? That's exactly right, man And and and and again, it's it's we have to sort of remind ourselves that it's real people who suffer because of this right There are Americans who are dead because the joint use of staff didn't listen to the president United States when he said you need to do true Pre-deployments out of Syria There are veterans who are dead because the VA does not function as well as it could because the president needs to be able to fire Again the small number but the small number of people who aren't doing their job and that same story repeats itself Rinse and repeat through the entire American government you have got to have basic democratic accountability I think you know most Americans recognize like look we're fine with you know bureaucrats making a reasonable salary we're fine with people having a good life But they've got to do their job right when you're in public service You've got to do your job and whether you're an elected official or an unelected bureaucrat If you're not doing your job, you got to get out there and make way for somebody who will so if you guys win and you start firing people who are acting against orders of their commander in chief and against the expressed will of voters The New York Times will call it a fascist take over exactly right. So the questions do you care? Well, I think we have to not care you know you have to care about public opinion of course because you have to actually make the case of the American people and on behalf of the public You have to say I mean look it is it's what's so funny about it is it's the opposite right real Democracy is when the elected leaders the voters elect actually make the decisions the government But fascism if it's anything it's that the voters don't get any say Actually operate so I think you have to do it and look man I've been in politics all of two years But there are all of these really subtle ways in which the media the tech sector that people who call the shots Try to manipulate the American public and manipulate political leadership into Not doing the things the American people actually won so here. Let me give you an example Mark this down. I guarantee an 18 months or so. We're gonna have This is gonna be prophetic So right now according to public opinion pulling 65% of Americans give or take support mass deportations meaning 25 million people here you've got to send some of the back to where they came from okay That's that's a common sense issue two-thirds of Americans give or take support it in 18 months There will be media stories and there will be public opinion polls to back it up that actually Americans do not support mass deportations that Donald Trump is doing all of these terrible things and he has to stop It's in its inhumane its evil and the American public don't support it the same people who put those public opinion polls together Are the same people who say for example that Donald Trump was gonna lose with constant by 17 points remember that three days before the 2020 election Donald Trump was supposed to lose with constant by 17 points and set to the side all of the debates about what happened in 2020 What's gone so was basically a tight election so these guys use public polls? They use the media not not even just to manipulate public opinion But to manipulate our leadership about what public opinion actually says so how does that have so those polls are fake is what your oh? Absolutely their fake they're absolutely fake And we see this I mean again You know this is like very nerdy, but let's like go down this polling rabbit hole Okay, so I I you know friend of mine I think is the best poll stern America every race I've ever seen in poll He's way better than anybody else. Okay, so good pollster versus a standard media poll for recent for recia Tony for recia great guys the president's pollster. Okay Take a standard media poll and Ask yourself like what are they doing those polls are all conducted by what's called online panels and other words They have a group of people that they go to again and again and again They ask their opinion well who are the people who are gonna respond aggressively to online panels about what they feel About every issue the day a bunch of highly engaged Typically far left typically people with professional degrees people who are not representative of the American people at large Right meanwhile most Americans are trying to pay their mortgage and trying to take care of their kids and trying to do all the things that are necessary To live a life in this country and they're not answering the phone when a pollster picks up So if you actually look at the good pollsters They're telling you a radically different story because they're talking to a representative sample of the United States and the fake media Pollsters are talking to a very narrow slice of the United States and again They're trying to sell us a story and it's not just again It's not just this is not primarily to manipulate the American people. I think I think it's to manipulate us Meaning elected officials because I sat in lunches with a number of my colleagues who will say look at this poll and Look how Americans are responding to this or that issue and then you realize that That exact same poll was wildly inaccurate two years ago Why are you making your judgments about what the American people believe based on some poll and oh by the way? Why don't you express some leadership? Why don't you just actually have a view and go to the American people and try to persuade them that your view is wise and then enact legislation and it quarantined with that wisdom right like that that's how real leadership worked deceptive and I think what people don't realize is that a lot of these polls are designed not to measure opinion but to shape it yes So they are tools of influence 100% President Trump said this recently in an interview We said that the purpose of some of these polls that say okay, you're down 17 points in Wisconsin So say you're a public invoader. You want to support Donald Trump and JD Vance And of course the polls now are much better For us than they were back in 2020, but let's say you want to support President Trump and you read a story that says he's down by 17 points in Wisconsin Why even show up right so there's a voter suppression dynamic here where you try to get people to get depressed and to drop out of the democratic process Don't even go and vote if the president is down by so much the purpose of these polls is actually Manipulation of both the public themselves But also of course elected officials and I think that we just have to we have to have the courage to trust our own convictions to say screw you I don't buy the polls and to do what you think is right on on behalf of the country Sounds so common sense A lot of like the leaders don't live in the world of common sense. So you said it to outset that You know if the current trajectory continues you're pretty confident you're gonna win yeah, I mean you look you can never be sure and You know, I've been wrong before but I just look the energy on the ground is really good right? I mean you know we had an event yesterday in Arizona and You know we had a few thousand people there and we didn't have a rock star rapper there We just had a few thousand people and I'm the VP candidate. I'm not the presidential candidate President Trump is getting 20,000 person crowds I do think that crowd size is predictive of enthusiasm and so you're seeing a lot of evidence that things are Are that our voters are in the news the internal numbers are good people aren't happy with the direction of the country I feel like we're gonna live but yes, yeah, everything you're saying makes sense I think it's demonstrable But you got to think that the Kamala Harris campaign is also aware of this that there may be not lying to themselves Maybe involved in fake polls designed to mislead You know others. They are probably clear right about their chances. They are and I doubt that I just I just have to Believe in you're just gonna sit back and think well, you know Trump tried hard people kind of prefer him. Yeah. Well, it's funny. What do you think could happen between now and watch? Yeah well, it's funny man because You know how this works, but I'll sort of give some insight into your Into this for your viewers and your listeners. Okay, so I have said publicly I've been attacked by this for the left. I've said look Kamala's own internal polls are not very good right now And of course the left is say well, J.V.A.S. is the VP candidate for Republicans Nobody in Kamala Harris's campaign is talking to and that's right by the way Kamala Harris's campaign is not talking to me But they are talking to journalists. Yeah, and then those journalists want insights into what's going on With the Republican ticket They want to see our internal numbers and look the journalists are telling me that Kamala Harris doesn't like her numbers The journalists are telling me our campaign does like their numbers. There's a consistency of story here Journalists acts it's kind of like that it's an information like the intelligence operatives right like And sure some of them are looking for intelligence Yeah, your journalists are to electoral politics with like the CIA is international relations people think just like in polling If no polls are designed to measure what people think journalists are designed to report what happened no journalists are players in the political system. Yes, and they do not disclose that to their readers and And you see it up quote, but it's interesting they play the role of kind of like covert diplomats between them Yes, yes, they do. Yeah, and I'll tell you I mean in 2016 What the journalists were telling you was Hillary Clinton's campaign is confident But then some of them like Bill Clinton were very not confident. Yeah, and in 2020 they were saying Nobody really knows what's going on and in 2024. They're saying Kamala Harris is feeling a little bit rough about her chances The truck people are very are feeling good about their chances look I think we're in a good spot, but you can't take this stuff for granted right now and by the way I think it goes in both ways right if you take two rows you have a picture you can get demotivated if you take too pessimistic of a picture you can get demotivated Excuse me. We still have to do our job. We have to go out there persuade voters Right to go out there knock on doors if you're watching this and you want to get involved in the campaign like go and do it Go to dall j trump.com Volunteer become a door knocker because we actually can win this race I think we will win this race, but not if we sit on our asses and don't get out there right what if the hot war breaks up between now and November Well, that's a that's a very good question We will win this race, but not if we sit on our asses and don't get out there and work. What if the hot war breaks out between now and November? Well, that's a very good question. Look, I obviously just baseline, I don't want a hot war to break out because I don't think we have a functional president right now. Right? I genuinely think that the closest thing that we have to do with president right now is Kamala Harris because Joe Biden clearly can't do the job. The people around him recognize that. And so it's the bureaucrats and Kamala who are calling the shots. If God forbid a true hot war, not just between Russia and Ukraine, but a broader regional war broke out or not just between Israel and some of Iran's proxies, but a broader regional war, it would scare the hell out of me to have Kamala Harris at the helm. And I think that we have to do a better job at highlighting. It's not just Kamala Harris. We say these things about her that are true. She wanted to defund the police. She wanted to ban fracking. She wanted to open the border. These things are all true. In fact, she is on video saying these things, but there's a fundamental incompetence to Kamala Harris. Okay. So let me ask you what was the Biden turnover rate among the people who worked for Joe Biden? About 78%. That's by the way about medium for American politics, right? Working the White House is a tough job. Donald Trump did better than that, but I think Donald Trump, you know, a lot of people have a very certain, very intense loyalty to Donald Trump. So it's not surprising he did better. Okay. Kamala Harris, 92% turnover. If a hot war breaks out, who is even going to be staffing the administration if you have a person who can't keep human beings in the executive administration of the government? Right? That's scary. If you're such an incompetent person that 92% of your staff doesn't want to work for you, maybe we shouldn't elect that person as president. Were you watch Kamala Harris give an interview? I mean, this is not a person who has like very well developed views about what she wants to do in the world. She's fundamentally a cog in the wheel of a very corrupt machine. That scares the hell out of me when that person goes to negotiate with a world leader about a hot war. So, okay, we're talking about the substance, okay. I know you're interested in the politics too. I don't know like if God forbid the rush you crane thing becomes a broader regional war. I don't know if that helps Kamala Harris or hertor. I almost think it's like two grotesque to even think about because hundreds of thousands and maybe more people would be dying. And I would just be terrified for the country and terrified for humanity. I couldn't agree more. Obviously, I agree with that vehemently. I only ask because I wonder if there's an incentive. I think they're desperate. Yeah. I think they worry that you guys get back in that you're going to be a little less humorless and forgiving this time. A lot of people committed very serious crimes against the United States. They're currently serving government. They have, they're afraid of what happens if you win and they should be. So like, do they have an incentive to start a hot war? I guess that's my question. Yeah, no, it's a totally fair question and I don't know because I don't know that it actually helps them, right? Because one of the things that look even President Trump's critics would have to admit, I remember this, like I was a Trump critic back in 2016. Yeah. Of course, you remember this. The president remembers this very well. I must say, you must my balls about it all the time. You hear these people who say, well, you know, Trump invited or both, you know, too old for the president saying it's like, Trump's memory is like a steel trap. Trust me, I know because he remembers what I said about him in September of 2015 to like an excruciating level of detail. But obviously, you know, the president I are like, like very simply I change my mind because he was a great president, right? But remember back then, the thing that they said about him is that he would start a nuclear. Oh, I remember right. That was the main thing that, all right, you've got this cowboy. He's going to start a nuclear war with Russia or China or somebody else. And even his critics admit that in hindsight, he was actually the president of peace. Now, of course, conflicts breakout, bad things happen. The president can't control everything, but he was remarkably good at using diplomatic leverage and the threat of American power to keep the world in a place of relative calm instability. So if a hot war breaks out, my guess would be a lot of Americans would say, holy shit. We've got to get back to the guy who knows how to manage the world, not the person who's so incompetent that she blundered us into this conflict in the first place. But I mean, look man, who knows by the way, it's shocking how little we know about the guy who shot Donald Trump in the head. I mean, weeks later, months later, we still have no idea. We allegedly have no idea what the guy's real motive is. But do I think that they were going to do increasingly crazy things to try to prevent Donald Trump from becoming president? Yes. I don't know exactly what that's going to look like. I think we have to be prepared for it. And we just have to do everything we can to make sure he wants. Last question. And it's to what you just said, Trump gets shot in front of everybody. I've on TV and the media, you know, bury it. But there's also you would think a process in place to find out what exactly was that? Yeah. Who was the person who did it? Why did he do it? Why was he allowed to do it? Is that process underway? I never hear Trump talk about it. I never hear you talk about it. Like, when are we going to find out what that was? Yeah. Part of the reason why we don't talk about that much is because we recognize that Kamala Harris runs the administration right now. And do we like, do we trust Kamala Harris's Department of Justice to really investigate this stuff? I mean, I don't think the president does either. But there needs to be a real investigation into this stuff. I think it's bizarre that we don't know anything about the guy's motive, though I've heard you know, various rumors. We don't really know anything about the guy's motive. I think there are clearly or some very serious security breakdowns. Some of my colleagues in the Senate have done a good job of pointing this stuff out. But unless you have an administration that's willing to cooperate, you can't actually do this stuff. Maybe he'd be much better at sniffing out what's going on with all these security breakdowns. But I mean, I think so. Here's this should be actually a media scandal. So Kamala Harris is running against Donald Trump for president. Kamala Harris runs the government right now. And Donald Trump came within millimeters of having his life taken by a massive security breakdown. She should be using every lever of power to force inside and to force some sunlight into what's actually been going on here. What breakdown? The fact that she's totally uninterested in it, I think is a real scandal. Her political opponent nearly got killed and she has not used her government to actually investigate why or what security breakdowns led to him almost getting killed. The media and everybody else should be really pissed off about this because she could be doing much more than she's doing right now. But it suggests like a level of darkness that's hard for me to accept. What is that? I mean, I don't know. Right? Is it in competence? Is that she doesn't want to get to the bottom of it? Is it that if a story comes out that this guy was the left wing radical, does it help Donald Trump? And so she wants to hide the motive? Like there are so many different explanations here for what could be going on. But look, man, I'm a realist. Do I think that we're going to find out what actually happened in Bucks County, Pennsylvania before the election? No, I don't because every incentive that exists in our government right now is to hide it, is to suppress it, is to lie about it, is to cover up for various people's failures. And because of that, look, man, I just don't think we're going to learn a whole lot about it. We're going to try. Again, Ron Johnson is a great friend of mine, a great Senate colleague does a very good job. I know he is obsessed with trying to get to the bottom of the county field. Like how did the guy get with an AR-15 130 yards from the president, which as you know, that's like a pot shot, right? That's a layup for an AR-15. It's shocking in some ways that President Trump didn't lose his life. But the fact that we're not more focused on the security breakdowns that led to that in the first place, look, man, it's bizarre. It's dark. And I think, unfortunately, we're not going to learn a whole lot about it till November. And the problem is that, like so many American young people in their 20s, he had no social media profile whatsoever. Everyone on the line. Everyone on the line. Everyone on the line. And never said anything publicly and everybody, he was basically a ghost. A ghost who just so happened and nearly killed the future president of the United States. And yeah, man, it's pretty weird. It's pretty weird. It's pretty weird. Senator J.D. Thank you very much. Absolutely.