This has probably happened to you every couple months or so. You look up from what you're doing otherwise occupied feeding the dog or paying your power bill and you look up and they'll be trying once again to make Roseanne Barbe quiet. Shut up Roseanne Bar you're a Nazi! You're crazy! It's not working. Roseanne Bar has been the public eye for almost 40 years and amazingly she's more influential than ever so we thought we would check in with her and see how she's doing Roseanne Bar. How are you? I'm great, Tucker. How are you? You're obviously unbound. I can't remember where I was the other day and someone was like, Roseanne Bar is a Nazi! She's an anti-Semite! I'm thinking... You probably criticize her, probably not. I'm not seared anti-Semite. Not. Oh, good. So they canceled famously, they canceled the resurgence of your show. Did we launch of your show? I feel like you won it with number one. Hey, how come I... Don't their shareholders wonder why they would do that? I don't know how that spooky finance stuff works. I don't either. I've still got some questions. I will say that. But did you figure out like I did that it's really personal? Oh, it's always personal. Think about televisions, everything's personal. Yeah, it's about you. So that's great. I'm like, oh, your Jesus! But it's not so good when they're like, you're fired! I don't take any of it personally, they haven't. But you get fired in this very, very public way, become the center of the national debate over Trump. But you don't go away and then all of a sudden look up and you're everywhere. How did that happen? I don't know how it happened. I really don't. Did you expect to be doing this at the stage of your life? No. I guess when I was really little, I saw myself doing something that was going to be have good consequences to it. And so anyways, this week I was like, hey, this is like when you were little, and now you're doing it. It was one of those minutes where you go, thank you, God. I do feel like God puts me where he wants me. I'll tell you all that later. But I go like, hey, I'm a lady, sit us in journalist for my old age. Hell, that's great. It's great because you know, I love that. Oh no, I can't remember her name. But that one that used to interview everybody in the 50s, she had her own show and she did the greatest interviews. I'm so stupid, I can't remember her name. Check that lady out. My son. My lady in the 50s, he used to interview people. She had a great interview show. Anyway, but I like being a citizen journalist. Like, you know, like, you know, like you're a real journalist, you know, but you're also a writer which astounds me because we never see that anywhere. I mean, you are such a great writer. So I want to talk to you about that. And I look forward to doing that. But you are such a great writer because I'm so much to say. I want to say it like this. Let me think. I'm a deeply religious Jew, which is why they call me a Nazi. And I understand my and the races. And a transphobe and whatever. A Zionist baby killer. They call me everything. And before that, when I was on the left, the right used to, but they're the same, I guess. It's all the same people. They're playing different parts. They're going to be a cow, a hope, you know, destroying the American dream, a man hater. You know, they always throw and stuff at me and not have never true. But I had to lift you to all that gauntlet of hate since I first showed up. So you have an answer to questions. Are lean friends? No, not our lean. He was good though. Not Barbara Walters. I knew her. She was good though with Adworsen. Got wasn't she? No. No. She was kind of an ugly little woman with brown hair. So an ugly little woman with brown hair. Big Emerson? No. Wendy Berry? No. Check Google, ugly little woman with brown hair in 1950. The greatest innerv- May Brussels! Thank you, God. May Brussels. Was this unsoughtly steady stations? Yeah, my dad used to watch it. And he'd say this woman has integrity. You know, my dad used to be code media for me because he wanted to be a comedian. So he always showed me how comedy works. And, you know, anyway. Oh my God, I can't even focus my mind. But anyway, she said you're a deeply religious Jew. Yeah, and since I was three years old, I wrote it in my third book called Roseanne Arke. I had a conversation going with God. I wrote it in my book. You know, how little kids have an imaginary friend? Yes. Well, mine was God. She was wisely. Yeah, because that's all we studied. It was an Orthodox Jewish family. And so that was my friend and I talked to him when I would read and say, I wanted to know everything about it, you know, and I would talk to him. And he'd always answer this in my book. I said, how come you, you, could solve every problem on earth? All you gotta do is just wiggle your little finger and you can stop all these problems. Why can't you do that? You probably have to do it with them, your finger. Because I was a suffering child. Yes. And he said to me, because I don't have fingers, Roseanne. Oh, but you do. And he said, and you should be very proud of that opposable thumb that I put on that handy years. Because now you can really get busy helping a lot of people. I'm trying to make things right. And he always gave me the answer that I knew God would give me. He didn't ever go, yeah, go get them. Yeah, they're wrong in their religion. He didn't never say none of that. So I knew it was him, you know. So he told me all the time, go over here and do this and go over there and do that. And just trust me on this. And I did that my whole life with the exception of the few marriages that really after me are. But then I got rid of those guys and continued on the path I supposed to go on. Did you not ask for guidance on the marriages? You know, I didn't listen. It wasn't God's fault. Yeah, he told me, but I go, I'm putting you on hold. Yeah. I got some physical business that you don't want to know about. Do you think you knew? Well, yeah. Yeah. But it wasn't anything I was married, so it wasn't anything bad. Right. I mean, except that it was horrible sex. Well, you know, people should not have sex. That's one way that we can fix the world right now. These people stopped having sex? Yes, absolutely. That's a tough one. I know. It's hard to complete putting smoking or something. I know. Unless you're married and you can take care of the kids that are going to be a result of it. Right? Isn't that common sense? Strongly agree. And we have journalists such as yourself with a conscience who care about this country and what it means and how we have to do everything we can to save it at this late late date. Wait, for all of us, hello. Yes. And stop buying in the bullshit. You know, I said that to introduce the potas, the deep state bullshit. Well, actually, it's funny, it's that we have that clip. Really? Yes. Roseanne, this is your life. Here you are. I got to put the deep state bullshit. Okay. Now, I just put the political announcement for two seconds. You're obviously enjoying that event. I'm so fine. It was so awesome. You know, it's always fun to make people laugh and come alive. So I think even if you didn't like Trump and you weren't going to vote for Trump, you look at that and be like, that looks like a pretty good time. Oh, no, I wouldn't do it if I were. Of course, I don't mean you, but like, I wasn't going to be out there doing that for a while. I wasn't doing that for a while. I was like, how boy had. Yeah, I was smart enough a guy. You did? And they didn't have the mic, because I had a stand on my tiptoes, which, you know, I could rarely reach the mic. But, yeah, I swiped this hat off the guy. And, you know, I don't like how my hair looks. Don't you know, I cut my own hair with tonal clippers. It took me four days, but I cut it hair by hair because I was so sick of it. But, yeah, I thought it, yeah, of course, the mirror. I'm not crazy. Do you know what you do? I was in a room by myself. But, no, but I loved it. And I had spent a lovely week down there at Mar-a-Lago. It was so awesome. And I just loved it. What do you think of Trump that got you know him, obviously? What do you think of him? Well, as I always say, he's the only guy in my Hollywood career that ever returned a favor. He's the only one who ever returned a favor and gave me back more than I had given him. I think he has such integrity. I think he's like me a lot. He tries to be funny. And he is really funny. The guys are really funny. He's got great timing. I last year. So you know him? He all laugh. I mean, we all think he's funny. What favor did you return? Well, you know, I did. I was doing my second or third HCL. Hey, it's Tucker Carlson. The internet is crowded with interesting things that don't really matter. On TCN, we attempt to bring you interesting things that actually do matter. And a lot of them interviews, long form and short videos, documentaries. You can find all of it on Tucker Carlson dot com. And we hope you will. Free speech is bigger than any one person or any one organization. The societies are defined by what they will not remember. What we'll watch is the total inversion of virtue.