the general gun experience. They're historically, you know, California's been the world leader in cults for a very long time. And I would say that has not stopped and that continues. Did you know that the building that I bought from my comedy club initially was owned by a cult? Fantastic. It was owned by a cult from West Hollywood called the Buddha Field that migrated out to Austin when they were being investigated by the cult awareness now where? It's fantastic. Are they gone? Are they still there? No, they're gone. There's a great documentary out there called Holy Hell. You should watch. It's pretty bonkers. But they're from California. From California. You know, the people's temple, you know, part of this great story, San Francisco, is the people's temple, which became famous for the Jim Jones that were getting killed everybody with poison kool-aid in the jungles in Guyana. He, that was a San Francisco cult for like a decade before they went to the jungle. Everybody talks with the jungle. Nobody talks about the San Francisco part. So are there a bunch that are running right now? Are you successful? Big time. Yeah, totally. Yeah, totally. Yeah, he knows. The place. Oh, a bunch of them. Wow. And how are they running? Well, some of them are older. There's two sort of groupings. There's the sort of 60s cults that are still kind of running. There's what is it? There's one called the family in like Southern California. It's still going from the 60s. There's a bunch of them running around. There's, there was a big cult for a long time. Sort of cultish kind of thing around. What was it? Not Air One, but it was Eslan. So there's still like that whole orbit. That's a psychedelic group. All that stuff. Yeah, that's from the 60s. And then there were a bunch of sort of tech cults in the 80s and 90s with names like the extropians. And, you know, there were a bunch of these guys. And then more recently, there's a lot of this. You'll hear these terms like rationalist, post-rationalist, effective altruism, existential risk, long termism, they sometimes say, and what you find is the people, again, the people associated with these tend to be very smart. They tend to be very prolific. They tend to do a lot. Many of them are involved in tech. And then they end up with, let's say, alternative living arrangements, alternative food and sex. And it's in the gracious. And, you know, lots of group oriented, you know, and it's like what's the line, right? What's the line between basically a, what's the line between a social group that all lives together that all has hex together, that all eats the same foods that is not a cult that, you know, engages in lots of, you know, so at some point they start to form, you know, belief systems that are not, you know, compatible with the outside world and they start to kind of go on their own orbit. Do they generally have a leader? So, I mean, there are generally leaders. I mean, there is a pattern. But if you talk about it in the book chaos, I mean, they're typically as a pattern. It's typically a guy. You know, there's typically, there's a male female dynamic to play out inside these things that you kind of see over and over again. And so they often end up with more women than men, you know, for mysterious reasons. But yeah, and then yeah, there's usually some kind of leader. Although, you know, the other things happening now is, you know, a lot of modern cults, you know, or just got a quasi cults, there's like, there'll be a physical component, but there's also an internet component now, right? And so the, the ideas will spread online, right? So there'll kind of be members of the cult or quasi members of the cult or quasi members of the quasi cult, it'll be, you know, online. And maybe at some point they actually come and physically join up. Mm. Yeah. So, and by the way, let me say, like generally I'm pro cult. Like, I'm actually quite pro cult. Well, the reason, if it's the same reason I'm pro fringe, right? Which is like you're gonna have, if you're gonna have people who are gonna be thinking new things, they're gonna tend to be these kinds of people. They're gonna be people who are on the fringe. They're gonna come together in groups. When they come together in groups, they're gonna exhibit cult like characteristics. What you're saying resonates, everything you're saying makes sense. But how did you get to these conclusions? Like, like it seems that like accepting fringe and saying like accepting the chaos of San Francisco. Like, oh, this is good, this is a part of it. This is how this works. This is why it works. Like how did you develop that perspective? Well, it's just, if you take a historical perspective, it's just like, okay, I mean, it's like, it's an easy example. If you like rock music, it just basically came modern rock and roll, basically came from the hate ashbury and the basically middle A 60s. And then from Laurel Canyon, which was another one of these sort of cultish environments in the middle A 60s. And there was like specific moments in time in both of these places. And basically all of the great rock and roll from that era that determined everything that followed basically came out of this. So, do you want that or not? Right. Right. If you want it, that's what you get. I'll give you, here's the crazy, here's the crazy. Oh, there's the other book about Laurel Canyon that's even crazier than chaos. It's the book called We're It's Scenes in the Canyon. Oh, yeah. Okay, you would love this one. So, Laurel Canyon was like the hate ashbury of Los Angeles, right? So, Laurel Canyon was like the music scene, the sort of music and drug and hippie scene of it. It's, Laurel Canyon's actually where the hippie movements started. There was actually a specific group in Laurel Canyon, in LA in about 1965. It was a guy named Vito Policus. And he had a group called The Freaks. And they were like a nonviolent version of the Manson cult. And it was all these young girls. And they basically would go to clubs. And they had, they were the ones to do the beads and the hair and like all the leather and like all the hippie stuff. Like they got that rolling. And so, they were in Laurel Canyon. And it was like round zero. There was like this moment where it's like Jim Morrison, the doors and Crosby stills a Nash and Frank Zappa and it was at John Phillips and was the mom as the papas and the birds and the monkeys. And like all of these iconic bands of that time basically catalyzed over about a two year period in Laurel Canyon. The conspiracy theory in this book basically is that the whole thing was an op. And the military intelligence op. And the evidence for the theory is that there was an Air Force military propaganda production facility at the head of Laurel Canyon called Lookout Mountain, which today Jared Leto owns and I should just say that. Yeah, but it was in that era in the 50s through the 70s. It was a vertically integrated military. Yes, it was a production facility for film and music. But by the way, have you met Jared Leto? Briefly, yeah. One of the most interesting guys I've ever talked to. Incredible, and it makes total sense. Totally normal, like really fun to talk to. Not like what you would think of as a famous actor at all at dinner with him and drinks. He's fucking great guy. But he lives in a military. He showed me all the pictures. He showed me. I'm like, this is wild. Yeah, so it led to amazing. If you believe the moon landing was faked, this is where they faked it. I thought they were supposed to do it in the Nevada desert. No, these are the sound speakers. They had sound speakers. They truly contain sound stages. They had full sound production capability. And so the theory goes basically. There were three parts of the conspiracy theory. So one is they had the production facility right there. We're all these musicians showed up. Two is the musicians like a very large percentage of these young musicians were sons and daughters of senior US military and intelligence. Including Morrison. Including Jamorson, whose father was the head of naval operations for the Vietnam War at the time. And there were these other favorites which ones were there were these other musicians at the time where their parents were like senior and like military, like psychological operations. And like that's all real. Like that's all documented. And then third is the head of the Rand Corporation, who was one of the inspirations for the Dr. Strange Love character in the movie. So he was the guy doing all the nuclear planning for nuclear war. He lived right in the heart of hippies in the rock anon. In this famous house that's still there. And so the theory basically goes that the anti-war movement before the hippies was basically a square movement. It was all these basically young people very clean cut and the men were all wearing. If you look at old like Vietnam War protests, like everybody's all dressed up like they're in a business meeting. It was developing a new real threat. And so the theory as the hippie movement in rock and roll and the drug culture of the 60s was developed in order to basically sabotage the anti-war movement. Right. Which basically is what happened, right? Because then what happened is the anti-war movement became associated with hippies. And that caused Americans to decide what side they were on. And then that led to Nixon being elected twice. Which was also part of chaos because that was the idea behind the Manson family and funneling acid to the facilities equipped with the sound stage, screening rooms, film storage vaults, and naturally a bombshell. During its 22 years of operation, look out mountain laboratory produced approximately 6,500 classified films for the Department of Defense and the Atomic Energy Commission documenting nuclear test series such as Operation Greenhouse, Operation T-POT and Operation Buster Jangle. So one of the conspiracy theories, okay, here's another conspiracy theory. You've seen all the grainy footage of nuclear test blasts that you've short the mushroom clouds. And there are always these grainy things and there's all these little houses lined up and little trees lined up and it blows everything down. Well, there's always been a conspiracy theory that those were all basically fabricated at this facility that those bombs actually were never detonated. Basically, the US military was basically faking these, bomb tests to freak out the Russians, to make us think that we had a potency to our nuclear weapon arsenal that we actually didn't have at the time. How did they fake it? They just did. Exactly. Well, so there is a, yeah. Okay, so here's a question, right? So what happened? Okay, so this is a great, okay, you'll love this. So what happened to the camera? You saw the game. You saw the bitch. How is that happening? You have the cameras like totally stable and fine. Oh my God. And by the way, in the film is fine. The radiation that didn't cause any damage to the film. Oh my God. This looks like high-sheet. Well, by the way, okay, we'll do this one more time here. Where's the close to the car? The car behind the house. Just showed up. Okay, show this up. Wait a minute. First of all, let's get careful with the car. No car. No car. The second is, is it really liquid? Car. Does that look like a real car? That's insane. And look at the, yeah, and look at the, when the house blows, look at the, the, the wood does that look like it's those are full size, like, you know, giant lumber beams. As they go flying. You know, is that a house or is that like, you know, you know, is that a 12 inch, you know, scale model? Why? So like the fucking car. Anyway, I don't know. Like I have no idea. Having said that, if that was fake, it was fake to look out mountain. Whoa. Right. If the exact same place and time. But did they have the kind of special effects to do something like that in the 40s? So the, the, the conspiracy, the full conspiracy theory is it was Stanley Kubrick, which again, I, I have no idea. What that does look fake. Yeah, that's the camera didn't move at all. You know what it looks like? Go back to that real quick. It looks like the smoke is too big. Watch, watch when it hits. Like it's the, the volume, like the size of it. It looks small. You know what I'm saying? I mean, it looks like somewhere looking at something that's like a few inches tall. Yeah. If you watch like making a Star Wars, any of the, you know, any movies before CGI, whenever they do anything like that, it's all these with these tiny models. Yes. And they just basically, what they do is they slow it down and then they add sound. Yeah, this looks fake as shit. Right. The clouds just don't look realistic. Right. Like it looks like they're too big and they move too quickly back and forth. There's another one. It's like, okay, what the camera, camera's fine. Oh, that's hilarious. That's hilarious. Yeah, here we go. Okay, then we've got a camera gun. Okay, but even though, but even still, the camera got knocked over and not destroyed. What is the, not destroyed? Is there a depth like some sort of a response to that? Have they come with some sort of an explanation? I'm right. I'm not that I know. That seems so fake. Yeah. Wow. Who can tell? Does that make you wonder about other things? Well, I mean, it's like in our time, right? It's like how much stuff do you read in the news where you're like, okay, I know that's not true. Right. And then you're like, okay, everything I read in the history books, like I was told it was true. It's like, yeah. It was definitely, that, that one though was really weirdly compelling. There's another video that was setting up these houses, which I mean, I guess you could make after the fact and say this is fake, but this is here that I'm setting it up. Yeah. You just do real size houses. We just light hand. Huh. I don't know. I don't know. I assume this is all, I assume this is all not true, but it is fun to think about. Why would you say it's not true? The camera alone, like this alone, like, yeah, where is the fucking camera? Where is that camera? Where is that camera? Because they have to have that explanation. Someone must have asked them at some point. Or nobody asked. Maybe. Yeah, maybe one of those, wow, look what they did. We know the Soviets did it too. And you're a Uygharin. When he was in that capsule in space, if you see the actual capsule, and then you see the film footage that was supposedly of him in the capsule, there's two different sources of light. There's shadows, the camera, somehow, there's in front of him, this big-ass camera. There's no room in the thing. Like, they filmed it afterwards. And it looks fake. Like, oh, I'm sure he really did go into space, but that wasn't it. That was weird propaganda. Garrett Kasparov has a theory. This is a theory they're missing centuries. Yeah. Kasparov has a theory that there are centuries that didn't happen. We mean. Which is just literally centuries that this whole idea of the middle ages, last to 1200 years or whatever is just not true. Really? Yeah. Why does he think that? There's something about whatever is there like enough historical evidence to support it. And various people over, various authorities over time have wanted to tell various stories about how long regimes have been in place or whatever. Oh, so he thinks it's exaggerated. Yeah. Yeah. Basically, not as much time has passed as we think. But that's quite possible. Yeah. How would we know?