Terry, thanks for doing this. What do you know about fatherhood? Well, my wife and I just had number eight, right? So I will tell you this. When you say just, well, we might go, no, but I mean, when did you have number eight? Last week. And you know, she, I was like, I just want to convey the evidence of it. To be fair to me, I'm a good husband and father. I did ask her if I was she wanted us to reschedule this. And she's such a huge fan of your show. And everything you do, she was like, no, you have to do it. Don't miss out on this. Well, that's, that's amazing. So is the father of eight? Yes. Why are you the father of eight? Well, I would say that, you know, I'm the Elsa 10 kids. I grew up working with my dad in our piece of shop. I had an amazing relationship with him. And I got to see what being a father is firsthand. And I had amazing grandparents and amazing great grandparents. But even more so, I just, I love my wife. Yes. I met her when I was 20, 20 years old. We started dating. That's we're on a presidential campaign out in Iowa. And I feel madly in love with her. And it hasn't stopped. And so, you know, I love being a dad because these kids are all unique and different. They make the world more beautiful. They're funny, they're bad. I, it strengthens me as a person. But I just, I love my wife. I love my kids. I love finding out who they are, right? Because when you're raising them, you learn who your children are and who they're going to become. And each one of them is so different. It's funny, you, you said in that district, I agree with everything that you said. But the one thing you said twice was I love my wife. So it sounds like your marriage is at the center of your, of your thinking of yourself as a father. Yeah. And I look back at, you know, because marriage is ups and downs, right? And you fight and you have disagreements and you move forward. But any time, the only regrets that I'm going to have on my death bed is when I wasn't as charitable to my wife or I wasn't as kind and caring to her. Yeah, our patient or dismissive, right? But those are the embarrassing moments of my life. And I, the only thing I'm going to regret is not spending more time with her, not getting to know her better. But I can fix that. I think over the next 40 years. So I have a million questions for you just based on this two minute exchange. But can we just go back to the beginning? If you do mind just summarizing, you know, if you said, I'm one of 10, I work with my dad at our pizza shop. Yeah. So already I know you had an unusual childhood. You just explain that. Well, I grew up in the Quad Cities. It's a Western Illinois in Eastern Iowa. It's on the Mississippi River, hometown of John Deere tractors. We have our own pizza styles called Quad Cities Style Pizza. And how about it? Different. Okay. So it's a barley malt crust, which is the number one most different thing about it. And it gives it more caramelization. So it's a little bit, I don't know, it's a complex flavor. But there's a crisper and it's crisper. And it's a medium crust. So the inside is kind of thinner. And on the outside, the crust is thicker. It's cutting strips. So if you like crust, you get the corner pieces. If you don't like crust, you get the middle pieces because there's thinner. But the sauce is more robust. You know, I like all different types of pieces. I don't like sweet pizza sauce for some reason. But it's got red pepper and it's just a little bit spicy. The sausage is actually the most important thing that we have. The thing that makes it most unique is it's a fennel sausage. It's spicier. So if you don't like spicy food, you wouldn't like it. The toppings are underneath the cheese. So it gives it a steamed effect instead of a fried effect. It's the best thing ever. I miss it every day. It can be. It's like I've never heard pizza describe so precisely or lovingly. Yeah. Well, it's a passion of mine. And I am not a believer in there being just one pizza place or one pizza that is better than everything else. There are all these different types of pizza flavors. There's New Haven style, there's New York style, there's St. Louis, Chicago. There's two types of Chicago style pizza. There's a tavern style. That's also cutting the strips, but it's a thinner crust. And then there's obviously the Loomal Naughty types, which is my favorite Chicago style pizza. But there's Neopolitan pizza. I know a lot about pizza. It's one of my passions. Interesting. I've eaten a lot of pizza more than my share, but I don't know as much. So I need to bone up. But your family owned a pizza place. Yeah, and that was where all of us kids started working. We started working. I started working at 10, 1996 is when we opened. I was the head dishwasher. What was it called? St. Giuseppe's heavenly pizza. And there's an interesting story about my dad in this in that it's called St. Giuseppe's heavenly pizza. Giuseppe is Joseph and Italian. And St. Joseph is the patron saint of our family. He's the foster father of Jesus. So he's the patron saint of fathers. He's a patron saint of workers. He's an amazing, he's the greatest non-divine figure that ever existed, I would say, besides Virgin Mary, obviously. But my dad started this pizza place to make more money, to provide for the family. I think they just had number five at the time, which when you become a father, you really feel the economic pressures and the stress. But before he opened the pizza restaurant, he was an insurance salesman. And he worked at Prudential Insurance. And in the 80s, his parents got divorced. He was a senior in high school. And he became a party guy. His dad was a bartender. His mom also worked at bars. They got divorced. And it really adversely impacted us. And he experienced terrible things. I don't want to get into that stuff because it's actually kind of painful. But he got way off track. He got way off track. And this is during the 80s at the height of the crack epidemic. And they didn't nearly have to sell crack that much. They basically just said, he smoked pot, right? And so he was leaving a liquor store. This is one of you could buy out quality team. But he's leaving a liquor store and the crack dealer said, hey, you guys smoke weed. And they're like, yeah, thinking he's going to sell weed. He goes, you want something better. And he gave him crack. And crack is obviously one of the worst substances you can get addicted to. People ruin their lives over it. Only 5% of people that get addicted to crack end up ever getting clean. So my dad developed a crack addiction at the height of the crack epidemic. And he was able to keep it at bay, or at least keep it under control. But as part of the filming of this, I sat down with my mom to talk about her experience as the wife of a guy with a crack addict and about crack addict. And one thing that blew me away that I didn't remember from my childhood really. I knew he had a drug addiction when I was a kid. And I knew it was a problem. I knew he got clean. But she told me that there were days where he would go three days without ever coming home. He would go to work. They'd go out drinking afterwards. And then they'd go smoke crack and do drugs. And they'd stay out all night. And then he knew he was in trouble. So he wouldn't go home. And he'd go right in work. And he'd work. And by the way, he was very successful at selling insurance. He, I think he was ranked 225 out of 5,000 prudential agents nationwide. So he's very effective, very productive. But he'd keep going on drinking. And they wouldn't come home until the third night. It really made me think about how these corporations in America, like my mom noticed when he wasn't home for three nights, but prudential insurance didn't care. Why would they care? They don't because he's selling, he's selling their product. He's producing value for them. And they probably were okay with him smoking crack, because they probably made him more effective and efficient. He could get back on the job. And so I've had this revelation over the last few years that the government's bad, now it's corrupted. But also the industries are bad. The industries will show you up and spit you out. And the irony is that there's this false notion of a work-life balance. It's total garbage. It's a total lie. And it's meant the entire framing of the work-life balance is meant to go to war with life. It is a false dichotomy set up by industries and corporations so that you have to make a choice between your work and your private life. We'll let you take more vacation time. We'll let you have some paternity leave. But you've got to come back to work and produce value for the company, otherwise you have no value to us. And it is a way that they have monopolized our actual lives. And in my opinion, and basically experienced with my dad, his life turned around when he integrated his work in his life. When the pizza shop came around, he was working with his sons. He was working with his wife. That was the center of our life, was the pizza shop. And my dad absolutely got clean. I want to be very clear about that. So the breaking point was when my mom was pregnant with number four, right? And Joe, his name, he's the one that runs the pizza restaurants now. But she filed for it of course when she was pregnant with number four after another three-day vendor. And there was something really beautiful in all this that happened, which is if you go back, I mentioned I quit drinking during my wife's fourth pregnancy. Oh, that is who weeks before the end. That's when God's like, all right, now. Well, 2026 is likely to be the year that some companies will find patriotism or discover it during the Biden years corporate America thought hating our country was the thing to do. So they did it. Now that we're in a new era, they are coming back to reality. It's not real though. It's a trick. They don't mean it at all. Black rifle means it. And they've been doing it since day one. Not just discovering patriotism. They were founded on the premise. As this country celebrates 250 years of existence, black rifle is brewing bold American roasted beans, built for people who believe in the values that made America great. So kick off 2026 with roast made for patriots, not spectators. And for the new year, black rifle is launching cold brew coffee cans in just black and vanilla powerful smooth and made in America. Want something even more explosive? Try grape X or tiger strike. Whoa, their new zero sugar energy drinks with 200 milligrams of caffeine. That's about half the output of a nuclear power plant. But it's clean energy for Americans who mean business. Visit black rifle dot com slash Tucker use the code Tucker for 30% off or find black rifle at Walmart, target Kroger. Remember great products are sold. Black rifle coffee veteran founded America roasted. It's America's coffee. Well, then there's something transformational about becoming a father. Especially for the fourth time. That's like I really got a girl. Or among us take a few kids to figure it out. Yeah, that's, but it's amazing. She filed for divorce. He didn't know where to go. So he went to his mom's house. Mom had divorced his dad. So we thought, you know, that's where you should go and get advice. She thought my grandmother finds out that my mom's divorcing him. She calls my mom and confronts her, which is interesting, right? Because this is a woman who absolutely participated in the no fault divorce culture. Yes. But she said, why are you divorcing my son? And my mom said her name was Pat. She said, Pat, he's not getting clean. He doesn't want to be married to me. He doesn't want a family. And grandma Pat hung up the phone. She said, I'll handle this. And she sat down with my dad and said, I just want you to know, I'll always love you. I'll always support you. But I never would have divorced your father if he asked me not to. And that was the moment where my dad called my mom and said, I don't want to get divorced. I want to get clean. And I think at a deep level, he knew that his problems weren't just because he was a a wild and crazy guy. He was filling a major hole in his heart from his parents' divorce. And so I'm actually grateful that he developed that crack addiction. Yeah. Because it made him a better person. I totally agree with that. And he chose us, right? He chose us over the crack addiction. He chose to break the cycle and the dysfunction and the chaos that result from breaking up families. He didn't want that trust. You can trust to man who said to face that about himself. Yes. He does lying to himself. It's so humiliating. It's humbling. Right? You have to admit, you know, when you go through these narcotics and anonymous programs or any anonymous programs, you have to say, I'm helpless against this. I rely on a power greater than myself. You have to accuse yourself, right? You have to go and apologize to everyone that you caused damage to. It's it's such a beautiful program. And the people that really take it seriously and go through it and absolutely transforming their lives. Humiliating a man can break him or make him. I mean, Jesus humiliates Peter right at the end. So I'm like, I'm leaving you. Yeah, you're going to deny me three times. Humiliates. Yes. And then builds the church on him because he's been humiliated. Yeah. I mean, I feel like those are the people I trust. Don't you people who face that? The people that are reflect, they reflect on their own behavior. Yes. Those are the best people in the world. Totally agree. The rather than the people that blame everyone else for their problems, like I think a major problem in our world is that there's obviously narcissism and people obsess with themselves. There's narcissism. But they blame everyone else for their problems. And the reality is you have no control over. Oh, this is an interesting you have no control over what other people do. So a lot of people don't know this unless you've been in these anonymous programs. But my dad was in our comics anonymous. My mom, so there's a whole support system for the families of these people. It's called Alonon. My mom told this story about how her first meeting she comes in and there's all these experienced women that have been dealing with alcoholic husbands or drug addicted husbands. She comes in, they go around the room. It's just like an anonymous meeting. And she's like, I just want to get my husband clean. I'm willing to do whatever I have to do to get him clean. And they kind of like have it around the head. Oh, that's very cute that you think you can change your husband. You can't. He's not going to get clean unless he wants to get clean. And that was when I learned that for my mom, it was a major life lesson that you're better off doing self reflection about where you come short. And if you really want to change things and make the world a better place, you have to start with yourself. I think it's all you can do. Take the plank out of your own eye. I totally agree with that. What's interesting though is that for a man with four kids to admit that he's addicted to crack, I do think for most men that kind of breaks them at that point, it's too much. They can't sort of pick up the mantle of father head of household again. But your dad goes on to be successful and have six more kids. Six more kids. Answer of a term in Congress. I mean, it's look unbelievable. Well, and there was something really beautiful about my dad's life. First of all, he got cancer in 2020 and at what age? He was 57, no, 56 when he was diagnosed. He passed away the next year when he was 57. And it was an advanced stage in testinal cancer. And they wouldn't have been able to pick it up even if they did colonoscopies or endoscopies or anything like that because it was on the outside of his intestines. And the thing that was beautiful about it was I went out, I have a great organization, great chairman and a great president at the time and they let me go take care of him the last month and a half. So I'm out there and I'm with all my siblings and you just want to get out of the house and clean your head from everything that's going on. So I took them all to target and we're just getting snacks and stuff. And I tell them like, you guys should just be really grateful that he's even alive now. because he had a real bad drug addiction and my younger siblings and these are numbers five, six, seven, and eight. And they're like, what are you talking about? Like, that was addicted crack. They had no clue because he had transformed his life so much. And the thing is he was a public figure, right? So he's a member of Congress. I started speaking about his crack addiction as a way to bring people over. he gave me permission on his deathbed to talk about it at the funeral. And the political report from back home were astounded. And there's actually a really interesting article where they're trying to call BS on me saying that he had a crack addiction because they had never heard of anything like this about him. But that's how much fatherhood and faith transformed his life. Was my siblings didn't even know about it? I mean, I knew there would be times I have very vague memories of my mom when I'm three, putting me in the back of the car and going and driving to the different bars in our area to try and find him. But it's very vague. My siblings have no record. Where is you in birth order? I'm the oldest. How old are your youngest? My youngest sibling is just turn 16. Wow. My mom was pregnant as she walked down the aisle with me at my wife. That's actually. Yes. It's very beautiful. I love it. I actually, two of my oldest daughter Grace who just got engaged is wonderful. She is older than the youngest brother of mine. Our youngest two siblings of mine. That's amazing. So the nightmare I think for any child and maybe especially the oldest son is his father's death. I think it's something in the back of your head. You always worry about it. Or I always did. How do you view it now? Your father's death. It's always going to be painful. But there was this moment when he's literally taking his last breaths. Before, let me go back actually. Earlier in the day, you could tell there was a, when someone's about to die that day, there's always like a big shift in them. They actually kind of get anxious. They want to get up and move around. I don't know what it is. But he started doing that. We got him back in a bed. He was in a lot of pain. And my mom asked him, oh gosh, what can we do? What can we do to help? And he said, I just want my family and I want Jesus. And that was his call to us to say I want last rights and he wanted to receive communion. We got that and we got the whole family in there. Tucker, I look back on that day and he died with all 10 of us at his side. It's incredible praying for him, thanking you. Thank you God for Bobby. You know? And like that is a beautiful life and it wouldn't have happened if he hadn't gotten clean. If he had stayed a crack addict and lulled the divorce to go on, what a max out of four kids. Yeah, maybe he got, you know, add some other woman on the side or whatever. But he died with all 10 of us. He was a great full to God for his existence and for what he did in our life. And it was a beautiful death, right? And I mentioned earlier that St. Joseph is the patron saint of fathers and workers. He's also the patron saint of a happy death. And the story is that he's the first kind of happy death because he died in the arms of Jesus and Mary. And I can't help but get that image out of my eye. I don't think the concept of happy death even exists in the West at this point. Hopefully we'll bring it back. But I feel like what you're describing so unfortunately is not even comprehensible to a lot of people that even know what that means. They're very fearful of death. And it's because we've lost faith. I think in our society, I think that we rely on ourselves a lot. I think a lot of those were so capable. Yeah. That's the irony. It's so capable. Human beings are so flawed, right? And you've got, you basically got a really corrupt system in America, which is on the left you have people that just want to want anarchy they want to give kids sex changes. They want the government to pay for it. They want to put you in prison for having the wrong political beliefs. They want you canceled. But then on the right, you have some of that stuff actually. But even worse, there's slaves to corporate America. There's slaves to the industries and the institutions. And it needs to change. One thing I wanted to share with you, I was a 2021 Lincoln fellow at Claremont with Charlie Kirk. And I got to know him a little bit. You know, there was like 12 people total. It's 10 days. We're in Las Vegas. Charlie didn't gamble or drink and I lost all my money on the first days. So I got to talk to him quite a bit. But it was, there was a fasting discussion where he was debating with another girl, a woman named Robbie Smith, who's one of the best people I've ever met. They were arguing about the lack of marriage and family formation America. Who was the blame men or women? And Robbie was saying it's, it's obviously the men. They're smoking pot. They're watching porn. They're all distracted. They don't want to get married. I have all these good girlfriends that want to get married. They can't find a guy. Charlie said, no, no, no, no. It's the girl bosses. It's the women wanting to get college degrees and putting off getting marriage. They don't want to get married. And Charlie turns to me and he says, Terry, you're the guy who's got a little bit of of work on family policy. What do you think? And I have a bad answer and I hate the answer I gave him. But I said, I think it's the men because, you know, biblically, men are the head of the household. So it's our job to win women over and to form our households. The reality talker is that who's the blame in our society is our elites. Of course. It's all of them. I mean, it's the elites in corporate America that set the HR policies that, you know, after Dobbs pass or after Dobbs decision came down. corporate America was tripping over itself for abortion tourism. Well, pay for you, your flights to go and your accommodations to go to California and secure abortion. Well, freeze your eggs. What is that? Well, I'll tell you what it is. It is corporate America saying if these women have babies, they'll leave the workforce. And they'll be fewer people. We'll have to pay people more money because there are fewer workers in the workforce because if these women have babies, they'll become moms. And then they'll maybe have another one. And they'll have less time to be efficient and effective. And it's so depressing. It's so sad. But I do feel like capitalism, I was promised. Exactly. Now we care about supporting companies whose values align with ours. We do not want to show firstly, as he companies. It is better to give business to like-minded Americans than people who hate us. That's our rule. And that's one of the reasons we like charity mobile. When you make the switch to charity mobile, the company sends 5% of your monthly price plan to pro-life, pro-family charities of your choice. That's millions of dollars in counting sent to pro-family philanthropies. Okay, you're probably thinking that sounds great, but charity mobile must be super expensive to pay for that. But no, they've literally never raised their mobile plan prices and no planning seeds $50 per month. Charity mobile is a good company with good service and good prices. So it's all good. Switch today and try. Keep your number with a compatible phone. No compromise and quality. And support a truly great company and a good cause at the same time. Promo code Tucker to get a free phone with free activation, free shipping and a free gift with every new line of service visit charity mobile.com slash Tucker. By the way, if women leave the workforce, then men will once again make more than women and then people will get married. And the cycle will harden because when women make more than men, they don't get married because women don't want to marry men who make less than they do. Sorry. That's not an attack on women. That's what women self report in survey after survey after survey. So when women make more than men, the marriage rate collapses. Duh, that's what happened in black America. Now it's happened in rural white America, but it's the same thing. Well, there's this interesting thing where you look at communist China, right? In the 1950s, they institute the one child policy and a bunch of different programs that incentivize sterilization. For birth rate in 1960, I think was 4.45 per woman. By 1997, they got it down to 1.53 after coercive and harsh tyrannical policies that really hurt and kill a lot of people. When the Brits gave up control of Hong Kong in 1987, the same year, their fertility rate under the loving, gazing eyes of the Western world, Hong Kong's birth rate was at 1.13. With all the prosperity, right? That's not the lower. Over that time, we have increased efficiency by 90% across the industries. We're almost double as effective and efficient as we were back in 1960, but more of our money goes towards the existential self. It was 50% of your income in the 1960s, went to your mortgage, your car, your insurance, all the things you need to live. Today it's 80%. So we're more efficient. We're producing way more goods than we've ever produced ever, but we're making less money. We need two incomes to make it in America today. People are buying homes with two incomes. When you lose your job, you go into foreclosure. This is all industry driven. Why do we allow people to buy homes with two incomes? Why do we allow people to get a mortgage with two incomes? I don't, all that's done is it's jacked up the price of housing in the good school district. Because there's only a few good school districts in the country. And if the incomes have doubled, you're in a bidding war now. And we have sacrificed our lives for business, for industry, for efficiency. And we're more miserable than ever. But they love us back, don't you think? You know, we were talking about this in the car. I admit it is Apple to you and your family. Oh, they hate you. First of all, oh my gosh, the iPhone should be free. The iPhone should absolutely, they need the iPhone to deliver all of their ads and their propaganda to you and to subvert everything you believe in. Why do we have to pay $2,000 for an iPhone? That doesn't make any sense to me. Two key to humility in us, maybe. I'm just guessing. Yes. Yes. Is that what it costs? That's 1,500, 1,600 or something. For an iPhone, for the most the highest level one. Yeah, I think so. I don't know. Well, I don't buy them. I don't either. Like they said them to me. I didn't know that. My office, I didn't. Wow, is that really what they cost? I'm so out of it. Gosh, I wish I didn't have one. So you're one of 10. You now are the father of eight. So I think you're in a pretty good spot to describe what makes a good father. I think if you boil what becoming a father is and what it means itself sacrifice, which is love. Yeah, right? Victor Hugo, author of Les Mis, he said that you can give without loving, but you can't love without giving. And I think the ultimate example of what a man is is priced on the cross. Like there's a guy that is literally giving up everything. And if you actually read the passion, he's fighting all the way up until the final moment. Right? These people are kicking him. He's falling. He's been beaten in scores. He's bleeding profusely. They ripped out. I mean, I saw the episode where you were talking about that. And it had, it was way more impactful than the passion. I'll tell you that. But you look at the passion of Christ. He was fighting and struggling to get to Calvary. The whole time it was not a, it was a submission of God's will, but he had to work for it. He had to push himself to get up every time and he did it for us. That is what we're called to be as fathers, self-sacrificial. You never, I also think the fathers are merciful, but they're just, right? So they're, someone described this to me, Pat Fagan, amazing guy who does a lot of profamily policy. But he told me the difference between the devil and Jesus, which is amazing. He said, you know, the devil always deviates from the law, but he shows no mercy when you break the law. Christ never deviates from the law, but shows infinite mercy when you apologize. And I think that's the rule of a father is to not stray from the law, not stray from the rules, but be merciful to your terms. Right? I think that there, you know, you hear horror stories about how some fathers behave, but I think if you're really doing it right, you're spending a lot of one on one time with each of your good, I believe you're not, even though I have eight kids, I make time for each one of them individually. And it doesn't have to be hours at a time. You can do a five, 10 minute trip to 7-11, get some snacks. Your kids will open up to you. You have to have that one on one time with your kids. But I would say that if you were to boil all down, it's sacrificing yourself for your children and your wife. You have to have that one on one time with your kids, but I would say that if you were to boil all down It's sacrificing yourself for your children and your wife It is being merciful and it's also making sure your kids know the rules and don't make these mistakes Discipline right these are these are the things that are the most important thing when it comes to being a father Well, you often hear people compare the West Last America Europe to Rome clearly Western civilizations in decline and at the same time You hear another set of people tell you that masculinity is the problem toxic masculinity and young people hear both of these things and a lot of them become Consumed by despair men are not irredeemable men can be stronger But you got to fix one thing before that happens and that's fatherhood No society without fathers can continue and that's why we made a new documentary on the topic It's called fathers wanted with the country is an less masculinity. It's more steady responsible self-sacrificing male leadership in a word fatherhood strong fathers build strong families and Strong families build strong nations which amount to a strong civilization Fathers wanted is available right now for limited time only on Tucker Carlson.com How do you keep fathers from not breaking? I've seen it many many times where a father loses his job He feels like a loser and then he starts behaving like a loser and Then his wife and children are unimpressed and so he becomes even less impressive and just like cycles out of life either literally or just falls apart with booze or other assorted self-destructive activities Well, I think we're seeing more and more of that today. Yeah Embarrassing level actually what the point of the system is what it produces not what it says it produces and our system today is attacking men You know, I work all the time in DC We all we do is pass laws and get people elected to help protect the family. That's what we do and you Talk to people on Capitol Hill You can't bring up all the attacks on young boys in schools You can't bring up the attacks on young men. How difficult is because women have it worse still they say they all well, well, it's starting to change. No, it's absolutely starting to change but you're not You really can't there's no the irony is is that there's a huge constituency with the American people on this but when you go to Washington DC The politicians don't want to hear about it. They definitely don't want to talk about it. That's true name now name name Five politicians Women were just sure made girls are screaming against in schools well of course women dominate schools completely from top to bottom They graduated a far higher rate at every level than boys do They used to say well women are paid a percentage of the male wage will women make more than men now nationally adjusted as you know and like so the data are in like this is not an argument we have to have boys are falling behind not girls and I've just to mame is that people in DC won't admit that It's um, it's one of the last acceptable big a trace is against men and it's because the news politicians everywhere in our culture the the movies We just saw Paul or like just died right I was actually in the delivery room. He's a lot of fun Oh actually in the delivery with the eighth child Or like when he asked yeah, and you explain new palette or like was for those who don't know it's a part or like wrote this book in 1968 called the population bomb and he basically said that the whole world was gonna collapse if we didn't stop people from having kids He was incredibly evil China's one child policies. He didn't go over and advise them But they read his books. They use his course. He wanted to sterilize people forcibly He wanted to have paid tax incentives for people that did sterilize themselves He wanted to have limits on how many kids he supported Forcing people to get licenses before they could have children right these these are crazy ideas that I don't know why they took off But the irony about Paul early because that he made all these predictions about devastation and chaos in the world if we didn't address the population bomb None of them came true Literally none of his ideas came true. The only one that got close to coming true actually was he predicted that in 2000 the year 2000 that the UK would fall. That's like the closest he's gotten The UK is falling by the way that but not because Britain's are having too many kids. No, it's no The opposite right of course but Paul early was in a atrocious man But one of the things that he was very passionate about was His guidance for television and movies if you depict a family they should be small No big families and movies. What how did Paul early have the right to advise filmmakers and TV producers on what their art should be everyone Everyone was scared of death. They really they bought it hook line of sinker and It's not new Tucker. It's also old the the idea that People are pollution it's so old. It's it's like kind of boring if you look throughout history sacrifice your children To the gods in order to become happy and prosperous. That's a pretty old concept. Well, there there's one group I actually I have a joke for you. I'll try it out anyway is To priest walk into a bar one's a Jesuit the others a Dominican the Jedler debating about who the best Order is in terms of Catholic priests and the Jesuits says well We were founded by Saint Ignatius of Leola and we were the most academic were the smartest and we were come we were founded to combat the Protestants and St sorry the Dominican priest says well, I think we have you beat we We were founded by Saint Dominic who founded us to Destroy the Alpagensians Who are the Alpagensians? Yeah, it was last time you heard of an Alba Gensian and they're like the Houthis they've never personally threatened may know Well, you would think so because you haven't heard of them, but their ideas are everywhere the the Alba Gensians were a 12th century Herrhetical cult of Christianity. They basically believe that the soul was perfect and pure But that the body in the physical world were corrupted and so they started punishing people Forgetting married they started encouraging people not to have children like the worst thing Anything pleasurable and if you enjoyed good food that was a sin for the Alba Gensians if you had sex with your wife that Having a baby was like the biggest Sin you could commit for the Alba Gensians because they were against marbrels and SUVs to I know these people they're worrying about climate yes Yes, but they thought the worst thing you could do is trap a pure soul into a corrupted body like you're actually doing this and Those ideas are still here. I see Alba Gensians everywhere in our society Their ideas have not died out. They've just taken different shapes It's it's why these corporations are promoting abortion and egg freezing. It's why states like California will take children from their parents If the parents will affirm their gender identity The family proceeds the state the family is the original community. It's the original society There is no right to take children away from from their parents unless there's actual serious abuse But we see these ideas everywhere and they've taken hold and you've got obviously Thomas Malthus who who believe that people were pop pollution Paul are like these guys their policies Have been very have been failures. They've caused misery and chaos and suffering But they've taken hold all of our elite institutions all of our elite institutions have been pushing these these policies on us So the these ideas shape shift. This is my read all these anti-human anti-God ideas like manifest is some Slightly different ideology depending on the period Whether it's the Alba Gensians or the Mark Sists or the Green Party All of those look antique kind of now especially even the climate people it was sort of gave up on that in exchange for building data centers So data centers are incompatible with green politics because there's such a massive energy trust you need all forms of like Electrical generation order to power these data centers, but what's the point of the data centers? It's to create something called artificial intelligence Which I'm beginning to wonder. I'm not against all AI I guess but I'm beginning to wonder if the agenda there is very is very different I mean it does seem like replacing thinking With the judgment of a machine. How is that different from what you're describing? I think it's very similar. It is at the heart of the entire AI Industry is the belief that human beings Need AI that they need some type of overlord above the way smarter that can process data Tucker that is that's I think the worst thing so Francis Bacon Was another guy that we've discovered and he basically believed he was the art of modern science Our father on modern science, but he basically believed that human beings could solve Anything that nature was actually meant for us to Completely alter and mess with I think you're with me. I think nature exists. I think it should be respected there Rules you shouldn't have sex outside of marriage. You should be open to life. You you shouldn't steal you shouldn't cheat You should lie But these these guys want to change innocent you can't kill innocent you can't sterilize innocent right? The They believe that they are their own gods. I had a Domenic and priest I had to go back to the Dominicans when the whole sex changes for kids thing took off I went to a very dark place I just couldn't believe that it was happening and I kept seeing these pictures and these stories are all horrific So I call my friend Tim from Francis University's a Dominican priest now and I'm lamenting all this I can't believe they're sterilizing kids and they're immediately in their bodies Any broken down he said what we're dealing with right now with this issue is is two things one It's very very old and two. It's very very new the old is the garden of Eden It is us trying to become our own gods and shape all of all of everything about us even reject the The biological sex that God assigned to you That God gave you But he said that the new is the technology you know previous societies did not even understand hormone levels So we have these new technologies and that is the Francis Bacon effect is the new technology is incongruing Nature and ever and and reshaping it to Something darker something that they can control and manipulate I don't think you can beat nature can you? No nature always wins that that's Because God is real right like he there was a designer for our universe and for our world and for humanity and He made these rules and if you reject them You're gonna a bad time Yeah, that's why I like bad weather because it reminds you of that Really, yes I mean it sort of doesn't matter what your ideology is if you go out naked in a snowstorm You're gonna die because nature is more powerful than you. Yes. That's just a fact. Yes And you can you know change your sex, I guess, but you can't change the need to be at 98.6 at all times Like it's such a great reminder. I wonder though As it relates to fatherhood Like the description of a good father Because fatherhood is part of nature Can't be that different from era to era Right no matter what we in the moment we're living in describe as a good father There is a kind of absolute standard for good fatherhood. There has to be because there is in the in the natural world Yeah, and it hasn't changed. I mean there are eternal truths a good father has always provided for his family He's always protected them and he's procrated You had the procreate it provide become a father protect Procreate and procreate and and discipline and teach rules be merciful Teacher kids, you know, there's there's a lot of new studies that have been coming out for last 10 years About fatherhood and how it impacts and shapes the individual and how it impacts and shapes the kids One thing that was very interesting to me Was it was the thing that was in reason magazine of all places? They they wrote about how fathers are actually the ones that instill empathy in their children And how they explain it was that fathers and men are naturally Concerned about themselves like we're kind of in our own heads and we're always thinking about what we need to do for our lives and so like when your kid breaks your $400 drill You're going down and lecturing them and saying you know how to had to work for that $400 drill I can't believe you use it without my permission. I know you're not supposed to do this We get kids to think about other people where it's like the moms are always gonna be like oh don't worry about it You're not just get another one. Don't feel that bad some moms No moms build Self-esteem mom still play a pyrtle. There's a there's a use to teaching your kids not to be suicidal We're breaking a drill right, but dads are the ones instill empathy so obvious women are more empathetic of course So we think of them that way, but societies in which There are very few fathers matriarchal societies are far less empathetic far less empathetic than patriarchal societies And you know that because they're like massively high crime rates in all societies run by women and those are way less empathetic societies Like that's the proof. Yes, and You know, I think largely I have a friend that uh We lament women because they're hard to understand they're complicated and uh He tells this funny joke. He said um you know what the difference between complex and complicated is and Complex a jet engine is complex. There's all these uh intricate parks that all logically make sense and the work together But it's complex so root Goldberg machine is complex. Yes. Yes. Women are complicated. Yes. That's right They're hard to understand especially if you're a guy um, but there's a whole nature of that and I think that one of the ways that our elites have really screwed us over um is convincing women that Having a career having a good job is the basis of a good life and not becoming a mother to women believe that do you think yes and um actually just you know people believe that I Yes, oh, I mean ask any woman who actually believe that though that that think that a career is is is the most important thing for a good life Yes a hundred percent. They don't Young man of a woman who believes that who believes a career working at the bank Will the lee ai start up? They'll they'll at least say this actually aren't preferable to having a husband who loves you takes care of You and provides you children. I don't think there's a woman alive who actually believes that well a lot of people that there's a lot of lies And are society and people that will say themselves are the most powerful right right and and women today I think they all know deep down. They really would do better with a husband. They really would be happier with a kid Right. I think you know biologically With a husband that could provide why do you want to go help Jeff Bezos make more money? Why do you want to go help Bill Gates make more money? Why do you want to help all these Super wealthy white billionaires make more money so you can be quote independent As you become totally dependent on a company that has no regard for you at all as a person. Yes I'm so independent. I work at JP Morgan. I'm so independent. Yes Tucker the So sad because these women are missing out. No, I don't know. I don't know. I'm laughing I'm laughing at the irony because everything is irony, but um, yeah, no if it's the tragedy of America really and You know the the egg freezing and the abortion tourism It's so evil because these women My dad died with ten of us surrounding him That's beautiful. Right. That's you you're gonna have a lonely death and and how things are headed Tell you that at your orientation and investment banking though. Do they no? I don't think there's any encouragement to think through to the end How does this end exactly exactly? Exactly? No in assisted living community where there's some You know foreign born nurse. It doesn't know my name. That's the end That is the end actually for a lot of people and we should tell them that at the start Like how do you want this to end? That's a totally fair question whether you're talking about war or your own life like What does this look like in the final stage? Well, I think if you go back to the AI situation a lot of speculation that AI is gonna eliminate every single job And we'll all be prosper that's the lie of their telling us we won't need to make money We won't need to work every machines will run our lives. Okay fine whatever but Won't need to work. Oh, that sounds fun But if you let's imagine this scenario though where you don't have to work where you you are living in heaven You're gonna have a family. You're gonna have a children. You're that is the ideal if you don't have all this noise around you Why don't I have to imagine how it works because I grew up in a trust fund world So know exactly how it works in it and it works where you know You become an alcoholic sleep with the au pair you're reviled by your children Then you shoot yourself. That's what a life of no working looks like and then on the bottom end the welfare world Which is the mirror image of the trust fund world? It's the same it's true despair Because a man needs work for meaning in his life. He protects and provides That's where his sense of himself comes. That's his duty and if he doesn't achieve it he hates himself So like a world without work is hell. It's not it's not advisable. I've seen it but the The people that put their careers first and that you know are going along with this life because like look They might not believe it, but they're doing it right and they're living it and what they're missing out on The the work is the what right? It's what you do The family is the why you get a job and you work hard at it so that you can provide for your family That the idea that you have a job so that you can build a legacy for yourself is Not right not correct. It's not gonna happen No one will remember you especially the company you work for The the company that you work for if you're a woman that's is playing to never get married that company is the day You die the day you leave the company they are going to immediately start preparing to replace you your children can't do that Your children won't do that unless you're a bad mother or a bad dad. No, but right but you You're missing out on the eternal You're missing out on the why when you say I need to get a college degree and advance college degree or I need to get a job I need to put everything in my life Ahead of my family families. I'm an advisable Um It's a disaster. It's an absolute disaster Yeah, I mean, first of all you work so your way for me proud of you You know your father works so hard. That's right. That's why I say grace at the table Because I work certain no, I mean that's like this is actually nature And I just feel like the program that we have sold To young people in our country is so unnatural and like bizarre and would make no sense to any So-called backward country. They'd look at this and be like what and they lifetime of backward countries and they do look at it like what Did it can't persist like you can't? I mean we're fighting gravity here kind of like this is not The natural order at all Well, so it's doomed. Well, I don't think it's doomed. I don't think anything's ever doomed No, but I mean the lies that we're telling ourselves Currently men and women are exactly the same. They occupy no unique role in the universe. They just can sort of choose it Working for you know Microsoft is more meaningful than having five children like these are such obvious lies that don't don't they have to just crumble at some point And I do think they're gonna be crumbling here soon. It can't go on in most like here now Even that you're saying this out loud you couldn't if you said this 10 years ago Right. Yeah. Well, you're you weren't really I don't think the crisis was as big of a deal or it wasn't as apparent how urgent The family formation crisis was or that we were prioritizing Putting women in the workforce over family. I mean I went to high I was in high school from 2001 to 2005 and Family was the center of everyone's life And maybe it was the part of the country I grew up Maybe the Quad Cities is just better than all these major cities or East Coast or West Coast stuff But family was very much the center of everyone's life like you And you learn that from talking to people at the pizza shop and but one thing one big change that I've noticed In our society is public parks Public parks are interesting because they're in major cities In spaces finite so when you decide to put an area up as a public park You're basically telling people what your top priorities are 5060s all that when we had the massive expansion of parks or our country over last Century up until recently. They were all kids parks. When you say I'm gonna go to the park You immediately envision Playgrounds and swings and and merry-go-rounds all of that But today if you go to the inner cities dog parks are Are outranking kid parks the kid parks are empty I went to a dog park and I talked to some of the people there and one girl I asked her You know how many dogs she has she had two but she's a dog walker. I love dogs, but I don't want to attack dogs but the Talk to another guy he said I asked him if he was ever planning a marrying having kids He said well, I've got all these international weddings. I have to go to and That's not the main point. We're developing we're directing all of these resources to dog runs and dog parks and not kid parks in in Hong Kong. It's actually a bit worse You know in a way the parks are actually for senior citizens They're their low impact exercise machines like hip twisters and all of that and it's they don't have children Their birth rate is like under I think it's under one it's like 1.09 or something It's devastating, but these people Either direct the money and the the resources towards dogs or the elderly if you look at federal spending on welfare and entitlements It's five to one welfare benefits going to people 65 and up We need to start reversing that back to Young people and families to get them a more stable life We are setting we're telling the world and our citizens what our priorities are Every time we build a dog park. I got to think so that you're break down a federal spending Do you think it's an indictment of a specific generation? I'm not gonna name them boomers, but I think That generation and the last year it was 1964 that you're after the cutting assassination um You know, they're on their way out They're 60 youngest or 62 you know the oldest or 80 so Once that that generation which is completely destroyed America not all of them, but most Uh, don't you think there will be change? I think there will be a lot of change um Yeah, these boomers have really screwed up our country and they really hurt young people They the boomers are the most selfish generation ever four or two is such a massive success How did it give rise to that generation? They came back from the war and had those people So like I'm not again, you know, I'm totally very anti-Nazi want to be clear But like if that's the founding myth of our country that winning that war was such a win then how did they produce the baby boomers? Well, I The there's probably a lot of reasons there's a lot of reasons, but there's something really heavy going on there like how could you wreck it all with one generation? I think that they I think that the The greatest generation the World War two of it generation They went through the depression. They went through a world war some of them went through two world wars I think they were ready for prosperity. Yeah, right? And I think that they kind of spoiled their children They're I sat down with Bishop Robert Baron. Yeah, and he told the story of King David And one of his sons so Absalon Who killed his brother? He kills brother He tried to overthrow his King David. Yeah, as the king he rise rose up and yeah, that's what we're seeing and then he got killed He got killed by God basically, but This is what we're experiencing with the boomers is they are Absalom. They weren't disciplined. They didn't have to go without you might create grandmother It helps being for a big family because the eldest I got to know my great grandmother. She was 64 when I was born She lived another 31 years And the stories I would hear from her. I was always grateful right? I think that creation oration at least for me instilled gratitude And I don't know why it didn't translate to their children because their children are only entitled and there's You said it earlier. There's a lot of good ones out there, but The majority I think are very self-centered. They they were the generation that gave us all of this nonsense. Oh, I know I'm very aware and they're sitting on all the wealth. They're sitting on multiple homes And here let's go back to this. There are so many We give so much more resources. You know in the big beautiful bill. I liked most of it They give $6,000 checks to senior citizens They don't need money. They have all the money. They have all the homes. They're not selling them It costs $750,000 in like to get a town home in DC Families can't afford town homes or for families. They're for new families actually and they're supposed to be affordable But now they're $750,000 because The boomers aren't selling their multiple homes. You know in California There's this interesting dynamic where There was a lawsuit that was challenging whether or not you could do Property tax freezes for senior citizens. They were arguing the people that are challenging were saying this is age discrimination you can't Allow them give them a different set of rules than the rest of us and the courts obviously ruled in favor of the boomers because the judges are all boomers but it's insane that we are freezing property taxes for these boomers who got their homes for eight raspberries and a blueberry and a horse They've had so much appreciation the value of their properties is skyrocketed Why do they get tax relief when working? The burden and the tax burden and the onus is all on young families And and we need to start reversing this if we don't start reversing this young people are not going to get married They're also going to get really really dark politics and I interviewed Nick Fuentes Who I disagree with him a lot earlier this year and was attacked for whatever but One of the main reasons I wanted to talk to him was like this guy's super popular like what is he saying? What what is this? This is a totally different kind of politics completely different kind of politics Been anything I've covered at 56 like I'm just interested And one of the things I learned from the experience was younger people have totally different politics and by My standards as a middle-aged person. They're pretty radical. Yes. And how did that happen? Well, it happened by taking away all their opportunity and then ignoring them when they complained about it So of course they ever and by the way I my senses that Nick Fuentes will be considered pretty moderate very soon So like if you want a stable moderate country You have to take care of people and give them opportunity like they're massive consequences for behaving this way I think you want more fathers you want more families if you want to moderate in politics You want people that are serious about Solutions to problems that actually are willing to address problems. Yes. You want more fathers You want more mothers you want more children and families because When you become a father when you come in husband you're thinking long-term So you're no longer thinking about today. The ballast and a ship. Yes. It keeps it steady. Yes Like I'm a dad. I've got kids Can't can't get too crazy because I've got children. I mean, that's just like a baseline impulse don't you think in fathers? Yes you These kids are being radicalized because they don't Most of them are products of the divorce generation. So you have like compounding dysfunction there. Yeah, they're Not only did their parents divorce, but their parents parents divorce and so You know, I went into my marriage Under the belief that this is the most sacred of all the agreements. I'm ever going to sign in my life Right, I can sign contracts with corporations. I can sign business deals But this is the one I can never break it has to come before everything else But this whole no fault of our situation Basically said no your your marriage is actually the least important of all the All the agree the only thing that you only agreement you can't break in modern America is paying your credit card interest And I suggest because I'm totally for not paying your credit card interest I think you should stiff city bank. That's my personal view And I've suggested that before to conservatives and they're like that's cray what Like no these people are evil just like I don't put the bank out of business just how about don't pay and They looked at me like I was a freak Conservatives are like, that's from what? And I was like, no, these people are evil. Just like, I don't put the bank out of business. Just how about don't pay? And they looked at me like I was a freak, which and that may be freaky. I'm not actually in real life suggesting that, the way kind of him. But like the same people are like, yeah, well, didn't work. I think I'm divorced. So that just tells you where the priorities are. It's immoral to stiff a bank, but it's okay to stiff your wife. Like how does that work? What are those values? Well, it's obviously predatory. It's obviously not treating the human person as a child of God, right? They're treating us like cogs in a machine. That's what the elites and all the industries as as pieces to play on the field that can make our products and do our services. They don't look at you as a dad. They don't look at you as a husband. They want you back in the workforce for maximum efficiency. And by the way, you're reading all about these artificial wounds and egg freezing and IVF and all of that stuff. I don't I don't judge or attack anyone that's gone through IVF except, you know, if you buy a baby as like a gay couple or something. I think that's really messed up. But I think that makes you a conservative leader if you do that. It makes you get a podcast. You get to yell at other people, talk about conservatism, the Trump coalition. Yeah. But the no, those are those are no, I know it's sorry. Sorry, sorry, sorry. But it's it's the commodification of the human person. And that is ultimately, you know, I love your actually. I kind of love it. I'm not endorsing it specifically. I need a new more research into it. But not paying your credit cards. Sounds like a great way to get these credit card companies to stop praying on. Well, how about my idea was like, let's have a, hey, let's not pay our credit card party where that's the only like bullet point on the agenda is we all agree on his pay our credit. And just to negotiate terms, like because Trump was always bragging about how, well, you know, if you take a big enough loan from a bank, they have to negotiate with you. Like you're in charge because they're exposed because it's just too much money, which I get. I'm not criticizing it. But like why not create a union to do the same for the entire public? Like stop sending credit card solicitations to kids. Stop charging 20% interest. Like that should be illegal. That's right. That's user. That's the mafia used to go to jail and to Rico for that. But it's okay for city bank. That's all I said. And it was like what? What? I was like, oh, I found the tender spot. Well, this is what really annoys me about Republicans. And, you know, they're so corporate center. They're so like free market centered. When Trump mandated that like that credit card companies couldn't go over 10%. All these libertarian right wing think things sort of criticizing him as an enemy. The free market, if that's an enemy of the free market, then consider everyone. Right? Because they're taking advantage of poor people. Rich people don't really use credit cards. They pay them off every month. But the poor people are the ones that pay the interest. We still have payday loans, dude. I mean, the only kind of capital is they seem to really endorse is like setting tax dollars to weapons companies. And I'm like, I'm a what's or something if I'm not for that or a piece of neck, which I'm not. Obviously, I'm like, yeah. Anyway, yeah, don't even get me going. Okay. So let me just let me end on this because I'm more positive note. It's about your dad and because you clearly consider him a great father and you become a father of eight, which is just amazing. God bless you. Thank you. What did you try question, but I think you probably have a real answer. What did you learn from him? Like as you go about the business of raising eight children, what do you, when do you think about your dad? Oh, that's a great question. I think about him a lot. I think about him every time I hold a new baby. My dad, this is actually advice for anyone that becomes a father or is going to have another kid. If you're the dad, one, you got to be in the delivery room and you got to look right. One, you got to watch that kid come out and I know wild experience. Oh, it is incredible. It is so euphoric, but you're the first guy that gets to see that kid's face. And you know, your wife's going through all this hell like pushing this kid out or getting your stomach ripped open. The least you can do to participate is to see your child come out, right? But that he advised me on the first one and I haven't ever looked away since. It's not just special experience, but I think working hard, my goodness, sacrificing yourself, accusing yourself. You're my dad and accusing your kids. I think it's okay to get cues your kids. And my dad, because of his addiction, he always was paranoid that one of us kids was a drug addict. Me too. It's good to be paranoid. He won time. We were going to the pizza restaurant. You get tips when you clean out the tables and all that. My brother is just weird and he keeps his dollar bills rolled up. And all over of my dad was like, he's confident down to see if there's any coke in it. And it's like, dad, I'm not doing coke, but that was actually him loving us because he was thinking, well, I did crack. So it's not impossible to get to do. I found your old dad bill in one of my kids' pockets. That would be the first thing I would think. Yeah. Yeah, obviously. He was at the time you're offended. Like how could you ever possibly leave? I would do coke. Kids are so offended. He was a crack addict. And I think one of the benefits of having a crack addict as a father, like people hear that. And like, oh my gosh, that must have been so terrible. I'm grateful for it. And it prepared me for the world to be living today, which is like, Gen Ziers are all being raised by these women on amphetamines and SSRI's and Xanax and all of that. So it helps me relate to them and actually connect with them to know what they're going through. Can we speak to them? Do you think they have a sense that their parents are on drugs? Yeah. For children's drugs. I don't think the parents hide. I mean, it's hard to hide these women. It's like a whole thing. They compete. They brag about the drugs that they're on, the pharmaceuticals. And you know, Tucker, I just want to say that the industries have monopolized our time so much and taken over our lives that these poor women and men at this point have to take Adderall to have the energy to do their job every day. But then they have to take the anti anxiety medication to combat that. And then they're taking all these other pills. You take a pill, then you have to take pills to combat the side effects of it all. That is what these industries have done through this fake concept known as the work life balance is they've monopolized our lives and taken over where we need pharmaceutical drugs just to exist and be happy. Do you feel like change is coming? Some type of change. I don't know if it's going to be good. It seems pretty dark. It seems very dark right now. You know, 40% of Gen Zers say they don't want to get married, 43% say they don't want to have kids. That's insane. That is not a sign for hope. Now I do think they have those other charts where I think there is some hope which show that liberals and progressives and these types, they're not having kids, but the Christians are. I think that's a very good sign for our country. I just don't know if it's in time. I hope it is. I think it if times are going to get bad though, you want to have kids. Right? I think I think one thing that we've really got wrong. I think one thing that we've really got wrong. That's it. That's that's what matters. Christian Christianity is what we're here for. If God actually exists, then he's the full story. If you actually believe in God, you can't not believe that he's the main character. He is the main character and we live by his rules. But if times are going to get bad, you want to have kids. The Bible is very clear. Children are a blessing from the Lord. They are a blessing from the Lord. Blessed is the man whose quiver is full. He will not be left in shame as his enemy is at the gates. We need more kids. So I mean, we're going to keep going. We're open to whatever God sends us because I don't think I have a right to tell God to know. Right? If my wife gets pregnant, I think there was a divine hand in that. And he's saying we need, you know, there's an old proverb. I forget who said it. But it's, you know, every new baby born is a sign from God that he wants the world to continue. He's sending his helpers. He's sending his people that have different skill sets, different dispositions. And so we're going to keep taking on who wouldn't want that. Who wouldn't want to like sit at the head of a big table and be the patriarch? I don't understand that. That seems like the most basic desire of the male heart. I thought that's what men did want. Well, I've always wanted that my whole life. I think dogs running around, little conversations going on at the end of the beauty. It's the best dude. It's the best. I mean, like what else is there? Yes. No amount of room service or carnival cruises or weekends and same parts could approach the deep joy and satisfaction of sitting at the head of a table of your descendants. It's like the greatest thing that's ever been. Doesn't, I thought everybody thought that. I think that the issue is the single life, the unmarried life, the childless life, it's very comfortable. It is fun. It is, you can do whatever you want. It's innocuous. It's like weed, right? Weed seems to be like it's not a threat, like it's not a big deal. But people will go 40, 50 years smoking pot every day. And then by the time that time is over, they look back at their life, they can't remember anything. They don't know what happened in their life. I've smoked a lot of weed in my life. No, I hate drugs. Agreed. But I have done it a lot and talk about aiming low. Yes. That's what you want to not remember or something. Like why wouldn't you want to sit at a table with your descendants? I mean, that's just like, well, the single life is just as innocuous or innocuous. It is, it doesn't seem threatening and actually seem, you're told by every corner of our society, by the elites that being single and child free is actually prosperity is actually human flourishing. So these poor people have been lied to. They've been manipulated into serving the state in their corporate masters. Man, that's the lamest thing to ever want. It is. It is. Terri Schling, thank you for this. Congratulations on child number eight. It's incredible. I know that when people, I'm sure like they say, caddy things, do you got an airplanes but deep down their envious. Thank you, Dr. Thank you.