When was the last time you were reading the news in this country and thought to yourself this can't be real this has to be a parody It's been more than three days you haven't been reading the news It's reached the level where it's almost Impossible to tell the difference between what's reported as facts by the news media and what someone with a dark sense of humor has made up Well, we thought this was exactly the moment to speak to the man who makes up more news than anyone in America Seth Dylan who runs Babylon be and he joins us now. So thanks so much for coming on. Thanks for having me So we're really talking to you today not as the proprietor of America's premier humor site, but as a prophet As our own Isaiah yeah, um because it turns out that we went through quite a few examples at the Babylon bees Parity stories have come true in dozens scores nearly a hundred cases I'm gonna put three on the screen and get your reaction to them to kind of set the stage To announce you as America's most accurate profit. So let's go in order here This is from January 2023 here said like experts say they don't know What thing is causing everyone to suddenly collapse, but it's definitely not that one thing? Let's go to the news story Something has been killing American young people and sharply rising numbers, but it's not vaccines They don't know what it is, but they know it's not vaccine They can rule that out safely So when you when you see the news story that confirms What you thought was a pretty out there joke. What's your reaction? I? Mean we're getting accustomed to it at this point. Yeah, but but you know it's uh it It I think it's probably the most common misconception people have is that when the world goes really wild and insane And there's crazy stuff happening that it's easy to satirize that it's easy to make fun of it and it's it's actually the opposite We we find that it's the way that I put it is imagine if your job is to write jokes that are funnier than what Democrats are doing in Realizing If your job is right jokes that are funnier than a common hare speech. No, it's totally I mean it's it's it's challenging So you're like so we're country where everything is like orderly and neat and sensible that's something fun to pivot against Yeah, exactly It so I don't know what we see this stuff happen where I'm used by it on the one hand and on the other hand But like this is it's crazy that satire can't stay satire from What the shelf life of your pieces is shows let's throw up another one This is from September 2020 stay with no electricity orders everyone to drive cars that run on electricity And there you have Gavin Newsom who's the governor of what state California California here's the news story California is told not to charge a lecture cars dates after gas cars sales band How'd you see that it's comical? I mean well, we're in some sense We're just reporting the news when we're doing this up You know like you see it happening you see the madness happening on raji You call it out and next thing you know, it's actually in the headlines. I don't But you I guess the joke is you see the implications of the news Yeah, the joke is that you see what you can kind of see around the corner I think it's easy to you can kind of guess at what people are gonna go to next What's the next logical? Step here given where we where we've come what is common Harris's line about how where we've been where we're going or something The line to keep repeating over wherever you are and wherever you are I Don't know I mean it's you can kind of see around the corner with this Especially when you're putting when you're trying to think yourself well You know what's the what is the next insane thing that they could that they could come up with that they haven't already come up with You just throw that out there and see what sticks. I mean eventually it's gonna come true. How long are your story meetings? Well, it's a it's a constant meeting. It's an ongoing meeting It's just you know pitching ideas all day long So we just pitch them back and forth out based off that we read the headlines We read the real headlines and then we exaggerate them a little bit You know we do this little caricature of the headlines and then that's when they come true. Do you do are you getting to the point where no idea is too outlandish for a joke? Well, I mean I guess part of the part of the problem is Some of these ideas are too outlandish for a joke But they do actually happen in real life so people don't realize they're a joke You know, so you have these things will publish a joke that's clearly a satirical joke that everybody thinks it's true And they share it as if it's true because they're so used to seeing almost satirical headlines in the real news. Yes So reality is it fault for that. It's not that we know our jokes are too believable How if that if that's acts of reality is too close to satire? I'll be get fact checked all the time. We've been fact checked Dozens of times snopes this fact checked us at least 20 times 20 plus times Do they know that you're a parody say they do they when they they used to attribute nefarious motives to us they used to say that we were like misleading people on purpose with these jokes because they were Believable and people were sharing them as if they were true Again, not our fault. I think that's the fault of reality being too close to satire Yes, but they would fact check them regular ridiculous jokes like you know AOC goes on the prices right guesses everything is free or or You know Ninth Circuit Court over turns death of Ruth Bader Ginsburg You know these these are it they're they're silly jokes They're funny jokes, but sometimes people believe that it's true because you could actually see somebody doing this came up with those two I don't know. I don't we don't we don't actually put the name of the author on the article So I'd have to go back in their clever stuff. Yeah, yeah, we have a we have a very very sharp writing team They're very good at this super good at this I think one of my honestly one of my favorites that got fact checked was our joke about Trump saying that he had done more for Christianity than Jesus himself and that was that was your headline that was the headline Trump I have done more for Christianity than Jesus But he and said that at some point didn't he did well Yeah, so we we made that joke in 2019 it got fact checked shortly thereafter because it went crazy viral and then in 2021 I think it was 2021 or 2022 he said he'd done more for Christianity and Religion in general than any other person in history So I it's hard to tell sometimes are people reading our website and getting ideas for what to say and what to do I don't know but that that one was kind of so how do you respond when someone fact checks a joke AOC Unprices right Trump's better for Christianity than Jesus. How do you respond to that? Well when they fact check it I think it's hysterical when they fact check it what I don't like what I don't like is when the fact check says they've managed to pull off This ruse before they're tricking people You know the reason your grandma shared that joke on Facebook is because the Babylon be tricked her into believing it was true You know that kind of stuff is ridiculous We actually threatened to sue snopes because they were they were literally Miligning us and suggesting that we were mis misinforming people on purpose and then Facebook was saying that they were gonna demonetize and Deplatformies because we were being fact checked by snopes So saying you can't spread fake news on our platform like it's satire So what I assume snopes is run by the CIA or I mean I don't have anything to say that but I like Wikipedia I seems obvious, but what do you know about snopes? There was a couple that started it and that they were running it for a long time. I think the guy's name I might mess it up. It was David Mikkelson or something like that or Michaelson I may be getting that wrong, but anyway, I think it changed hands recently somebody else took it over Oh, so they actually reached out to us and said I know we've had a you know We've had a rough past but we want to put that behind us and move forward and I mean in your experience to the the fact checkers which are I mean again Clearly at the very least influenced by the intelligencies. Yeah, do they play any constructive role in our public conversation? No No, I mean well first of all, they're spending their time fact checking satire This the the joke about Ruth Bader Ginsburg that are her death being overturned by the Ninth Circuit or a return someone's death by the way It happened with what happened once yeah It happened once I don't think it happened with Ruth Bader Ginsburg But USA today fact check that one and they cited 15 sources in their fact check like they were taking it so seriously They checked the Ninth Circuit Court website. They placed phone calls It's like just look at the website that published it. So you're the Babylon being the same right? Yeah, so I always think that behind every ludicrous event like that as a person who spent his day doing that thing So imagine if you went home at night and your wife says you know like what's that what you do today? You're accomplishing it and you're like well I fact checked Resources like the respect level for your wife has to plummet right the fact that it got fact checked is funnier than the joke itself Yes, like the one so I had spoken with you about this one before CNN purchasing an industrial size washing machine to spin the news and before publishing it That's a ridiculous joke. It's silly. It's a CNN bias joke and that got fact checked and rate of false to so they're spending their time on story We didn't actually purchase some industrial size never half and they never per written and never did they never slapped their logo on a washing machine and spun the news and it before It never happened was a joke But the joke is that they fact check it they took it seriously, but no fact checking so the way that I look at it is you know fact checking is a It's an arm It's one of the methods that's employed by the lovers of censorship to guard the narrative not the truth Yeah, and so what they're doing with fact checking is they're very selective first of all They're super select about what they fact check and then the fact checks themselves often get the facts wrong on purpose and so They're not guarding the truth and saying okay, there's this problem of misinformation We're gonna prevent it spread and we're gonna do that by having objective people look at what the facts are That's all narrative driven. It's all about protecting the popular narrative You mean lie the lie. Yeah, whatever the popular lie is that they want you to believe yes that that that the claims are that you have the press secretary for the current administration saying that Biden has done more to secure the border than any other person That's a straight face claim from the press secretary fact checkers haven't touched it. It has not been rated false now Governor Abbott in Texas governor Abbott in Texas Had was talking about how this administration currently has basically an open border policy and that got fact check them rate of false So you know that the challenges to the narrative are fact checked and rate of false the narrative itself Which isn't true is allowed to go unchecked? So normally we wouldn't care what the fact checkers say because they're obviously Discredited I mean they're disgusting by their nature but we have to care because they are the triggers that set into motion the censorship apparatus at the Social media companies correct well, they rely on this so they use that the fact checkers are the way of them Getting out of the way and saying well, we're not the ones determining we're not the arbiters of truth Facebook could go could punt to Snopes or whoever else USA today whoever's doing the fact checking and say we're not censoring you We're not removing your content based on you know arbitrary rules We have third-party fact checkers that are objective and they're the ones deciding what's true and what's false Someone can stay in what goes so they just they fit in as a piece that allows them to basically have like plausible Deniability that they're involved in censorship, but the USA today fact check on Ruth Bader Ginsburg's death That was funded by grants from Facebook so Facebook paid USA today to write that Selection to they put almost half a billion dollars mark Zuckerberg into changing the way we vote So I don't know are they gonna fact check that Is that actually happened okay, let me get to the third Example of the Babylon bees prophetic accuracy and I don't actually know how else you describe this This is from April of 2022 government disinformation were determines all criticism of government disinformation board to be Sit for make it. It is a self-looking ice cream coat. Okay, so that was your headline Here's the fact we are cassettes misinformation on Homeland Security Security It's it, you know, if the world is too absurd to be satirized what so when you see that I mean do you feel vindicated? Yeah, yeah, of course I mean did Jeremiah feel vindicated? I mean it's wrong to something what it what it means is that there was okay So this is this is another criticism of the Babylon Bee We're we're narrative driven. We're propagandists. We're we're trying to push our own Viewpoint that has a problem basis. Yeah, they're like slate all these people rolling stone When they write and they write sis they do. Yeah, and when they write pieces about us They talk about how we're trying or the reason our jokes aren't funny is because they're not riding on the back of the truth They're not carrying a message of truth. They're pushing in narrative. They're based on a narrative So so the joke isn't funny because it's rooted in all I so slate doesn't think it's fun But but I think the fact that we get fact check so much and these jokes are coming true of indicates that there is truth to them Obviously they're rooted in the truth because they're coming true You have to fact check them and write them fall I Wonder if we take this seriously enough I mean if someone is trying to stop you from talking That person doesn't consider you human of course because you can't if you consider someone human that person is every bit the right to speak that you do If you consider the person subhuman a slave Then you can make him shut up. So it's the way they see you is not how you see them at all You see them as human beings correct the censors the fact checkers slate You don't want to shut them up or put them in prison. Do you know no? No, and I this is I actually like the way that Twitter now acts as handling False claims or or misleading claims because what they're doing is instead of trying to shut anybody up You know the community notes thing where they tag a note on it But it's the best feature of the platform by the way It's so entertaining when people get noted and it's you know they make a ridiculous claim Biden's been noted a bunch of times Even Elon's been noted a couple of times So you share something that's either from a you know a dubious source or you make a claim that's you know Obviously false and a community note gets attached to it that offers context readers added context, right? That's at least more speech in the answer to speech that's disliked. It's it's it's a rebuttal That's that's prominently set up next to whatever the claim was I like that a lot more than okay Snopes rated you false. Therefore. We're taking your page down. You can't talk anymore You know the answer the answer to speech that you don't like should be more speech right a reputation or an argument Not removal of your voice. Well, of course not so but your voice was removed from Twitter back when it was Twitter You were in Twitter prison. I can't remember. Why were you there? prison changes like how was your time in Twitter prison? We were in Twitter jail as you could put it for eight months How did you join a gang? We were there with a few other interesting people Jordan Peterson Do you you know a lot of a lot of interesting people in Twitter jail I get a switch. Are you smoking your homeworld cigarettes playing P. Knuckle cooking pasta So we had we had made a joke so so there was a real headline USA Today names Rachel Levine Woman of the year so Rachel Levine is the transgender health animal in the vitamin S. Oh they do and with the metal Yes, yeah, yeah Woman of the year so that headline itself. I think is comical. It's funny. It's it's it seems like a parody But it's not it's real so we were thinking to ourselves. Oh, I think it's woman in America. What do we do? Very bold and beautiful woman. I don't know what you're talking about Brave stunning so we were we were trying it We were looking at this headline and thinking to ourselves What do we do with this like what is the angle here to make a joke out of what's already a joke? This is already a joke and women should be offended everybody should be offended that this that that a male person is winning this woman of the year but The only thing that we could think of to say was okay. Well, how about in defense of women in sanity? We just simply say the battle on bees picked for man of the year is Rachel Levine So that was the headline that we put out there Babylon being named Rachel Levine man of the year So you know Twitter didn't like that. It's misgendering. It's that's so useful. Yeah, exactly so Misgendering falls under the hater. That Adam's that pull it a juxtap. You're calling him a man You're referring to a male person as a man. Yeah, that's hate and that's it's hate. It's hate face-to-hate hateful conduct It's it's misgendering by their policy. It's not you know. It's not acceptable So what basically what they said was this you can have your account back If you delete the tweet with that joke attached to it You have but you have to delete it They didn't take it down. They wanted us to delete it and check this box that said by deleting You know when you delete this tweet you acknowledge that you violated the rules including the rules against hateful causes So sign a confession sign a confession bend the knee, you know Sensor yourself delete your own joke Like we were I was basically telling Twitter. I'm like you guys delete if you don't like it You take it down. Why make me take it down and admit that I did something wrong. Well, that's the whole point It's not censorship and subjugation right. Yeah, exactly So we said no, so we're like no, we're not gonna delete it and we got into the standoff with you Can I ask you just a question too? Which is a little bit off topic, but maybe central central you are a Christian son of a pastor When when you're told by the authorities Not simply that you're being punished, but that you have to agree that your punishment is just right Is it like a theological component for you when you say no? Yeah, I mean it's standing out. It's standing on the principle that not only do we think that this first of all It's a joke right second of all. It's true. This is a male person referring to them as a man means an adult human male So there's truth to it as well So the the idea that we're not allowed to speak the truth But and that we have to censor ourselves and admit that we engaged not just in a falsehood But something that was hateful. Yeah, I think I think that there's there's a moral objection to to play any part in that So yeah, so that that was really the ground that we were standing on it wasn't just like oh Let's you know, let's get some publicity by refusing to this was a costly decision by the way We had there was nobody in the world that time knew that Elon was positioning himself to take over Twitter So and we didn't know that if he did that he would end up restoring us So it wasn't like we had any kind of fallback for that It was just our Twitter audience was going to be inaccessible to us if we didn't delete the joke And we deliberated about it for like five minutes and we're like no, we're not doing it so we sat in Twitter jail until Elon took the reins and was like bring back the Babylon be so how did that play out? And by the way, this is you're one of the main owners of the business Your whole business is getting your content in front of viewers selling ads against it I mean, this is like a as you said a very costly. It was a very stupid business decision It was I think it was a morally right decision But you know the right thing in the easy thing are rarely over the same It was a costly decision because that's where we generate a lot of our traffic is through Twitter. Oh, yeah And that's where so when people say well how costly was it to be off of Twitter? Well, I mean We weren't we weren't getting engagement from people like Trump or yourself or Rogan or or musk on Facebook or Instagram It was happening on Twitter. That's where we got engagement from people with big followings That's where they that's how they knew about the bee and that's how they engaged with the bee So once we were sidelined from Twitter. We were basically out of the conversation. That's where the conversation was happening So it was it was a big cost to us not just monetarily but just being relevant. We weren't relevant anymore so I mean the way the way it went down was really crazy because you had you know obviously Elon Was Wanting to make a move to buy Twitter. You know when he first found out that we were suspended He reached out to us. He's like is this true? Are you guys really suspended? That's what I'm hearing? At first he actually reached out to our babble on the account and we couldn't respond to him because we were locked out of it So we're like we can receive the message But we can't reply to it. So like Elon Musk is trying to message us and we can't get back to him. Yeah So we couldn't even respond so eventually he you know He found our editor-in-chiefs account was able to message him and can touch with him So we're like yeah, we got to find you. Oh, yeah. He was yeah He was trying to get in touch. Let's to figure out what was going on because at the time unknown to us and anybody else He was already buying Twitter stock and he was kind of positioning himself looking at Twitter as like a potential acquisition so And he wanted in the reason he wanted to do that is because he was current concerned that there was a lot of censorship And people weren't allowed to speak freely on the platform anymore And that's something needed to be done about that. So then he finds out that the biggest is spending He's like are you serious? This is ridiculous. You should be able to tell jokes so Yeah, so we had a conversation with him about you know How insane it was that that we were kicked off and well and he's like why don't you just delete the tweet to get back on and we're like I don't think we should I don't think we should have to and he's like well no, I don't think you should have to eat it So Fast forward a little bit I mean we were on a roller coaster there for a while because he was you know He made an offer and then he tried to get out He tried to back out and say oh, you know, you guys misrepresenting your numbers There's all these bots. I don't want to buy bots. I want to buy real users And so he was trying to get out of the deal Maybe he put off more than he could chew and was like having having cold feet about an outful Yeah, yeah, and then Twitter sues him to try to keep him in the deal And so we had no idea if anything was going to happen If he was actually going to take over if this was just a big publicity player or whatever So I woke up to a message one morning. It was a october in November last year I don't know exactly when it was the D took over But he finally closed the deal and And yeah, it was in october He finally closed the deal and I wake up at like I don't know eight or nine in the morning It was sleeping in that it was a weekend I think it was and I had a message from Elon That he sent overnight. He said would you like me to restore the bees account? There will be no censorship of humor So he took over and was immediately wanting to rectify the problem And how long after he took over was that? That was day one Day one? So what if his first text was to you saying you're restored Yeah, well, would you like me to restore your account? There will be no censorship here Come to find out We actually didn't get restored for another month Because he started, you know, he went into the meetings with the trust and safety team and they're like you can't just restore people You can't just break the rules There's rules We enforce the rules if you break the rules for one person You have to break them for everybody If you insult someone in power, we censor you Yeah, yeah So they were like you can't just restore the Babylon bee and he's like well, why not? Why can't it's not like a presidential pardon? Why can't I pardon somebody, you know and set them free and they're like This is that's not how this works I mean, I guess you can if you want to so they actually argued with him a lot back and forth Can't get us you just another sideline question But like you can't insult Richard Levine Product of private school Doctor Guy posing as an admiral or whatever He's in power he works for the current administration But if you were to find like some 45 year old white guy Drywall hanger In Iowa Is there anything that you would not be allowed to say about him? No, nothing Nothing Yeah, now so this is what you want to kill him and everyone like him Right, right, right, right, right Now so this is such an important point you're bringing up The idea this concept of who you can and can't make fun of So Richard Levine, Rachel Levine, whatever you want to call him, man of the year Uh High ranking white male government official Yeah High ranking white male government official and this is a person that you can't joke about because they're marginalized and oppressed supposedly I do words even have meaning What does the word marginalized mean? Dylan Mulvaney is Dylan Mulvaney on the red carpet at these events and and sponsored by every major You know brand Marginalized and oppressed. What does that word even mean to be marginalized? Right So we're looking at this and we're like so wait a minute. They're telling us they have a rule Facebook now has a rule the other platforms are adopting this rule And they're trying to make comedians live by the rule You're not allowed to punch down. That's what they say you can't punch down and punching down Dylan Mulvaney towers above the rest of us in his power, right, right, right But the rule against much down. We're Dylan Mulvaney I can't get anybody censored for making fun of me So I think I think if you have the will and the power to Silence people who so much as make a joke at your expense then you have more power than any you're punching up Ebrum X candy has way more power than anyone in the county. I live it right right Yeah, so this idea the punching down like the number one rule of comedy should be fun It to be funny right when I come when I go in a humorist or satirist Comedian sitting down to write a joke. They should be thinking themselves is this joke funny not am I am I going to be making fun of someone Who supposedly has less power and privilege than me but can actually get me punished if if they're offended by my joke, right? And it's such a but I think it's a matter of reclaiming the language like Dylan Mulvaney Rachel Levine I mean these are our rulers Actually, right. Yeah, they're the most powerful and privileged people in our culture And you're not allowed to joke about them. So and that's that's a shallow bomb. And that's what's yeah Yeah, and I mean this is all everybody understands this too. This is it's a well-known saying that you know You can tell who you can tell who rules over you by who you're not allowed to criticize or who you're allowed to joke about And that's exactly I don't think you're able to say that though. Are you probably not? I don't think you are you know, yeah That that's hate speech right there. Yeah, but we're not but we're not we're not punching down We're not punching down. I think we're punching back, but this is the thing that this is the so comedy When they when they make this rule, you know, well, there's there's a number of elements this too Imagine thinking yourself when you're making a joke to like you know what I shouldn't joke about this people they're beneath me Imagine if that's the mentality that you're in right that's a condescending mentality Well, anyway, and who's ever lived in a dorm knows? The mocking somebody is a sign of fraternal friendship That's your peer right I had a friend whose birthday was this morning. I mean, I said a whole barrage of insulting jokes about his age and his sexual potency And that's the first thing I do one of the like closest friends gets older You know the way of treating each other equally is joking about each other indiscriminately So yeah, I think I think comedy comedians who and this is this is why so much of comedy is not funny today It's it's my chief criticism of like late night comedy, which I find unwatchable. I think it's totally But also contemptible. I mean the collaborators and they are they are They just like the fact checkers their guardians of the narrative, you know They are they're people live with them. Let Jimmy Kimmel is a talented guy And I don't think he's like an evil person or something, but he's made this deal where He just serves power and attacks anybody who challenges power like how can Honestly, how can you look at the mirror and say I'm doing something honorable like how could he live with himself? How can his wife sleep with him? Well, it'd be One thing it'd be one thing if if his job wasn't to be a comedian and to do that But his job is to be a comedian is supposed to be funny and comedians are supposed to hold people in between These are the powers of the people in charge exactly he's their portraying guard. Yeah, and it's like The self hatred he must feel because he wasn't always that's my point I mean Colbert has always been a hard part of this and Talent guy, but obviously a part, you know, not he's not a comedian But Kimmel was a comedian like how does he I don't understand I don't know how he can that sleep he might he might buy into the narrative to the extent that he thinks it's morally Wrong to joke about these these certain topics, but it's not just that he's like pouring hot oil on the peasants from the parapet Like he's hurting anyone who challenges the king. It's crazy. It is crazy. It's upside down The comedians should be poking holes in the popular narrative. Not properly. I guess you need Kim was a truly No, I mean that you said it's not money. It's worth what he's doing. It might be the end. Yeah. Yeah, okay So speaking of handmaidens to power who want to kill you and anyone else who speaks the truth So you get back on Twitter and this deeply upsets a figure called Brandi Zed Drosney Assuming I'm pronouncing its name correctly And I'm also not guessing gender on this one But I will say as you watch this clip. This is Brandi Zed Drosney complaining about you speaking out loud Keep in mind it's not just about Brandi Zed Drosney. Whatever that is This is the person who runs our society This person and people like it are actually in charge And I just can't wait till the rule ends because there's never been a worse ruling class Than Brandi Zed Drosney inference Here who did he bring back yesterday? He brought back Jordan Peterson the Babylon be in half the You're Kathy Griffin So the Babylon be and Jordan Peterson They were just taken off the on they were suspended for misgendering trans people So apparently that Policy against hate speech and and harassment of trans people that's done with that's important This comes at a time when trans people are being harassed and you know violence is aimed at them at sort of unseen levels before so this is sort of matters Everything about that The sort of obviously the low IQ The up-talk whoo on that at the end of every sentence The earth sets glass to complete the theatrical fake glasses The made up stats The fake concern for some group that she knows nothing about at all And then under all of it the desire to press harder with her boot against the neck of ordinary people And to shut them up on behalf of her bosses the people who run the world Like every that's just that's the perfect I hope this home puts that in a time capsule For when the revolution finally ends and like we're rid of people like that They ran the world. How do we let them? I know it's insane But it's you know it's it's it's how they control speech and thought. It's how it's if you if your worldview is incoherent and impossible to defend Rationally yes, then you have to insulate it from criticism And what's the most effective kind of criticism there is? I think it's mockery which exposes foolishness for what it is inherent and impossible to defend rationally. Yes. Then you have to insulate it from criticism. And what's the most effective kind of criticism there is? I think it's mockery, which exposes foolishness for what it is. So it makes perfect sense to me. I honestly, I was mistaken about this. It's something I admit I was wrong about is when early on when we first started getting fact checked and we first started having these issues with censorship with the Babylon B, it was my belief that humor, these were humanless scolds who just didn't think our jokes were funny. And they thought they were offensive and they were being hypersensitive. And that's not, that's not the goal. It's not, you're going through the stages of realization, the stage of realization. I eventually learned and came to realize that it's not humor, humor is a vehicle for truth delivery. They don't like the fact that the narrative is being challenged in a way that's effective. And so they have to shut you up. And so that's what it's about has nothing to do with them being, you know, as a slibb is or they don't have to do it. And it has nothing to do with being offended. This whole thing, you know, the hypersensitive, the people getting up in comedians faces or charging their state, the stage to slap them in the face when they make a joke. They don't like the, you know, don't bring your speaker to our campus because we need a safe space here and this will offend people. The, they're not, it's all fake outrage because they've learned that fake outrage can be used as a tool to bludgeon you into silence and submission. But that's, that's exactly right. If they would censor you, they would kill you, period, because you don't censor a peer, another citizen, another human being, you censor your slaves, you censor someone, you consider less than humans. So if censorship ship doesn't work, they didn't date you, if that doesn't work, they would kill you. I mean, that's just, it's a very obvious continuum. But I also say, and I want to ask you this, as the target of people like Brandi Zad Rozni, wouldn't you rather be the target of an explicitly fascist regime where it was aggressive rather than passive aggressive where some guy in a funny mass, must dash, got up and said, you're going to jail instead of having someone in fake complex glasses telling you you're endangering trans people. I mean, there is a kind of, the passive aggression is very hard to take. I'd rather neither of them. But well, I don't know if I have to take my pick, I'll take Twitter jail over real jail any day. But, um, well, that's where that's going. You don't censor people, you consider them human. Period. Yeah. No. I, they're both bad. They're both bad. They're, they're just two sides the same coin. How long do you think, um, your moment of freedom will last? Well, a lot longer now that, uh, Musk is running one of the predominant platforms. Um, if that hadn't happened, I mean, it was just a matter like Facebook throttles us so badly. Now, we don't get any reach on Facebook. We don't drive any traffic on Facebook. It's not, it's not really that valuable to us anymore. Do you talk to them about it? We've tried. We don't, you can't get straight answers. Do they work complicated glasses too and up talk? They, if they just give you like really like canned responses or they point you to their policies or your credit point. Exactly. That's kind of my point though, you know, they have people in place. They'll have some kind of like policy person who's there to mollify you and just hear what you have to say and tell you, we're, we're looking into this for you. And then, you know, I'm going to run this up the chain kind of like the people who are there to listen to you to make it seem like they're actually paying attention, but they don't do anything about it. Honestly, wouldn't you rather, and I'm not being we have facetious deal with like the North Korean security apparatus where they're like say that and we'll kill you. Super straight forward and they're not going to lecture you about Translaut. At least that's honest. At least it's honest. Yeah, it's less so frickest. Yeah. But I don't know. I mean, I think I'm hopeful for a couple reasons. I think, I think Musk really is committed to free speech. I think he means that. I don't think, you know, Twitter was not a money play for him. I don't think that he's, you know, was not a money play for Twitter. Twitter was is an absolute money pit and, and he realized very early on it became real. So one of the conversations that they were having internally about whether to restore us was, well, what, what are going to be the advertisers reactions to us putting people back on the platform? And so this, and this is where the censorship gets all the more complicated is the brands themselves don't want that speech. They will pull, they will pull out their funding. They will pull out their ad buys and cripple Twitter financially if Twitter doesn't do their bidding. And so it's coming from the government. It's coming from the advertisers. It's coming from everywhere. All the positions of power are controlling our speech and saying that we can't joke about these people and things, but we're punching down. So yeah, I mean, he had to, he's, he's, he's walking that tightrope of, I want free speech, but I need revenue in order to keep this business going. So, you know, he was doing this drastic cost cutting measures, you know, all of that stuff. But trying to, I don't know how you actually run a free speech platform and have it be, have it generate enough revenue for you to survive. I don't know how he's going to figure out. Maybe he will. If anyone can do it, Musk can do it. He's, he reuses rockets and lands them on platforms, then the ocean after they've already launched and crazy stuff like that. So I think he can figure this out, but I don't know how he's going to do it. So you expect to be up and available to the public through the election. Yeah. Yeah. I do. I mean, will we, do we have as much reach as we used to have? No, but I mean, we still have, we still have a platform. I don't, I've never been an advocate of let's go create new platforms and do our own thing because then you're just creating a new echo chamber where people who agree with you are on that platform. And there's not interesting conversations happening there. So I am wanting to stay in the conversation where the conversation actually matters. These prominent platforms where that you could call the public square of the modern age. And I think that we have a hopeful outlook when it comes to legal recourse there too. I mean, you have, you have these laws that were passed at the state level, but in Florida and Texas that make it illegal to for these platforms to engage in viewpoint discrimination. And the Supreme Court is now going to hear these cases because, you know, one of them was rejected by the 11th Circuit. One of them was upheld. The Texas one was upheld by the fifth circuit. So the Supreme Court's going to make a decision on whether or not these companies can engage in politically motivated viewpoint discrimination. And if they can't, then we're legally allowed to be there. Last question is someone who operates in this world every day. Which platform do you think is more censored? The Facebook American owned by Mark Zuckerberg or TikTok owned by the Chinese Communist Go. I'm not sure that that distinguishable at this point. I mean, what do you think? The Facebook is not a free speech platform at all. They may give more lip service to free speech. In fact, Twitter did too back when we were censored that there were platform for free expression without barriers. There are liars. There are liars. They lie straight to your face. And that's fraud. They shouldn't be allowed to do that either. Seth Dylan, thank you for everything you've done. Thank you. I'm congratulations on your prophecy. Thanks.